2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Curvature sensing with a spherical tactile sensor
using the color-interference of a marker array
Xi Lin1,2, Laurence Willemet1, Alexandre Bailleul1 and Michae¨l Wiertlewski2
Abstract—The only way to perceive a small object held set them apart is that they are endowed with a rich sense
between our ﬁngers is to trust our sense of touch. Touch of touch, mediated by a collection of mechanoreceptors,
provides cues about the state of the contact even if its view
densely populated in the ﬁngertips. This wide-ranging ar-
is occluded by the ﬁnger. The interaction between the soft
ray of mechanoreceptors encodes the complex mechanical
ﬁngers and the surface reveals crucial information, such as
the local shape of the object, that plays a central role in ﬁne interaction that occurs at the contact between the skin and
manipulation. In this work, we present a new spherical sensor the object. The sense of touch captures surface features [5],
that endows robots with a ﬁne distributed sense of touch. [6], compliance of materials [7], [8] or the presence of
This sensor is an evolution of our distributed tactile sensor
edges [9]. Of importance for the present work, an estimate
thatmeasuresthedense3-dimensionaldisplacementﬁeldofan
of the curvature of an object can be extracted from a single
elasticmembrane,usingthesubtractivecolor-mixingprinciple.
We leverage a planar manufacturing process that enables the press[10]andguidethetimingofmotorcommandsrequired
design and manufacturing of the functional features on a ﬂat for grasping and object manipulation [11], [12].
surface. The ﬂat functional panels are then folded to create a Given the usefulness of touch in manipulation, it is not
spherical shape able to sense a wide variety of objects.
surprising that tactile sensors for robotics have shown great
The resulting 40mm-diameter spherical sensor has 77 mea-
promise in providing a rich image of the mechanical in-
surement points, each of which gives an estimation of the
local 3d displacement, normal and tangential to the surface. teraction on a par with human perception. A large vari-
Each marker is built around 2 sets of colored patches placed ety of strategies can be used to transduce the mechanical
at different depths. The relative motion and resulting hue of deformation into an electrical signal, for a full review the
each marker, easily captured by an embedded RGB camera,
reader can refer to [13]. Amongst these techniques, camera-
providesameasurementoftheir3dmotion.Tobenchmarkthe
based tactile sensors attract increasing attention due to their
sensor,wecomparedthemeasurementsobtainedwhilepressing
the sensor on a curved surface with Hertz contact theory, a higher spatial resolution and minimum wiring requirement
hallmarkofcontactmechanics.Whilethemechanicsdidstrictly comparedtoothertactilesensingtechnologies.Thesesensors
followHertzcontacttheory,usingtheshearandnormalsensing, typicallyuseacameratotrackthedisplacementsofmarkers
ChromaTouch can estimate the curvature of an object after a
embedded in a soft elastomer. This method delivers dense
millimeter-size indentation of the sensor.
tactileimageswitharelativelyﬁnetemporalresolutionwhen
leveraging high frame-rate cameras [14], [15]. However,
I. INTRODUCTION
exceptforafewexceptionsdetailedinthenextsection,these
Robots interact with their surroundings by sensing and
sensorsusuallyarelimitedtomeasuringlateraldeformation,
reacting to the mechanical behavior of the environment,
whichprovidesvaluablemeasurementsbutrequirescomplex
usually through an impedance control feedback loop [1].
processing and approximations to gauge the normal motion
In a classical impedance control, the mechanical interaction
of each marker.
with the environment is measured with a force sensor and
The ChromaTouch sensor, introduced in [16], solves the
serves as a basis to control the motion of the robotic arm
at modulating its apparent stiffness. Yet, perceiving the
mechanical world with only a single point of measurement (a) (b) (c)
discards the abundance of information that the mechanical
scene has to offer. A single 6-axis force sensor can indeed
be used to ﬁnd the timing, location, and direction of a
contact force [2], [3] but the limited spatial distribution of hue and centroid 
the data prevents the estimation of the shape and the surface detection
properties of an object without active exploration [4]. (d)
Humans also use proprioception to gather kinematic in-
formation to control the impedance of their limbs, but what RtRt
This work was supported by Agence Nationale de la Recherche within
thePHASEproject16-CE10-0003
1Xi Lin, Laurence Willemet and Alexandre Bailleul are
with ISM, CNRS and Aix-Marseille Universite´, France Fig.1. (a)Thesensor,mountedonaroboticarm,exploresanobject(b)
{ }
name.surname @univ-amu.fr Typical image retrieved by the embedded camera (c) Effect of lateral and
2MichaelWiertlewskiiswiththeCognitiveRoboticsDepartmentofTU normalforcesontheshapeandhueofamarker.(d)Aftercalibration,the
Delft,Netherlandsm.wiertlewski@tudelft.nl lateralandnormaldeformationofeachpointisestimated.
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 603
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:46:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. problem by encoding the normal motion of each marker in contact [20], [15]. Because of its working principle, these
the color channels of the camera, effectively converting a sensors can only be planar or have small curvature, and
2-dimensional color image information into 3-dimensional therefore accommodate well only with convex objects. In
deformation ﬁeld. Each marker is made by 2 overlapping [18],thetactilesensorusesthechangeofcolortodetermine
submarkers,onediffusiveandmagenta,theothertranslucent normal pressure with 3×3 markers.
and yellow. The full 3d relative motion of the submarkers TheChromaTouchsensorbuildsupontheseprinciplesand
is found from both the centroid detection and the change of extends to the recovery of the full displacement ﬁeld to
hueofthemarker.Wedemonstratedtheeffectivenessofthis gather a complete picture of the contact.
transduction principle to detect dense 3d displacement ﬁelds
B. Spherical-shaped sensors
on a ﬂat sensing surface. The long-term goal of the work is
to integrate this sensor in with a robotic end-effector with Soft spherical-cap artiﬁcial ﬁngertips are popular in
curved ﬁngertips. In this paper, we introduce a new version robotic grasping as they help stabilizing the contact with an
of ChromaTouch that uses the color-mixing transduction arbitrarilyshapedobject.Therefore,alargebodyofresearch
principleonahemisphericalsensingsurface,abletoexplore has created artiﬁcial ﬁngertips with spherical or complex
surfaces with arbitrary shapes, see 1a. The sensor embeds a convex shapes.
camera equipped with a ﬁsheye lens, which has the double A wide array of manufacturing strategies has been de-
beneﬁt of amplifying the signal used to estimate the normal ployed. Casting the body of the sensor in a spherical mold,
displacementsaswellasunwrappingthesphericalprojection with grooves results in structures with soft and complex
of the sensing hemisphere, see 1b. Figure 1c, illustrates the shape that can even incorporate markers if the grooves
sensingmethod.Aftercalibration,thesensorretrievesthe3d are included in the mold [21]. Another popular fabrication
deformationﬁeldatthelocationofthemarkerswhichcanbe method makes use of 3d printing with soft elastomer. 3d
interpolatedintothefulldeformationofthebody,seeﬁg1d. printing offers a versatile method for producing complex-
shaped sensors [19]. One of the downside of spherical
II. RELATEDWORK sensors has to do with the fact that circular markers on a
A. Camera-based sensors sphere will appear as ellipses when projected on the image
The success of camera-based tactile sensors can be at- plane. Several sensors subsequently require image wrapping
tributed to the decades of engineering that reﬁned camera to recover the proper shape of markers [21].
sensors and allowed converting photons into digital data. Alternatively, piezoresistive and capacitive sensors can
By relying on off-the-shelf camera, these sensors bypass the be mounted on a ﬂexible printed circuit board that is cut
electronicengineeringthatisrequiredtomakecapacitiveand and wrapped around a rigid core, then covered with a
piezo-resistive tactile sensors. For this reason, camera-based rigid layer [22]. The cover ﬁlters and blurs the signal from
sensors often boast larger resolution and higher refresh-rate. the contact thus markers beneﬁt from being near to the
Camera-basedtactilesensorsrelyonadeformablemedium surface [23].
seen by the camera, which essentially converts the mechani-
III. CONVEXSENSORTOMEASURE
calinteractionintoavisiblechangeoftheimage.Therefore,
CONVEXANDCONCAVEOBJECTS
the necessary inventiveness to extract data about the contact
A. The case for spherical shape when exploring objects
lies in the engineering of this medium. The simplest method
is to place black markers on a white background on a soft Simple reasoning can highlight why a curved sensor is
elastomer and track the motion of these markers to infer beneﬁcialfortheversatilityofsensingwitharbitraryobjects.
the interaction at the contact. The biomimetic approaches
suggest amplifying motion via an array of pins attached to a
deformable membrane [19]. However, the transduction from Ro−1 0 Cr=Rt−1+Ro−1 ...
the 2D optical image to a 3D mechanical deformation ﬁeld
remains a challenge [17], mainly because the distance from Ro−1<0
theGmelaFrokrecres dtoevtehleopceadmebrya [is14u]nkemnopwlony.ing double layers of Ro−1=0 ... ill defined ...
rigid markers to compute the 3D stress ﬁeld. The normal Ro−1>0 Cr>0
stresses are calculated from the lateral distribution of the
...
markers. This implementation is effective but the spatial Ro−1 0 Cr<0
resolution of the sensor is limited, because the markers
on both layers cannot be overlaid. The GelSight sensor R−1 0 <0 =0 >0 0
t
measuresthetopographyofanelastomercoveredbyalight-
reﬂecting membrane illuminated from 3 sides by 3 lights of Fig.2. ShapeofthecontactbetweenasensorwithcurvatureR−1andan
− t
complementary color. The 3d geometry of the deformation objectwithcurvatureRo1.WhenrelativecurvatureCr isnull,thecontact
of the gel is reconstructed from the shadow of the asperities topologyisill-deﬁned.Sincetheenvironmentoftherobotcontainsobjects
ofundeﬁnedcurvatures,asmallradiuswillprovidethebestversatility.The
in contact with the membrane. The sensor has been used
shaded area shows the operating range of curvature that spherical sensors
with added markers to measure the slip and shear at the cantypicallysample.
604
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:46:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) (b) (c)
Itallowsthesensortiptoconformtothetouchedobjectwith
2πR
a larger contacting surface [24], [25]. The shape and size of n
the contact surface are determined by the relative curvature R
πR
at the contact point. Assuming concave or convex spherical
2
sensor and object, the relative curvature can be expressed as
πR
Cr =Rt−1+Ro−1, where Rt is the radius of the sensor, and 2m
R is the local radius of the object, near the contact point.
o
The radius is positive for the convex object and negative for Fig.3. Constructionofthepolyconicpattern.(a)Oneofthenth segment
—calledgore—ofthesphere(b)isconstructedbyprojectingmregularly
the concave object. When the object is ﬂat, the radius is
spacedpointsofaninnercirclewhosediameteristheequatorofasegment
inﬁnite and the curvature of the object is null. If both the ontoaregularlinegridspacedbyπR/2m(c)Thesegmentisthencopied
sensor and the objects are ﬂat, the relative curvature is null, ntimesandrotatedarounditsapextoproducetheﬁnalﬂatpattern.
and in this special case, the contact is made on the higher
asperities of both surfaces, therefore, relying on stochastic
the distortion induced by stretch is reduced. In our case,
properties and being ill-deﬁned at macroscopic scales [26].
because we are using compliant elastomers which forgive
On the other hand, when the relative curvature is negative
some stretch, cutting the sphere in 4 gores was enough to
— the concave object has a smaller radius than the convex
ensure an easy manufacturing process, while reducing the
object—thecontactismadeattheedgeoftheconvexobject
number of seams.
and therefore the mechanical interaction is discontinuous.
Figure 3 illustrates the process used to create the shape
From a sampling point of view, in order to have an unin-
of the gores and assemble them into a spherical cap of
terrupted contact surface, the best choice is to have positive
radius R. The shape of each gore is found by constructing
relative curvature (see Figure 2). In this case, the contact
a semicircle with a diameter the equatorial edge of length
follows Hertz theory and the contact area is elliptical.
2πR/n. Then we divide the inner circle in m radii and
This result is well known by the mechanical community
projectthevectorﬁeldontoaregularlyspacedgridofwhich
and is the reason why surface scanning instruments have
extend from the equator line to a parallel line spaced by
small diameter tips and can capture the small-scale changes
πR/2. Placing the markers onto the ﬂat gores is effortless
in curvature [26].
comparedtoassemblingthemonasphericalsurface.Regular
B. Flat to curved projection manufacturing techniques such as printing, laser cutting,
molding can be used to create the required pattern.
The manufacturing of the double overplayed layer needed
for ChromaTouch requires the alignment of magenta and C. Manufacturing process
yellow dots on two different planes. This sensitive operation
The manufacturing process illustrated in ﬁgure 4 is an
is relatively straightforward to process on ﬂat surface but
update from the original ﬂat version [16]. First, the base is
challenging when the alignment must be done on a curved
cast from transparent elastomer (Sortaclear 12, Smooth-On,
surface, such as a sphere.
Macungie, PA, USA) in a high-resolution 3d-printed mold.
Gauss’ Theorema Egregium provides an opportune frame- The grooves left by the cast are ﬁlled with the magenta
work to understand how to design a ﬂat part that can be markers, made from the same elastomer in which a dye is
folded. The remarkable theorem states that the Gaussian added. Then, a protective layer is molded, on top of which
curvatureκ—deﬁnedbybeingtheproductofeachprincipal the yellow ﬁlter is placed. The yellow elements are laser cut
curvature — of a surface is invariant under bending. A ﬂat andtherestoftheﬁlmarediscarded.Aprotectivetransparent
plane of Gaussian curvature κ = 0 can be bent along one layer embeds the yellow transparent submarkers. The whole
dimension for which one of the principal curvatures will be operation including curing takes approximately 2 days.
non-zero, but cannot be deformed into a sphere for which Atthisstage,themanufacturingprocessrequiringthepart
bothprincipalcurvatureswillbethereciprocalofthebending tobeﬂatarecompletedandthepatternisfoldedontoarigid
radius R , i.e. κ=1/R2. Since bending and folding are not and transparent sphere made of acrylic. Lastly, the white
b b
sufﬁcient to make the sphere, in our production process, the outer layer is cast onto the exterior of the sphere to ensure
surface has to be stretched or cut. thepropercohesionofthegores.Thelastexternallayeralso
To work out a way around this fundamental constraint, acts as a barrier for external light and as a diffuser for the
we used a production method that is popular for making marker illumination.
spherical globes from ﬂat maps. The sphere is divided into
D. Assembly and optical image correction
n gores (i.e. segments), each of which can be worked on
as it is a ﬂat surface. In globe production, each of the gore Withinthecurrentlimitofouroff-the-shelfmanufacturing
contains a part of the map so that the shape and linearity process, we can create spherical sensors with 77 markers
of the meridian are preserved. Once the gores are printed, measuring2mmindiameteranddistributedonthemeridians
they are folded into a sphere to make the globe. The fold of a sphere of radius 40 mm. A USB-camera (Aria A15S-
introduced a small distortion as the ﬂat gores still must be C, Alkeria, Cascina, Italy), with a 1/2.9” image sensor, is
bent in both directions. However, as the number of gores placed at the center of the sphere. The camera is ﬁxed onto
increases, the bendalong the equator isless pronounced and a mounting ﬁxture that is linked to the force sensor of the
605
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:46:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (1) Fill transparent base (2) Fill magenta markers (3) Laser cut yellow film (4) Remove surplus
(8) release
(5) transparent coating (6) fold (7) cohesive and 
light diffusive coating
Fig. 4. Manufacturing process. A ﬂat mold makes alignment of the magenta and yellow marker easier. Once the ﬂat pattern is completed, it is folded
intoasphericalshape,andheldinplacebycuringadditionalelastomer,whichactsasadiffuserfortheillumination.
(a) (b)
robot arm. The overall assembly of the sensor is shown in
mounting
ﬁgure 5a. image sensor
The camera is equipped with a f = 2.2 mm ﬁsheye wide f
lens (Lensagon BF5M2223S129, Lensation GmbH, Karl- camera &
sorfuhthee, Gmearmrkaenryi)s. Amsosfotunnodtapbrleeviwouhselny [th1e6],letnhse ihnatserfaersehnocret fisheye lens light ray R
focal length, which provides a better signal to noise ratio. leds
The ﬁsheye lens has a 180◦ ﬁeld of view, which usually
sphere
creates a characteristic distortion due to the equidistant
array (c)
projection.However,inthiscase,eachmarkerisatthesame
distance from the focal of the lens and cancels exactly the
distortion made by projecting the markers onto a plane. The
image created by the combination of the ﬁsheye lens and
spherical marker array creates an image without needing
post-processing for image distortion. Fig.5. (a)Explodedviewoftheassembly.(b)Theﬁsheyelenscreatesaﬂat
projectionofthesphericalarray,cancelingthedistortions.Themarkershave
similarareathroughouttheimage.(c)Theresultingimageandestimation
E. Signal processing
ofthelocalshapeanddeformation.
The 3-dimensional displacement of each marker with
respect to the camera depends on the observed lateral dis-
is used to isolate the marker in the original image. For each
placement of the centroid and the change of hue of their
marker, the average hue is stored. At this stage, we have the
projection on the image sensor. To convert the image into a
hue, which reﬂects the normal displacement, and the motion
vectorﬁeld,aprocessingpipelineisasfollows.First,theraw
of the centroid in 2 dimensions, which reﬂects the lateral
imagesfromthecameraarecroppedusingacircularmaskto
displacement of the markers.
remove everything outside of the edge of the sensor. Then a
tophat ﬁlter is applied to mitigate the effect of non-uniform
IV. EXPERIMENTALVALIDATION
lighting and the contrast is enhanced. Once the correction is
A. Calibration
done, the images are converted from RGB to HSV color
space. The hue channel is used to segment the markers The link between the hue of the marker and the actual
by thresholding around the yellow and magenta hue. The displacementitexperiencesisinﬂuencedbytheconstruction,
centroidofeachmagentamarkerisdetectedfromthebinary illumination,andcameraparameters.Therefore,thisrelation-
images using the regionprop function in Matlab. The mask ship needs to be calibrated against a ground truth.
606
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:46:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. The calibration is done by pressing the sensor onto a ﬂat the normal deformation since the markers moved. The red
plate, with a robot (UR3, Universal Robots, Odense, Den- dots in Fig 7 show the normal displacement at the original
mark)equippedwithaforce-torquesensor(FT300,Robotiq, radial location of the markers.
Le´vis, Canada) to measure interaction forces. During a
(a)
normal loading experiment, the force and the displacement
of the robot are recorded to provide ground truth for the contact 
load curve of the system. At the same time, the state of conditions
each marker is determined to ﬁnd the distribution of the Ro=−80mm Ro=∞ Ro= 80 mm
(b)
displacement over the contact area.
(a) δr (b)0.04 c) 15 image
(c)
ue px)10
δt δr reference h0 0 0.7 1.4centroid shift ( 05 0 1 2 deofrmation(mm)01 R-10=0.98 0 10R-1=0o0.97 0 10 -R10=0.96 0 10
(mm) (mm)
2a δr δt radial position (mm) radial position (mm) radial position (mm)
Fig. 6. (a) Effect of pressing the spherical sensor on a plane (b) The
Fig. 7. (a) Comparison between Hertz contact theory and measurement
referencehueasafunctionofthenormaldisplacementoftheroboticarm,
givenbythesensorwhenpressingonanegative,nullandpositivecurvature
anditslinearﬁtindashedline.(c)Resultsfromthetangentialcalibration.
object.(b)Theimagedifferencebetweenthenormalstateandthedeformed
state is affected by the curvature of the object. The negative difference
As shown in ﬁgure 6a, the external force P applied by is in magenta and the positive in green. (c) The resulting proﬁle of the
displacementofthemiddlecross-sectionofmarkers.Thevectorsshowthe
the robot will induce a deformation δr of the soft sensor actualdisplacementofeachmarker,thereddotshighlightonlythenormal
if the contacting surface is inﬁnitely stiff compared to the motionandthegraycurvesshowtheresultofcurve-ﬁttingwithaﬁltered
complianceofthesoftelastomerofthesensor.Thisdeforma- Hertziancontact.
tionδ alsocorrespondstothemaximumofthedeformation
r The Hertz contact theory can be used to analyze the mea-
ﬁeld measured by the tactile sensors, independently of the
sured displacement and extract the radius of the contacting
curvature of the object. Therefore, we can use the ground
body[27].Inthefollowingparagraph,theassumptionisthat
truth values to calibrate the variation of observed hue.
the object is inﬁnitely rigid compared to the soft ﬁngertip.
Figure 6b, shows typical traces obtained during calibra-
The theory ﬁrst observes that the contact area between two
tion. The relationship between the hue of the marker that
spherical objects will lead to a circular contact area of
experiences the maximum deformation (i.e. located in the
center of the contact patch) and the displacement recorded radius a. The relative displacement of the two bodies δr
by the robot is invariant with the curvature of the contacting is related to the contact area a2 by the equivalent radius
object. A linear ﬁt gives the coefﬁcient to extrapolate the R=(Rs−1+Ro−1)−1 such as:
displacementfromanyarbitraryobservedhue.Thegoodness a2 =Rδ (1)
r
ofﬁtonthesampleddataisR2 =0.89.Asimilarprocedure
wheretheeffectiveradiusiscalculatedwiththeradiusofthe
is done for the lateral displacement with the goodness of ﬁt
R2 =0.99, see ﬁgure 6c. sensor Rs and the radius of the object Ro in contact. This
equationcanbereversedtoﬁndtheradiusoftheobjectfrom
thedisplacementandtheareaofcontact,knowingtheradius
B. Example application: model-driven curvature estimation
of the object.
Once the relationship between the observed hue and
According to Hertz theory, the contact at the surface
the displacement is established, we can reconstruct the 3d shouldleadtonormaldisplaceme(cid:18)ntu oft(cid:19)hesoftbodywhich
displacement ﬁeld of the sensor from the observed images z
follows a parabolic shape such as:
sampled at the location of the markers. The data is then
interpolated again to provide a regularly spaced sampling. u (r)| =δ 1− r2 (2)
Thecontactswithtwocurvedobjectsofradii±80mmand z z=0 r a2
a ﬂat surface are illustrated in ﬁgure 7. The image reveals a where r is the radial coordinate. Curve ﬁtting this relation-
difference in the extent to which the markers are disturbed. shiptothemeasurement,couldintheoryresolvefromtactile
The measured displacement ﬁeld reveals the nature of the data the displacement of the sensor and the area of the
interaction.Theﬁeldshowsapeakatthecenterofthecontact contact patch. However, the measured displacements from
thattapersastheedgeofthecontactinamonotonicfashion. ChromaTouch come from the markers that are embedded
It is interesting to note that the local contact force is not deeper in the elastomer. The elastomeric layer that cov-
strictly normal to the surface but has a slight angle due to ers the markers acts as a mechanical ﬁlter and blurs the
the work of friction and elastic stretch. The measurement of contact distribution. In order to simplify the ﬁtting proce-
the lateral motion has importance in evaluating the shape of dure, the distribution is approximated by a gaussian curve
607
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:46:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. uz(r)|z=2mm =δrexp(−r2/2a2), from which the amplitude istheoreticallyenoughtoreconstructthestresspatternatthe
is the global displacement and the deviation is related to the surface. The current work shows that the deformation of the
areaofcontact.Figure8aillustratestheﬁlteringdonebythe sensor is in good agreement with the Hertz contact theory
softtissues,whichcanbeestimatedfromBoussinesq-Cerruti despite showing some striking differences.
equations. The gaussian approximation has a goodness of ﬁt During the experiment, we made sure that the contact
with the theoretical deformation of R2 =0.96. was lubricated, therefore as close to frictionless as possible,
to follow the assumptions underlying Hertz contact theory.
(a) (b) 60 26.7 20 16
Upon contact, the section touching the object expanded
2m)40 laterally to maintain its surface area. The displacement of
individual points did not follow a pure normal path but was
m
uz(r)|z=0  (2 20 also shifted toward the outside of the contact patch contrary
a
tothepredictionofHertztheoryinwhichthedisplacementis
0
purely normal. The discrepancy with the linear small-strain
(c) 0 0.7 1.4 theoryofHertzismostcertainlyduetolargedeformationsof
e 50 ground truth motion (mm) thesoftlayersofthesensor.Thelateralmotioncouldbeused
v
ectim)40 toestimateslipperinessofthesurfacewithouthavingtoslide
ed effus (m2300 tohfefsriecntsioonrlpaeterrcaelplyti.oSnomwheielevipdreenscseinsghoinwshusimmainlasr[c2a8p]a,b[i2li9ti]e.s
atdi
δrexp −2ra22 estimra100 noLrmasatllyf,ortchee,bluatteirtaalpcpaelaibrsrattoiobneiasffepcetrefdorbmyetdheoinnldyenattatoionne
depth, which translates into an underestimation. Finer cali-
uz(r)|z=2mm 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
normal displacement (mm) bration procedure should lead to even more accurate results.
Fig.8. (a)Sensorsembeddedintheelastomerinherentlyobserveablurry B. Future improvements
picture of the contact. (b) Evolution of the contact area as the sensor is
The analysis of the experimental results suggests several
pushedintoacurvedobject.(b)Resultsoftheestimationofthecurvature
at the beginning of the press. The estimated effective radius (plain lines) essential improvements. First of all, the rigid core inside the
convergetotherealvalue(dashedlines). sensorshouldberemovedtohaveamorelineardeformation
pattern and to avoid saturation of the sensor at higher
We conducted measurements on three spherical objects loads. Along those lines, future sensors will use a softer
mentioned earlier. Figure 8b shows the estimation of the compound to maximize the deformation and color changes
area of contact a2 extracted from the gaussian ﬁt, when the of the markers inside the sensor.
normaldisplacementoftherobotincreases.Theradiusofthe Second, in this study, the sphere was made using four
contactareaincreaseswiththeappliednormaldisplacement. gores which is practical from the standpoint of folding but
The equivalent curvature is computed from the deformation still induces too much stress and distortion when wrapped
ﬁeld. Figure 8c reveals that the equivalent curvature con- around the spherical core. The sweet spot between low
vergestotheactualcurvaturewhenthenormaldisplacement distortion and ease of manufacturing might be closer to 6 or
increases,althoughsomediscrepanciesexist.Forindentation 8 gores. Increasing the number of markers to provide better
lower than a millimeter, the noise of measurement has a spatial resolution will offer the possibility of digital spatial
signiﬁcantinﬂuenceonthequalityofresults.Afteranormal ﬁltering that can improve the signal to noise ratio.
displacement of 1 mm, the estimation converges to the real Lastly, the calibration procedure will be replaced by a
value. When the total displacement reaches 1.4 mm, the machine-learning approach in the hope that it considers the
estimations of the effective radius R corresponds well the deviation from the calibration of each marker.
desired values, which are R = {26.7mm,20mm,16mm}
for the sensor with the radius of R = 20 mm in contact C. Conclusion
t
with objects with the radius of R ={−80mm,∞,80mm} This work presents a new hemispherical version of the
o
respectively. camera-based tactile sensor developed by [16]. The sensor
can measure the 3d deformation ﬁeld of the contact via
V. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSIONS
marker tracking and hue detection. With the hemispherical
A. Discussion
conﬁguration, the sensor is suited to explore surfaces with
Tactile sensors are essential tools to enable robots to arbitrary curvature even if the object is slightly concave. We
haptically explore their surroundings, perceive changes in proposedanalgorithmtoestimatethecurvatureoftheobject
contact conditions and subsequently accomplish dexterous with a 1 mm indentation on the object. Experimental results
manipulation tasks. The spherical shape associated with show a good agreement between the estimated effective
the use of soft elastomer offers tactile sensing as well radius and the real value despite using Hertz contact in
as intrinsic stability when grasping. The color subtraction the presence of friction. Future work will solve the existing
method, presented in this work, enables access to the shear limitations of the sensor and extend the application of the
aswellasthenormalcomponentsofthedeformation,which sensor to robotic manipulation tasks.
608
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:46:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [16] X.LinandM.Wiertlewski,“Sensingthefrictionalstateofarobotic
skin via subtractive color mixing,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
[1] N.Hogan,“Impedancecontrol:Anapproachtomanipulation:Parti— Letters,vol.4,no.3,pp.2386–2392,2019.
theory,” Journal of dynamic systems, measurement, and control, vol. [17] N. J. Ferrier and R. W. Brockett, “Reconstructing the shape of a
107,no.1,pp.1–7,1985. deformable membrane from image data,” The International Journal
[2] A. Bicchi, J. K. Salisbury, and D. L. Brock, “Contact sensing from ofRoboticsResearch,vol.19,no.9,pp.795–816,2000.
forcemeasurements,”TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch, [18] Z. Kappassov, D. Baimukashev, Z. Kuanyshuly, Y. Massalin,
vol.12,no.3,pp.249–262,1993. A.Urazbayev,andH.A.Varol,“Color-codedﬁber-optictactilesensor
[3] C. Hudin, S. Pane¨els, and S. Strachan, “Intact: Instant interaction for an elastomeric robot skin,” in 2019 International Conference on
with3dprintedobjects,”inProceedingsofthe2016CHIConference RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2019,pp.2146–2152.
ExtendedAbstractsonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems. ACM, [19] B. Ward-Cherrier, N. Pestell, L. Cramphorn, B. Winstone, M. E.
2016,pp.2719–2725. Giannaccini, J. Rossiter, and N. F. Lepora, “The tactip family: Soft
[4] T. J. Prescott, M. E. Diamond, and A. M. Wing, “Active touch opticaltactilesensorswith3d-printedbiomimeticmorphologies,”Soft
sensing,”2011. robotics,vol.5,no.2,pp.216–227,2018.
[5] M. Wiertlewski, J. Lozada, and V. Hayward, “The spatial spectrum [20] W.Yuan,R.Li,M.A.Srinivasan,andE.H.Adelson,“Measurement
of tangential skin displacement can encode tactual texture,” IEEE of shear and slip with a gelsight tactile sensor,” in 2015 IEEE
TransactionsonRobotics,vol.27,no.3,pp.461–472,2011. InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,
[6] A.M.Kappers,“Humanperceptionofshapefromtouch,”Philosophi- 2015,pp.304–311.
calTransactionsoftheRoyalSocietyB:BiologicalSciences,vol.366, [21] T. Sakuma, F. Von Drigalski, M. Ding, J. Takamatsu, and T. Oga-
no.1581,pp.3106–3114,2011. sawara, “A universal gripper using optical sensing to acquire tactile
[7] M. A. Srinivasan and R. H. LaMotte, “Tactual discrimination of informationandmembranedeformation,”in2018IEEE/RSJInterna-
softness,”Journalofneurophysiology,vol.73,no.1,pp.88–101,1995. tionalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,
[8] K. Fujita and H. Ohmori, “A new softness display interface by 2018,pp.1–9.
dynamicﬁngertipcontactareacontrol,”in5thWorldMulticonference [22] A. Schmitz, M. Maggiali, M. Randazzo, L. Natale, and G. Metta,
onSystemics,CyberneticsandInformatics,2001,pp.78–82. “A prototype ﬁngertip with high spatial resolution pressure sensing
[9] J. Platkiewicz, H. Lipson, and V. Hayward, “Haptic edge detection for the robot icub,” in Humanoids 2008-8th IEEE-RAS International
throughshear,”Scientiﬁcreports,vol.6,p.23551,2016. ConferenceonHumanoidRobots. IEEE,2008,pp.423–428.
[10] A. Goodwin, K. John, and A. Marceglia, “Tactile discrimination of [23] M. Shimojo, “Mechanical ﬁltering effect of elastic cover for tactile
curvature by humans using only cutaneous information from the sensor,”IEEETransactionsonRoboticsandAutomation,vol.13,no.1,
ﬁngerpads,”Experimentalbrainresearch,vol.86,no.3,pp.663–672, pp.128–132,1997.
1991. [24] R. S. Fearing and T. O. Binford, “Using a cylindrical tactile sensor
[11] I. Birznieks, P. Jenmalm, A. W. Goodwin, and R. S. Johansson, fordeterminingcurvature,”inProceedings.1988IEEEInternational
“Encodingofdirectionofﬁngertipforcesbyhumantactileafferents,” ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation. IEEE,1988,pp.765–771.
JournalofNeuroscience,vol.21,no.20,pp.8222–8237,2001. [25] A.M.OkamuraandM.R.Cutkosky,“Featuredetectionforhapticex-
[12] R.S.JohanssonandJ.R.Flanagan,“Codinganduseoftactilesignals plorationwithroboticﬁngers,”TheInternationalJournalofRobotics
from the ﬁngertips in object manipulation tasks,” Nature Reviews Research,vol.20,no.12,pp.925–938,2001.
Neuroscience,vol.10,no.5,pp.345–359,2009. [26] J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and surface forces. Academic
[13] R.S.Dahiya,G.Metta,M.Valle,andG.Sandini,“Tactilesensing— press,2015.
fromhumanstohumanoids,”IEEEtransactionsonrobotics,vol.26, [27] K.L.Johnson,Contactmechanics. Cambridgeuniversitypress,1987.
no.1,pp.1–20,2009. [28] T. Maeno, T. Kawamura, and S.-C. Cheng, “Friction estimation by
[14] K. Sato, K. Kamiyama, N. Kawakami, and S. Tachi, “Finger-shaped pressing an elastic ﬁnger-shaped sensor against a surface,” IEEE
gelforce:sensorformeasuringsurfacetractionﬁeldsforrobotichand,” Transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 222–
IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.3,no.1,pp.37–47,2009. 228,2004.
[15] D. Ma, E. Donlon, S. Dong, and A. Rodriguez, “Dense tactile force [29] J. Monnoyer, E. Diaz, C. Bourdin, and M. Wiertlewski, “Perception
estimation using gelslim and inverse fem,” in 2019 International of ultrasonic switches involves large discontinuity of the mechanical
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2019, pp. impedance,”IEEEtransactionsonhaptics,vol.11,no.4,pp.579–589,
5418–5424. 2018.
609
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:46:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 