2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Design and Compensation Control of a Flexible Instrument for
Endoscopic Surgery
Wuzhou Hong1,3*, Andreas Schmitz2*, Weibang Bai2, Pierre Berthet-Rayne2, Le Xie1,3,
and Guang-Zhong Yang2,3, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Snake-like robots for endoscopic surgery make it
possible to reach deep-seated lesions. With the use of small
ﬂexibletendon-driveninstruments,itispossibletoperformbi-
manual micro-surgical tasks that are challenging for standard
endoscopicsurgeries.Existingdevices,however,lackarticulated
wrists and rolling motion of the end-effector. This paper
presents a new instrument design with a distal-roll gripper
for snake-like robots. The developed 5 DoFs miniaturized
instruments with a diameter of 3 mm enable the deployment
into narrow endoluminal channels. Issues related to actuation
coupling,tendonslack,andbacklashareaddressed.Experimen-
◦ Fig.1:Flexibleinstrumentprototypeforendoscopicapplica-
talresultsshowthatthedistal-rollgrippercanrotate106 ,and
theactuatedjointscanachievegoodrepeatabilityandaccuracy tions. The instrument is based on geared joints with tendon
with the proposed compensation control scheme. actuation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Snake-like robots for Minimally Invasive Surgery (MIS) robotshouldhaveaﬂexibleshaft,preventingitfromrotating
have attracted increasing attention in the past decade for freely. Another possible method is to roll the gripper at the
endoluminal and transluminal surgical procedures [1], [2]. tip of the instrument which allows in-place rolling and more
Once the robot is in place, ﬂexible devices are deployed stable motion as it does not affect the other joints.
through the robot’s instrument channels. Surgeons can con- Schmitz et al. developed a 4 mm rolling-tip ﬂexible
trol the instruments remotely with the vision provided from instrument of 6 degrees of freedom (DoFs) [8]. The layout
the endoscopic camera mounted on the tip. For accessing of the whole instrument is similar to the human arm. The
◦
small, distal lesions, there is an increasing demand for rolling-tip gripper has a rolling angle of 165 . Based on this
the development of smaller and ﬂexible instruments at the design, a smaller ﬂexible instrument is developed to reach
millimeter scales [3]. narrower natural oriﬁces in this paper.
During MIS, having a distal rolling motion is recom- Currently, many efforts are focusing on the miniaturiza-
mended as it signiﬁcantly improves the overall dexterity for tion of articulation joints and steerable surgical instruments.
single-port and micro-surgical tasks [4], [5]. However, the Thereareseveraltypesofjointdesigns[9]:rolling[10],[11],
commonly used back-end rolling method is known to have sliding [2], [12], rolling sliding [8], and bending [13].
limited precision. The lack of accuracy is because when the Therollinggearjointcanbeusedtopreventslip[11],[14].
back-end rotates, all the distal joints in the front need to Therollingjointdesignconsistsoftworollingjointsaligned
rotate as well, which will result in backlash accumulation perpendicular to each other. Jung-wook et al. proposed
through the kinematic chain. In order to have a rolling guidelines to assist the development of various steerable
motion, the shaft is rotated using the method developed instruments and some parameters were analyzed for the
by Shang et al. [6] and Shin et al. [7] where the whole rolling teeth [15].
arm is rotated. In endoscopic applications, instruments will However, there are many nonlinear problems with rolling
pass through an articulated or ﬂexible endoscope, so the tooth joints in tendon transmission [15]. Tendon-sheath ac-
tuation system is common in designing robots to provide
*Theauthorscontributedequallytothework. remote power transmission [5], [16]. Additionally, tendon
ThisworkwassupportedinpartbyNationalNaturalScienceFoundation compliance and friction can cause some control problems,
ofChinaunderGrant61973211andGrant61672341,inpartbythePillar
such as backlash, hysteresis, direction-dependent behavior,
ProjectofScienceandTechnology Commission ofShanghaiMunicipality
under Grant 17441903800, and in part by supported in part by China and tendon slack [17], [18].
ScholarshipCouncilGrant201806230191. Some methods of modeling and compensations were pro-
1 Institute of Forming Technology & Equipment, Shanghai Jiao Tong
posed [19]. Xu et al. presented a recursive linear estimation
University,Shanghai,China.
2 The Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College London, using actuators and the tip positions to estimate backlash
London,UK. and adding correction factors for motion [20]. Simaan et al.
3 The Institute of Medical Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
describedamethodofcompensationwithapush-pulltypeof
China.
(Correspondingauthors:lexie@sjtu.edu.cn;gzyang@sjtu.edu.cn) backbone[21].Fourierserieswasusedtodescribethetendon
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1860
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:41:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. transmission loss and cross-talk, and the static model was
used for feedforward compensation [20]. Jung-wook et al.
described the coupling effect for the rolling-based joint, and
this joint could be actuated with tension and bend uniformly
[15].
Fig. 3: Schematic view of the ﬂexible arm. This prototype
This paper presents a miniature ﬂexible instrument with
is 3 mm in diameter with 5 DoFs.
a distal-roll gripper and a spring-loaded closing mechanism.
SectionIIintroducestheoverviewoftheinstrument.Section
III describes the compensation model for the instrument,
additional tendon is used to close the gripper. As a result, 9
followedbyexperimentalresultsoftheevaluationinSection
tendonsareguidedthroughtheﬂexibletailandpre-tensioned
IV. Conclusions are given in Section V.
to stiffen the instrument. For translation motion, the tendon
II. DESIGN control unit translates on a guide rail through a rack and
In this section, a new small-size surgical instrument is pinion mechanism.
presented as shown in Fig. 1. When the i2Snake robot The instrument arm layout is shown in Fig. 3. The ﬁrst
[1] is in position during endoscopy, two instruments will jointcanmovethearmleftandrightandmovethearmaway
be deployed through the channels. In order to perform fromthecenter.Thesecondjointcanmovetheinstrumentup
endoscopic surgery and enable more precise operations, the anddown.Andthethirdjointwillmovetheinstrumentback
maximum diameter of the surgical instrument is limited to 3 to the center. All joints work together to get the instrument
mm. to a target position. The gripper incorporates a rolling-tip to
enable front-end rolling.
A. Overall Layout
The instrument is composed of an arm, a tendon control B. Tendon Control Unit
unit, an actuation unit, and controllers. The overall setup is The tendons pass through the instrument tail and are then
shown in Fig. 2. The ﬂexible tail and the arm pass through rearrangedwithinatendonbox,asshowninFig.4.Bowden
the channel of i2Snake. The actuation unit can be installed cables are placed inside the channels to reduce friction.
on the i2Snake robot. Theﬂexibletailcontainstwomulti-lumencatheters,Bow-
The instrument is designed with 5 DoFs including trans- den cables and heat-shrink tubes [8]. The parameters of the
lation. It is actuated using stainless steel tendons. Two instrument components are shown in Table I. Since this is a
antagonistic tendons are ﬁxed at a single capstan to control prototype, the ﬂexible tail is shorter than required.
one DoF in both directions, so one motor actuates two The tendon layout of the base link is shown in Fig. 5. To
tendons simultaneously. The number of motors is reduced make the joint motion stable, four tendons are arranged to
to lower the cost and increase the compactness of the pass through the center of the link cylinder.
system.However,thisintroducestendonslackandhysteresis
and is further discussed in Section III. This can be solved C. Links with Gear
by calculating and compensating the tendon length change Thearmiscomposedoffourlinks.Thelengthofeachlink
and optimizing the design. Therefore, the instrument arm is derived from previous research [22]. A genetic algorithm
is actuated by 8 tendons corresponding to 4 motors. One combined with recorded suturing and anatomical data was
used to design a pair of robotic instruments for the i2Snake
∅
under strict mechanical constraints. Each link is 3 mm in
∅
diameter, as shown in Fig. 5. It has a central hole ( 0.5
∅
mm) for the central tendon and 8 holes ( 0.45 mm) for the
Fig. 2: The overall setup of the ﬂexible instrument. A Fig. 4: The tendon control unit of the ﬂexible instrument.
modular design is adopted for rapid replacement. Two tendons of a joint are actuated by a single capstan.
1861
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:41:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE I: Parameters of Instrument Components
Part Description Size Material
Instrumentarm ∅3mm
Arm Numberofteeth 14 SS316
Moduleofgear 0.1
Tendonsforjoints ∅0.33mm
Tendon Tendonforgripper ∅0.30mm SS316
Gripper Nitinolwire ∅0.305mm Nitinol
Tail Multi-lumencatheter ID:0.4mm,OD:1.6mm PTFE
Fordistal-rolltip ID:0.4mm,OD:0.8mm
Bowden
Fortail ID:1.7mm,OD:2.15mm SS316
cable
Fortendonbox ID:0.5mm,OD:0.9mm Fig. 5: The tendons layout of the base link. The compact
design enables a miniaturized instrument arm.
othertendons.Alllinksare3Dprintedinstainlesssteel.Itis
notedthatthelinksaresplitintotwohalves.Splittingdesign
ensures a good print quality of the gear teeth and limits the
backlash.
Theprimarypurposeofusingageareddesignistoenable
stable rolling. They prevent slip and stabilize the rolling
motion. Therefore, the gears help joint motion get more
predictableandmoreprecise.However,italsohasaproblem
of backlash like spur gear.
Fig. 6: The developed gripper with distal-roll capabilities. A
On both sides of the gears, the joints have cutouts for
Nitinol wire is used as a spring to open the gripper.
the tendons. It is necessary to have those cutouts which can
prevent the tendons from scratching and sharp bending at
large angles [23]. Furthermore, the height of the cutout will
opening is possible thanks to the spring once the tension in
be discussed in Section III.
thetendonisreleased.Thespringisattachedtothejaws,and
thehole ineach jawholds thespring inplace. Thetendon is
D. Distal-roll Tip
attached to the sliding part. When the tendon is pulled, the
To achieve the front-end rolling motion, the distal-roll tip
jaws slide into the tip’s hull, closing the gripper. The jaws
is designed by rotating against the top link. The distal-roll
haveﬂattenedoutsidesurfacesthatﬁttheﬂatsurfacesofthe
tip is driven by two tendons around a central cylinder, as
tip’s hull. These surfaces at the jaws are well polished to
shown in Fig. 6. The height of the cylinder is analyzed in
ensure smooth motion.
Section III.
The tendon for gripper passing through all joints helps to
Once one tendon is pulled and the counterpart tendon
preventslippagetosomeextent.Also,itincreasesthetorque
is released simultaneously, the change in torque direction
resistance of the joints.
causestheupperpartstorotate.Thecontactsurfacesbetween
the cylinder and the top link need to be well polished so
III. COMPENSATION
thatthecylinderpartcanrollsmoothly.Becausethetendons
Inthissection,theactuationcompensationforthetendons
for the distal-roll tip are ﬁxed on one side of the tip, all
is presented. The compensation mitigates joints coupling,
the pulling force is applied to the other side. Therefore,
backlash, and tendon slack.
the distal-roll tip will be twisted at a high rolling angle.
Meanwhile, the tendon of the gripper passes through the
A. Joint Coupling
distal-roll tip and makes it more stable to the joint by
maintaining the tension. When the distal joints are actuated, the proximal joints
When the tendons for distal-roll come out of the top will also be moved by the reaction moment as the tendons
link, they will go around the cylinder so that it will have are passing through. By adding a compensation model of
a large pulling angle and friction. To reduce the friction and joint coupling, this effect can be reduced.
avoid sharp edges from the top link, two Bowden cables are The instrument consists of 5 DoFs. Let q be the vector
mounted to the link to make the distal-roll tendons move of the joint variables: q = [d ,θ ,θ ,θ ,θ ]T. d is the
1 1 2 3 4 1
smoothly. displacement of translation, θ is the bending angle of ith
i
joint.
E. Gripper
As shown in Fig. 7, the tendon length between the upper
It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd existing miniature springs to control and lower gears of links is l . Since the tendons come out
i,j
the gripper. Therefore, a Nitinol wire (Memry Corporation, fromtwodifferentsurfaces,thetendonlengthchangeintwo
USA)isusedasaspring,asshowninFig.6.Thedeveloped different ways. Both are obtained by geometric calculations.
gripper only needs one tendon to close both jaws and the One is the tendon length l (θ ) which changes between
i,j,s i
1862
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:41:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. where ϕ is the initial angle of rolling, R is the radius of
0 r
the cylinder plus the radius of the distal-roll tendon, and h
r
is the height of the cylinder. ϕ determines the maximum
0
rolling angle, so ϕ should be as large as possible during
0
the design.
Intheproposedtendon-drivensystem,theactuatorscannot
control tendons independently, as the variation of tendon’s
length for each joint is different.
Thelengthofthetendonscanbecalculatedwithrespectto
thejointangles.Therearetwotypesoftendonlengthforthe
gearjoint,correspondingtotwokindsofdifferencesbetween
thestateθ andtheinitialstate.Whenthejointmovestothe
i
right/up, the types are as follows:
−
Fig. 7: Schematic view of tendons’ length change. Tendons ∆l (θ )=l (θ ) l (0)
i,j,s i i,j,s i i,j,s
come out from two different surfaces. − − θ (4)
=2r(cosβ cos(β i))
i,j i,j 2
−
∆l (θ )=l (θ ) l (0)
i,j,c i i,j,c i i,j,c
− − θ − θ (5)
=2(r h)(1 cos i) 2dsin i
2 2
Thelengthchangefortherollingtendonisadifferentway
fromthegearjoints.Thedifferenceinlengthchangesforthe
rolling tendon is as follows:
(cid:112)
−
∆l (θ )=l (θ ) l (0) (6)
r 4 r 4 r
where l (0)= (ϕ R )2+h2.
Fig.8:Thegeometryandmotionofthedistal-rolljointatthe r 0 r r
As a result, the length change of each tendon ∆l can
gripper. (a) Two tendons for distal roll move in the opposite be presen(cid:88)ted as follows: i,j
direction around the cylinder. (b) The tendon length change
with a rolling angle. 4
∆l = (x ∆l (θ )+y ∆l (θ )+z ∆l (θ ))
i,j i,j i,j,s i i,j i,j,c i i,j r i
i=1
(7)
the upper and lower gear surface. It is expressed as follows:
where x , y , and z are the tendon states of each gear
i,j i,j i,j
− − θ joint. In other words, the tendon state reﬂects the length
li,j,s(θi)=2r(1 cos(βi,j 2i)) (1) change of tendons at each joint. The relationship between
the angle and tendon length is nonlinear.
where r is the curvature radius of the rolling surface, β is
i,j
aconstantangleand 2βi,j isthemaximumbending angleof B. Tendon Slack
ith joint.
Tendon slack can be obtained by calculating the total
Theotheroneisthetendonlengthl (θ )whichchanges
i,j,c i lengthchangeoftwotendonsforasinglejoint.Therefore,the
between the upper and lower gear cutout. It is expressed as −
tendonslack∆l(θ )+∆l( θ )canbecalculatedasfollows:
follows: i i
− − ≥
l (θ )=2r−2dsinθi −2(r−h)cosθi (2) ∆li,j,s(θi)+∆li,j,s(−θi)=4rco−sβi,j(1− cosθ2i) 0
i,j,c i 2 2 ∆li,j,c(θi)+∆l−i,j,c( ≤θi)=4(r h)(1 cosθ2i)
wherehistheheightofthecutout,andddenotesthedistance ∆l (θ )+∆l ( θ ) 0
r 4 r 4
between the tendon holes and the central axis of the link. (8)
From Equation (1) and (2), r and h primarily affect the −
cross-coupling behavior of the gear joint. Therefore, these The ﬁrst type of tendon slack ∆li,j,s(θi)+∆li,j,s( θi) is
not constant and always greater than zero, which means the
two parameters can be used to determine the design of the
releasing tendon is getting loose when the two tendons are
gear joint.
driven by a single capstan. In this case, the central tendon
Forthedistal-rollmotion,itisactuatedbytwotendons,as
should be pulled to provide the tension to prevent slack.
shown in Fig. 8. The pulling angle α is the angle between
the tendon and the sur(cid:112)face of the link. The length of the As f−or the second type of tendon slack ∆li,j,c(θi) +
tendon is related to the rolling angle θ . ∆li,j,c( θi),whenrisequaltoh,thesumofthetwotendon
4 lengths is always zero. It indicates that both tendons can be
−
l (θ )= [(ϕ θ )R ]2+h2 (3) driven by one motor with limited slack.
r 4 0 4 r r
1863
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:41:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Since the tendon slack of the distal-roll tip ∆l (θ ) + A. Maneuverability
− r 4
∆l ( θ )islessthanzero,thetendonsfordistal-rollbecome
r 4 The instrument prototype was placed on a test-bed and
tighter. It may cause a small rolling angle and make the
a camera was used to record the motion. To measure the
distal-roll tip twisted. To reduce the tension of the distal-roll
maximum bending angle of each joint, the base link of the
tendon, the tendon slack should be smaller. Since ∆l (θ )+
− r 4 joint was ﬁxed and the angle was measured by the camera.
∆l ( θ ) increases with the height of the rolling cylinder ◦
r 4 For gear joints, they could bend up to 82 in one direction.
h .Thesmallerh is,thesmallerthetendonslackanddistal- ◦
r r The maximum bending angle is supposed to be 112 by
roll tension are. However, a small pulling angle α will make
design, because the remaining tendon slack e and the
distal-rollnotsmoothandunstable.Asaresult,theheightof s,i,j
pulling force from other tendons limited the bending angle.
the rolling cylinder part should not be too small. Therefore,
To measure the rolling angle of the distal-roll joint, it
h and α should be considered simultaneously during the
r was rolled to extreme position and the maximum angle was
design. ◦ ◦
measured. It can roll up to 106 , and at least 90 of rolling
The gripper is actuated by a central tendon, which goes
motion is required for surgical applications to manipulate in
throughallthejointsandthetendonlengthchangeisrelated −
all directions. Due to the tendon slack ∆l (θ )+∆l ( θ ),
to∆l (θ ),∆l (θ )and∆l (θ ).Therefore,thetendon r 4 r 4
i,j,s i i,j,c i r 4 the distal-roll tip is a little twisted when it rotates to the
slack of the central tendon is obtained as follows:
extremeposition.Themaximumrollingangleissupposedto
◦
− θ − θ be145 bydesign.Itisbecausethecontactsurfacesbetween
∆l =4r 2rcos 1 2rcos 3,j =9 (9)
j 2 2 the top surface of the link and the bottom surface of the
(cid:40) cylinder are uneven which increases the friction.
Insummary,slackcompensationcanbewrittenasfollows:
− (cid:54) B. Positioning Accuracy
∆l (θ )+∆l ( θ ), j =9
es,i,j = 4ri−,j2ricosθ1 −i,j2rcoisθ3, j =9 (10) To collect motion data of the instrument, the data col-
2 2 lection was done by using an Aurora system control unit
C. Backlash (Northern Digital Inc.) and an ElectroMagnetic (EM) sensor
(Aurora, Micro 6DOF Sensor Tool) which allowed RMS
Thebacklashfortheithjointaccountsforthebacklashin error of 0.48 mm and 100 Hz recording frequency. One
the gear teeth and assumes symmetrical backlash behavior.
miniature EM sensor was equipped at the tip of the instru-
Thebacklashalsocomesfromthegapbetweencapstansand
ment.
motors, and this can be reduced by quality manufacturing.
To validate the accuracy of the compensation control
In this case, the backlash is assumed to be constant. This is
method, the instrument is required to track a given end-
solved using a feed-forward approach. The backlash effect
effectortrajectory.Figure9showstherecordedandpredicted
for the ith joint is given by: trajectories of the gripper under various compensations. The
· joint variables q of the trajectory are obtained by using
θ :=θ +sgn(θ˙) e (11)
i i i b,i RoboticsToolboxforMATLAB.Theredcurvesarethegiven
trajectoryofthegripper,whilethebluedotsaretherecorded
where sgn(θ˙) accounts for the change of motion direction,
i trajectories. In case 1, the instrument has all the compen-
e a constant that represents the actuation compensation to
b,i sations, including decoupling, backlash, and slack. As for
overcome the backlash of the ith joint during the motion
cases 2, 3, and 4, the instrument follows the circle without
transmission.
backlash, slack, and decoupling compensation, respectively.
Incase5,onlythedecouplingisincluded.Intheseﬁvecases,
D. Total Actuation Compensation
the trajectories of the gripper are measured using the EM
Taking all the compensation into account, the total com- sensor shown in Figure 9 and Figure 10.
pensation for coupled actuation joint design is obtained. e Figure 9 shows that the recorded trajectory of case 1
i,j
is deﬁned as the jth tendon actuation error for the ith joint. matches better than the other cases. However, there is an
Therefore, the net actuation error is given as: importantdeviationwhentheinstrumentmovedtothelower
right position of the circle. It also appeared in other cases as
ei,j =eb,i+es,i,j (12) well, so it cannot be solved by compensations. It might be
dueto thediscontinuous motionof thetendon. Areasonable
The actuation compensation for the jth tendon ∆lac,i,j explanation is that the tendons for the second joint are
can be given by: −
slack ∆l (θ ) + ∆l ( θ ) > 0, which may cause
i,j,s 2 i,j,s 2
the tendons to derail from the capstan and a failure of the
∆l =∆l +e (13)
ac,i,j i,j i,j tendon control system. From the results of case 2, case 3,
and case 4, it is shown that the compensation of decoupling
IV. EVALUATION
is more important than slack and backlash. Compared to
Three different tests were performed to evaluate the capa- the backlash, the slack has more impact on the positioning
bilities and compensation of the ﬂexible instrument. results.
1864
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:41:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 11: Repeatability error of the gripper under different
compensation.
Fig. 9: Trajectory tracking of a circle under different com-
pensation cases.
of repeatability is 0.48 mm. The maximum error occurs at
the angle of the quadrant and the three-quarters circle where
the moving direction of second joint changes. It indicates
that a jerk happened in the second joint.
The test-bed was also used to test the repeatability of
the distal-roll motion, which was recorded by a camera. To
measure the repeatability, the distal-roll tip was driven by a
deﬁnedrepetitivemotionﬁvetimes.Themaximaldifference
◦
waslessthan3 .Itmainlycomesfromthetwisteddistal-roll
tip at a high rolling angle.
V. CONCLUSION
Fig. 10: Positioning error of the trajectory tracking under
Thispaperpresentsthedesignofanewﬂexibleinstrument
different compensation cases.
prototype for endoscopic surgery with a distal-roll gripper.
Thenewlybuilt5DoFsinstrumentarmis3mmindiameter.
The instrument arm is composed of three geared joints.
The curves in Figure 10 are the positioning error between
The rolling of the gripper is achieved via two antagonistic
the target trajectory and the recorded trajectory under differ-
tendons. The gripper closes by pulling a tendon and opens
ent compensations. The curves of Case 1 to 5 are in blue,
by a Nitinol spring mechanism. The evaluation results show
orange, yellow, purple and green respectively. As shown in ◦
that the gear joints and the distal-roll tip bend up to 82
Fig. 10, it is shown that the motion with all the compensa- ◦
and 106 respectively. The limitations are mainly due to the
tions has the best result, and the average positioning error
manufacturingtechnique(3Dprinting)andwillbeimproved
of case 1 is 1.15 mm. The average positioning errors for
in future versions.
other cases are 2.04 mm, 2.70 mm, 4.88 mm, and 4.00 mm,
The actuation compensation model was developed with
respectively. The maximum positioning errors for these ﬁve
consideration of joint coupling, tendon slack, and backlash
cases are 3.02 mm, 4.20 mm, 5.91 mm, 8.20 mm, and 7.19
effects. The positioning accuracy was evaluated with dif-
mm, respectively. Both case 1 and case 2 have a small error.
ferent compensation processes. The positioning error and
Thus, the positioning error is relatively small after applying
repeatabilitywere1.15mmand0.48mmrespectively,which
all the compensations combined. Furthermore, the value of
mainlycamefromtheslackofthesecondjoint.Therepeata-
the x-axis and y-axis slack can be obtained from the result
bility of the developed instrument is signiﬁcantly improved
of case 3. The slack of the second joint is larger than the
withproposedthecompensationcontrolmethod.Futurework
sum of the ﬁrst and the third joint. This may be due to the
will be devoted to developing a machine-learning based
anisotropyoftheﬂexibletail,whichismorelikelytobebent
model to solve the compensation.
by the tendons of the second joint in the up/down direction.
C. Repeatability
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The repeatability of the bending angles was recorded
by the EM sensor. The instrument tracked the same circle TheauthorswouldliketothankShenTreratanakulchaifor
trajectory in a loop, as shown in Fig. 11. The average error his great help with 3D printing.
1865
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:41:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [12] Chi Min Seow, Wei Jian Chin, Carl A Nelson, Akiko Nakamura,
Shane M Farritor, and Dmitry Oleynikov. Articulated manipulator
[1] Pierre Berthet-Rayne, Gauthier Gras, Konrad Leibrandt, Piyamate
with multiple instruments for natural oriﬁce transluminal endoscopic
Wisanuvej,AndreasSchmitz,CarloASeneci,andGuang-ZhongYang.
surgery. JournalofMedicalDevices,7(4),2013.
The i2snake robotic platform for endoscopic surgery. Annals of
[13] Jessica Burgner, Philip J Swaney, Trevor L Bruns, Marlena S Clark,
biomedicalengineering,46(10):1663–1675,2018.
D Caleb Rucker, E Clif Burdette, and Robert J Webster. An au-
[2] Wuzhou Hong, Le Xie, Jiahui Liu, Yajing Sun, Keyong Li, and
toclavable steerable cannula manual deployment device: Design and
HeshengWang.Developmentofanovelcontinuumroboticsystemfor
accuracyanalysis. Journalofmedicaldevices,6(4),2012.
maxillary sinus surgery. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics,
[14] MMinorandRMukherjee. Amechanismfordexterousend-effector
23(3):1226–1237,2018.
placementduringminimallyinvasivesurgery. JournalofMechanical
[3] Kai Xu, Jiangran Zhao, and Minxiao Fu. Development of the
Design,1999.
sjtu unfoldable robotic system (surs) for single port laparoscopy.
[15] Jung-wook Suh, Ki-young Kim, Ju-won Jeong, and Jung-ju Lee.
IEEE/ASMETransactionsonMechatronics,20(5):2133–2145,2014.
Design considerations for a hyper-redundant pulleyless rolling joint
[4] JessicaBurgner-Kahrs,DCalebRucker,andHowieChoset. Contin-
with elastic ﬁxtures. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics,
uumrobotsformedicalapplications:Asurvey. IEEETransactionson
20(6):2841–2852,2015.
Robotics,31(6):1261–1280,2015.
[16] QingcongWu,XingsongWang,LinChen,andFengpoDu.Transmis-
[5] Weibang Bai, Qixin Cao, Chuntao Leng, Yang Cao, Masakatsu G
sionmodelandcompensationcontrolofdouble-tendon-sheathactua-
Fujie,andTiewenPan. Anoveloptimalcoordinatedcontrolstrategy
tionsystem.IEEETransactionsonIndustrialElectronics,62(3):1599–
for the updated robot system for single port surgery. The Interna-
1609,2014.
tional Journal of Medical Robotics and Computer Assisted Surgery,
[17] GianlucaPalli,GianniBorghesan,andClaudioMelchiorri. Modeling,
13(3):e1844,2017.
identiﬁcation, and control of tendon-based actuation systems. IEEE
[6] Jianzhong Shang, Konrad Leibrandt, Petros Giataganas, Valentina
TransactionsonRobotics,28(2):277–290,2011.
Vitiello,CarloASeneci,PiyamateWisanuvej,JindongLiu,Gauthier
[18] Gianluca Palli and Claudio Melchiorri. Optimal control of tendon-
Gras, James Clark, Ara Darzi, and Guang-Zhong Yang. A single-
sheathtransmissionsystems. IFACProceedingsVolumes,39(15):73–
portroboticsystemfortransanalmicrosurgery—designandvalidation.
78,2006.
IEEEroboticsandautomationletters,2(3):1510–1517,2017.
[19] RajarshiRoy,LongWang,andNabilSimaan.Modelingandestimation
[7] Won-HoShinandDong-SooKwon. Surgicalrobotsystemforsingle-
offriction,extension,andcouplingeffectsinmultisegmentcontinuum
port surgery with novel joint mechanism. IEEE Transactions on
robots. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 22(2):909–920,
BiomedicalEngineering,60(4):937–944,2013.
2016.
[8] Andreas Schmitz, Shen Treratanakulchai, Pierre Berthet-Rayne, and
[20] KaiXuandNabilSimaan. Actuationcompensationforﬂexiblesurgi-
Guang-Zhong Yang. A rolling-tip ﬂexible instrument for minimally calsnake-likerobotswithredundantremoteactuation.InProceedings
invasive surgery. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and 2006 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
Automation(ICRA),pages379–385.IEEE,2019. 2006.ICRA2006.,pages4148–4154.IEEE,2006.
[9] FilipJel´ınek,EwoutAArkenbout,PaulWJHenselmans,RobPessers,
[21] Nabil Simaan, Kai Xu, Wei Wei, Ankur Kapoor, Peter Kazanzides,
and Paul Breedveld. Classiﬁcation of joints used in steerable instru-
RussellTaylor,andPaulFlint. Designandintegrationofatelerobotic
mentsforminimallyinvasivesurgery—areviewofthestateoftheart. systemforminimallyinvasivesurgeryofthethroat.TheInternational
JournalofMedicalDevices,9(1),2015. journalofroboticsresearch,28(9):1134–1153,2009.
[10] Tin Yan Nai, Just L Herder, and Gabrie¨lle JM Tuijthof. Steerable
[22] A. Schmitz, P. Berthet-Rayne, and G. Yang. Endoscopic bi-manual
mechanical joint for high load transmission in minimally invasive roboticinstrumentdesignusingageneticalgorithm.In2019IEEE/RSJ
instruments. Journalofmedicaldevices,5(3),2011. International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
[11] Pierre Berthet-Rayne, Konrad Leibrandt, Kiyoung Kim, Carlo A
pages2975–2982,Nov2019.
Seneci, Jianzhong Shang, and Guang-Zhong Yang. Rolling-joint
[23] Yong-Jae Kim, Shanbao Cheng, Sangbae Kim, and Karl Iagnemma.
design optimization for tendon driven snake-like surgical robots. In
A stiffness-adjustable hyperredundant manipulator using a variable
2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
neutral-line mechanism for minimally invasive surgery. IEEE trans-
Systems(IROS),pages4964–4971.IEEE,2018. actionsonrobotics,30(2):382–395,2013.
1866
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:41:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 