   
2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
VariPath: A Database for Modelling the Variance of Human 
Pathways in Manual and HRC Processes with Heavy-Duty Robots 
Mohamad Bdiwi*, Ann-Kathrin Harsch, Paul Reindel, Matthias Putz 
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology IWU, Chemnitz 
  Abstract—  Unlike  robots,  humans  do  not  have  constant  studies also has investigated the human movement behavior 
movements. Their pathways are individually changeable and  created  a  dataset  for  human  detection [8],  [9]  and  [10]. 
influenced by circumstances. This paper presents a method to  However, none of them has considered the requirements for 
investigate  human  pathway  variations  in  a  real  study.  In  modelling the variance of human movements in the industrial 
systematically selected tasks, human pathways are examined  sectors. In [11], a comparison for the human reactions against 
for 100 participants in manual and human-robot collaboration  a moving robot and a moving human is presented. Inter alia, 
(HRC) scenarios. As a result, the variations of pathways are  the human walking behavior in HRC was determined in [12] 
presented depending on various features: e.g. in nearly all cases  and [13]. Here, Bardot et al. defined different tasks with a 
the variance of women’s walking pathways is smaller than that  large-scale robot and determined the walking velocity and the 
of men. VariPath database can be used in any planning process 
distance of the human to the TCP (Tool Center Point) or the 
of manual or HRC scenarios to ensure safety and efficiency. 
robot  base.  However,  in  the  most  mentioned  works  the 
I.  INTRODUCTION  human individuality still has no real influence on the robot 
path planning and robot control, as is shown in Fig.1.  
Human-robot-collaboration  (HRC)  as  a  man-machine 
system increases the flexibility and efficiency, particularly in 
complex  or  time  consuming  industrial  tasks  [1],  [2].  In 
addition, heavy-duty collaborative robots improve ergonomic 
and physically stressful tasks at all interaction levels which 
are mentioned in [3] and [4]. However, working together 
with a high payload robot can include a serious risk for 
humans because of the large workspace and high potential 
forces of the robot. According to safety requirements, the 
calculation of safety distances is usually based on the worst-
case scenario in which the human walks straight to the source 
of danger. Safety distances are related to the robot’s and 
human’s velocities and assumed to be fixed values – which 
do not correspond to the reality. Therefore, industrial HRC 
processes with  heavy-duty  robots  can  rarely  be  designed 
efficiently, even at the lowest interaction level (fenceless 
shared workspace, without shared tasks). If the real human 
movements, and in particular the variance of pathways, can 
be  described  as  a  function  of  the  human  tasks  and 
environmental conditions, the HRC processes can be made   
equally safe and efficient.   Fig. 1 Advantages of the proposed work in comparison to the 
state of the art. 
Processes in HRC can be controlled and secured in many 
ways. In addition to visual monitoring of the process [3],  The aim of this work to get efficient HRC scenarios 
another innovative concept comprises the control of HRC  without any lacks in the safety requirement. This efficient 
processes via brainwaves [5]. These approaches secure the  HRC-planning  should  take  into  account  different 
online process. During planning and conception of HRC- requirements  and  properties;  e.g.  human  anthropology, 
processes,  verified  offline  information,  procedures  and  human tasks, robot tasks and environmental conditions (as 
methods must be available. Empirical studies in the HRC  shown  in  “individual  planning  conditions”  in  Fig. 2)”. A 
context often deal with human acceptance, wellbeing and  primitive approach to consider and investigate the variance of 
user-friendliness of new technologies [6], [7]. Some further  human  motion  behavior  and  walking  pathways  in  the 
planning  process  of  industrial  heavy  payload  HRC 
 
applications is proposed in [14]. Based on that approach, this 
This project has been funded by the European Union (EU) and the  paper  presents  extensive  investigations  as  an  important 
European Fund for Regional Development (EFRE). 
database for modeling the human pathways. The first step is 
* Mohamad Bdiwi is the head of robotics department within Fraunhofer 
to  collect  a  large  amount  of  data,  which  covers a  wide 
Institute for machine tools and forming technologies “IWU”, Chemnitz, 
Germany  (phone:  0049  371  5397-1658;  e-mail:  Mohamad.bdiwi@  spectrum of industrial tasks and body dimensions combined 
iwu.fraunhofer.de).  
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1821
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:11:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
with individual human movement and behavior. A systematic  Fig. 4 illustrates the relevant specifications examined in the 
HRC  planning  process  has  been  considered  with  new  study. A reasonable combination of the tested specifications 
boundary  conditions  in  the  HRC-tasks.  Based  on  these  results in 16 different boundary conditions for ”walking“. 
conditions  an  empirical  study  has  been  performed.  The 
collected  dataset  could  be  the  main  core  for  new  robot 
planning tools in HRC scenarios. Furthermore, it can be used 
for safe robot path planning. 
 
Fig. 2 Databased planning process in heavy-duty HRC, due 
to moving robots and individual human behavior. 
II.  INVESTIGATED CONDITIONS AND PARAMETERS 
                   
A.  Investigation strategy 
Fig. 4 Specified investigated variables. 
To provide a reliable database representing the variance of 
human motion behavior in industry, it is necessary to select 
B. Specific tested scenarios 
experimental conditions that correspond to real production 
conditions.   Fig. 5 shows the layouts of the four test scenarios. The 
As a first step, typical manual manufacturing activities  robot stage is related to the number of the scenarios. 
were analyzed and listed in various industries (automotive, 
Scenario  1  investigated  the  avoidance  strategy  of  the 
agriculture, etc.). It turned out that “walking“ as well as 
participants (preferred side of walking along the obstacle) 
”picking and placing“ are the most frequently performed 
and the variance while passing the obstacle. A 6 m long path 
activities in assembly workspaces. Since “walking” ocupies 
included a central obstacle (trolley, dimensions: 780/ 430/ 
the larger space and holds the greater danger potential due to 
560 mm). At the starting point a SLC (Small Load Carrier, 
an inreased collision risk with the robot, it was investigated 
dimensions: 300 x 200 x 150 mm) of 10 kg had to be gripped 
in this paper.  
at a height of 900 mm. The participant had to go from start to 
end point and avoid the obstacle on a freely selectable side. 
In each of four rounds the participant had to walk forth and 
back four times. After each round, the obstacle was shifted by 
100 mm in the preferred walking direction without being 
noticed by the participant.  
Scenario 2 determined the variance in pathways during a 
surprisingly  occurring  distraction.  The  participant  had  to 
walk 3 and 6 m in each pass, which consisted of four walks 
back and forth, respectively. A SLC of 10 kg also had to be 
randomly picked up and carried while walking. In some cases 
(randomized and without prior-warning of the participant) the 
distraction was activated in the form of a signal lamp with a 
siren.  
 
Scenario  3  served  to  investigate  the  pathways  when 
Fig. 3 Most frequent tasks in the industrial sectors. 
bypassing a robot over a path length of 6 m. Depending on 
Despite the general definition of the task, there is a large  scenario  1,  the  starting  point  was  chosen  so  that  the 
number of possible influencing variables. Thus it is possible  participant had to avoid the robot on his preferred side. The 
to differentiate  how  long  the  pathway  is  or  whether  the  robot arm with a standard industrial gripper pointed in the 
human has to fulfill a task or not. In addition, the human can  direction of the walking path at a height of approx. 1.40 m 
be  distracted  while  walking  or  fulfilling  tasks  (such  as  and with a constant eccentricity of the robot arm of 1.15 m. 
carrying an object).   The participant had to bypass the stationary robot as an 
1822
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:11:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
obstacle and randomly pick up and carry a 10 kg SLC for  of the participants are varying extremely, e.g. body-height 
half of the passes.  ranges between 1600mm until almost 2000mm and body-
weight ranges from 45kg to 120kg. All this diversities make 
In  scenario  4  the  test  person  had  to  walk  a  straight 
the  collected  measurements  an  optimal  database  for 
distance of 3 and 6 m while the robot was moving, providing 
modelling the variance of the human movements in relation 
a diffuse distraction. A SLC of 10 kg also had to be randomly 
to their body anthropometry.         
picked up for half of the runs. In total, 96 curves were 
recorded per participant in all presented walking scenarios.   
 Test layout to evaluate the pathways. 
Fig. 5
Scenario 1: robot stage 0, no robot in sight, or space for human movement available   
Scenario 2: robot stage 1, stationary robot within sight, but not in space for human movement  
Scenario 3: robot stage 2, stationary robot as an obstacle in space for human movement   
Scenario 4: robot stage 3, moving robot within sight, but not in space for human movement  
Table 1  
III.  PARTICIPANTS AND MOTION CAPTURE SYSTEM  Composition of the participant sample. 
A.  Participants 
Table 1 shows the composition of the 100 examined 
participants. The first 10 test persons were evaluated as part 
of preliminary investigations to insure the accuracy of all 
required  measurement  setups.  Before  the  evaluation  and 
using acquired data in the modelling, the plausibility of the 
measurement for the rest participants have been again tested.  
Due  to  technical  defects  or  missing  data,  about  20 
measurement series could not be used in the final evaluation. 
Hence, the evaluated data differs only marginally from the 
total recorded data set.  
As is shown in Table 1, about 65% from the evaluated 
measurement have been performed on men with age average 
between  twenty  and  sixty-five  years  old,  while  the  age 
structure of the female-participants ranges between eighteen 
 
and fifty years old. As is also shown, the body anthropometry 
1823
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:11:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
B.  Motion capture system  to the defined start point at [x=0, y=0]; 2. rotating the black 
curve over a linear fit to the axis of the end point [x=0]; 3. 
The human motion data was recorded with an inertial 
filtering the continuous black curve over a moving average; 
motion capture system (XSENS AwindaⓇ) using 17 sensors 
4. determining the turning points (as start and end points of 
attached  to  body  parts  (Fig.  6).  Accelerometers,  rate 
the single curves) over the local minima and maxima (in y-
gyroscopes and magnetometers are included in the inertial 
direction) to split up the continuous curve into single curves 
measurement  units  (IMUs)  enabling  the  determination of 
(per path). All steps were repeated for each single curve. 
acceleration, velocity and position. Using algorithms and a 
Thus, the resulted red curve had correct start-points and the 
generated  3D  human  model,  human  movements  can  be 
end-points were just on the right axis. 
reproduced. 
 
Fig. 6. Applying the Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) to 
specific anatomical landmarks and the generated virtual 3-D 
human model of XsensⓇ 
Compared to an optical system, this system is not affected   
Fig. 7. Method of data recording and post processing of the 
by occlusion. However, it is influenced by the magnetic field. 
pathways for each participant. Shown example: scenario 1, 
It causes a drift of the measured values and has to be taken 
central  obstacle  (E0,  with/  without  SLC).  a)  and  b)  
into account. 
Participant 13: female, P95 body height. (8 pathways)  c)
  All  females  of  P95  body  height,  without  SLC.  (20 
C. Preparation of the participants 
pathways) 
All participants were equipped with sensors as shown in 
Fig. 5. The 17 sensors were attached with a skin-friendly tape  Fig. 7 b) shows the second step, the curve fitting. Since a 
to given anatomical landmarks. Next, the anthropometric data  continuous pathway was recorded under different conditions 
of the test persons were measured and implemented into the  (e.g. “with SLC”/ “without SLC”), it was not immediately 
possible  to  compare  paths  with  the  same  conditions.  In 
recording software (MVN AnalyzeⓇ), creating a virtual 3-D 
addition, the starting point of the backward path was the 
human model. 
endpoint of the forward path and vice versa. So the single 
curves  of  the  backward  paths  were  shifted  to  the  same 
IV.  DETERMINING THE VARIANCE IN PATHWAYS 
starting point of the forward paths, were rotated by 180° 
towards the y-axis and fitted exactly to the end point [x=0, 
A.  Data evaluation 
y=6] . Furthermore, the test conditions were assigned to the 
The data of the pelvis sensor (Fig. 6 B) was used to  individual curves. In the third step all curves with same test 
evaluate the pathways. Unlike the center of mass, which  conditions were selected. Fig. 7 c) illustrates, for example, 
changes rapidly with the human posture, the position data of  the  results  for all female  participants of the  95th height 
this specific sensor is more constant. Due to the magnetic  percentile who walked around the obstacle without a SLC. 
field prevailing in the test field, the measured values hold a 
translational and/ or rotational drift. In Fig. 7 a) the recorded  B.  Calculation of the percentiles 
black  curve  demonstrates  the  drift  for  the  path-ways  of 
To  compare  different  variables,  e.g.  gender  or  test 
scenario 1: it does not start at the defined starting point [x=0, 
conditions, curves recorded under the same variables were 
y=0] and theoretically runs through the obstacle.  
grouped. Fig.8 shows the steps to compare the distributions 
Fig. 7 a) and b) show the first steps of post processing for  of the pathways of all females, who walked with and without 
scenario 1, exemplarily for test person 13. Participant 13 was  SLC in scenario 1. Fig.8 d) shows the curves of all females 
a  woman  with  a  height  of  the  95th  percentile.  This  without  carrying  a  SLC.  Fig.8  e)  depicts  the  calculated 
(randomly) means that at least 95% of German women are  percentiles for discrete points. The range between the 2.5th 
smaller.   and 97.5th percentiles represent 95% of the measured values 
and is pictured with the turquoise curve. The dark green 
The data in Fig. 7 a) was corrected in the following steps 
curve includes 80% of the measured values. Fig.8 f) shows 
to obtain the drift-adjusted red curve and to split up the 
the comparison of the percentiles of all females with and 
continuous black curve in individual forward and backward 
without SLC: Carrying an object does not seem to have a 
paths: 1. shifting the actual starting point of the black curve 
clear influence. 
1824
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:11:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
 
 
Fig. 8. Data post processing for comparing the variance in 
pathways for the different test conditions. d) to f)  All  Fig. 9. Percentiles and variance of the pathway curves in 
females. (104/ 208 pathways)  scenario 3 for all males who walked around the robot on the 
right side.  a) with SLC, b) without SLC. 
C. Comparison of percentile curves 
The  variances  of  the  four  tested  scenarios  and  test 
The procedure described above for drift correction, data  conditions were compared by using the variances ∆1m, ∆3m 
preparation and determination of percentiles was applied to 
and ∆5m (Fig. 9). It was found that 85% of the participants 
all data of the four scenarios. The curves in all scenarios were 
chose the right side when bypassing the obstacle in scenario 
always differentiated regarding gender (“male”/ “female”), 
1. Therefore Fehler! Verweisquelle konnte nicht gefunden 
body height (“percentile 5”/ “50”/ “95” according to DIN 
werden.  presents  the  variance  values  of  the  specific 
33402) and weight (“with”/ ”without SLC”). In addition, the 
following parameters were considered in the scenarios: In  scenarios for the “right” avoidance strategy and a distance of 
scenario 1 a distinction was made between the eccentricity  “6 m”. 
(“E0” - “E3”) and the avoidance strategy (“right”/ “left”). In 
scenario  2  the  influencing  factor  “with”/  “without  Table  2  Variance  of  95%  of  the  recorded  pathways, 
distraction” was evaluated. In dependence of the preferred  calculated over the delta of the 2.5th and 97.5th percentile 
bypassing  direction  scenario  3  results  in  an  avoidance  (∆95%,1m, ∆95%,3m, ∆95%,5m).  Conditions: distance “6 
strategy of “right”/“left”. Scenario 4 comprised a constant  m”, *bypassing direction (avoidance strategy) “right”  
“diffuse distraction” by the moving robot. 
Fig. 9 presents an example of the results for scenario 3. It 
illustrates all curves including the percentiles of the male 
participants who bypassed the robot on the “right” side with 
and  without  SLC.  It  was  found  that  the  width  of  the 
percentiles, which are depicted here as scatter or variance, is 
smaller without carrying a SLC for all illustrated cases for 
males in scenario 3. Furthermore, the variance in the first 
half of the pathways is smaller compared to the variance 
when the robot was passed.  
 
Based on Table 2 the following valuable findings can be 
concluded: 
  1. Gender seems to have the most influence: in nearly all 
1825
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:11:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
tested  scenarios  females  exhibited  a  smaller  variance  in  human behavior during the work in a shared workspace with 
path-ways compared to males.  various mobile agents.  
[1] Colledani, M., Gyulai, D., Monostori, L., Urgo, M., Unglert, J., 
2. The robot as an obstacle has a distinct influence: ∆3m 
van  Houten,  F.,  2016.  Design  and  management  of 
as the variance in the middle of the pathway was smaller  reconfigurable assemRbElFyE lRinEeNsC iEnS t he automotive industry. 
than ∆1m and ∆5m in all cases of scenario 3.  CIRP Annals 65 (1), 441–446. 
 
3. Carrying  a  SLC  has  an  ambiguous  influence:  the  [2] Delang, K., Todtermuschke, M., Bdiwi, M., Putz, M., 2018. 
variance in pathways was rather greater when carrying an  An approach of service modeling for the demand-driven 
implementation  of  Human-Robot-Interaction  in 
object, but this did not apply to scenario 4 and females in 
manufacturing,  in: 2018  IEEE  14th  International 
scenario 3.   
Conference  on  Automation  Science  and  Engineering 
4. The diffuse direction by a moving robot seems to have 
(CASE).  2018  IEEE  14th  International  Conference  on 
no influence: the variances of scenario 4 are rather small  Automation  Science  and  Engineering  (CASE),  Munich, 
com-pared to scenario 2, but they did not differ clearly.  Germany. 20.08.2018 - 24.08.2018. IEEE, pp. 705–710. 
[3] Bdiwi, M., Pfeifer, M., Sterzing, A., 2017. A new strategy for 
V.  CONCLUSION  ensuring human safety during various levels of interaction 
with industrial robots. CIRP Annals 66 (1), 453–456. 
Human  movements  in  different  HRC-scenarios  were 
[4] Aaltonen, I., Salmi, T., Marstio, I., 2018.  Refining levels of 
systematically analyzed with a motion capture system during   
collaboration  to  support  the  design  and  evaluation  of 
an extensive study. With more than 1800 measurements and 
human-robot interaction in the manufacturing industry. 
9300 walking paths a huge database for human pathways was  CIRP Annals 72  (2018), 93-98 
generated  for  industrial  applications.  Post processing  and  [5]  Mohammed, A., Wang, L., 2018. Brainwaves driven human-
evaluation of the data show that women exhibited a smaller  robot collaborative assembly. CIRP Annals 67 (1), 13–16. 
width in the walking variance than men. When an obstacle, in  [6] Brauer, R.R., 2017. Akzeptanz kooperativer Roboter im 
particular a robot, was bypassed, the variance at the bypass  industriellen  Kontext.  Universitätsverlag  Chemnitz, 
 
point was the smallest. Finally, carrying an object had a  Chemnitz, 145, xxv. 
different influence on the variance.  [7] D’Addona,  D.M.,  Bracco,  F.,  Bettoni,  A.,  Nishino,  N., 
 
Carpanzano, E., Bruzzone, A.A., 2018. Adaptive automation 
Taking into account the variance of human movements in 
and  human  factors  in  manufacturing:  An  experimental 
planning of HRC guarantees the natural moving behavior of 
assessment for a cognitive approach. CIRP Annals 67 (1), 
humans. Furthermore, the robot trajectory can be planned   
455–458. 
avoiding collisions, e.g. by using the ∆95% as the probable 
[8] Taiana,  M.,  Nascimento,  C.,  Bernardino,  A,.  2013.  An 
human movement space. In addition, the robot trajectory can 
Improved Labelling for the INRIA Person Data Set for 
be generated online considering the individual human profile  Pedestrian  Detection,  Iberian  Conference  on  Patern 
and required tasks as is presented in Fig. 10.  Recognition and Image Analysis, pp 286-295. 
 
[9] Cao, Z., Simon, T., Wei, S., Sheikh Y., 2017. Realtime Mulit-
Person 2D Pose Estimation using Part Affinity Fields, IEEE 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 
[10]Villasenor,  L.M.,  Ponce,  H.,  Espinosa-Loera,  R.A.,  2018. 
 
Multimodal Database for Human Activity Recognition and 
Fall Detection, MPDI Proceedings 2018, 2, 1237.  
[11]Höcherl, J., Wrede, B., Schlegl, T., 2017. Motion Analysis of 
 
Human-Human  and  Human-Robot  Cooperation  During 
Industrial  Assembly  Tasks,  in: Proceedings  of  the  5th 
International Conference on Human Agent Interaction. the 
 
5th  International  Conference,  Bielefeld,  Germany. 
17.10.2017 - 20.10.2017. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 425–429. 
[12]Bortot, D., Ding, H., Antonopolous, A., Bengler, K., 2012. 
Human  motion  behavior  while  interacting  with  an 
industrial robot. Work (Reading, Mass.) 41 Suppl 1, 1699–
1707. 
 
[13]Szemes,  P.T.,  Korondi,  P.,  Hashimoto,  H.  2006,  Human 
Walking  Behavior  Model  for  Intelligent  Space,  IEEE 
  International  Conference  on  Mechatronics,  DOI: 
10.1109/ICMECH.2006.252585  
   
[14]Harsch, A., Delang K., Bdiwi, M., Breitfeld M., P.M., 2017. 
Fig. 10. Future work based on VariPath database  
Safe Human-Robot-Collaboration (HRC) based on a new 
The  collected  dataset  can  be  easily  upgraded  by  concept  considering  human  movement  variability, 
Vancouver. 
investigation other scenarios. In other words, the influence of   
other variables on the human pathways and behavior in the 
industrial  sectors  could  be  defined  and  modelled.  One 
Interesting scenario is by modelling the pathway variance and 
1826
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:11:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 