   
2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Pinbot: A Walking Robot with Locking Pin Arrays for Passive 
Adaptability to Rough Terrains 
Seonghoon Noh, Student Member, IEEE and Aaron M. Dollar, Senior Member, IEEE 
d  Abstract— To date, many control strategies for legged robots 
have  been  proposed  for  stable  locomotion over  rough  and 
unstructured  terrains.  However,  these  approaches  require 
sensing information throughout locomotion, which may be noisy 
or unavailable at times. An alternative solution to rough terrain 
locomotion is a legged robot design that can passively adapt to 
the variations in the terrain without requiring knowledge of 
them. This paper presents one such solution in the design of a 
walking robot that employs pin array mechanisms to passively 
adapt to rough terrains. The pins are passively dropped over the 
terrain to conform to its variations and then locked to provide a 
statically stable stance. Locomotion is achieved with parallel 
four-bar  linkages  that  swing  forward  the  platforms  in  an 
alternating  manner.  Experimental  evaluation  of  the  robot 
demonstrates that the pin arrays enable legged locomotion over 
rough terrains under open-loop control. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Figure 1. The walking robot standing with three pin arrays 
The mechanical design and control strategy for legged 
flexures, have been used to assist in walking, climbing, and 
robots  are  often  closely  tied,  giving  rise  to  various 
standing over rocky terrains in various situations. Kim et al. 
maneuvering capabilities. Some recent legged robots such as 
designed SpinybotII, a wall-climbing robot, with compliant 
the MIT Cheetah 3 [1] and ANYmal [2] feature the prominent 
microspines  that  engage  the  asperities  on  vertical,  rough 
universal-revolute leg topology. Thanks to the use of elaborate 
surfaces to cling without actuation and to climb while carrying 
control methods necessitated by the high number of joints and 
a payload of its own weight [7]. Carpenter et al. have also 
actuators in these robots, they are able to achieve impressive 
utilized arrays of compliant microspines for locomotion over 
dynamic maneuvers. In contrast, designs intended for more 
rough, vertical surfaces but in a rotary configuration as in a 
quasi-static  locomotion  have  also  enabled  legged  robot 
wheel [8]. Another variation known as a linearly-constrained 
locomotion  while  allowing  a  simpler  control  approach, 
spine mechanism also consists of sharp, needle-like tips but 
sometimes even open-loop. Notable examples of these include 
are constrained to prismatic motion and uses compression 
RHex [3], a hexapod robot with compliant, arched legs for 
springs for compliance. Wang et al. used this mechanism to 
rough terrain locomotion, and Sprawlita [4], a robot with 
assist a human-scale robot in walking over rough terrains [9, 
pneumatically  actuated  prismatic  legs  and  compliant  hip 
10]. Other unique applications of microspines include those 
joints. 
designed by Parness et al. as anchors for the JPL LEMUR IIb 
One mechanism that has not yet been explored in legged  robot  for  exploration  and  drilling  in  microgravity 
robots is a pin array, but it has been briefly explored in a few  environments like asteroids [11] and microspines in a grapple 
other  robotic  applications.  Perhaps  the  earliest  robotic  created by Nguyen et al. for perching in aerial robots [12]. 
application of a pin array was a universal gripper concept 
In this work, we present the design of a walking robot that 
named the ‘Omnigripper’ [5] in which two surfaces consisting 
uses pin arrays to passively adapt to rough terrains during 
of pin arrays are lowered onto an object to adapt to its top 
locomotion. The pins are released to passively drop onto the 
surface and then closed like a parallel gripper for grasping. A 
terrain and are “locked” using a locking plate that applies a 
more recent adaption of pin arrays in a universal gripper was 
lateral force on them. The locked pins support a statically 
presented  in  [6].  In  this  universal  gripper,  pins  with  an 
stable stance while other pins are moved forward via a parallel 
elliptical  cross  section  are  arranged  perpendicularly  for 
four-bar linkage in an alternating stance gait. We first discuss 
jamming through relative rotation. The jammed pins then 
the pin array mechanism and its design parameters. We then 
provide the necessary lateral force for grasping objects. 
present the locomotion mechanism and the corresponding 
In mobile robots, a slightly different mechanism known as  locomotion strategy. Lastly, we demonstrate the pin arrays’ 
microspines,  which  are  small,  sharp  tips  with  compliant  ability to passively adapt to rough terrains. 
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation,  II.  PIN ARRAY MECHANISM 
grant IIS-1637647. 
A pin array in this work is a set of densely populated 
S. Noh and A. Dollar are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering 
prismatic joints whose stroke is unactuated and is specified 
and Materials Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520 USA (e-
mail: seonghoon.noh, aaron.dollar@yale.edu).  by the pins’ contact with the environment or lack thereof, i.e., 
 
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1438
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 14:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
below the locking plate. At 
(a)  (b)  (c) 
the  other  end,  the  locking 
plate is displaced with respect 
to the other two support plates 
and is jamming the pins. 
While  this  is a function 
generation problem in linkage 
synthesis,  it  is  sufficient  to 
  create a linkage that has the 
following  characteristics 
Figure 2. (a) A pin array in swing phase hovers over a rough terrain. (b) 
The pins are released to fall under their weight and passively adapt to  because only the two ends of 
the terrain. (c) The locking plate (white) is pulled horizontally to lock  the  motion  range  are  of 
the pins.  interest.  The  transmission 
 
angles  across  the  linkage 
resting on a surface or being suspended in air. Instead, the 
should seek to maximize the  Figure 3.The six-bar linkage for 
actuation in a pin array mechanism locks the pins such that  locking. A DC motor actuates 
locking force when the slider 
their stroke remains fixed. By passively dropping onto and  the  input  link  (orange)  to 
link  is  approaching  the 
conforming to the terrain rather than being actuated by a  translate  the  locking  plate 
locking  configuration.  The  (green) and jam the pins. 
motor or a spring, the pin arrays achieve passive adaptability 
motion range of the slider link 
and thus reduce the likelihood of postural disturbance due to 
should be great enough to contact as many pins as possible. 
ground reaction forces. Moreover, the pins’ vertical, prismatic 
Given these conditions, the lateral force on the locking plate is 
orientation suggests several favorable attributes for legged 
approximately multiplied by the mechanical advantage of the 
locomotion such as constrained vertical linear motion for 
lever colored in cyan in Figure 3. 
obstacle clearance and minimal horizontal forces. 
B.  Pin array density 
A.  Pin array locking mechanism 
The density of the pin array primarily affects the pin 
The pin locking strategy in this work embodies a principle 
arrays’ ability to support the robot’s weight and to passively 
similar to that of other material jamming mechanisms seen in 
adapt to terrains. As described previously, the pins are jammed 
variable stiffness robots. One notable example is the universal 
by a locking plate that is actuated to move laterally against the 
gripper based on granular jamming by Brown et al. [13]. 
pins, and the resulting frictional force locks the pins. This 
Follmer et al. and Stanley et al. have used particle jamming to 
locking method induces a double shear stress on the pins. 
modulate the stiffness of tactile user interfaces [14, 15]. Kim 
Assuming that the locking plate and the pins are perfectly 
et  al.  used  layer  jamming  to  create  a  variable  stiffness 
perpendicular and  that the  shear  stress  is evenly divided 
mechanism for applications in minimally invasive surgeries 
between the two shear planes, the shear stress in a single shear 
[16]. 
plane for each pin is given 𝜏𝜏by=  𝐹𝐹
In contrast to these jamming mechanisms which constrain  2𝑁𝑁𝜋𝜋𝜋𝜋2
continuous or discrete, adjacent bodies, the pin array locking      (1) 
mechanism must constrain discrete, separated bodies. The 
where F is the lateral force applied by the locking plate, N is 
mechanism must also be able to exert a sufficient force parallel 
the number of pins in the array, and r is the radius of the pin. 
to the pins to support the weight of the robot. Since the pins 
will have different strokes when standing on a rough terrain,  Clearly, the minimum locking force to support the robot 
the locking mechanism must not be dependent on the pins’  weight depends on the coefficient of friction between the 
length. Such mechanism would confine its motion to a plane  locking plate and the pins. For a given coefficient of friction, 
perpendicular to the pins’ motion.  the locking force should be sufficiently high to prevent the pins 
from slipping but not too high that the pins fail in shear. 
A one degree-of-freedom locking mechanism may consist 
Calculating this range of allowable forces can be difficult since 
of numerous, coupled components that individually constrain 
not all pins will experience the same force due to variations in 
the pins or a monolithic component that can affect the pins 
their pose upon locking and/or variations in the locking plate. 
simultaneously.  The  former  can  quickly  result  in  a 
Also, simply using a stronger pin material can unnecessarily 
complicated  design  since  the  pins  are  expected  to  be 
increase the total weight, which in turn increases the required 
compactly placed. As for the latter, an appropriate, monolithic 
locking force. Therefore, a high pin array density is required 
component already exists in a pin array assembly: the pin array 
to use a light pin material and to distribute the shear stress 
support plates. Therefore, a pin array support plate can be 
among the pins supporting the robot’s weight. 
added to jam the pins by applying a lateral force on the pins to 
lock them via friction.  One consequence of a high pin density is the likelihood that 
some pins will not lock at all. Since the force exerted on each 
The locking mechanism that translates this locking plate is 
pin is approximately proportional to the amount of axial 
a six-bar rocker-slider linkage, shown in Figure 3 and is driven 
misalignment between the holes in the fixed support plates and 
by a small DC motor. The two additional links in comparison 
the moving locking plate, not all pins will have enough friction 
to a typical four-bar rocker-slider linkage allow the motor to 
to support their own weight. Thus, these unlocked pins will not 
be placed above the pin array. At one end of the rocker’s 
share the shear force nor will they support the weight of the 
motion range, the locking plate ideally is perfectly aligned 
robot. The minimum force the locking plate must apply on the 
with the other two pin array support plates that lie above and 
1439
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 14:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
𝜇𝜇
𝑠𝑠
pins to support the robot’s total mass, m, is dependent on  , 
First gait phase  Second gait phase 
the coefficient of static friction between the locking plate and 
the pins. Therefore, the average minimum shear stress in a  (a)  (b) 
shear plane of a locked pi𝜏𝜏n is=  𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
𝑎𝑎 2𝑛𝑛𝜇𝜇 𝜋𝜋𝜋𝜋2
  𝑠𝑠   (2) 
 
where n is the number of actually locked pins.   
III.  LOCOMOTION 
(c)  (d) 
In this section, we develop the design and control strategy 
for a walking robot that can achieve locomotion under open-
loop control by leveraging the passive adaptability of the pin 
array mechanism. The walking robot in this work adopts a 
   
statically stable gait to accommodate the locking speed of the 
pin  array  mechanism  prototype  and  to  evaluate  its 
performance without requiring a complex control method. We 
(e)  (f) 
discuss how multiple pin array mechanisms can be combined 
and coordinated to achieve rough terrain locomotion. 
A.  Pin array layout 
   
The layout and the number of pin arrays must be such that 
the robot can maintain stability during locomotion, so we look 
to a stability metric for selecting the configuration. Several  robot center of gravity  pin array center of gravity 
stability  metrics  for  legged  robots  have  been  previously  stance phase pin array   swing phase pin array 
proposed, but two prominent metrics include the stability 
current support polygon 
margin proposed by McGhee and Frank [17] and the energy 
 
stability margin proposed by Messuri and Klein [18]. Without 
a priori knowledge of the terrain and with countlessly different  Figure 4. Top views of three possible pin array layouts and their support 
polygon during the two gait phases. The two pin array layout (a, b) 
types of terrain, the design of the pin array layout can only be 
cannot maintain static stability whereas the three (c, d) or four (e, f) pin 
guided by the stability margin by assuming a flat terrain for  array layouts can always be statically stable. 
now. However, the importance of the energy stability margin 
will become more apparent when the locking mechanism of  Figure 4 contains diagrams of the robot support polygon 
the pin array is evaluated.  before and after the stance switching for three different layouts 
that are joined by some abstract locomotion mechanism not 
The stability margin is the perpendicular distance between 
illustrated. A suitable layout should use the minimum number 
the robot’s center of gravity projected onto a horizontal plane 
of pin arrays while keeping the projected robot center of 
and an edge of the support polygon, a convex polygon created 
gravity within the support polygon. It is clear that the design 
by the robot’s ground contacts. The energy stability margin 
with two pin arrays presents the classic control problem of a 
extends the stability margin to uneven terrains and is the 
bipedal robot, for which additional bodies must be controlled 
energy required for the robot’s center of gravity to rotate over 
to balance the robot. Therefore, this configuration is not a 
the corresponding edge of the support boundary, a 3D convex 
feasible design for a statically stable locomotion. The designs 
hull formed by the footholds. The energy stability margin is as 
with three and four pin arrays can both maintain static stability 
𝑆𝑆 =𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚|𝑅𝑅|(1−𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐
follows 
at all times, but the former is chosen to keep the robot design 
𝐸𝐸
    (3)  minimal. 
where R is the vector from the midpoint of AB, an edge formed  B.  Locomotion mechanism 
by two adjacent footholds to the robot’s center of gravity and  Unlike common leg mechanisms in legged robots, a pin 
θ and ψ are the angles by which R is rotated to lie in the vertical  array mechanism cannot accomplish locomotion alone since 
plane and to align with the vertical axis respectively.  the pins can only move vertically. However, the pin array 
walker is by no means the first to require a separate locomotion 
Although  legged  robots  with  statically  stable  gaits 
mechanism.  Ambler,  a  large  six-legged  robot,  rotated  its 
typically have at least four legs, we desire to keep the pin array 
vertical, prismatic legs in the body plane for locomotion [19]. 
layout and the required locomotion mechanism as minimal as 
Another locomotion strategy is to horizontally translate one 
possible. Therefore, we select the pin array layout from three 
frame or platform forward while keeping another in stance in 
candidate configurations: two, three, and four pin arrays. By 
an  alternating  manner.  This  method  was  adopted  by  a 
representing a pin array as a rectangular arrangement of pins, 
planetary  rover  prototype  dubbed  the  “walking  beam” 
the support polygon of the robot can be found as a polygon 
developed  by  the  Martin-Marietta  Corporation,  which 
consisting  of  the  outermost  corner  pins  in  stance  phase. 
regrettably does not have a citable publication, and by another 
Furthermore,  with  a  predominantly  symmetric  pin  array 
legged robot from our previous work [20]. 
assembly, the center of gravity for each pin array can be 
approximated to be at its centroid, and the robot’s total center  However, unlike these aforementioned legged robots, the 
of gravity can be easily determined.  pin array walker does not have the ability to retract its legs, the 
1440
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 14:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
pins, once they are released, so it requires an upward motion 
during the gait cycle to allow the pins to clear any obstacles in 
front of them. Therefore, a parallel four-bar linkage is used to 
join each of the two side pin arrays to the center pin array. The 
linkage rotates half a revolution and then stops to allow the 
side and center pin arrays to switch their gait phase, as shown 
in Figure 4. The parallel four-bar linkage was chosen for its 
simple design and actuation that can provide the cyclical 
motion needed for an alternating gait. 
The length of the two rotating links in the four-bar linkage 
determines the required input torque for locomotion, the stride 
length, and the maximum obstacle clearance height.  It also 
affects the stability margin of the robot because the robot’s 
 
center of gravity can approach or cross over the edges of the 
Figure 6. A rendering of the locomotion mechanism 
support  polygon  during  locomotion.  Without  strict 
performance  requirements,  the  design  of  the  locomotion 
array assembly respectively. In this prototype, only about half 
mechanism was guided by the motor’s available torque and the 
of the pin’s total length is usable for passively adapting to the 
stability margin of the robot at its designed scale. 
terrain, which is about 0.96 inches. The mass of each side pin 
C.  Gait cycle  array and the center pin array is 149 grams and 521 grams 
respectively, totaling in 819 grams. 
Because the prismatic motion of the pins is unactuated and 
the robot begins its locomotion with its pins pushed in, the pins  The  actuation  unit  for  the  locomotion  mechanism  is 
must be allowed to fully release initially such that subsequent  located on  the center pin  array. Timing belts couple the 
half revolutions of the linkage will continue to allow the pins  rotation of the parallel links in the four-bar linkages to ensure 
to drop fully and utilize their full length. Therefore, the linkage  continuous motion past the singularity, and a metal bevel gear 
first rotates from a horizontal configuration to an angle less  train drives the two linkages. The length of the rotating links 
than 180o to allow maximum extension of the pins. This angle  in the linkage gives a stride length of 23 mm. Each pair of 
can be quickly found based on the length of the pins at  adjacent pulleys has its own timing belt, and the timing belts 
maximum extension, the kinematic parameters of the parallel  are tensioned by sliding out the outer pulleys. Deflection of the 
four-bar  linkage  and  the  robot’s  design  parameters.  To  acrylic base due to the belt tensioning is reduced by reinforcing 
minimize the impulse on the pin arrays during switching due  it with aluminum bars. 
to impact with the ground, the angle should allow the pins to 
L293D H-bridge chips on an Arduino prototype shield are 
fully contact the ground. 
used for the motor control. Position control of the DC motor 
IV.  ROBOT PROTOTYPE  for locomotion is implemented with a PID controller on an 
Arduino Uno. The PID control’s command is limited to a 
The robot consists of three pin arrays that are joined by two 
maximum value to maintain a quasi-static locomotion. Due to 
parallel four-bar linkages that enable locomotion. The pin 
the resulting low angular speed of the DC motor, the integral 
arrays are made from commercially available plastic pins and 
term is also limited to a maximum value to prevent integral 
laser-cut  acrylic  sheets  for  a  convenient  manufacturing 
windup. The small DC motors for the locking linkages are 
process. A small DC motor actuates each locking linkage. The 
actuated to stall and then turned off to avoid damage. The robot 
side pin arrays have a small counterweight to balance the 
is powered with an external, benchtop power supply. 
weight distribution due to an asymmetric design. Maximum 
retraction and extension of the pins are determined by the 
height of the top plate and the three lower plates of the pin  V.  EVALUATION 
A.  Pin array mechanism 
We first evaluate the pin array’s locking mechanism and 
its implications on the stability of the robot. Because the 
diameter of the pinholes in the support and locking plates 
dictates whether the locking plate can contact every pin with 
a sufficient lateral force, numerous fabrication iterations (all 
using a laser cutter) were required to improve the uniformity 
of the locking force distribution while minimizing the friction 
on the pins during the release. Despite these iterations, only a 
portion of the pins could be locked. 
Figure 7 shows an image of a locked pin array after it was 
oriented upside down to allow the ineffectively locked pins to 
slide  out.  For  every  locked  pin  array,  there  often  were 
alternating rows of locked and unlocked pins, resulting in a 
higher average shear stress in the locked pins. This may be 
attributed to the arrangement pattern of the pins on the plates. 
Figure 5. A rendering of a pin aray assembly 
1441
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 14:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
TABLE I.   MAXIMUM LOAD SUPPORTED BY A PIN ARRAY 
Left pin array  Center pin array  Right pin array 
1450 g  1050 g  1350 g 
 
Quantitative  evaluation  of  the  pin  array  mechanism 
involved measuring the maximum load supported by different 
areas of the pin arrays: the four corner and center areas, each 
of which consists of about thirty pins. The pin arrays were 
locked  at  maximum  extension  and  placed  upside  down. 
Calibration  weights  were  placed  directly  on  the  pins  in 
increments  of  10  grams  and  then  50  grams  over  the 
corresponding region to determine the maximum load. For 
measuring the maximum load for an entire pin array, a thin, 
acrylic plate was placed over all pins to distribute the weight. 
Table I reports the maximum load supported by each of 
  the three pin arrays. The two side pin arrays supported a 
similar amount, but the center pin array supported much less. 
Figure 7. A bottom view of a locked pin array after being rotated upside 
This may be attributed to the moment induced on the locking 
down to check for unlocked pins. The pins extending out towards the 
viewer are the locked pins.  plate by the offset between the midplane and the plane of the 
locking linkage in the center pin array. This moment may 
It can also be observed in Figure 7 that not all of the four  have exacerbated the misalignment in the center pin array, 
corner pins, or even their adjacent pins, are locked. This  reducing its effectiveness. 
shows that the support polygon of the robot is not constant 
Figure 9 presents the measurements from the maximum 
and often smaller than the theoretical support polygon.  
load  test  as  a  visual  representation of  the locking  force 
Several factors contribute to this observation in the pin  distribution discretized across the regions of the pin arrays. 
array  mechanism.  The  aforementioned  tolerance  in  the  While the center regions could support loads comparable to 
pinhole diameter necessary for allowing all pins to release  the maximum measured in each pin array, some of the corner 
smoothly creates enough gap between the holes and the pins  regions could only support a fraction of the maximum values 
such that the pins can have random angular misalignments  or even none at all. This diagram reveals that an actual support 
with respect to the vertical plane. Thus, the lateral locking  polygon constructed from the convex hull of the pins is not 
force on each pin is not completely perpendicular to its side,  representative of the robot’s stability during locomotion even 
which produces different frictional forces on the pins. The  over a flat terrain. 
tolerance also creates differences in the axial misalignment of 
Extending this comparison to the energy stability margin, 
the pinholes, which affects the lateral force exerted on each 
one may recall that it quantifies the energy required to rotate 
pin. 
and topple a rigid body over a given edge formed by two 
The pin arrays’ passive adaptability to arbitrary features  adjacent  footholds.  Whereas  the  energy  stability  margin 
can be observed in Figure 8, in which a pin array stands on  captures the stability of a fixed robot configuration, i.e., rigid 
rock-like objects and on human fingers. In both situations, the  legs, the stability metric represented by Figure 9 is more 
pin array was simply placed over the objects and locked.  conservative and accurate in that it shows the maximum force 
Because the motion of the pins induces a negligible amount  under  which  a  region  of  the  support  boundary  will  be 
of ground reaction force, postural stability is maintained  compromised. Thus, it may be useful to obtain an updated 
regardless of the terrain features. Applications for the pin  stability metric that also considers the reconfigurability of leg 
array’s  passive  adaptability  can  range  from  standing  on  mechanisms such as a pin array. 
numerous, small asperities to maintaining a stable foothold on 
a non-flat surface. Of course, this does not consider the 
frictional forces necessary to maintain a fixed ground contact, 
which will be discussed in the next section.  100 g 110 g
0 g 130 g 220 g 120 g 180 g
220 g 0 g 220 g 190 g
280 g 230 g 250 g 100 g
 
 
Figure 9. Maximum load supported by each region of the three pin arrays. 
Figure 8. Side views of a pin array passively adapting to rough, rock-like  The red regions consistently did not have enough locked pins to place a 
features (left) and a human hand (right).  calibration weight over the area. 
1442
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 14:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
 
Figure 10. Views of the robot walking over wooden blocks. In the left image, the center pin array partially lands over a wooden block and adapts to the 
height difference between the its front and rear pins. In the center image, the side pin arrays are seen adapting to the wooden block in a similar manner. 
In the right image, the side pin arrays are standing between two wooden blocks. 
B.  Locomotion 
A  more  effective  pin  array  mechanism  can  provide  a 
The robot’s ability to walk was tested over two terrains: a  consistent support boundary like that of a fully-actuated robot, 
smooth, level terrain and a terrain with obstacles. In both  while maintaining passive adaptability, a useful trait in rough 
situations, the robot used the same, fixed gait parameters and  terrain locomotion. The results presented here also identified 
did not utilize any sensing or planning. By doing so, the tests  a need for a legged robot stability metric that can quantify the 
highlighted the benefits of passive adaptability of the pin  reconfigurability in robot legs, which could be a fruitful topic 
arrays in rough terrain locomotion.  for future research. 
The robot walked over the smooth terrain effortlessly and  The current design assumes there is no drastic change in 
exhibited minimal changes in its posture. When walking over  the  terrain’s  overall  slope.  To  consider  the  problem  of 
the terrain with obstacles, the robot benefited from the passive  locomotion over changing slopes while adapting to smaller 
adaptability of the pin arrays to support its stance without any  asperities, a more appropriate locomotion mechanism will 
footstep planning. This can be observed in Figure 10 that  need to be implemented. The design also lacks to ability to 
depicts the robot’s locomotion over wooden blocks with a  steer or control its yaw rotation, which is a necessary function 
nominal thickness of 0.5”. In the left image, the center pin  for mobile robots. Optimization of the pin array size and 
array has partially landed over a wooden block when it enters  density may be useful after material properties and other 
the stance phase. Despite the height difference between the  design parameters are finalized. 
front and rear parts of the pin array, the pins extend to 
different lengths according to the terrain. The center image  REFERENCES 
provides a clear view of this behavior in the side pin arrays. 
[1]  G. Bledt, M. J. Powell, B. Katz, J. Di Carlo, P. M. Wensing and S. 
The right image shows the side pin arrays standing in between 
Kim, "MIT Cheetah 3: Design and Control of a Robust, Dynamic 
wooden blocks to their front and rear. 
Quadruped Robot," 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Madrid, 2018, pp. 2245-2252. 
During these tests, the pin array walker demonstrated the 
[2]  M. Hutter et al., "ANYmal - a highly mobile and dynamic 
need for better traction and a method for adapting to changing 
quadrupedal robot," 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
slopes.  The  robot  was  occasionally  observed  undergoing 
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Daejeon, 2016, pp. 38-44. 
undesired  yaw  rotation  upon  collision  with  the  terrain.  [3]  Saranli, U., Buehler, M., and Koditschek, D. E., 2001, “RHex: A 
Depending on the type of asperities on the terrain, pins with  Simple and Highly Mobile Hexapod Robot,” Int. J. Rob. Res., 20(7), 
sharper tips or tips with a friction material may be required.  pp. 616–631. 
Also,  the  rotating  motion  of  the  locomotion  mechanism  [4]  Cham, J. G., Bailey, S. A., Clark, J. E., Full, R. J., and Cutkosky, M. 
R., 2002, “Fast and Robust: Hexapedal Robots via Shape Deposition 
imparted some horizontal velocity to the pins, sometimes 
Manufacturing,” Int. J. Rob. Res., 21(10-11), pp. 869–882. 
causing them to deflect or jam with the terrain features. This 
[5]  Scott, Peter B. “The 'Omnigripper': a form of robot universal gripper.” 
either resulted in some postural disturbance or a yaw rotation. 
Robotica 3 (1985): 153-158. 
[6]  Mo, An, and Wenzeng Zhang. “A Novel Universal Gripper Based on 
VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  Meshed Pin Array.” International Journal of Advanced Robotic 
Systems, Mar. 2019. 
In this work, we presented the design of a walking robot  [7]  Sangbae Kim, A. T. Asbeck, M. R. Cutkosky and W. R. Provancher, 
that can passively adapt to rough terrains using pin arrays. The  "SpinybotII: climbing hard walls with compliant microspines," ICAR 
robot  successfully  maneuvered  over  obstacles  and  '05. Proceedings., 12th International Conference on Advanced 
demonstrated high adaptability to various terrain features  Robotics, 2005., Seattle, WA, 2005, pp. 601-606. 
under open-loop control. Evaluation of the robot indicated  [8]  K. Carpenter, N. Wiltsie and A. Parness, "Rotary Microspine Rough 
Surface Mobility," in IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 
that while the pin array walker can support several times its 
21, no. 5, pp. 2378-2390, Oct. 2016. 
own weight, the uneven distribution of the locking force 
[9]  S. Wang, H. Jiang and M. R. Cutkosky, "A palm for a rock climbing 
limits its stability and thus its locomotion performance.  robot based on dense arrays of micro-spines," 2016 IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 
The current proof-of-concept prototype is limited in its 
Daejeon, 2016, pp. 52-59. 
stride length, gait speed and payload carrying capability by  [10] Wang, Shiquan, et al. “Design and Modeling of Linearly-Constrained 
the locking mechanism. The mechanism’s effectiveness may  Compliant Spines for Human-Scale Locomotion on Rocky Surfaces.” 
be improved by adding a friction material such as silicone to  The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 36, no. 9, Aug. 
the pinholes to increase the frictional force and by preventing  2017, pp. 985–999. 
unwanted jamming or slipping of the pins during locomotion.  [11] A. Parness, M. Frost, N. Thatte and J. P. King, "Gravity-independent 
mobility and drilling on natural rock using microspines," 2012 IEEE 
1443
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 14:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Saint Paul, 
MN, 2012, pp. 3437-3442. 
[12] H. Nguyen, R. Siddall, B. Stephens, A. Navarro-Rubio and M. Kovač, 
"A Passively Adaptive Microspine Grapple for Robust, Controllable 
Perching," 2019 2nd IEEE International Conference on Soft Robotics 
(RoboSoft), Seoul, Korea (South), 2019, pp. 80-87. 
[13] E. Brown, N. Rodenberg, J. Amend, A. Mozeika, E. Steltz, M. R. 
Zakin, and H. M. Jaeger, “Universal robotic gripper based on the 
jamming of granular material,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 107, 
no. 44, pp. 18,809–18,814, 2010. 
[14] S. Follmer, D. Leithinger, A. Olwal, N. Cheng and H. Ishii, “Jamming 
user interfaces: Programmable particle stiffness and sensing for 
malleable and shape-changing devices,” in Proc. 25th Annu. ACM 
Symp. User Interface Software Technology, 2012, pp. 519–528. 
[15] A. A. Stanley, A. M. Genecov and A. M. Okamura, "[D13] 
Controllable surface haptics via particle jamming and pneumatics," 
2014 IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS), Houston, TX, 2014, pp. 
1-1. 
[16] Y. Kim, S. Cheng, S. Kim and K. Iagnemma, "A Novel Layer 
Jamming Mechanism With Tunable Stiffness Capability for 
Minimally Invasive Surgery," in IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 
29, no. 4, pp. 1031-1042, Aug. 2013. 
[17] McGhee, R. B. and Frank, A. A. On the stability properties of 
quadruped creeping gaits, Mathematical Bioscience, Vol. 3, pp. 331-
351, 1968. 
[18] A. Messuri, Dominic & A. Klein, Charles. (1985). Automatic body 
regulation for maintaining stability of a legged vehicle during rough-
terrain locomotion. Robotics and Automation, IEEE Journal of. 1. 132 
- 141. 10.1109/JRA.1985.1087012. 
[19] E. Krotkov, J. Bares, T. Kanade, T. Mitchell, R. Simmons and R. 
Whittaker, "Ambler: a six-legged planetary rover," Fifth International 
Conference on Advanced Robotics 'Robots in Unstructured 
Environments, Pisa, Italy, 1991, pp. 717-722 vol.1. 
[20] Noh, Seonghoon, and Dollar, Aaron. "Design of an Underactuated 
Legged Robot With Prismatic Legs for Passive Adaptability to 
Terrain." Proceedings of the ASME 2019 International Design 
Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information 
in Engineering Conference. Volume 5A: 43rd Mechanisms and 
Robotics Conference. Anaheim, California, USA. August 18–21, 
2019. V05AT07A052. ASME. 
1444
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 14:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 