2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Using Manipulation to Enable Adaptive Ground Mobility
Raymond Kim1, Alex Debate1, Stephen Balakirsky2, and Anirban Mazumdar1
Abstract—In order to accomplish various missions, au-
tonomous ground vehicles must operate on a wide range of
terrain. While many systems such as wheels and whegs can
navigate some types of terrain, none are optimal across all.
Thiscreatesaneedforphysicaladaptation.Thispaperpresents
a broad new approach to physical adaptation that relies on
manipulation. Speciﬁcally, we explore how multipurpose ma-
nipulators can enable ground vehicles to dramatically modify
their propulsion system in order to optimize performance
across various terrain. While this approach is general and
widely applicable, this work focuses on physically switching
between wheels and legs. We outline the design of “swappable
propulsors” that combine the powerful adhesion forces of per-
manent magnets with geometric features for easy detachment.
Fig.1. Aprototypeimplementationoftheswappablepropulsorrobot.
We provide analysis on how the swappable propulsors can
be manipulated, and use these results to create a functional
prototype robot. This robot can use its manipulator to change
between wheeled and legged locomotion. Our experimental re- but do not modulate their physical form for different terrain.
sultsillustratehowthisapproachcanenhanceenergyefﬁciency Biologically inspired cockroach robots are good examples
and versatility. of such systems, and can operate on varying terrain [4],
Index Terms—Mechanism design, mobile manipulation,
[5]. Similarly, the RHex robot uses six semicircular legged
wheeled robots.
wheels to walk over a range of surfaces [6]. Because static
I. INTRODUCTION methods do not adjust their behavior on different surfaces,
they can be simple and robust. However, ﬁxed structures
Mobile robots can aid search and rescue, explore remote
cannot be easily changed and therefore are suboptimal on
locations, and scout conﬂict zones [1]–[3]. To execute such
one or more types of terrain.
missions, terrestrial mobile robotic platforms must traverse
In contrast, passive-adaptive methods adjust their proper-
through unpredictable terrain that can have large variations
ties without centralized sensing or control. Wheels that can
in height, friction properties, and grade. While autonomous
passively change their radius have been developed to better
mobility on paved roads has progressed considerably, off-
traversetheirgivenenvironment[7],[8].Othersystemsoffer
road and rugged terrain remain challenging due to their
theabilitytocompletelychangetheirphysicalconﬁgurations
highlyvariablephysicalproperties.Off-roadterrainsarepar-
for new modes of locomotion [9]–[11]. The inability to
ticularlydifﬁcultforautonomousroboticsystemsbecausean
control these adaptation behaviors means that they may
individualmodeoflocomotionmaydegradewhenconditions
deploy in conditions where such changes are undesirable.
change.
Additionally, these approaches add mass and mechanical
This paper presents a new approach to adaptive terrestrial
complexity to wheels or legs. This can modify the vehicle
locomotion. The core contributions of this work are: 1)
dynamics and risk failure.
formulating a new manipulation based framework for adap-
Active-adaptive methods require energy and control to
tation, 2) designing a magnet-based design for swappable
modify their mode of locomotion. These approaches offer
propulsors, 3) experimental results illustrating the energy
the greatest degree of ﬂexibility and optimality. Recent
efﬁciency and versatility beneﬁts from using this method
works have presented vehicles that can actively change their
of adaptation. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is
wheel diameter or articulate their suspension on different
the ﬁrst to use manipulation to enable adaptive mobility of
terrains [12], [13]. Other designs are capable of actively
unmanned ground vehicles.
lengtheningorrepositioningtheirmechanicalcomponentsto
Existing terrestrial locomotion strategies can be catego-
bettertraverseagiventerrain[14]–[19].Activemethodsalso
rized into three different areas: static, passive-adaptive, and
provide the capacity to transform between wheels and legs
active-adaptive. Static methods consist of mechanical sys-
[20]–[23]. Active-adaptive designs hold great promise, but
temsthataredesignedtoperformwellonarangeofsurfaces,
in order to maximize performance they must use low power,
1R. Kim, A. Debate, and A. Mazumdar are with the G. W. Woodruff have minimal complexity, and be physically robust.
SchoolofMechanicalEngineering,GeorgiaInstituteofTechnology,Atlanta, In this paper, we propose a new approach that uses ma-
GA30332email: rsk@gatech.edu
nipulation to combine the simplicity and robustness of static
2S. Balakirsky is with Georgia Tech Research Institute, Atlanta, GA
30318email: Stephen.Balakirsky@gtri.gatech.edu methods with the controllable versatility of active-adaptive
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 857
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. approaches.Weexplorehowrobotscanutilizemulti-purpose
manipulators to modify their legs or wheels for different
terrain. To ensure generality, we refer to features that propel
the vehicle as “propulsors.” Propulsors can include wheels,
legs, propellers, whegs, or tracks. The use of manipulation
enables discrete switching between propulsors. This con-
cept of “swappable propulsors” enables a broad range of
adaptations. We liken this approach to how humans change
(a) SwappableWheelPropulsor
shoes for different types of terrain. The ability to change
shoes enables a broad range of locomotion capability. This
can enable motion over varying terrain (running shoes and
cleats), to different modes of locomotion (shoes and roller
skates), and even locomotion in ﬂuids (shoes and ﬂippers).
We begin by outlining a set of functional requirements
for the swappable propulsor framework that can enable a
range of adaptations. We then describe a speciﬁc design of
swappable propulsors for legs and wheels which exploits
directional magnetic forces for strong attachment and easy
detachment. Finally, a unique prototype robot (shown in
Fig.1)isdesigned,fabricated,andexperimentallyevaluated.
The experimental results illustrate the merits of this new (b) SwappableLegPropulsor (c) SwappableFinPropulsor
approach.
Fig.2. Thisﬁgureillustratesthe frameworkoftheswappablepropulsor.
II. SWAPPABLEPROPULSORFRAMEWORK Different types of swappable propulsors (red) can be incorporated into a
singlehousing(black).
A. Functional Requirements
This section describes the functional requirements for
Since the principle of swappable propulsors is new, our
the swappable propulsor framework. We envision that these
search of existing works did not provide an existing system
requirements are applicable to many types of propulsors.
that meets all four functional requirements. Therefore, we
Fig. 2 illustrates the concept of swappable propulsors. A
developed our own system based on permanent magnets and
mobile robot can carry around multiple sets of swappable
geometric features.
propulsors, each assigned to its own unique terrain. These
propulsors are all designed to mount into a single housing B. Magnet Embedded Propulsors
andcanbeeasilyattachedordetached.Theswappablewheel
Permanent magnets enable large force capacity with zero
propulsor is an ideal choice for energy-efﬁcient propulsion
power consumption. However, this high force also makes
on ﬂat surfaces, whereas the swappable leg propulsor is
permanent magnets difﬁcult to detach. If the manipulator
appropriate for rugged, off-road terrain. The swappable ﬁn
is used to simply pull the propulsor perpendicular to the
propulsor can enhance versatility by enabling the robot to
steel surface (y-direction), Fig. 3 demonstrates that the
move effectively in water.
detachmentforce F wouldhave tobe greaterthan orequal
1) High holding force: When swapping propulsors, the B
to the magnetic force F . This method would require a
system must have reliable attachment to keep its mag
powerful manipulator that would add considerable mass and
propulsors in place. Once swapped, the propulsor
complexity to the robot.
should enable the robot to traverse the propulsor-
Geometrycanbeexploitedtoenhancemanipulation-based
speciﬁc terrain without the risk of detaching or losing
detachment[24].Consideraswappablelegpropulsorthathas
its functionality.
an extrusion with an angled edge so that it can rotate about
2) Low-force detachment using manipulator: The
point A (as shown in Fig. 3). In this case, r is the distance
propulsors must be easy for the manipulator to detach
from the center of the magnet to the angled edge, and the
when the system is switching its mode of locomotion.
resulting moment created by the magnetic force about point
The force needed to detach the propulsor should be
A is F r.
small enough for the manipulator to execute reliably mag
If a force F is applied at the tip of the propulsor (point
and repeatedly. C
C)inthepositivey-direction,itwillproduceamomentF h
3) Electro-mechanically simple: Swappable propulsors C
about point A. If this moment is greater than F r, the
should not add substantial complexity or mass to the mag
propulsor will begin to tilt.
interface between the robot and the terrain.
4) Easily manipulated:Theswappablepropulsorsshould r
F > F (1)
be lightweight and have shapes or geometric features C h mag
that can be exploited for reliable grasp and manipula- F becomes signiﬁcantly smaller than the magnetic force
C
tion. F as the propulsor length h becomes longer than r. As
mag
858
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) T-SlotDesign.
Fig.3. Aschematicillustrationofthepropulsordimensionsandthetilting
propulsorconcept.Tiltingthepropulsorrequiressigniﬁcantlylessforcethan
pullingitoffthesteelsurface.Oncethepropulsoristilted,itcanbedetached
easily.
a result, tilting should become much easier as the propulsor
rotates. This methodology can enable a much lighter and
simpler manipulator.
(b) Detachingmotionofthepropulsor.
C. Mechanically Constraining Steel Surface Mounts Fig. 4. A sliding motion is required to release the magnet embedded
propulsorfromconstraint.Figure4(a)illustratestheT-slotcouplersonthe
Whenusedforlocomotion,theswappablepropulsorsmust
swappableleg-wheelpropulsordesign.Figure4(b)illustratesthesequential
be mechanically constrained to avoid undesired detachment. motionofthepropulsordetachment.Theslidinglinearmotionisfollowed
Thisconsiderationmustbebalancedwiththeneedtodetach byaliftinglinearmotion.
theswappablepropulsorswithlowforcesandasimplegrasp
strategy.
surface mount. The ﬁrst motion consists of a linear drag in
To constrain the propulsors on the robot, a steel surface
the negative z-direction (illustrated in Fig. 4-b). The second
mount with mechanical frames can be utilized. As shown
motion consists of a linear pull in the positive y-direction.
in Figure 4(a), the steel surface mount consists of a t-slot
Once detached, the propulsors can be stored in the mobile
opening, framing, and ﬁtting. The t-slot opening provides
robot.
roomforattachmentanddetachmentofthepropulsorswhile
thet-slotframingconstrainsthemagnetembeddedpropulsor
III. MANIPULATOR:STATICANALYSIS
in every direction but the z-direction. Different types of
propulsors can be placed on the steel surface mount, but the To make full use of the swappable propulsor, the manipu-
t-slot must be oriented to ensure that the propulsor does not lator must be able to achieve the kinematics and kinetics of
detach during locomotion. For instance, the swappable leg- attaching and detaching the swappable propulsors. For this
wheel propulsor design shown in Fig. 4, must be mounted study,aﬁvedegreeoffreedom(5DOF)serialroboticmanip-
such that the semicircular appendage is pointing in the ulator was considered for a swappable leg-wheel propulsor.
negative z-direction. The t-slot framing would react to any The 5 DOF was chosen to ensure that the manipulator
forces applied during motion. can reach objects in proximity and in distance. The wrist
The attachment process of the propulsor must be simple joint was integrated to exploit the geometric features of the
enough for the manipulator to execute reliably and repeat- propulsors. With Eq. 2, Jacobian static analysis can be used
edly. The t-slot ﬁtting, which has an embedded magnet, is to predict the manipulator joint torques required to detach a
easilyattachedtothet-slotopening,thatconsistsofaferrous swappablepropulsor.Thisanalysiscanthenbeusedtoeither
stainlesssteelsurface(illustratedinFig.4-a).Thisminimizes designthemanipulatorortheswappablepropulsor.Usingthe
the need for precise positioning of the end-effector when two linear motions discussed in the previous section, Fig. 5
attachingthemagnetembeddedpropulsor.Ifthemanipulator illustrates these motions as static forces on the end-effector
approaches the t-slot opening within the magnetic attraction frame.
forcethreshold,theembeddedmagnetwillattachitself.Once
attached, the propulsor can be slid across the steel surface τ =JTf (2)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
to the end of the t-slot framing to be constrained. With
ﬁxed positions of the steel surface mount on the robot, the
−
end-effector and the mount can be coordinated to attach the f = F 0 F 0 0 T (3)
propulsors. slide (cid:2) x6 z6 (cid:3)
The swappable propulsor framework combines two se-
quential linear motions to detach the propulsor from the f = 0 F 0 0 0 T (4)
pull y6
859
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (cid:2) (cid:3)
τ = 0.042 0.176 0.132 0.0968 0.0968 T (5)
max
D. Modes of Locomotion
The robot employs six Dynamixel XL-320 position-
controlled servos during its leg mode and wheel mode. A
Pololu 7.5V, 2.6A step-down voltage regulator was used to
power the XL-320 servos.
WheelMode:Proportional+Derivative(PD)controlwas
implemented for the robot’s wheel mode. The robot disables
torqueonthetwomiddlewheelsandthemanipulatorduring
Fig. 5. An illustration of the manipulator conﬁguration and layout with
staticforcesforpropulsordetachment. its wheel mode.
Leg Mode: The MiniRHex open source software is used
to operate in leg mode [25]. A tripod gait pattern was used
Since the kinematics of serial manipulators are well for legged locomotion.
known, we do not repeat them here. Equations (3) and (4)
represent the static forces for the detachment. The analysis
outlinedherecanbeusedtodeterminethejointtorqueswhen
detaching a swappable propulsor and then moving it. These
results can be used to design the swappable propulsor based
onaknownmanipulator,ordesignthemanipulatorbasedon
the known swappable propulsor.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Chassis Design
(a) Wheelmode. (b) Legmode.
The swappable propulsor prototype was designed, fab-
Fig. 6. The swappable propulsor prototype has two different modes of
ricated, and experimentally evaluated. The motor mounts
locomotion.Figure6(a)showstherobotinwheelmode.Figure6(b)shows
and the body cover were 3D printed on a Lulzbot TAZ 6 therobotinlegmode.
printer with Polylite PLA material. The storing base of the
swappable legs were 3D printed and embedded with 3.175
E. Manipulator
mm neodymium magnets. The prototype is approximately
Based on the maximum torques calculated (Eq. 5), joints
363 mm long, 230 mm wide, and weighs approximately 1.6
4 and 5 were assigned with smaller actuators to reduce the
kg including the battery and all electronic components.
size and weight of the manipulator. For consistency, the
B. Swappable Leg-Wheel Propulsor gripper was also reduced in size. The manipulator consists
of three Dynamixel AX-12A servos and three Dynamixel
To ensure simplicity, the leg propulsor was designed to
XL-320 servos (shown in Fig. 7-a). The sixth XL-320 servo
be swappable while the common housing was designed as a
is used as a gripper. A parallel-jaw gripper was custom
wheel propulsor. This allows the system to revert to wheel
designed and 3D printed. The manipulator is mounted on
propulsorsoncetheswappablelegpropulsorisremoved.The
therearoftherobotformaximumworkspace.Aswithother
wheel propulsors consist of 3D printed wheel housings and
mobile manipulators, this system can be used for a range of
rubbertires.A3Dprintedt-slotframingismountedontopof
purposes, including sampling the environment, manipulating
thewheelpropulsor.0.635mmthick430stainlesssteelsheet
objects, and positioning sensors. The maximum payload of
wasusedtocreatethesteelsurfacemount.Thelegpropulsors
the manipulator when fully extended is: 350 g.
were 3D printed and embedded with 6.4mm nickel plated
neodymium magnets each rated at a maximum of 5.39 N. F. Control
The amount of force to slide the propulsor was approxi-
The OpenCM9.04 microcontroller board was used in tan-
mately0.88Nforthisprototype.Theamountofforcetopull
dem with custom written Arduino IDE and OpenCM IDE
the propulsor by exploiting directional forces was no more
software for the locomotion and manipulation of the robotic
than 0.1 N.
device. An 11.1 V, 1800 mAh lithium-ion battery was used
to power the robot.
C. Actuator Selection
G. Measurement
Since the swappable propulsors are relatively lightweight,
the manipulator joint torques are primarily dependent on the An INA219 high side DC current sensor breakout board
detachment forces. Using Eq. 2 and substituting the forces was used to measure the power consumption of the robot.
deﬁned above into Eq. 3 and 4, the maximum joint torques SparkFun microSD transﬂash breakout board was used to
for each joint in N-m were computed to be: record the data collected during experiments.
860
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. average power consumption of 6.5 W, whereas the wheeled
locomotiondrewanaveragepowerconsumptionof4.287W.
The COT of legged locomotion was 3.087, while the COT
of wheeled locomotion was 1.106. Since ﬂat ground is very
common, this illustrates the need to swap propulsors.
(a) (b)
Fig.7. Figure7(a)representsthe5DOFprototypemanipulator.Themanip-
ulatorconsistsofﬁverevolutejointsandaparallelgrippertoattach/detach
the leg propulsor. Figure 7(b) illustrates the internal components of the
Fig. 8. Power consumption measurements on ﬂat concrete surface over
robot.
18meters.Averagepowerconsumptionforleggedlocomotionwas6.5W.
Averagepowerconsumptionforwheeledlocomotionwas4.287W.
V. RESULTS
C. Adding the Manipulator
A. Overview
Since wheels provide substantial energetic improvements
Experiments utilizing the prototype robot were carried
on ﬂat ground, manipulation can be used to transition to
out on a range of terrain. Energy consumption, distance
wheels for long stretches of ﬂat ground. However, if the
traveled,andtraveltimeweremeasured.Thesewereusedto
added mass from the manipulator increases power dramati-
determinecostoftransport,whichisacommonmetricforthe
cally, then such a strategy is not viable. Therefore, we con-
energetic performance of mobile systems. The experiments
ducted additional experiments with the manipulator added.
are illustrated in the accompanying video. The swappable
For this comparison, power is a better metric than cost of
leg-wheel propulsor prototype was tested on four different
transport because the manipulator does not participate in
terrains (concrete, grass, forest, and gravel). During the
active locomotion. The results, shown in Table I, illustrate
experiment, the robot was allowed to traverse through the
that the added mass of the arm only increases the wheeled
given terrains at maximum actuator speed (114 rpm) over
and legged power consumption slightly. Therefore, the use
a straight 18 m course. Voltage and current of the battery
of the arm to switch to wheeled mode is a viable strategy
were measured throughout the experiment. Using the mea-
for increasing energetic performance.
surementsobtained,batterypower,energyconsumption,and
cost of transport (COT) were calculated using Eq. (6), (7),
TABLEI
and (8).
SWAPPABLELEG-WHEELPROPULSORROBOTPOWERCONSUMPTION
× VALUES
Battery Po(cid:90)wer=V I (6)
battery battery Mode Power(W)Energy(J)Mass(kg)Distance(m)Time(s)COT
WHLa 4.287 263 1.346 18 50 1.106
t
Energy= BatteryPower(t) dt (7) WHL-Ab 4.440 268 1.566 18 50 0.970
0 LEGc 6.500 762 1.4 18 110 3.087
LEG-Ad 6.558 930 1.62 18 136 3.253
Energy
Cost of Transport= × × (8)
mass gravity distance aWHL:WheeledLocomotion.
bWHL-A:WheeledLocomotionManipulatorAttached.
B. Legged vs. Wheeled Locomotion cLEG:LeggedLocomotion.
dLEG-A:LeggedLocomotionManipulatorAttached.
Toprovideabaselineillustrationofthetrade-offsbetween
wheeled and legged locomotion, we performed a series of
D. Performance of Fully-Integrated System
experiments with wheels and legs. These did not include the
manipulator. The wheels performed well on concrete (ﬂat With the beneﬁts of manipulation clearly demonstrated,
ground), but eventually failed to advance on grass, forest, we performed a number of experiments to illustrate the
and gravel. The legs utilized a tripod gait [6], and were able performanceofafullyfunctionalprototype.Themanipulator
to traverse all terrain. These experiments are shown in the was incorporated into the vehicle and the vehicle used the
accompanying video. optimal mode of locomotion on four surfaces. Flat concrete
These results illustrate the widely known versatility of featured wheeled locomotion, and the COT was 0.97. This
legs [26]. Consequently, there is a tendency to only use represents a roughly three-fold decrease when compared to
legs to traverse a broad range of terrain. However, as Fig. 8 the legged results on concrete. For grass, gravel, and forest,
illustrates, wheels were more energy efﬁcient than legs on theoptimalmodewaslegged(COTwasinﬁniteforwheeled
ﬂatconcretesurface.Therobotinleggedlocomotiondrewan due to getting stuck). The COT was 3.3 for grass, 5.3 for
861
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. forest, and 6.7 for gravel. The time histories are shown in seconds. Future studies will look to optimize the speed and
Fig. 9. robustness of swapping propulsors.
Fig.9showshowtheswappableleg-wheelpropulsorrobot
VI. CONCLUSION
inlegmodewassuccessfulonterrainsthewheelmodefailed
to traverse. The leg mode consumed least amount of energy In this paper, we presented a new approach to adaptive
on grass with average battery power draw of 5.23 W and terrain locomotion. We formulated a unique manipulation-
COTof3.312.Thelegmodehadthehighestpowerdrawon based framework for adaptation that exploits a combination
gravel which had the most uneven surface. of the powerful adhesion forces of permanent magnets with
geometric features for easy detachment. We analyzed how
the swappable propulsors can be manipulated in simple
linear motions and used these results to create a functional
prototype robot. We speciﬁcally focused on the leg-wheel
propulsorstodemonstratethatchangingmodesforaspeciﬁc
terrain can be energy efﬁcient. We also showed how adding
amulti-purposemanipulatordoesnotsignﬁcantlychangethe
power consumption of the robot during locomotion.
Our system was designed to be simple with minimal
integrationofsensors.Manymethodsincludingmanipulation
and terrain transition are currently open-loop or human-in-
the-loop.Therefore,futureworkwillfocusoncreatingrobust
andrapidmanipulationstrategies.Inaddition,weareexcited
toexaminehowperceptionandmappingcanbeusedtoplan
paths for these vehicles that minimize energy consumption.
Such techniques would identify which terrain would require
anadaptationandwouldusetheadaptationstoreduceoverall
energy expenditure. Lastly, there are other propulsors that
merit further exploration, such as ones that enable transition
between water and land.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
TheauthorswouldliketothankDavidBooker-Earley,Eric
Dong, Varun Madabushi, Avi Balakirsky, and all the DART
Lab members for supporting this project.
(a) Grasp leg propulsor inside (b) Detachfromstoringbase.
chassis.
Fig. 9. Power consumption of the swappable leg-wheel propulsor robot
onvariousterrainsatmaximumactuatorspeed(114rpm)over18meters.
E. Using Manipulation to Enable Adaptive Mobility
To evaluate the adaptive mobility aspect of the swappable
leg-wheel propulsor design, the manipulator was given for-
ward kinematic control commands to attach the leg propul-
sors to its wheel propulsors. Using known coordinates of
each t-slot openings, the 5 DOF manipulator and the wheels
were coordinated to place the legs. The robot switching its (c) Attachtowheelpropulsor. (d) Slidepropulsortoconstrain.
mode from wheel mode to leg mode has been illustrated
Fig.10. Aphotographicillustrationoftheswappableleg-wheelpropulsor
in Fig. 10. The process to swap a single propulsor took 13 robotattachingalegpropulsorisshown.
862
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [21] C. C. Phipps, B. E. Shores, and M. A. Minor, “Design and quasi-
staticlocomotionanalysisoftherollingdiskbipedhybridrobot,”IEEE
[1] D.F.Hougen,S.Benjaafar,J.C.Bonney,J.R.Budenske,M.Dvorak, transactionsonrobotics,vol.24,no.6,pp.1302–1314,2008.
M. Gini, H. French, D. G. Krantz, P. Y. Li, F. Malver, et al., “A
[22] K.Tadakuma,R.Tadakuma,A.Maruyama,E.Rohmer,K.Nagatani,
miniature robotic system for reconnaissance and surveillance,” in
K.Yoshida,A.Ming,M.Shimojo,M.Higashimori,andM.Kaneko,
Proceedings2000ICRA.MillenniumConference.IEEEInternational
“Mechanical design of the wheel-leg hybrid mobile robot to realize
ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation.SymposiaProceedings(Cat.
alargewheeldiameter,”in2010IEEE/RSJInternationalConference
No.00CH37065),vol.1. IEEE,2000,pp.501–507. onIntelligentRobotsandSystems. IEEE,2010,pp.3358–3365.
[2] F. Matsuno and S. Tadokoro, “Rescue robots and systems in japan,”
[23] S.-C. Chen, K.-J. Huang, W.-H. Chen, S.-Y. Shen, C.-H. Li, and P.-
in2004IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandBiomimetics. C. Lin, “Quattroped: a leg–wheel transformable robot,” IEEE/ASME
IEEE,2004,pp.12–20. TransactionsOnMechatronics,vol.19,no.2,pp.730–742,2013.
[3] B.M.Yamauchi,“Packbot:aversatileplatformformilitaryrobotics,”
[24] A.MazumdarandH.H.Asada,“Mag-foot:Asteelbridgeinspection
inUnmannedgroundvehicletechnologyVI,vol.5422. International robot,” in 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
SocietyforOpticsandPhotonics,2004,pp.228–237. RobotsandSystems. IEEE,2009,pp.1691–1696.
[4] R.D.Quinn,J.T.Ofﬁ,D.A.Kingsley,andR.E.Ritzmann,“Improved
[25] M.Barragan,N.Flowers,andA.M.Johnson,“MiniRHex:Asmall,
mobilitythroughabstractedbiologicalprinciples,”inIEEE/RSJInter- open-source, fully programmable walking hexapod,” in Robotics:
nationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems,vol.3. IEEE, Science and Systems Workshop on “Design and Control of Small
2002,pp.2652–2657. LeggedRobots”,Pittsburgh,PA,June2018,workshopabstract.
[5] J. M. Morrey, B. Lambrecht, A. D. Horchler, R. E. Ritzmann, and
[26] C. Ordonez, J. Shill, A. Johnson, J. Clark, and E. Collins, “Terrain
R.D.Quinn,“Highlymobileandrobustsmallquadrupedrobots,”in identiﬁcationforrhex-typerobots,”inUnmannedSystemsTechnology
Proceedings 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
XV,vol.8741. InternationalSocietyforOpticsandPhotonics,2013,
RobotsandSystems(IROS2003)(Cat.No.03CH37453),vol.1. IEEE,
p.87410Q.
2003,pp.82–87.
[6] U. Saranli, M. Buehler, and D. E. Koditschek, “Rhex: A simple and
highlymobilehexapodrobot,”TheInternationalJournalofRobotics
Research,vol.20,no.7,pp.616–631,2001.
[7] D.-Y. Lee, G.-P. Jung, M.-K. Sin, S.-H. Ahn, and K.-J. Cho, “De-
formable wheel robot based on origami structure,” in 2013 IEEE
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation. IEEE,2013,
pp.5612–5617.
[8] T.Aoki,H.Yamato,M.Shimaoka,andS.Mitsumori,“Studyofomni-
directionalallterrainmobilerobotwithglobularmetalspringwheel,”
in2013IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation.
IEEE,2013,pp.5606–5611.
[9] Y.-S. Kim, G.-P. Jung, H. Kim, K.-J. Cho, and C.-N. Chu, “Wheel
transformer:Aminiaturizedterrainadaptiverobotwithpassivelytrans-
formedwheels,”in2013IEEEInternationalConferenceonRobotics
andAutomation. IEEE,2013,pp.5625–5630.
[10] Y.She,C.J.Hurd,andH.-J.Su,“Atransformablewheelrobotwitha
passiveleg,”in2015IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligent
RobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2015,pp.4165–4170.
[11] J. Park, D. H. Kong, and H.-W. Park, “Design of anti-skid foot
with passive slip detection mechanism for conditional utilization of
heterogeneous foot pads,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
vol.4,no.2,pp.1170–1177,2019.
[12] K. Nagatani, M. Kuze, and K. Yoshida, “Development of trans-
formable mobile robot with mechanism of variable wheel diameter,”
J.Robot.Mechatron,vol.19,pp.252–253,2007.
[13] K.Iagnemma,A.Rzepniewski,S.Dubowsky,andP.Schenker,“Con-
trolofroboticvehicleswithactivelyarticulatedsuspensionsinrough
terrain,”AutonomousRobots,vol.14,no.1,pp.5–16,2003.
[14] Y.-J.Dai,E.Nakano,T.Takahashi,andH.Ookubo,“Motioncontrol
of leg-wheel robot for an unexplored outdoor environment,” in Pro-
ceedingsofIEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobots
andSystems.IROS’96,vol.2. IEEE,1996,pp.402–409.
[15] F. Michaud, D. Letourneau, M. Arsenault, Y. Bergeron, R. Cadrin,
F. Gagnon, M.-A. Legault, M. Millette, J.-F. Pare´, M.-C. Tremblay,
etal.,“Multi-modallocomotionroboticplatformusingleg-track-wheel
articulations,”AutonomousRobots,vol.18,no.2,pp.137–156,2005.
[16] J.B.JeansandD.Hong,“Impass:Intelligentmobilityplatformwith
active spoke system,” in 2009 IEEE International Conference on
RoboticsandAutomation. IEEE,2009,pp.1605–1606.
[17] J. A. Smith, I. Sharf, and M. Trentini, “Paw: a hybrid wheeled-
leg robot,” in Proceedings 2006 IEEE International Conference on
RoboticsandAutomation,2006.ICRA2006. IEEE,2006,pp.4043–
4048.
[18] D. Zarrouk, A. Pullin, N. Kohut, and R. S. Fearing, “Star, a sprawl
tunedautonomousrobot,”in2013IEEEInternationalConferenceon
RoboticsandAutomation. IEEE,2013,pp.20–25.
[19] G. Endo and S. Hirose, “Study on roller-walker-energy efﬁciency of
roller-walk,”in2011IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsand
Automation. IEEE,2011,pp.5050–5055.
[20] T. Okada, W. T. Botelho, and T. Shimizu, “Motion analysis with
experimentalveriﬁcationofthehybridrobotpeopler-iiforreversible
switchbetweenwalkandrollondemand,”TheInternationalJournal
ofRoboticsResearch,vol.29,no.9,pp.1199–1221,2010.
863
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 