2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
On the efﬁcient control of series-parallel compliant articulated robots
Vishnu Dev Amara1, Jo¨rn Malzahn1, Zeyu Ren1, Wesley Roozing2 and Nikos Tsagarakis1
Abstract—Torque distribution in redundant robots that
combine the potential of asymmetric series-parallel actuated
branchesandmulti-articulationposeanon-trivialchallenge.To
address the problem, this work proposes a novel optimization
based controller that can accommodate various quadratic
criteria to perform the torque distribution among dissimilar
series and parallel actuators in order to maximize the motion
efﬁciency. Three candidate criteria are composed and their
performancesarecomparedduringperiodicsquatmotionswith
a 3 degree of freedom series-parallel compliant articulated leg
prototype. It is ﬁrst shown that by minimizing a criterion that
takes into account the actuator hardware speciﬁcations such
as torque constant and transmission ratio, the gravity-driven
phases can be lengthened. Thereby, this particular criterion
results in slightly better performance than when adopting a
strategy that maximizes the torque allocation to the higher
efﬁciency actuators. Furthermore, valuable insights such as
that the efﬁcacy of maximum utilization of the highly-efﬁcient
Fig.1. Thearticulatedlegprototypeusedinthiswork.
parallel actuation branches decreases progressively at high
frequencies were observed.
I. INTRODUCTION Moreover, in biological systems, muscle units can span
multiple joints and enable energy efﬁciency and power
Extending the power autonomy of robotic systems is
transfer between the spanned joints [9], [10], [11]. Coupling
fundamental for their successful deployment in applications
this principle along with the aforementioned idea of an
where they are expected to be capable of prolonged un-
asymmetricjointunit,theauthorsof[12],[13]optimizedand
tethered operation. Such a requirement can be addressed
developed a three degrees of freedom (DoF) leg prototype,
onlythroughadvancementsinrobotefﬁciencythroughmore
the eLeg. Additionally, the PEAs in the eLeg can be swiftly
efﬁcient,actuationandmotioncontrolstrategies.Researchon
reconﬁguredtoeitherencompassoneortwojointsdisplaying
actuation systems towards this objective has already led to a
distinct articulation topologies. With the PEAs providing for
radicaldeparturefromstifftocompliantactuators.Compliant
gravity load cancellation/majority of the torque demand in
actuatorsareinherentlyrobust,efﬁcient,saferandcanpoten-
steady-state, the monoarticulated and biarticulated conﬁgu-
tially satisfy peak velocity/power achievements. Compliant
rations exhibited substantial energy savings [14], [15].
actuation technology has spawned two broad classes of
actuators - series elastic actuators (SEA) and parallel elastic Nevertheless, a research gap exists in understanding how
actuators (PEA). SEAs utilize soft elements in series with to optimally distribute the desired torques among the pri-
the motor while PEAs recruit soft elements in parallel with mary and the secondary actuator units. The authors of [16]
the main actuation drive. While SEAs have matured to compared various approaches to resolve the torques from
be the preferred drive units in many contemporary high- identical biarticular actuators among the various joints in
performance robots [1], [2], [3], PEAs have not attracted a redundant manipulator. The question still remains open
equal attention although they have shown massive energy- whenactuatorsofdifferentefﬁciencyandtorquecapacityare
efﬁciency beneﬁts [4], [5], [6], [7]. Further, it is not fully employedondistinctarticulationtopologies.Aninvestigation
understood how to combine the two classes of actuators intothesametakingintoaccountthehardwarespeciﬁcations
for achieving high performance and energy-efﬁciency. In can lead to valuable considerations for control.
[8], the authors demonstrated a method to synergistically Therefore,thisarticleinvestigatestheefﬁciencyofvarious
employthembothtoobtainefﬁcientmotion.Anasymmetric torque-distribution strategies in compliant articulated robots
joint unit that comprises a high power SEA for primary powered by hybrid series and parallel actuation principles.
torque supply along with a high efﬁciency PEA for energy Firstly,anoveloptimizationbasedtorquedistributionframe-
storage/release led to considerable power savings. work that can apportion the instantaneous joint torque de-
mandtothevarioustorquesourcesbasedondifferentcriteria
1V. D. Amara, J. Malzahn, Z. Ren and N. Tsagarakis are with the are presented. Secondly, we investigate if demanding max-
Humanoids and Human-centered Mechatronics Lab, Istituto Italiano di
imum torques from the higher efﬁciency parallel actuators
Tecnologia, Genova, Italy (e-mail: vishnu.amara@iit.it). 2W. Roozing is
withUniversityofTwente,theNetherlands. is the best strategy, especially during periodic motions with
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 385
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. PB
signiﬁcantgravity-drivenphases,byperformingexperiments ESB
on the 3-DoF leg setup depicted in Fig.1 using cyclic squat
motions on two different articulation topologies. Thirdly, we
extend our energy-based analysis to squat motions across
various frequencies to obtain some valuable insights for
energy-efﬁcient joint torque resolution.
      ESB drives 
Thepaperisorganizedasfollows.Abriefoverviewofthe high on thigh - 
lower leg inertia
actuation branches, the leg prototype and its modelling are
PB drives high
provided in Sec. II. The derivation of the control framework on limbs to reduce Biarticulated ESBs 
leg inertia can be concentrated 
based on the various cost functions is described in Sec. III. on calf to save space 
on knee (cables)
An analysis is conducted with experiments and a discussion
ispresentedinSec.IV.ThepaperﬁnallyconcludesinSec.V
providing valuable recommendations for future work. Belt drives or
4 bar linkages
II. BACKGROUND
A. Articulated Compliant Actuation (ACA) Arrangements
Fig. 2. The noESB and the biarticulated conﬁgurations of the anthropo-
morphiceLegwithACAarrangements.
The ACA arrangement that we refer to in this paper com-
prise compliant actuators of vastly different torque output
capacity, efﬁciency and stiffness characteristics. The motor [17]1. The hip joint is loaded with a 15 kg trunk. The
M1 is a SEA that is capable of exerting high power and
ESBs employ Maxon EC22 motors with Maxon GP22 HP
forms the power branch (PB). Motor M2 is a low power
planetary gearboxes. For the tendons, we utilize rubber-type
motor that utilizes a ball-screw transmission mechanism of
bungee cords that showcase S-shaped stiffness curves. The
a high rotary - linear reduction. The transmission unit is
bungees are unidirectional, i.e. they transmit forces only
coupled to the driven joints via elastic tendons and forms
whenstretched.Weallowforelongationsupto80%oftheir
the energy storage branch (ESB). While the efﬁciency and
natural lengths. Strain gauges attached on the ballscrew nuts
energy storage capacity of the ESB is quite high, their
provide for tendon force measurement. Stiffness coefﬁcients
stiffness is quite small compared to the PB.
are computed in the working range of the bungees through
Additionally, the ACA branches are modular and can
linear regression. Necessary speciﬁcations for the PB and
exhibit more than a single articulation topology. When
ESB units are tabulated in Table I. For more details about
monoarticulated, the ESB tendon is directly coupled to a
the mass, length and hardware speciﬁcations, refer to [18],
single joint while in multiarticulation, the same spans over
[19].
two or more joints through free pulleys and is then coupled
to a distal joint. In the latter case, the elongation of the ESB C. ACA Actuation Modelling
tendon transmits torque to both the spanned as well as the For an n joint articulated ﬂoating-base planar robot with
∈
driven joint. Consequently, the ESB torque proﬁle depends n+3 DoF and m ACA branches the tendon deﬂections ∆
on the joint conﬁguration, pulley radii and tendon stiffness. Rn, can be written :
B. eLeg Hardware with ACA Branches ∆=Sp+Tq. (1)
TheeLegisathreeDoFsemi-anthropomorphicplanarleg whereq∈Rn isthejointconﬁgurationvectorandp∈Rm is
prototype. The hip joint is driven exclusively by a SEA; thetendonpretensionvector2.S ∈Rnxm isaselectionmatrix
∈
the knee and ankle joints are powered by ACA branches. that indicates the joints equipped with ACA branches. T
The ESB units in the eLeg prototype can actively load Rnxn is a topology matrix and relates the rotary joint conﬁg-
the tendons to achieve the desired extensions. Further, to urationstothelineardeﬂectionsofthecoupledtendons.The
demonstrate generality and energy-efﬁciency characteristics
oftheprototype,theadjustableACAbranchescanbeswiftly 1TREERobotics,treerobotics.eu/
≤
2Without loss of generality, we assume m n, i.e. ACA branches can
reconﬁgured to obtain various conﬁgurations. In this paper,
eitherbepresentinsomeorallofthejoints.
we utilize the following articulation topologies, see Fig.2 :
- noESB : All joints are solely driven by SEAs and the
robot weighs 24.5 kg. TABLEI
- Biarticulated : In this conﬁguration, while the ankle ELEGSPECIFICATIONS
ESBisbiarticulated,thekneeESBismonoarticulated.Here,
Speciﬁcation PB ESB
the ESBs serve the function of gastrocnemius and lateralis
TransmissionRatio 80 6.66e4(Knee),3.64e4(Ankle)
muscles and the robot weighs 26.1 kg. Stiffness 5.8kNm/rad 7.8kN/m(Knee),
The SEAs on the eLeg are all Kollmorgen TBMS-6025 29.5kN/m(Anklebi)
motors that employ CPL-20 Harmonic Drive (HD) gear- Torqueconstant 85mNm/A 14.2mNm/A
boxes and are in series with deﬂection-based torque sensors Windingresistance 0.318ohm 0.797ohm
386
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. topology matrix T is a function of the tendon transmission 2) Minimize sum of squared load currents (MSLC): A
ratios (pulley radii), see(cid:40)[19]. The forces due to the tendon common candidate cost that is frequently used in optimal
deﬂection can be approximated : control to obtain actuator inputs is the minimization of
the sum of squared input torques. However, due to the
Fp= K∆, ∆>≤0, (2) differencesinparametersincludingtransmissionratio,motor
0, ∆ 0. torqueconstant,tendonstiffness,theactualelectricaleffortin
whereK∈Rnxnisastiffnessmatrixwhosediagonalelements deliveringthesameoutputtorquetotheloadvariesacrossthe
non-homogenous actuators. Therefore, we consider a more
are the linear stiffnesses of the unidirectional bungees. Then
generalcriterion,thesumofsquaredcurrentsthatcorrespond
by using the same topology matrix again, the tendon forces
to the load torques :
can be mapped to the joint torques :
− −
τττp = TTFp = TTK(Sp+Tq). (3) J=iTPB iPB+iTp ip
− −
Finally, the total instantaneous joint torque vector can be =(APB(τττp τττ(cid:63)))T(APB(τττp τττ(cid:63)))+
written as the sum of the torques due to PB and ESB : (ApFp)T(ApFp). (6)
(cid:0)(cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:1)
τττ = τττPB +τττp. (4) wher(cid:0)e(cid:2) A and A are diago(cid:3)n(cid:1)al matrices given
PB p
− −
III. OPTIMIZATIONBASEDTORQUERESOLUTION by diag (PB−kτ1PBN1) 2,...,(−PBkτnPBNn) 2 and
Resolving actuator redundancy to apportion the joint diag (pkτ1pN1) 2,...,(pkτmpNm) 2 . Here (.)N(.) and
torque demand is of paramount importance in redundant (.)kτ refer to the transmission ratio and the torque constant
(.)
robots. Furthermore, with multiarticulation, the ESB torques of the corresponding actuator.
at the spanned joints depend on the conﬁguration of all the 3) Minimize sum of power losses (MSPL): Further, the
spanned joints. Therefore, resolving the torques among the dissipated power can vary across unidentical actuators due
branches is not straightforward. In this work, we use an on- to their distinct electrical dynamics [25]. Speciﬁcally, the
line optimization based approach to resolve the commanded electrical winding resistances are not the same across dif-
instantaneous torques from PB and ESB actuators. ferent actuators, therefore the electrical losses associated
while generating the same torque output are different. In
A. Choice of optimization method
this work, according to the manufacturer speciﬁcations, the
More often, the optimization criteria is a quadratic func- winding resistance of the ESB motors are more than twice
tion of certain control variables [20] which might be sub- of the PB motors. Taking this into account, the sum of the
jected to linear and box constraints. Owing, to its efﬁcacy electrical power losses associated with only the load torques
and computational efﬁciency in solving problems online is considered as a cost function candidate in this work :
includinginversedynamics[21],trajectoryoptimization[22],
footstep planing [23], etc. we choose to use a quadratic J=iTPBRPBiPB +iTpRpip
programming (QP) based method [24] to obtain torque − −
commandsfortheESBs.Inparticular,QPalgorithmprovides =(APB(τττ(cid:63) τττp))TRPB(APB(τττ(cid:63) τττp))+
fortheinstantaneouspretensionreferencesp(cid:63).Theremaining (ApFp)TRp(ApFp). (7)
instantaneous joint torque demand is satisﬁed by the PB
actuators, see Fig. 3. It is worth mentioning that the torque where R is a diagonal matrix that contains as its elements
(.)
distribution scheme is completely privy to the higher level the resistances of the electrical windings in the actuators of
control strategy. the corresponding branch.
B. Cost function candidates
We consider the following cost functions in this work : C. QP Problem formulation
1) Maximize ESB load share (MELS): In [15], [19], the
controller minimizes the squared norm of the error between Ineachoftheabovecases,aQPproblemisformulatedto
the commanded joint torque and the ESB load torque. obtain the desired pretension references p(cid:63) that comply with
Although the high-efﬁciency ESBs cannot solely satisfy the the following constraints :
joint torque requirements in the eLeg, they can surpass the • Tendon slack constraints - since the bungees are unidi-
gravitational load torques which happen to be the most
rectionallyelastic,slackinthemisunfavourable.Hence,
signiﬁcant during slow periodic motions. In this work, we
to avoid slack, soft constraints are enforced with the
use a similar criterion that aims to allocate the maximum
help of slack variables.
possible torque demand to the ESB : • ESB pretension constraints - the bungees can only be
J=(τττp−τττ(cid:63))T(τττp−τττ(cid:63)). (5) • sEtSreBtcvheeldoctiotyacoﬁnnsittreaeinxttsen-tt.heESBactuatorshavealimit
where τττ(cid:63) is the joint torque reference vector. on the maximum achievable linear velocity.
387
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. PB pˆ(fromencoders) IV. RESULTS
ESB QPbased
Torque Pretension τττ A. Implementation
Control p
Distributionp(cid:63) The control experiments were executed with Simulink
τττˆp −TT Fˆp (fromstrain RealTime interface on an Intel NUC PC with 2GB DDR-3
gauges) RAMandaCorei5-3427Uprocessor(3Mcache)runningat
Higher τττ(cid:63) τττˆPB (fromdeﬂectionencoders) 1.8Ghz.Thecontrolalgorithmisimplementedandallsensor
Level measurements are obtained at a sampling rate of 1kHz. A
τττ(cid:63)
Control PB SEATorqueControl custom MATLAB implementation of the Goldfarb-Idnani
Strategy q(cid:63) +Friction method[26]isusedtosolvethestrictlyconvexQPproblem.
Compensation τττPB Owingtohardwarelimits,werestrictedthekneeESBtendon
extensionrangeandthemaximumlinearvelocityoftheESB
qˆ(fromjointencoders)
actuators in the QP problem to 0.072 m and 0.007 m/s. The
Fig.3. SchematicofthecontrolarchitectureontheeLeg. elements of the weighting matrix W˜ for the slack variables
p˜ are set such that they are at least two orders of magnitude
higher than the elements of the quadratic term associated
Consequently, we have the QP problem in discrete form : with p.
The electrical power is computed using current mea-
mp(cid:63)ii+n1i,mp˜ii+z1e Ji+1(qi,τττ(cid:63)i,p(cid:63)i+1,p˜i+1)≥ sthuerembaecnkt-sEfMroFmanthdetsheenseolersctriincatlhedyancatumaitcosr.sTahnedyinacreludthinegn
subject to S(p(cid:63)i+1+p˜i+1)+Tqi 0, (8) integrated to yield the energy expenditure. Further, since
≤ ≤ ≥
p p(cid:63)i+1 p¯, p˜i+1 0, untetheredrobotsareequippedwithpowersourceson-board,
≤ − ≤ typicallyrechargeableLi-ionbatteriesandarecapableoffour
p˙∆t p(cid:63)i+1 pi p¯˙∆t. quadrant operation, we consider negative power ﬂows in our
where p˜ ∈ Rm denotes the slack variable, ∆t is the control energy calculations.
step size. (.) and (¯.) denote the minimum and maximum B. Experiments
values of the corresponding quantity. (.)i and (.)i+1 denote
We ﬁrst performed cyclic squat experiments wherein the
the quantity at the current and successive time instants.
cartesianpositionofthetrunkiscommandedtotraceinclined
WhileformulatingtheQPproblem,itissufﬁcienttoobtain
elliptical trajectories of 0.3 Hz with horizontal and vertical
the quadratic and linear terms associated with the states
amplitudes of 3 and 15 cm respectively. As the energy efﬁ-
that are solved for. A single template expression in the QP
ciency of the biarticular conﬁguration has been established
frameworkcanbeconvertedintothevariousaforementioned
(cid:18) (cid:19) previously,thedatafromnoESBconﬁgurationisnotvisually
candidate cost functions :
presented. For all the three cost functions, the ESB preten-
(cid:18) (cid:18) sionswereinitializedsuchthattheyaccountedforthegravity
Ji+1=p(cid:63)i+T1 ST(CPBTTMTM +SCPSTKTK)S p(cid:63)i+1 + torqueattheinitialconﬁgurationofthesquatmotions.Fig.4
displays the knee torque, actuator current and power and the
(cid:19)(cid:19)
p(cid:63)i+T1 2ST CPBTTM(TMTqi+τττ(cid:63)i)+ total energy expenditure for the biarticulated conﬁguration
after the pretension references from the controller converge.
SCpSTKTKTqi + p˜Ti+1W˜ p˜i+1. (9) thaFtrothme tjhoeinktnteoerqtourequdeistprliobtustiFoing.a4ma-o4ncg, itthceanPBbeaonbdseErvSeBd
are different with the three criteria. While MELS criterion
∈ ∈
whereTM isTTK.CPB Rnxn andCp Rmxm arediagonal clearly allocates the maximum torque demand to the ESBs,
matrices of weighting coefﬁcients associated with PB and MSLC and MSPL criteria converge to a similar strategy that
ESB actuators. W˜ ∈ Rmxm is a diagonal weighting matrix demandslowertorquefromtheESBactuators.FromFig.4d-
for the slack variables. Table II shows how by using (3) and 4f, the actuator current for the ankle ESB across all the cost
merely setting the weighting coefﬁcient matrices CPB and functions are negligible. In comparison to MELS, MSLC
Cp in (9) appropriately, one can formulate the QP problems andMSPLcriteriademandconsiderablepositivepowerfrom
with the various aforementioned cost functions. the ankle SEA, see Fig. 4g-4i. It is worth clarifying that
while MSLC and MSPL minimize the current and power
losses involved with the load torques alone, the plots depict
TABLEII
currents and powers that include contributions necessary to
QPPROBLEMFORMULATION-WEIGHTINGS
overcome friction in the transmission units and drive the
Optimizationcriteria C C actuator inertias to the required accelerations. Furthermore,
PB p
MELS(5) Inxn 0mxm a slight chattering in the reference pretensions obtained
MSLC(6) ATPBAPB ATpSTSAp from the QP solver with MSPL propagates in the current
MSPL(7) ATPBRPBAPB ATpSTRpSAp and power readings. However, MSPL criterion manages to
388
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 10 10 10
0 0 0
-10 -10 -10
-20 -20 -20
-30 -30 -30
-40 -40 -40
-50 -50 -50
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
(a) Knee Torques (MELS) (b) Knee Torques (MSLC) (c) Knee Torques (MSPL)
6
6 6
4
4 4
2 2 2
0 0 0
-2 -2 -2
-4 -4 -4
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
(d) Measured currents (MELS) (e) Measured currents (MSLC) (f) Measured currents (MSPL)
30 30 30
20 20 20
10 10 10
0 0 0
-10 -10 -10
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
(g) Electrical powers (MELS) (h) Electrical powers (MSLC) (i) Electrical powers (MSPL)
200 200 200
150 150 150
100 100 100
50 50 50
0 0 0
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
(j) Energy expenditure (MELS) (k) Energy expenditure (MSLC) (l) Energy expenditure (MSPL)
Fig.4. Datafromsquatexperiments(x-amp:3cm,y-amp:15cm).(.)1,(.)2 and(.)3 correspondtoquantitiesassociatedwiththeankle,kneeandhip
jointsrespectively.Biarticulatedconﬁguration,leftcolumn:MaximizeESBloadshare(MELS),184.3J,middlecolumn:Minimizesumofsquaredload
currents(MSLC),193.2J,rightcolumn:Minimizesumofpowerlosses(MSPL),177.1J.ThenoESBconﬁgurationconsumes598.66Jforthesamesquat
motion.Associatedenergysavingsare69%(MELS),67%(MSLC)and70%(MSPL).ThenoESBresultsareredactedforreasonsofspace.
100 100 100
50 50 50
0 0 0
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8
(a) Energy expenditure (MELS) (b) Energy expenditure (MSLC) (c) Energy expenditure (MSPL)
Fig.5. Datafromellipticalsquatexperiments(x-amp:3cm,y-amp:6cm,freq:0.5Hz).Leftcolumn:MELS,69.28J,middlecolumn:MSLC,95.46J,
rightcolumn:MSPL,92.56J.ThenoESBconﬁgurationconsumes686Jtoexecutethesamesquatmotion.
complete the squat motion with the least energy expenditure Consequently, this phenomenon leads to almost negligible
as can be seen from Fig. 4j-4l. Besides, it is interesting to energy consumption during the ”squat-down” phase and
observe the signiﬁcant negative power phases with MSLC maintainson-parenergyefﬁciency.ThenoESBconﬁguration
and MSPL criteria when the robot squats down. This occurs consumes599J,substantiallyhigherthanwhenbiarticulated.
because the pretensions of the ESB tendons are smaller than Thereupon,italsobecomesessentialtoverifyiftheenergy
when using the MELS criterion, so the required counter- saved in a particular phase is higher than the extra energy
action by the PBs to drive the leg in the ”squat-down” spent in the other phase with the MSLC and the MSPL
phase is lower, leading to higher backdrivability of the PB criteria. In a second set of experiments, to analyze the
actuators. Therefore, even if higher reference torques are candidatecriteriaacrossfrequencies,inthebiarticulatedcon-
demandedwhen drivingagainst gravity,the reference torque ﬁguration, the hip is commanded to track smaller amplitude
demand drops by about 10 Nm during the other phases. squat trajectories (x-amplitude: 3 cm, y-amplitude: 6 cm)
389
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. tension references based on the chosen criteria. The analysis
90
is conducted on squat motions because legged locomotion
85 in general involves cyclic motion such as walking, hopping,
jumping etc. The analysis is made to verify if the MELS is
80 the optimal criterion owing to the higher ESB efﬁciencies.
A ﬁrst set of experiments indicated that MSPL can perform
75 equally well as the MELS by promoting backdrivability.
In order to extend the analysis, we additionally execute
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
squat experiments across frequencies. While the MELS
results in higher energy savings at low frequencies, the
Fig.6. Energysavingswiththethreecriteriafromsquatexperiments(x- higher pretensioned biarticulated ESB also hamper the PBs
amp:3cm,y-amp:6cm)forthebiarticulatedconﬁgurationwithrespectto from being back-driven at higher frequencies. Especially,
thenoESBconﬁgurationwhiletheeLegexecutessquatsacrossfrequencies.
the MSPL criterion brings about negligible energy costs
at various frequencies. Owing to the limits of the actuator through longer gravity-driven phases. Though not described
performance, experiments were performed only up to 0.7 explicitly, this behaviour naturally emerges out of the con-
Hz. Albeit smaller motions, they necessitate considerable troller. The RMS value of the cartesian hip position tracking
torques especially at the knee joint, where the reference errors for all reported experiments, across various criteria
torque consistently exceeds the maximum continuous torque and conﬁgurations are all below 5 mm.
of the SEA. The observations made are two-fold. Firstly, At this juncture, it is also important to realize that the
at 0.5 Hz squats, similar inferences were made about the efﬁciency of torque generation varies between actuators and
pretension references and gravity-driven phases. However, depends on the actuator inertia, friction in the transmission
the MELS criterion seems to perform the same task more units, thermal fatigue of the actuators, etc. This efﬁciency
efﬁciently, see Fig. 5. Compared to the other two strategies, measure is not a constant and it varies with temperature,
the excess energy that MELS entails in the ”squat-down” loading, velocity, component wear, etc. For instance, the
phase is lower than the energy saved during the ”squat-up” efﬁciency of CPL-20 HD varies between 45-88 % [27].
phase. Intuitively, since the torque reference variations are Nevertheless, we regard uniform efﬁciencies across all ac-
smallerthaninthepreviouscase,thekneePBhadtooppose tuators in this work. Additionally, the motor torque constant
the ankle ESB lesser during ”squat-down” phase, leading to decreases with thermal fatigue. A valuable extension would
higher overall efﬁciency. This result advocates for a case- be to integrate the efﬁciencies and their thermal variations
by-case analysis for choice of a strategy with amplitude speciﬁcally in (6) and (7).
variations in trajectories. Further, the same will also depend
on the relative dynamics of the PB and ESB actuators. V. CONCLUSIONANDOUTLOOK
Secondly, we discuss about the energy savings across In this paper, an analysis is conducted on the eLeg that
frequencies whose results are depicted in Fig.6. The energy is powered by modular ACA branches to identify energy-
savings obtained with the biarticulated conﬁguration with efﬁcient joint torque distribution strategies. An optimization
respect to the noESB conﬁguration are plotted across fre- based controller is presented which upon using quadratic
quencies. It can been seen that at higher frequencies, the criteria can provide instantaneous reference pretensions for
energy savings obtained with the MELS strategy, which theparallelactuators.Theenergy-basedanalysisisconducted
relies on the maximum ESB utilization, drops below the to check if delegating the maximum torque demand to the
savings of the other two criteria. Consequently, there is less highly efﬁcient ESBs is always the best strategy.
opposition to the PB actuators being back-driven by the Observations from one set of cyclic squat experiments in-
gravity potential. This is in line with the ESB characteristics dicatedthattheMSPLbylengtheningnegativepowerphases
as they cannot be pretensioned at velocities higher than attainscomparableenergysavingswithMELSstrategy.From
0.007 m/s and cannot account for the necessary ESB torque anothersetofexperimentswhereeLegexecutessquatsacross
variations with the MELS at higher frequencies. Although a range of frequencies we ﬁnd that at lower frequencies
theconclusionisobtainedfortheexecutedtrajectoryandthe although MELS is more effective, MSLC and MSPL can
samemayvarywithamplitudes,weexpectasimilartrendin result in better efﬁciencies at higher frequencies as MELS
thevariationoftheseefﬁcienciesforsquatmotions.However, results in longer actuator-driven motion phases.
the crossover point, the frequency at which MSPL overtakes Future work would be to account for thermal efﬁciencies
MELS in efﬁciency could vary with different amplitudes. and plan for longer horizons in a model-predictive fashion
and obtain optimized pretensions speciﬁc to periodic motion
C. Discussion
amplitudes and frequencies. During extended operations,
Multi-articulatedsystemsexhibitcouplingswhereinapar- demanding higher torques from the ESBs once the SEAs
ticular joint torque is affected by the conﬁguration of the are fatigued may hold the key to enduring autonomy. More-
other articulated joints. Therefore, it is not straightforward over, suitably simplifying and incorporating non-quadratic
to resolve the joint torques among the various actuators. For criteria such as joint work minimization into the presented
thatreason,weuseanoptimizationschemethatprovidespre- framework might provide additional insights.
390
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1080–1091, Apr.
2016.
[1] P. Hebert, M. Bajracharya, J. Ma, N. Hudson, A. Aydemir, J. Reid, [14] W. Roozing, Z. Ren, and N. G. Tsagarakis, “An efﬁcient leg with
C. Bergh, J. Borders, M. Frost, M. Hagman et al., “Mobile ma- seriesparallelandbiarticularcompliantactuation:designoptimization,
nipulation and mobility as manipulationdesign and algorithms of modeling, and control of the eleg,” The International Journal of
robosimian,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 255–274, RoboticsResearch,vol.0,no.0,p.0278364919893762,0.[Online].
2015. Available:https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364919893762
[2] N.Paine,J.S.Mehling,J.Holley,N.A.Radford,G.Johnson,C.-L. [15] ——, “Design of a Novel 3-DoF Leg with Series and Parallel
Fok, and L. Sentis, “Actuator Control for the NASA-JSC Valkyrie CompliantActuationforEnergyEfﬁcientArticulatedRobots,”in2018
Humanoid Robot: A Decoupled Dynamics Approach for Torque IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA).
Control of Series Elastic Robots: Actuator Control for the NASA- Brisbane,QLD:IEEE,May2018,pp.1–8.
JSC Valkyrie Humanoid Robot,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 32, [16] V. Salvucci, Y. Kimura, S. Oh, T. Koseki, and Y. Hori, “Comparing
no.3,pp.378–396,May2015. Approaches for Actuator Redundancy Resolution in Biarticularly-
[3] M.Hutter,C.Gehring,D.Jud,A.Lauber,C.D.Bellicoso,V.Tsounis, Actuated Robot Arms,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics,
J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie, P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch et al., “Anymal-a vol.19,no.2,pp.765–776,Apr.2014.
highly mobile and dynamic quadrupedal robot,” in 2016 IEEE/RSJ [17] L. Baccelliere, N. Kashiri, L. Muratore, A. Laurenzi, M. Kamedula,
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). A.Margan,S.Cordasco,J.Malzahn,andN.G.Tsagarakis,“Develop-
IEEE,2016,pp.38–44. mentofahumansizeandstrengthcompliantbi-manualplatformfor
[4] D.F.B.Haeuﬂe,M.D.Taylor,S.Schmitt,andH.Geyer,“Aclutched realistic heavy manipulation tasks,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International
parallel elastic actuator concept: Towards energy efﬁcient powered ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2017,
legs in prosthetics and robotics,” in 2012 4th IEEE RAS & EMBS pp.5594–5601.
InternationalConferenceonBiomedicalRoboticsandBiomechatron- [18] Z.Ren,W.Roozing,andN.Tsagarakis,“TheeLeg:ANovelEfﬁcient
ics(BioRob). Rome,Italy:IEEE,Jun.2012,pp.1614–1619. Leg Prototype Powered by Adjustable Parallel Compliant Actuation
[5] G. Mathijssen, D. Lefeber, and B. Vanderborght, “Variable Recruit- Principles,”in2018IEEE-RASInternationalConferenceonHumanoid
ment of Parallel Elastic Elements: SeriesParallel Elastic Actuators Robots(Humanoids). Beijing,CHN:IEEE,Nov.2018,p.7.
(SPEA) With Dephased Mutilated Gears,” IEEE/ASME Transactions [19] W.Roozing,“ModelingandControlofAdjustableArticulatedParallel
onMechatronics,vol.20,no.2,pp.594–602,Apr.2015. CompliantActuationArrangementsinArticulatedRobots,”Frontiers
[6] Xin Liu, A. Rossi, and I. Poulakakis, “SPEAR: A monopedal robot inRoboticsandAI,vol.5,Feb.2018.
with Switchable Parallel Elastic actuation,” in 2015 IEEE/RSJ In- [20] C. D. Remy, K. Bufﬁnton, and R. Siegwart, “Comparison of cost
ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). functions for electrically driven running robots,” in 2012 IEEE In-
Hamburg,Germany:IEEE,Sep.2015,pp.5142–5147. ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation. St Paul, MN,
[7] A.Mazumdar,S.J.Spencer,C.Hobart,J.Salton,M.Quigley,T.Wu, USA:IEEE,May2012,pp.2343–2350.
S. Bertrand, J. Pratt, and S. P. Buerger, “Parallel Elastic Elements [21] S.-H. Lee and A. Goswami, “A momentum-based balance controller
ImproveEnergyEfﬁciencyontheSTEPPRBipedalWalkingRobot,” for humanoid robots on non-level and non-stationary ground,” Au-
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 898– tonomousRobots,vol.33,no.4,pp.399–414,Nov.2012.
908,Apr.2017. [22] M. Posa, S. Kuindersma, and R. Tedrake, “Optimization and stabi-
[8] N.G.Tsagarakis,H.Dallali,F.Negrello,W.Roozing,G.A.Medrano- lization of trajectories for constrained dynamical systems,” in 2016
Cerda, and D. G. Caldwell, “Compliant antagonistic joint tuning for IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA).
gravitational load cancellation and improved efﬁcient mobility,” in Stockholm,Sweden:IEEE,May2016,pp.1366–1373.
Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), 2014 14th IEEE-RAS International [23] S.Kuindersma,F.Permenter,andR.Tedrake,“Anefﬁcientlysolvable
Conferenceon. IEEE,2014,pp.924–929. quadraticprogramforstabilizingdynamiclocomotion,”in2014IEEE
[9] G. J. van Ingen Schenau, “From rotation to translation : Constraints InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). Hong
onmulti-jointmotionsandtheuniqueactionofbiarticulatedmuscles,” Kong,China:IEEE,May2014,pp.2589–2594.
HumanMovementScience,vol.8,no.1,pp.301–337,1989. [24] S.P.BoydandL.Vandenberghe,Convexoptimization. Cambridge,
[10] L. Gregoire, H. Veeger, P. Huijing, and G. van Ingen Schenau, UK;NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress,2004.
“Role of Mono- and Biarticular Muscles in Explosive Movements,” [25] S.Seok,“Actuatordesignforhighspeedproprioceptivecontrolinfast
International Journal of Sports Medicine, vol. 05, no. 06, pp. 301– legged locomotion,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012
305,Dec.1984. IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceon. Vilamoura,Portugal:IEEE,
[11] F. Iida, J. Rummel, and A. Seyfarth, “Bipedal walking and running 2012,oCLC:777811617.
withspring-likebiarticularmuscles,”JournalofBiomechanics,vol.41, [26] D. Goldfarb and A. Idnani, “A numerically stable dual method for
no.3,pp.656–667,2008. solving strictly convex quadratic programs,” Mathematical Program-
[12] W. Roozing, Z. Li, D. G. Caldwell, and N. G. Tsagarakis, “Design ming,vol.27,no.1,pp.1–33,Sep.1983.
Optimisation and Control of Compliant Actuation Arrangements in [27] “Harmonic Drive AG, Engineering Data, CPL-2A component
Articulated Robots for Improved Energy Efﬁciency,” IEEE Robotics sets,” https://harmonicdrive.de/mage/media/catalog/category/
andAutomationLetters,vol.1,no.2,pp.1110–1117,Jul.2016. 0505CPL2A1.pdf,Accessed:2019-08-30.
[13] W.Roozing,Z.Li,G.A.Medrano-Cerda,D.G.Caldwell,andN.G.
Tsagarakis, “Development and Control of a Compliant Asymmetric
Antagonistic Actuator for Energy Efﬁcient Mobility,” IEEE/ASME
391
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 