2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Bidirectional Resonant Propulsion and Localization for AUVs
Thomas W. Secord1 and Troy R. Louwagie2
Abstract—Batterylife,reliability,andlocalizationarepromi- manybio-inspiredorbio-mimeticapproaches,controllability,
nent challenges in the design of autonomous underwater vehi- reliability, and precision of these mechanisms are typically
cles(AUVs).Thisworkaimstoaddressfacetsofthesechallenges
sacriﬁced to improve efﬁciency or maneuverability. Thus,
usingasinglesystem.Wedescribethedesignofabidirectional
AUV propulsion remains a very fertile area for design
resonant pump that uses a single electromagnetic voice coil
motor(VCM)capableofrotationaroundacentraltwodegree- improvement and paradigm shift.
of-freedom ﬂexure stage axis. This actuator design produces Two additional challenges in AUV development are lo-
highly efﬁcient resonant motion that drives two orthogonally calization and overall system reliability. The multiple facets
oriented diaphragms simultaneously. The operation of this
of localization difﬁculty are well understood (e.g., [13]) and
diaphragm pump mechanism produces both adjustable thrust
stem mainly from the inability to use radio transmission,
vectors at the aft surface of the AUV and a monotonic
relationship between thrust vectors and operating frequency. broad-spectrumcommunications,andglobalpositioningsys-
Weproposeusingtheuniquefrequencytothrustrelationshipto tems (GPS) underwater given the signiﬁcant attenuation
enhanceAUVlocalizationcapabilities.Weconstructaprototype of electromagnetic radiation. Acoustic underwater signals,
and use it to experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of the
though commonly used, still rely upon a digital paradigm
directionally-tunable resonance concept.
(e.g.,acousticmodems)forcommunicatingpositionalknowl-
edge between robots within a multi-agent arrangement [13].
I. INTRODUCTION
Beyondassuringreliablelocalization,overallsystemreliabil-
Unmanned Underwater Vehicles (UUVs) are widely used
ity in AUVs is a known challenge [14], [15]. For example,
in exploration, search and rescue, structural monitoring, and
Xu, Li, and Liu acknowledge that system complexity can
military applications. Among the different types of UUVs,
substantially degrade reliability and they employ a fault
remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) are most commonly
tree technique to identify ways to improve AUV reliability.
employed,yettheyarehinderedbothincostandperformance
The simulated variables include AUV propulsion system
by the length and bulk of their tether to a surface ship [1].
leaks,steeringmotorfaults,andpropellerfailures[14].Brito
By contrast, autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) hold
and Grifﬁths provide an even more comprehensive catalog
thepromiseofloweroperationalcostandgreaterunderwater
of actual AUV reliability issues that include propulsion
ﬂexibility by eliminating the need for human teleoperation
motor bearing degradation, cables entangled in propellers,
through a physical tether. AUV design presents its own
reducednavigationaccuracy,andfailuresinacousticDoppler
host of challenges. Three of the major challenges in the
currentproﬁlers(ADCPs)[15].AsinAUVpropulsion,AUV
design and application of AUVs include power endurance,
localization and overall system reliability offer prominent
localization, and reliability.
avenues for improvement.
PowerenduranceofAUVsisfundamentallylimitedbased
The approach described in this work attempts to address
on the nearly exclusive use of propeller-based propulsion
all three of the foregoing challenges within a single system.
schemes. Typical electromechanical system efﬁciency is ap-
We propose a design for a single electromagnetic voice coil
proximately 40% and this efﬁciency is substantially lower
motor (VCM) that pivots around a central two degree-of-
for electro-hydraulic thrusters [1]. Efforts to improve these
freedomﬂexurestageaxis.Theﬂexurestageiscomprisedof
classical systems have seen some success (e.g., [2]), yet
multipleﬂexurespringsthatarecutfromasolidpieceofma-
the propeller paradigm persists even in some systems that
terialsoastoallowformotionintwodirections.Byrotating
use novel actuation technologies or methods (e.g., [3]–[7]).
aroundthecentralaxisofthestage,theVCMproducesreso-
Many researchers attempt to improve power endurance and
nant motion in two orthogonally oriented diaphragm pumps.
enhance maneuverability of AUVs using biomimetic or bio-
These pumps produce adjustable thrust vectors at the aft
inspired propulsion [8]. In particular, thrust produced by
surface of the AUV. In this paper, we amalgamate concepts
cephalopod jets have been of interest [9], [10], and the
drawn from prior work by combining the idea of resonance-
undulation motion of the manta ray has also shown some
based propulsion [16] with our previous development of
promise as a propulsion strategy for AUVs [11], [12]. As in
resonance-based pumps [17]. We also take inspiration from
novel jet-based propulsion mechanisms such as [18] and
*Thisworkwasnotsupportedbyanyorganization.
recent diaphragm propulsion ideas described in [19].
1Thomas W. Secord is an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineer-
ing, University of St. Thomas, 2115 Summit Ave., St. Paul, MN 55105, Ourdesignaddressespropulsionefﬁciencybyusingatun-
thomas.secord@stthomas.edu able resonant frequency that is achieved through anisotropic
2TroyR.LouwagieisaResearchAssistantintheDepartmentofMechan-
ﬂexure stage stiffness. The device is operated at resonance
ical Engineering, University of St. Thomas, 2115 Summit Ave., St. Paul,
MN55105,louw1728@stthomas.edu in all of its possible excitation orientations and thereby
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 878
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 01:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. minimizes current input into the VCM regardless of the In order to change the ﬂow through each channel, and
thrust generated at the output of the diaphragm pump mech- thereby maneuver the AUV, the orientation of the pitch or
anism. Our design also enhances AUV localization capa- yawpumpVCMisadjustedusingrotationofacarriagering
bility through a monotonic relationship between operating towhichtheVCMisattached.Thisrotationalchangeisonly
frequency and the thrust vector proﬁle. When acoustically requiredintermittentlyandcanbeprovidedbyastandardDC
coupledtotheexteriorsurfaceoftheAUV,theinstantaneous gear-motor.AstheVCMorientationischanged,thedisplace-
resonant frequency of pump operation directly broadcasts ment of each diaphragm (and therefore the stroke volume)
the AUV’s thrust vectors to neighboring AUVs or stationary varies according to the displacement of the ﬂexure stage.
acousticreceivers.Thistechniqueavoidsthestandarddigital Like magnetically coupled actuators (such as in [3]), our
communication paradigm and encodes what would normally pump design isolates the mechanism components from the
be multiple bytes of thrust information into a single fre- ﬂuidenvironment.Theoperatingprincipleofthemechanism
quency.Finally,ourproposeddesignachieveshighreliability is described in more detail below.
inmultipleways:1)reducedpartcountcomparedtostandard
propeller designs; 2) mechanical component isolation using
A B
actuated diaphragms; 3) a high cycle ﬂexure-based linear
bearing mechanism; and 4) standard off-the-shelf actuators
and components.
II. AUVDESIGNCONCEPT
Fig. 1 (a) shows the design of an AUV that utilizes
Diaphragm Deformation Diaphragm Deformation
resonant pumps to apply forward thrust as well as pitch and
yaw moments using thrust vectors at the aft surface of the
C D
AUV. The two resonant pumps are oriented at right angles
within the AUV housing as shown in Fig. 1 (b). In this
concept, one pump controls the yaw, one pump controls the
pitch,andbothpumpscontributetoforwardthrustappliedto
the AUV. Each pump drives the motion of two diaphragms
based on the orientation of a single voice coil motor (VCM)
around the central axis of a two degree-of-freedom ﬂexure Diaphragm Deformation Diaphragm Deformation
stage.Thediaphragmmotionsprovidepositivedisplacement
pumpingthroughtwosetsofdiametricallyopposedchannels Fig.2. Operatingprincipleoftheresonantpumpsystemusingaradially
that span the length of the AUV and terminate in check directed VCM. (a) Minimum resonant frequency; zero ﬂow in the left
channel(b)Operationatamid-rangeresonantfrequencytoequalizechannel
valves.
ﬂow.(c)Operationnearthemaximumresonantfrequencytofavorﬂowin
theleftchannel.(d)Operationatmaximumresonance;zeroﬂowintheright
channel.
Fig. 2 shows the operating principle of the pump system.
Themostsalientfeatureofthisdesignisthatthetwo-degree
of freedom ﬂexure stage exhibits different resonant frequen-
ciesbasedontheorientationoftheexcitationforcefromthe
radially directed VCM. We explore this idea quantitatively
A
in Section III-A. Flexure stages commonly exhibit resonant
frequencies, yet they are considered undesirable behaviors
Pitch  Pump  Pitch control  Inlet  from a position control perspective [20]. In our design,
down  diaphragm resonant pump valve we operate in an open-loop fashion and deliberately excite
channel
the fundamental resonant frequency of the ﬂexure stage at
the given orientation of the VCM. In this way, resonance
is used advantageously to minimize the power required to
drive the voice coil. Others have also shown viability of
Forward  theresonanceapproachinunderwaterpropulsion[16],[21]–
Yaw control  cavity   
resonant pump [23]. Hence, the present approach holds signiﬁcant promise
Outlet  B
valve for enhancing AUV power endurance and longevity through
increased propulsion efﬁciency.
Fig. 1. AUV design concept. (a) Fully assembled AUV. (b) Cross In Fig. 2 (a), the ﬂexure and diaphragm system is shown
sectionalviewoftheAUVshowingthepitchandyawresonantpumpthrust at resonance in the most compliant direction. The associated
mechanisms.
ﬂow is maximum in the right channel causing the most
879
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 01:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. aggressive directional change. For example, in the pitch F
VCM
control usage, this resonant frequency would yield the most
aggressive possible pitch maneuver in the associated direc-
K
tionoftheAUVpitch.Fig.2(b)and(c)showtheresonance q y
of the ﬂexure stage and diaphragm in between the two x
resonance extremes. By moving between the two resonance
M M
extremes,ﬂowismodulatedbetweenthechannelsasdictated ax
D
bythestrokevolumeandfrequencyoftheparticularresonant K x
x y
pump design. Hence, moving between resonance extremes D
y
will causing more gradual veering motion in pitch or yaw.
Finally, Fig. 2 (d) shows the resonance of the ﬂexure stage M
ay
and diaphragm in the stiffest direction. The associated ﬂow
is maximum in the left channel causing the most aggressive Fig.3. Lumpedparametermodelofthebidirectionalresonantpumpsystem
subjecttovoicecoilmotorexcitation.
turning moment about the associated pitch or yaw axis.
III. DYNAMICSOFRESONANTPROPULSION (cid:113)
Webeginbyconsideringthedynamicsofresonance-based γ
propulsion pumps using a simpliﬁed model for a single Keq=Kx (2)
γ2cos2θ+sin2θ
pump mechanism. We then discuss the considerations for
diaphragm design to ensure that the desired ﬂow rates are where we have used an additional deﬁnition of the dimen-
achieved despite different frequencies of diaphragm motion sionless ratio between the x- and y-axis stiffness values:
(cid:44)
across the range of excitation angles illustrated in Fig. 2. γ Ky/Kx, which we take to be between 0 and 1 because
the x-axis represents the stiffest direction of the stage from
A. Angular Dependence of Resonant Frequency our previously stated assumption.
We represent the dynamics of the resonant propulsion The natural frequency, fn(γ,θ), of the stage is now rec-
system using the simple lumped parameter model shown in ognized to bea function of the angle ofexcitation θ and the
Fig. 3. The model consists of a stiffness along each axis value of the stiffness ra(cid:114)tio γ(cid:118). If we assume that M>>M
(Kx, Ky), a viscous damping effect along each axis (Dx, Dy), and M>>May, then the natu(cid:117)(cid:117)(cid:116)ral(cid:113)frequency can be written aasx
a central mass (M) representing the ﬂexure stage and any of
1 K γ
iatsssotrcainasteladtiwngithcoemacphodnieanpths,raagdmde-dﬂumidasinsteelreamcteionnts,a(nMdaxa,fMoracye) fn(γ,θ)= 2π Mx γ2cos2θ+sin2θ (3)
(F ) from the voice coil applied at an angle with respect
VCM
to the principal x- and y-axis directions. Theassumptionregardingsmalladdedmassismadeonlyfor
This model is intended to undergo relatively small dis- model simpliﬁcation purposes. Added mass terms can be re-
placement in both the x and y directions, so we approximate inserted with an associated angular dependence should this
(cid:112)
the spring deformations using only the values of the dis- become necessary for certain resonant pump designs. The
placementcoordinatesofxandy.Inourmodeldevelopment natural frequency of the stage during pure x-axis excitation
we deﬁne the x direction of the pump to be the stiffer willbedenotedbyωnx= Kx/M.Weshalldeﬁnethesecond
directionandthereforethedirectionalongwhichtheresonant squareroottermof(3)tobeascalarfunctionΦ(γ,θ).Hence,
frequency is the largest. We also assume that the ﬂexure (3) is now more compactly written as
stage behaves as a single degree-of-freedom, second-order,
1
oscillating system with only a single, dominant resonant fn(γ,θ)= 2πωnxΦ(γ,θ) (4)
mode, the frequency of which can be determined by the
excitation angle of the VCM with respect to the x and y If we also assume that the equivalent damping, Deq, for
directions.Lastly,weassumethattheAUVaccelerationsare an arbitrary excitation angle θ can be written in the same
small and that the ground reference in Fig. 3 can be treated form as (2), then the equivalent stiffness and damping are
as an inertial frame. now written as
If F is a static force, then the deformation of each
VCM
diaphragm in the pump is given by Keq=KxΦ2(γ,θ) Deq=DxΦ2(λ,θ) (5)
(cid:44)
F cosθ F sinθ where λ Dy/Dx is the ratio of the viscous damping along
x= VCM y= VCM (1) eachaxisandΦ(λ,θ)isthesamescalarfunctionasΦ(γ,θ)
(cid:112) K K
x y but with λ taking the place of γ.
We will deﬁne the net displacement of the central stage Our primary interest is in the displacement amplitude of
(cid:44) (cid:44)
mass as δ x2+y2 and the equivalent stiffness as Keq thecentralstagesincethiswilldeterminethedisplacementof
FVCM/δ. With these deﬁnitions, the equivalent stiffness be- each diaphragm as represented in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. We now
comes take the VCM force to be of the form FVCM(t)=F0sin(ωt).
880
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 01:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Therefore, the DC displacement of the system is F0/Keq. frequency) and excitation angle θ, Fig. 5 shows the fre◦-
In response to this sinusoidal excitation, the steady state quency response of the ﬂexure stage at three angles: 0 ,
◦ ◦
displacement amplitude (normalized with respect to the DC 45 , and 90 . These frequency response curves represent
displacement)canbewrittenusingthestandardsecond-order radial slices of Fig. 4 along the corresponding θ line. For
system frequency response as the plot in Fig. 5, we have selected γ =0.75, λ =0.9, and
ζx =0.1. For these design parameter values, the frequency
A(ω¯,γ,λ(cid:112),θ,ζx)= response peak amplitude remains relatively constant and the
◦
−Φ2(γ,θ) (6) 4ap5proexxcimitaattieolnymdiirdewctaioynbeytiweledesnathrees0o◦naanndt f9r0e◦queexntrceymtehsa.tAiss
(Φ2(γ,θ) ω¯2)2+4ζ2Φ4(λ,θ)ω¯2
x shown in Section V, behavior consistent with these model
wherewehaveintroducedthex-axisvib√rationdampingratio parameters can be realized in practice.
usingthefamiliarrelationshipζx=Dx/ 4KxM andwehave
also introduced the dimensionless frequency ω¯ (cid:44)ω/ωnx. B. Diaphragm Design
To illustrate the use of this equation, we selected λ =1, We will assume that thrust vectors Tx and Ty arise from
γ = 0.5, and ζx = 0.1. The resulting frequency response the jets of water exiting the diametrically opposed aft valves
amplitude contours of (6) are shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4, the and that these thrusts are proportional to the corresponding
peakdisplacementamplitudeisnormalizedtoavalueof1for volumetric ﬂow rates Q and Q in the x and y channels,
x y
excitation along the x-axis. For our selected values of λ, γ, respectively. Letting this proportionality constant be denoted
andζ ,thefrequencyresponsemagnitudefunctionexhibitsa by τ, we have
x
strongresonantpeakatthevariousexcitationanglesbetween
◦ ◦
0 and 90 . The frequency at which peak displacement Tx=τQx Ty=τQy (7)
occurs shifts downward as the excitation angle is increased.
Though more elaborate thrust models are possible (e.g.,
This downward shift is the result of the downward shift
[24]), the ﬂow rate from the x-axis side of the diaphragm
in K . Hence, for highly efﬁcient operation of the pump- (cid:18) (cid:19)
eq
pump will be approximately
based thruster system, the excitation frequency for a given
excitation angle must reside in the red (i.e. highest) contour α F ωcosθ
ofFig.4.InthecaseofplanarAUVmaneuvering,theunique Qx= 2πxKx0Φ2(γ,θ) A(ω¯,γ,λ,θ,ζx) (8)
resonantfrequencyforeachangleofstageexcitationhasthe
addedbeneﬁtofprovidingamonotonicrelationshipbetween where αx is the equivalent area of the diaphragm such that
pump operating frequency and the forces and moments the product of this area and the stroke yields the stroke
applied to the AUV. This allows for enhanced multi-robot volume for the diaphragm associated with the x-axis. All
localization as discussed in Section IV. other parameters remain as previously deﬁned. A similar
area, α , and ﬂow rate Q are deﬁned for the orthogonal
y y
y-axis diaphragm.
A logical design goal is to achieve thrust out of a single
◦
channel that is equal when the VCM is oriented at 0 and
◦
90 . To achieve this, we combine (7) and (8) to deﬁne the
required ratio for the diaphragm effective areas:
√
◦
αx = A( γ,γ,λ,90◦ ,ζx) (9)
αy γA(1,γ,λ,0 ,ζx)
e1.2
d
u Compliant Direction
plit 1 45 Degrees
m Stiff Direction
A
nt 0.8
e
m
e
ac0.6
pl
s
Di0.4
d 
alize0.2 0.86 0.91 0.99
m
or
N 0
Fig.4. Contoursofnormalizeddisplacementamplitudeversusnormalized 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 1.1 1.2
excitationfrequencyforthebidirectionalresonantdevice.
Fig.5. Displacementamplituderesponseversusnormalizedfrequencyfor
To further illustrate the monotonicity of the relationship the bidirectional resonant device in the most compliant, middle, and least
compliantdirections.
between resonant frequency (i.e., optimal pump operating
881
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 01:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. In(9),theamplituderesponsefunctionhasbeenevaluated Though thrust vector information would be insufﬁcient for
◦
at ω¯ =1 for the √x-axis excitation (0 ) while it has been accurate localization on its own, it would provide a useful
◦
evaluated at ω¯ = √γ for the y-axis excitation (90 ) since contribution to sensor fusion approaches. In short, multi-
ω¯ny = ωny/ωnx = γ. If the diaphragms are designed to agent or cooperative localization techniques described in
satisfy (9), then equal thrust is expected at the two extremes [27] can be applied to good effect provided that the chal-
of θ. lenges unique to underwater communication (e.g., surface
reﬂections) are accounted for in the algorithm [13], [28].
IV. ACOUSTICLOCALIZATION Our future work will explore how strongly the acoustic
As discussed in Section III-A, for an AUV operating in emission of the pump-based system can be transmitted into
only pitch (up-down) or yaw (left-right) maneuvers, there surroundingﬂuidmediuminordertodeterminetheeffective
is a monotonic relationship between the frequency of the range of our proposed technique.
pump and the speciﬁc thrust vector proﬁle generated at the
aft valves. This implies that the acoustic emission from a V. EXPERIMENTALPROTOTYPE
resonantpumpcanbeusedtobroadcastanindividualAUV’s
Fig. 7 shows the experimental prototype for the bidirec-
thrust setting to neighboring AUVs. In this concept, we
tionalresonantﬂexurestagesystem.Inthisinitialprototype,
assume that the AUV is sufﬁciently close to neighboring
we have not coupled the stage axes to diaphragms pumps,
AUVssuchthattheactuatorsneedonlyresonateatrelatively
≈ yet all other essential features such as directional stiffness
lowunderwateracoustictransmissionfrequencies(i.e., 10
dependence, VCM excitation, and rotating carriage ring are
Hz - 300Hz [25]). This technique avoids the standard digital
all included. We employ a ﬂexure stage kinematic structure
communicationparadigmandinsteadencodesmultiplebytes
described in [20] with a modiﬁcation to reduce stiffness by
of thrust information into a single frequency. This general
usingonlysingleﬂexurecolumnsinthexandydirections.In
concept is shown in Fig. 6.
future pump versions, all of the well established ﬂexure de-
signtechniquesfortwodegree-of-freedomstages(e.g.,[29],
[30]) can be employed to further enhance axis decoupling
and minimize parasitic rotations.
AUV B:
Turning
Rotating 
Carriage Ring
 ! Flexure Stage
!
AUV A:
Fixed 
  Course
VCM
Fig.6. Acousticlocalizationprincipleformonotonicfrequencytothrust Laser 
relationshipsoftheAUVs. Displacement Sensor
Fig.7. Experimentaltestsetupforthebidirectionaloscillatorprototype.
Fig. 6 shows AUV B performing an aggressive left turn,
which would require a high frequency excitation of the
resonant pump’s ﬂexure stage along a direction close to The detailed schematic of our test setup is provided in
◦
θ =0 . At this frequency, the pump provides a preferential Fig.8.Wedrivethevoicecoilmotor(MoticontLVCM-010-
thrust in AUV B’s right ﬂow channel per Fig. 2. This high 013-01) using a linear power ampliﬁer (Gain = 2) whose
frequency acoustic transduction is detected by AUV A and inputisobtainedfromafunctiongenerator(Agilent33120A)
used in conjunction with its own internal position estimate set to provide a 200 mV peak-to-peak sinusoidal voltage
−
rˆA to update rˆB and thereby update rˆAB=rˆB rˆA. sweep from 10 Hz to 80 Hz in a linearly spaced span of 20
Once a neighboring AUVs thrust proﬁle is known at a seconds. Both the current and voltage in the voice coil are
given instant (e.g., from hydrophone data), this thrust can measuredbyaNationalInstrumentsNI6215USB-baseddata
be used in an online observer. For example, the Extended acquisitioncardsettosampleatat500Hz.Thedisplacement
Kalman Filter (EKF) commonly used in land based simul- along the direction of excitation is measured using a laser
taneous localization and mapping (SLAM) can be viable in displacement sensor (Micro-Epsilon optoNCDT 1420-25).
this situation [26]. The EKF would continually update the All signals are stored using LabVIEW running on a data
various position vectors r , r , and r shown in Fig. 6. acquisition desktop computer.
A B AB
882
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 01:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. VI. CONCLUSIONSANDFUTUREWORK
12 V FUNCTION  We have described a bidirectional resonance-based di-
GENERATOR aphragm pumping mechanism that can be used to propel
LASER  TUNABLE VCM  AUVs using a small number of readily fabricated compo-
SENSOR OSCILLATOR ASSEMBLY
nents. In addition to operating efﬁciently at resonance, the
+
device operating frequency can encode the thrust vector
-
conﬁguration of the AUV so that neighboring AUVs can
R R better estimate relative and absolute positions. Our design
R s
12 V minimizes the component count and surface interfaces as-
sociated with rotary and linear bearings by using a ﬂexure
based suspension and deforming diaphragms. Reduced com-
CURRENT  ponent count and ﬂexure-based mechanisms are expected to
SENSE 
DATA  RESISTOR VAOPLPTLAIEGDE  increaseAUVpropulsionsystemreliability.Ourfuturework
ACQUISITION  LEADS will focus on implementing and testing speciﬁc diaphragm
PC
designs for optimal thrust generation at the scale of typical
AUVs. The performance of the localization system may
also exhibit depth dependence and issues attendant with
Fig.8. Schematicoftheexperimentalsetupforthebidirectionaloscillator
prototype. traditional acoustic sensing, which we also plan to assess
in future work.
Given the monotonic relationship between thrust vectors
Using the setup described above, we collected resonance and operating frequency, useful information is encoded in
data at three different directions of excitation: 1) along the the operating frequency of the pumps themselves. In its
most compliant direction (i.e., y-axis); 2) along the stiffest current conceptual form, the localization principle described
direction (i.e., x-axis); and 3) midway between these two in Section IV requires only simple hydrophone sensors. If
extremesatanangleof45◦.Ateachorientationwecomputed we assume the AUV has identical pitch and yaw pump
the ratio of FFTs between input current signal (A) and mechanisms, our approach would be limited to scenarios
outputdisplacementsignal(mm).TheresultsshowninFig.9 in which multiple AUVs are performing maneuvers in one
exhibit the dynamic behavior described in Section III-A and plane of motion (e.g. pitching up or down; turning left or
model output in Fig. 5. Moreover, the experimental results right) at a time so as to avoid confounding between fre-
incorporate a crucial aspect of efﬁciency: current input into quencies producing pitch motions or frequencies producing
theactuator.TheplottedmetricinFig.9illustratesthebeneﬁt yaw motions. However, this limitation can be overcome
of resonance wherein at least a three-fold increase in the by designing the yaw and pitch pumps to operate within
displacement per unit of current is obtained relative to DC non-overlapping frequency ranges. Such designs form the
or above-resonance operation. This is in stark contrast to basis for ongoing and future work. Overall, the bidirectional
the typical UUV propulsion paradigm where continuously resonant pump mechanism addresses multiple challenges
rotating propeller mechanisms provide no resonance beneﬁt. within AUV design and provides a promising foundation for
further development.
4
Compliant Direction REFERENCES
3.5 45 Degrees
Stiff Direction
[1] L.L.Whitcomb,“Underwaterrobotics:Outoftheresearchlaboratory
3 andintotheﬁeld,”inProceedings2000ICRA.MillenniumConference.
IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation.Symposia
2.5 Proceedings(Cat.No.00CH37065),vol.1. IEEE,2000,pp.709–716.
[2] B. Allen, W. S. Vorus, and T. Prestero, “Propulsion system per-
formance enhancements on REMUS AUVs,” in OCEANS 2000
2
MTS/IEEEConferenceandExhibition.ConferenceProceedings(Cat.
No.00CH37158),vol.3. IEEE,2000,pp.1869–1873.
1.5
[3] E. P. Vega, O. Chocron, and M. Benbouzid, “A ﬂat design and
0.15 = 42.0 Hz = 52.2 Hz = 65.4 Hz [4] atpXhp.r.vuLa2silt8,ied9rDa,2”t.–eI2CdE9hE0meE1no,/,Ad2JeS0.lM1J6ifEno.,rTarnaandnsLAa.cUWtiVoannsrge,ocn“oAnMﬁngeoucvrheaalbtlrueonndmiecrsaw,gnavetoetlir.cp2i1ceo,zuonpeoll.ienc6g-,
f  f  f  tric thruster with one single resonance mode,” Review of Scientiﬁc
0 Instruments,vol.90,no.4,p.045007,2019.
30 40 50 60 70 80 [5] E.Cavallo,R.C.Michelini,andV.F.Filaretov,“Conceptualdesignof
Frequency (Hz) anAUVequippedwithathreedegreesoffreedomvectoredthruster,”
JournalofIntelligentandRoboticSystems,vol.39,no.4,pp.365–391,
Fig. 9. Resonance data collected from a simpliﬁed resonant propulsion 2004.
prototype. [6] L. Pugi, B. Allotta, and M. Pagliai, “Redundant and reconﬁgurable
propulsionsystemstoimprovemotioncapabilityofunderwatervehi-
cles,”OceanEngineering,vol.148,pp.376–385,2018.
883
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 01:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [7] S. A. Watson and P. N. Green, “Propulsion systems for micro- multidirectional maneuvering,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mecha-
autonomousunderwatervehicles(µAUVs),”in2010IEEEConference tronics,vol.20,no.6,pp.2890–2902,2015.
on Robotics, Automation and Mechatronics. IEEE, 2010, pp. 435– [19] K.Choi,“Devicehavingavibrationbasedpropulsionsystem,”May2
440. 2017,USPatent9,638,177.
[8] M. Mojarrad, “AUV biomimetic propulsion,” in OCEANS 2000 [20] Y. K. Yong, S. S. Aphale, and S. R. Moheimani, “Design, identiﬁ-
MTS/IEEEConferenceandExhibition.ConferenceProceedings(Cat. cation, and control of a ﬂexure-based XY stage for fast nanoscale
No.00CH37158),vol.3. IEEE,2000,pp.2141–2146. positioning,”IEEETransactionsonNanotechnology,vol.8,no.1,pp.
[9] K. Mohseni, “Pulsatile vortex generators for low-speed maneuvering 46–54,2008.
of small underwater vehicles,” Ocean Engineering, vol. 33, no. 16, [21] X. Deng and J. Zhang, “Voice coil actuator direct-drive resonant
pp.2209–2223,2006. system,”Feb.92017,USPatentApp.14/969,171.
[10] F.Giorgio-Serchi,A.Arienti,andC.Laschi,“Underwatersoft-bodied [22] K. A. Harper, M. D. Berkemeier, and S. Grace, “Modeling the
pulsed-jet thrusters: Actuator modeling and performance proﬁling,” dynamics of spring-driven oscillating-foil propulsion,” IEEE Journal
The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. ofOceanicEngineering,vol.23,no.3,pp.285–296,1998.
1308–1329,2016. [23] C.NiezreckiandS.Balakrishnan,“PowercharacterizationofTHUN-
[11] C.-M. Chew, Q.-Y. Lim, and K. Yeo, “Development of propulsion DER actuators as underwater propulsors,” in Smart Structures and
mechanism for robot manta ray,” in 2015 IEEE International Con- Materials2001:SmartStructuresandIntegratedSystems,vol.4327.
ference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO). IEEE, 2015, pp. InternationalSocietyforOpticsandPhotonics,2001,pp.88–98.
1918–1923. [24] E.P.Vega,O.Chocron,andM.Benbouzid,“AUVpropulsionsystems
[12] K. W. Moored, P. A. Dewey, M. C. Leftwich, H. Bart-Smith, and modeling analysis,” International Review on Modelling and Simula-
A.J.Smits,“Bioinspiredpropulsionmechanismsbasedonmantaray tions,vol.7,no.5,pp.827–837,2014.
locomotion,” Marine Technology Society Journal, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. [25] J.-N.Decarpigny,B.Hamonic,andO.B.Wilson,“Thedesignoflow
110–118,2011. frequency underwater acoustic projectors: present status and future
[13] L. Paull, S. Saeedi, M. Seto, and H. Li, “AUV navigation and trends,”IEEEJournalofoceanicengineering,vol.16,no.1,pp.107–
localization:Areview,”IEEEJournalofOceanicEngineering,vol.39, 122,1991.
no.1,pp.131–149,2013. [26] M. Bryson and S. Sukkarieh, “Building a robust implementation of
[14] H. Xu, G. Li, and J. Liu, “Reliability analysis of an autonomous bearing-only inertial SLAM for a UAV,” Journal of Field Robotics,
underwater vehicle using fault tree,” in 2013 IEEE International vol.24,no.1-2,pp.113–143,2007.
Conference on Information and Automation (ICIA). IEEE, 2013, [27] S. I. Roumeliotis and G. A. Bekey, “Distributed multirobot localiza-
pp.1165–1170. tion,” IEEE transactions on robotics and automation, vol. 18, no. 5,
pp.781–795,2002.
[15] M.P.BritoandG.Grifﬁths,“Amarkovchainstatetransitionapproach
to establishing critical phases for AUV reliability,” IEEE Journal of [28] S.E.Webster,R.M.Eustice,H.Singh,andL.L.Whitcomb,“Prelim-
OceanicEngineering,vol.36,no.1,pp.139–149,2011. inarydeepwaterresultsinsingle-beaconone-way-travel-timeacoustic
navigationforunderwatervehicles,”in2009IEEE/RSJInternational
[16] T. W. Secord, A. Mazumdar, and H. H. Asada, “A multi-cell piezo-
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems. IEEE,2009,pp.2053–
electricdevicefortunableresonanceactuationandenergyharvesting,”
2060.
in2010IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation.
[29] G.Hao,“A2-leggedXYparallelﬂexuremotionstagewithminimised
IEEE,2010,pp.2169–2176.
parasiticrotation,”ProceedingsoftheInstitutionofMechanicalEngi-
[17] T. Secord and M. Audi, “A high efﬁciency tunable resonance pump
neers,PartC:JournalofMechanicalEngineeringScience,vol.228,
for biomedical applications,” in 2018 Design of Medical Devices
no.17,pp.3156–3169,2014.
Conference. American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital
[30] S. Awtar and A. H. Slocum, “Constraint-based design of parallel
Collection,2018.
kinematic XY ﬂexure mechanisms,” Journal of Mechanical Design,
[18] A. Mazumdar, M. S. Triantafyllou, and H. H. Asada, “Dynamic
vol.129,no.8,pp.816–830,2007.
analysis and design of spheroidal underwater robots for precision
884
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 01:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 