2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Velocity Field based Active-Assistive Control for Upper Limb
Rehabilitation Exoskeleton Robot
En-Yu Chia1, Yi-Lian Chen, Tzu-Chieh Chien, Ming-Li Chiang2, Li-Chen Fu3, Fellow, IEEE,
Jin-Shin Lai4 and Lu Lu
Abstract—There are limitations of conventional active- therapy, or assist-as-needed (AAN) one, is shown to be an
assistivecontrolforupperlimbrehabilitationexoskeletonrobot, effective way to provide the necessary assistance for stroke
such as 1). prior time-dependent trajectories are generally
patients in the clinical study [5], [6]. It is also suitable for
required, 2). task-based rehabilitation exercise involving multi-
stroke patients with different levels of impairment. Thus,
jointmotionishardtoimplement,and3).assistivemechanism
normally is so inﬂexible that the resulting exercise performed the research on AAN has received great attention [7]. In
by the subjects becomes inefﬁcient. In this paper, we propose this mode, the robot provides the required assistance for
a novel velocity ﬁeld based active-assistive control system to achievingtherehabilitationtaskwhileconsideringtheactive
address these issues. First, we design a Kalman ﬁlter based
intention of the subject. That is, if the human subjects
interactive torque observer to obtain subjects’ active intention
can perform the given task well on their own, then the
ofmotion.Next,ajoint-position-dependentvelocityﬁeldwhich
can be automatically generated via the task motion pattern robot doesn’t need to provide assistance. Thus, the subjects’
is proposed to provide the time-independent assistance to the involvement of the task can be promoted.
subjects. We further propose a novel integration method that To implement active-assistive control, we require the
combines the active and assistive motions based on the perfor-
control system to obtain human active intention, generate
manceandtheinvolvementofsubjectstoguidethemtoperform
assistance based on the given task, and integrate human
thetaskmorevoluntarilyandprecisely.Theexperimentresults
show that both the execution time and the subjects’ torque active intention of motion and assistance. Additional sen-
exertion are reduced while performing both given single joint sors such as force/torque (F/T) sensors [8], [9] or surface-
tasks and task-oriented multi-joint tasks as compared with the electromyography (sEMG) sensors [10], [11] are utilized
relatedworkintheliterature.Tosumup,theproposedsystem
to obtain human intention. Nonetheless, these sensors have
not only can efﬁciently retain subjects’ active intention but
limitations[12].Forexample,thelocationofF/Tsensorsre-
alsocanassistthemtoaccomplishtherehabilitationtaskmore
precisely. strictsthepointofhuman-robotinteractionandapoorsignal-
to-noiseratioreducesreliabilityofsEMGsensors.Toaddress
I. INTRODUCTION these issues, the interactive torque observer is developed in
related studies [13], [14] to estimate human intention. In
Stroke is the most common neurological disorder and
[13],aKalmanﬁlterbasedobserverisdesignedtohandlethe
approximately 795,000 people suffer from a new or re-
uncertaintiesoftherobotmodelandmeasurements.Besides,
current stroke each year [1]. The survivors of stroke may
anonlinearobserverisemployedin[14]toensureabounded
sustain from upper limb motor impairment which makes the
estimation error.
impaired arm partially or totally paralyzed [2], [3]. These
In order to implement the active-assistive system, one
survivorsrequireproperrehabilitationtherapytoregaintheir
generally needs to combine human active intention and the
motor function. Introducing the robot-assisted device into
assistance.Thegenerationoftheassistanceiscloselyrelated
the therapy is a feasible solution to fulﬁll the uprising
to the format of rehabilitation task. Normally, such task
demandfortreatmentintheconditionofincreasinglaborious
is given as a time-dependent trajectory in many related
cost. Compared with the conventional therapy provided by
works [8]–[10], [13]–[16], which however, implies that the
therapists, the robot-assisted device can offer the subject
generated assistance compels the subjects to achieve the
a rehabilitation exercise with reliable quality and longer
task-speciﬁc motion following closely the pre-speciﬁc time
duration [4].
proﬁles. Some approaches have been developed to deal with
Amongdifferenttypesofrobot-assistedrehabilitationther-
thisproblem.In[13],adecayalgorithmandanadaptivegain
apies to train various exercises, the active-assistive mode
controller are proposed to make the subjects move slightly
faster than the desired motion. The similar gain adjustment
1En-Yu Chia, Yi-Lian Chen and Tzu-Chieh Chien are with the Depart-
strategy is also available in [14], [16]. However, since the
mentofElectricalEngineering,NationalTaiwanUniversity(NTU),Taiwan,
R.O.C.,r06921018@ntu.edu.tw controller for tracking the desired timed trajectory is still
2Ming-LiChiangiswiththeGraduateInstituteofAutomationTechnol- dominating, the above problem is not solved well.
ogy,NTUT,Taiwan,R.O.C.,minglichiang@ntu.edu.tw
On the contrary, constructing a force or velocity ﬁeld to
3Li-Chen Fu is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and De-
partmentofComputerScienceandInformationEngineering,NTU,Taiwan, represent the motion task, which is a time-independent for-
R.O.C.,lichen@ntu.edu.tw mat, has been utilized in [17]–[20]. In these studies, a joint-
4Jin-Shin Lai and Lu Lu are with the Department of Physical
position-dependent force or velocity ﬁeld is deﬁned which
Medicine and Rehabilitation, NTU and NTU Hospital, Taiwan, R.O.C.,
jslai@ntu.edu.tw characterizes the desired motion in terms of the position
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1742
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 16,2020 at 08:02:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 2: The block diagram of the proposed active-assistive control
system
II. DESIGNOFACTIVE-ASSISTIVECONTROLSYSTEM
We design the active-assistive control system to provide
appropriate assistance as needed to assist the subject to
Fig. 1: NTUH-II exoskeleton robot accomplish the rehabilitation task. In addition, the proposed
information.Thus,thesubject’smotioncanbeliberatedfrom system considers the human active intention while perform-
thetimefactor.Nevertheless,thegivenﬁeldsintheserelated ing the task. To evaluate our work, we apply this system to
studies are required to be predeﬁned speciﬁcally, which is the rehabilitation robot, NTUH-II, and conduct some human
nontrivialespeciallywhenthemulti-jointtasks.Furthermore, testing. The system overview is shown in Figure 2. The
it needs to be altered if the desired motion is repeated or designed Kalman ﬁlter based interactive torque observer is
overlapped in the workspace. introducedﬁrst,whichistoextracttheexertedhumantorque
reliably. Next, the admittance model is utilized to access
Toaccomplishactive-assistivecontrol,humanactiveinten-
the active motion of the human. After that, the proposed
tion and assistance from the robot are combined by torque-
velocity ﬁeld and the integration method are shown. Finally,
based integration method in many related works [10], [13]–
we present the controller design and the stability analysis of
[17], [20]. The robot controller reduces the assistance if the
the proposed system to verify the performance.
subject exerts the correct amount of torque to perform the
task. However, it asks subjects to exert torque rather than A. Kalman Filter based Interactive Torque Observer
the desired motion. A clinical report also reveals that AAN The intention of the subject is crucial for the robot to
should promote the motion of performing the rehabilitation determine the control policy. In this paper, the proposed
task actively rather than increase the exerted force [21]. interactive torque observer is inspired by [23] and [13]
In this paper, we propose a novel active-assistive control to obtain human active intention. The method in [23] is
systemwhichconsidersthementionedissues,andimplement utilized to construct a linear robot dynamic model in terms
it on the self-built exoskeleton rehabilitation robot named of generalized momentum p to reduce the computational
NTUH-II [22] as shown in Figure 1. The intention of cost and to apply Kalman ﬁlter directly. The generalized
the human subject is acquired by the designed interactive momentum is deﬁned as
torque observer without suffering limitation of additional
p=M(q)q˙ (1)
sensors. Besides, we design a method to automatically
encode the given general rehabilitation task into a joint- and the variable u is deﬁned as
position-dependent velocity ﬁeld instead of time-dependent − −
u=C(q,q˙)Tq˙ G(q) τˆ +τ . (2)
velocity ﬁeld in most of the existing works in the literature. f r
The generated assistance is time-independent, which aims where M(q) is the inertia matrix; q is the joint angle;
to prevent dramatic limitation on the active intention of the C(q,q˙), G(q) and τ represent the centrifugal/Coriolis
f
subject. After that, we propose a novel method to integrate matrix, gravity vector and friction vector of the robot; τ
r
human active intention and assistance based on the perfor- is the torque exerted by the motor.
−
mance and the involvement of the subject. The integrated By using the passivity property of the robot, M˙ (q)
result considers both the active intention and the given task 2C(q,q˙) being a skew-symmetric matrix, and the derivative
to make subjects perform the task actively and precisely. of the generalized momentum, we can obtain the following
As a result, the performance of the proposed system is linear dynamic model
veriﬁed with the stability analysis and various experiments
p˙ =u+τ +ω (3)
are conducted to validate the effectiveness of the system. h
where ω represents the Gaussian noise with zero mean and
Thepaperisorganizedasfollows.InsectionII,themethod
covariance of Q which is introduced by the estimation of
foracquiringhumanactiveintentionofmotion,theproposed
thefriction[24];τ istheinteractivetorquebetweenhuman
velocityﬁeld,themethodforintegratingactiveintentionand h
and the robot. Besides, we deﬁne the measurement z of the
assistance, the controller design and the stability analysis
generalized momentum of the robot as
are presented. The experiment result is shown in section III.
Finally, the conclusion is drawn in section IV. z =p+v (4)
1743
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 16,2020 at 08:02:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ∼
where v N(0,R) is the measurement noise with zero C. Velocity Field Synthesis with Rehabilitation Task
mean and covariance of R. Here, we propose a method of generating time-
Then,wecandirectlyapplyKalmanﬁlteronboth(3)and
independent assistance with the given rehabilitation task.
(4) which yields
First. we consider the task to be described as a parametric
− −
pˆ˙ =(u+τˆ ) K(zˆ z) curve. For example, if a single joint task is known to be
h (5)
a pattern of repeated and periodical motion between two
zˆ=pˆ
endpoints, of which the peri(cid:20)od is T a(cid:18)nd the(cid:19)e(cid:21)ndpoints are q
− s
where K =P(P +R) 1 is the Kalman gain and P is the and q , we can describe the task as
f
covariance of the estimated error. −
After that, we utilize Lyapunov analysis to construct the q (c)= (qf qs) 1−cos 2πc +q (12)
adaptation law of the estimated interactive torque τˆ . Let d 2 T s
− − h
e=pˆ p and ed =τˆh τh. Furthermore, since there are where q (c) is the task parametric curve and c is the curve
random variables in the model, we perform the analysis on d ≥
parameter, c 0. Note that even the motion period is given,
themovingaverageoftheseerrorsanddenotethemase¯and the motion pattern is what we concern and the task will
e¯d, respectively. Hereafter, by combing (3), (4) and (5), we become time-independent after encoding it into the velocity
can obtain the following error dynamics.
ﬁeld. Furthermore, if we want to cope with a general task,
−
e¯˙ = Ke¯+e¯ (6) the motion pattern of the task can be recorded during the
d
therapist’s demonstration and the method for interpolating a
Consider the following Lyapunov candidate function.
curve can be utilized.
1 1 − After that, we encode the curve using the velocity ﬁeld
V = e¯Te¯+ e¯ TΛ 1e¯ (7)
o 2 2 d d to make the assistance time-independent, which is inspired
where Λ is a diagonal positive deﬁnite matrix. We assume byacontourfollowingapplication[25].Thecurveparameter
thatthetorqueexertedbythesubjectissmoothanddoesnot representsthedesiredtargettoreachontheparametriccurve.
change rapidly, which is quite reasonable in rehabilitation Once a position is given, we can obtain a velocity from
task. Thus, the derivative of the true interactive torque the ﬁeld which aid the subject perform the correct motion
approximates to zero. With this assumption, taking the pattern. In addition, with the help of the curve parameter,
derivative of (7) and performing the substitution with (6) our designed method can even deal with a general multi-
yields dimension task and the repeated and overlapped motions.
− −
V˙ = e¯TKe¯+e¯ T(e¯+Λ 1τˆ˙ ) (8) First,theerrorfunctionwhichrepresentsthedeviationbe-
o d h
tween the current and the desired position on the parametric
We can design the adaptation law as
curve is deﬁned as
− −
τˆ˙h = Λ(pˆ p) (9) −
E(q,c)=q q (c) (13)
where Λ controls the rate of convergence. Substituting (9) d
back into (8) results in where q and q (c) are the current and the desired joint an-
d
− gles,respectively.Then,basedonthedeviation,thepotential
V˙ = e¯TKe¯ (10)
o function can be constructed as
By selecting the initial value of P as positive diagonal 1
matrix and setting both R and Q to be constant positive U(E(q,c))= E(q,c)TΓE(q,c) (14)
2
diagonal matrices, the resulting Kalman gain K is ensured
where Γ is a positive diagonal matrix. To minimize the
to be a diagonal positive deﬁnite matrix. Finally, follow the
deviation, we compute the negative gradient of the potential
procedure in [13], by applying Barbalat’s Lemma, we can
→ → ∞ function and the result is
prove that e¯ 0 as t . Furthermore, the estimated
torque τˆh is stable and may converge to true value with −∂U(E(q,c)) =−Γ[q−q (c)]. (15)
certain inputs. ∂q d
B. Admittance Model Thedirectionoftheequation(15)isactuallythedirectionof
thecurrentpositionpointingtowardthetargetonthedesired
Admittance model is utilized to obtain human active
curve q (c). Thus, we set it as a component of the assistive
intention of motion from the estimated interactive torque. d
velocity which guides the subject back to the desired curve.
In this paper, the admittance model is deﬁned as a virtual
Another velocity component is needed to help subject to
mass-damper system which is shown as
traverse the curve, we deﬁne it as ω (c) = dqd(c) which
d dc
M q¨ +D q˙ =τ . (11) is the velocity on the curve. Note that this velocity can be
h h h h h
predeﬁned with the task.
where M is the virtual mass matrix and D is the virtual
damping hmatrix. In this paper, M and Dh are set in Therefore, the assistive velocity q˙a can be deﬁned as the
h h blending of the two velocities which is expressed as
diagonal form to decouple the velocities among joints, and
the values are empirical. Besides, τ is the input which − ∂U(E(q,c))
represents the human torque. h q˙a =λ1(q,c)ωd(c) λ2(q,c) ∂q (16)
1744
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 16,2020 at 08:02:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. where q˙ is the human’s active motion of the i-th joint, q˙
hi ai
is the assistance obtained from the velocity ﬁeld and q˙
agri
is the integrated velocity.
The blending coefﬁcient α for each joint relies on the
i
involvement a(cid:20)nd t(cid:16)he perfor(cid:17)m(cid:21)ance of the subject and is
proposed to be an asymmetric bell-shaped function.
exp(cid:20)−1(cid:16)q˙hi−q˙ai(cid:17)2(cid:21) if (q˙hi|q˙ai|)≥>|0 |
αi = −2 σah−ead 2 and q˙hi q˙ai , (22)
exp 1 q˙hi q˙ai otherwise,
Fig. 3: Visualization of the composition of the assistive velocity 2 σbehind
where σ and σ can be viewed as the standard
with two position-dependent coefﬁcients λ (q,c) and ahead behind
1 deviation of the Gaussian function. From the equation, one
λ (q,c), which are deﬁned as ∈
2 can observe that α [0,1]. If the subject are involved in
i
λ (q,c)=exp(−K·U(E(q,c))) (17) the task actively and performs adequately, which means the
1
− − · activevelocityofthesubjectisnottoobiggerorsmallerthan
λ (q,c)=2 exp( K U(E(q,c))) (18)
2 assistive velocity, a higher value of α will make the subject
i
where K is a positive constant. These coefﬁcients depend intention dominate. The asymmetric property of αi not only
on the potential function in (14) which can be viewed as a encourages subjects to perform the task faster if they can
measurement of the deviation. When the deviation is small, but also inhibits them from performing task much slower
λ1(q,c)iscloseto1whichmakesq˙a in(16)beclosetoωd. than assistive velocity. Furthermore, we design σahead and
On the contrary, if the deviation is large, λ1(q,c) is close σbehind based on the assistive motion as follows
to 0 and λ2(q,c) is close to 2 which makes the guidance σ =δ |q˙ |,σ =δ |q˙ | (23)
term dominate. Figure 3 illustrates the two velocities that ahead ahead ai behind behind ai
construct the assistive velocity q˙ . In (23), δ and δ are positive constants, where
a ahead behind
Next, to construct the assistive velocity for the whole task 0 < δ < 1 to avoid the subject can alter the direction
behind
curve, the point represented by c should be controlled to of the motion when the assistive velocity is slow. It is noted
traverse through the curve. Thus, the velocity for the curve that σ needs to be handled speciﬁcally to avoid singularity.
parameter is deﬁned as Equation(23)letssubjectshavemorefreedomwhenassistive
velocity suggests to move fast and makes subjects perform
c˙=βλ1(q,c) (19) ﬁne movement when assistive velocity is slow. Thus, the
(cid:40)
proposed method promotes subjects to accomplish the task
where β is a scalar function which is deﬁned as
activelywhileprovidingthenecessaryassistancetomaintain
| | | |(cid:54)
|q˙r| if q˙ =0 the performance of the task execution.
β = q˙a a (20) To maintain the synchronization among joints when per-
1 otherwise.
forming multi-dimension tasks, we follow the idea in [26].
When the subject’s position deviates from the desired Only the correct motion synergies are allowed to contribute
curve, we want the subject to move toward the curve ﬁrst. to the motion. Thus, the vector of integrated velocities are
Hence,c˙isslowinthiscase.Onthecontrary,ifthesubject’s projected onto the direction of the assistive velocity vector.
position is close to the curve, c˙ becomes large to make the The equation of the projection is given as
subject traverse through the curve. Note that, since we will
q˙ Tq˙ q˙
considerthehumanintention,thevelocityforrobottotrack, q˙ = a|gr | a| a|. (24)
which is q˙ , will not be the same as q˙ . The detail will be r q˙a q˙a
r a
discussed in section II-D. Thus, the velocity for the curve E. Controller Design and Stability Analysis
parameter should also be scaled by the factor of the ratio The controller is designed for robot to track the given
between q˙ and q˙ . In addition, since q˙ = 0 only when velocity command to accomplish active-assistive control.
r a r
q˙ =q˙ =0, β is always greater than 0. First, consider the robot dynamics is given as
r a
D. Integration of Active Motion and Assistance M(q)q¨+C(q,q˙)q˙+G(q)+τ +τ =τ +τ (25)
f dis r h
To accomplish the active-assistive control system, the where τ is the unmodeled disturbance.
dis
velocity command to the controller should consider not only Then, with the results proposed in previous subsections,
the human active motion but also the assistance. Therefore, the controller is designed by the standard computed torque
an integration method is proposed to combine these two method which is
factors in this section. The following equation presents the − − − −
τ =M(q)[q¨ K (q˙ q˙ ) K (q q (c))
proposed integration method for each joint r − r − v r p d −
ρsgn(q˙ q˙ )]+C(q,q˙)q˙+G(q)+τ τ
− r f h
q˙ =α q˙ +(1 α )q˙ , (21) (26)
agri i hi i ai
1745
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 16,2020 at 08:02:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (cid:12) (cid:12)
w(cid:12) here K an(cid:12)d K are positive diagonal matrices. In
v p
addition, ρ is a positive constant with a lower bound
−
M 1(q)τ .
dis
Before the stability analysis, it is worth mentioning that
the ratio between q˙ and q˙ is in fact a scalar, which is β
r a
deﬁnedin(20),accordingtotheprojection.Besides,by(22),
it ensures that the result of q˙ is limited regardless of q˙
agr h
being large or small.
The Lyapunov function candidate is chosen as the fol-
− −
lowing form with ed = q qd(c), er = q˙ q˙r and (a) Joint angle of EF task
V = 1e TK e + 1e Te .
2 d p d 2 r r
By taking the time derivative of V and using the relation-
ship between q˙ and q˙ , we obtain
r a
− −
V˙ =e TK [q˙ q˙ +βq˙ ω (c)c˙]+e Te˙ . (27)
d p r a d r r
After substituting equation (25), (26) and the designed
velocity ﬁeld into (27), the following derivation is obtained.
−
V˙ =e TK [e +βλ (q,c)ω (c) βλ (q,c)Γe
d p r 1 d 2 d
−
ω (c)βλ (q,c)]+e Te˙
d 1 r r
− − −
= βλ (q,c)e TK Γe e TK e e Tξ
2 d p d r v−r r (b) Interactive torque and α of EF task
ρe T(cid:88)sgn(e )
r r
≤− − −| || |
βλ (q,c)e TK Γe e TK e ξ e
2 d p d r v r r
− | |
ρ e
ri
i
<0 (28)
−
where the unmodeled disturbance ξ = M 1(q)τ is
|d|is
supposed to be upper-bounded which abides by ρ> ξ and (c) Velocities of EF task
Γ is a positive diagonal matrix. Furthermore, it is ensured Fig. 4: The result of EF task in the ﬁrst experiment
that λ (q,c)>0 and β is always greater than 0. Thus, both
2
e and e converges to zero asymptotically. Therefore, we Figure 4 shows the result of performing EF task. From
d r
can conclude that performance and safety of the proposed Figure 4b, the subject initially exerts the torque to achieve
method is still guaranteed. the task before about 4 seconds. Since the subject tries
to perform the task with an adequate velocity, which can
III. EXPERIMENT be seen from Figure 4c, blending coefﬁcient α becomes
To evaluate the proposed system, two experiments are nearly 1 to make subject’s intention dominate. Thus, by
performed.Theﬁrstexperimentveriﬁesthesystemcanassist the proposed design, the overall velocity for robot to track
the subject as needed. The second compares the proposed becomesthehumanactivevelocity.Thesimilarphenomenon
system with the prevalent assistive control in the related can be observed when the subject involves in the task at the
work [13]. Three healthy subjects are recruited for these time instant after 9 seconds. On the other hand, the subject
experiments.Theexperimentsareconductedwiththeirright- relaxes the arm in between 4 to 9 seconds. Then, α drops to
side arm. During the experiment, the subject receives the 0 which makes the overall velocity for robot become the
visualfeedbackofthepositioninformationfromthemonitor. assistive velocity. Thus, the given task can be accurately
completed with the assistance of the robot. In conclusion,
A. Experiment of Assist-as-needed Property theexperimentrevealsthattheproposedmethodcanachieve
Intheﬁrstexperiment,subjectsareaskedtoperformelbow assist-as-needed efﬁciently.
ﬂexion/extension (EF) exercises using the proposed system.
B. Comparison with Related Work
The exercise is about moving the forearm back and forth
◦ ◦
between the endpoints (0 and 60 ). Subjects will change Thesecondexperimentistocomparetheproposedsystem
the level of involvement in the middle way before reaching with AAN method in related work [13]. To focus on the
theendpoint.Thatis,subjectstrytoachievethetasknearthe performanceofassistivecontrol,weonlyimplementthecore
initialpositionbutrelaxthearmwhenthejointangleisclose part of assistive controller in [13] and the controller gain is
totheendpoint.Weexpecttheproposedsystemcanassistthe ﬁxed for simplicity.
subject as needed according to different involvement levels Two multiple joints tasks related to activities of Daily
of the subject. Living (ADL) including “Raising the arm” and “Greeting”
1746
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 16,2020 at 08:02:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 5: The motion ﬂow of “Raising the arm” task
TABLEI:Comparisonoftheaverageperformanceofmultiplejoints
tasks with the related work for all subjects
Task τavg (Nm) tavg (s) avg (degree)
Related Ours Related Ours Related Ours
Raising
5.14 2.83 11.89 10.33 1.23 0.70
thearm
(a) Performed trajectory of the given task
are performed in this experiment. Each task will be con-
ducted for ﬁve trials, and the subjects are asked to do their
best to complete the tasks. For the limited space, we focus
our following discussion on the “Raising the arm” task
(Figure 5) which is composed of elbow ﬂexion/extension
(EF) and shoulder ﬂexion/extension (SF). The full content
of the experiment is shown in our video attachment.
Three metrics are utilized in this experiment. The ﬁrst
metric is the average of absolute interactive torque τ
avg
which is measured from the F/T sensor on NTUH-II. The
metric is used for quantifying the exertion of the subject
(cid:80)
when performing a task. The second metric is the mean (b) Interactive torque when performing the task
absolute position error to the desired path which is deﬁned Fig.6:Resultsof“Raisingthearm”taskinthesecondexperiment
| − |
as  = 1 q q . N is the number of the data and
| −avg | N n d
q qd representstheminimumdistancetothedesiredpath are proposed. First, a Kalman ﬁlter based interactive torque
given a position. The third metric is the average execution observer combined with an admittance model is designed to
timeofagiventasktavg.Sinceourmethodallowsthesubject obtain the human active intention of motion. In addition, we
tomoveactively,weexpectthattheexecutiontimeusingthe propose a method to generate the position based velocity
proposed method will be shorter compared with the related ﬁeld from any given task automatically to provide time-
work. independent assistance. Finally, we propose an integration
The experiment result is shown in Figure 6 and Table I. method for combining human active intention of motion
From Figure 6a which shows the trajectory, one can observe and the assistance based on the subjects’ involvement and
that the subject ﬁnishes the task earlier than the controller performance. The method assists subjects as needed and lets
in [13]. It is also noted that the interactive torque using the them move actively when the task is performed well.
proposed system is less than the torque in the related work, The experiment result validates that the proposed system
which can be seen in Figure 6b and Table I. can preserve the active intention of the subject and assist
From the Table I, we can observe that the average perfor- the subject as needed. Furthermore, the comparison result
mance of all subjects with the proposed system outperforms with the related work suggests that the subject not only
the related work. Under the same condition that subjects try can use less effort to achieve the given task but also will
theirbesttoperformthetask,thetime-dependenttaskmodel not be limited by the original execution time of the task.
and the torque-based integration method in [13] make the In conclusion, the proposed system can provide necessary
controller conﬁne the subject to keep tracking the given task assistance according to the subjects’ intention and can assist
whenthesubjectexertexcessivetorque.Onthecontrary,the them to accomplish given rehabilitation tasks accurately.
proposed system will not restrict subjects’ active intention Nonetheless, the effectiveness of the proposed method for
duetotheintegrationmethodproposedinSectionII-D.Thus, stroke patients requires to be validated through clinical
the task can be accomplished earlier while minimizing the studies in the future work.
interactive torque. Furthermore, we also achieve satisfactory
accuracy without the high-gain trade-off in the design of V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
controllerin[13]whichsacriﬁcesthehumanactiveintention. This research was supported by the Joint Research Center
for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare under Ministry
IV. CONCLUSIONS
of Science and Technology of Taiwan, and Center for Ar-
In this paper, a novel velocity ﬁeld based active-assistive tiﬁcial Intelligence & Advanced Robotics, National Taiwan
control system for upper limb rehabilitation exoskeleton University,underthegrantnumbersof108-2634-F-002-017,
robot is proposed. To realize the system, several methods 109-2634-F-002-027 and MOST 108-2218-E-027-014 - .
1747
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 16,2020 at 08:02:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO),
2017,pp.1485–1490.
[1] E. J. Benjamin, P. Muntner, A. Alonso, M. S. Bittencourt, C. W.
[13] A. U. Pehlivan, D. P. Losey, and M. K. O’Malley, “Minimal Assist-
Callaway,A.P.Carson,A.M.Chamberlain,A.R.Chang,S.Cheng,
as-Needed Controllerfor Upper Limb Robotic Rehabilitation,” IEEE
S. R. Das, F. N. Delling, L. Djousse, M. S. Elkind, J. F. Ferguson,
TransactionsonRobotics,vol.32,no.1,pp.113–124,2016.
M.Fornage,L.C.Jordan,S.S.Khan,B.M.Kissela,K.L.Knutson,
[14] A. U. Pehlivan, D. P. Losey, C. G. Rose, and M. K. O’Malley,
T. W. Kwan, D. T. Lackland, T. T. Lewis, J. H. Lichtman, C. T.
“Maintainingsubjectengagementduringroboticrehabilitationwitha
Longenecker,M.S.Loop,P.L.Lutsey,S.S.Martin,K.Matsushita,
minimal assist-as-needed (mAAN) controller,” in 2017 International
A.E.Moran,M.E.Mussolino,M.OFlaherty,A.Pandey,A.M.Perak,
ConferenceonRehabilitationRobotics(ICORR),2017,pp.62–67.
W. D. Rosamond, G. A. Roth, U. K. Sampson, G. M. Satou, E. B.
[15] E. T. Wolbrecht, V. Chan, D. J. Reinkensmeyer, and J. E. Bobrow,
Schroeder, S. H. Shah, N. L. Spartano, A. Stokes, D. L. Tirschwell,
“OptimizingCompliant,Model-BasedRoboticAssistancetoPromote
C. W. Tsao, M. P. Turakhia, L. B. VanWagner, J. T. Wilkins, S. S.
Neurorehabilitation,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Re-
Wong, and S. S. Virani, “Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics2019
habilitationEngineering,vol.16,no.3,pp.286–297,2008.
Update:AReportFromtheAmericanHeartAssociation,”Circulation, [16] T. Proietti, G. Morel, A. Roby-Brami, and N. Jarrasse´, “Compar-
vol.139,no.10,32019. ison of different error signals driving the adaptation in assist-as-
[2] J. G. Broeks, G. J. Lankhorst, K. Rumping, and A. J. Prevo, “The neededcontrollersforneurorehabilitationwithanupper-limbrobotic
long-termoutcomeofarmfunctionafterstroke:resultsofafollow-up exoskeleton,”in2017IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsand
study.” Disability and rehabilitation, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 357–364, 8 Automation(ICRA),2017,pp.6645–6650.
1999. [17] H. J. Asl, T. Narikiyo, and M. Kawanishi, “An Assist-as-Needed
[3] M.C.CirsteaandM.F.Levin,“Compensatorystrategiesforreaching Velocity Field Control Scheme for Rehabilitation Robots,” IEEE
instroke.”Brain:ajournalofneurology,vol.123,no.5,pp.940–953, InternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems,pp.3322–
52000. 3327,2018.
[4] V.S.HuangandJ.W.Krakauer,“Roboticneurorehabilitation:acom- [18] U. Keller, G. Rauter, and R. Riener, “Assist-as-needed path control
putational motor learning perspective,” Journal of NeuroEngineering forthePASCALrehabilitationrobot,”IEEEInternationalConference
andRehabilitation,vol.6,no.1,p.5,2009. onRehabilitationRobotics,2013.
[5] L.E.Kahn,M.L.Zygman,W.Z.Rymer,andD.J.Reinkensmeyer, [19] P.AgarwalandA.D.Deshpande,“Subject-SpeciﬁcAssist-as-Needed
“Robot-assisted reaching exercise promotes arm movement recovery ControllersforaHandExoskeletonforRehabilitation,”IEEERobotics
in chronic hemiparetic stroke: a randomized controlled pilot study,” andAutomationLetters,vol.3,no.1,pp.508–515,2018.
Journalofneuroengineeringandrehabilitation,vol.3,p.12,62006. [20] H.J.AslandT.Narikiyo,“Anassistivecontrolstrategyforrehabili-
[Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16790067 tationrobotsusingvelocityﬁeldandforceﬁeld,”in2019IEEE16th
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1550245/ International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), June
[6] M.-H.Milot,S.J.Spencer,V.Chan,J.P.Allington,J.Klein,C.Chou, 2019,pp.790–795.
J. E. Bobrow, S. C. Cramer, and D. J. Reinkensmeyer, “A crossover [21] N. Hogan, H. I. Krebs, B. Rohrer, J. J. Palazzolo, L. Dipietro, S. E.
pilotstudyevaluatingthefunctionaloutcomesoftwodifferenttypes Fasoli,J.Stein,R.Hughes,W.R.Frontera,D.Lynch,andB.T.Volpe,
ofroboticmovementtraininginchronicstrokesurvivorsusingthearm “Motions or muscles? Some behavioral factors underlying robotic
exoskeletonBONES,”Journalofneuroengineeringandrehabilitation, assistanceofmotorrecovery.”Journalofrehabilitationresearchand
vol.10,p.112,122013. development,vol.43,no.5,pp.605–618,2006.
[7] A. Basteris, S. M. Nijenhuis, A. H. A. Stienen, J. H. Buurke, [22] C.H.Lin,W.M.Lien,W.W.Wang,S.H.Chen,C.H.Lo,S.Y.Lin,
G.B.Prange,andF.Amirabdollahian,“Trainingmodalitiesinrobot- L. C. Fu, and J. S. Lai, “NTUH-II robot arm with dynamic torque
mediatedupperlimbrehabilitationinstroke:aframeworkforclassi- gain adjustment method for frozen shoulder rehabilitation,” in 2014
ﬁcationbasedonasystematicreview,”JournalofNeuroEngineering IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems,
andRehabilitation,vol.11,no.1,p.111,2014. 2014,pp.3555–3560.
[8] J. Zhang and C. C. Cheah, “Passivity and Stability of HumanRobot [23] A.Wahrburg,E.Morara,G.Cesari,B.Matthias,andH.Ding,“Carte-
Interaction Control for Upper-Limb Rehabilitation Robots,” IEEE sian contact force estimation for robotic manipulators using Kalman
TransactionsonRobotics,vol.31,no.2,pp.233–245,2015. ﬁlters and the generalized momentum,” in 2015 IEEE International
[9] S.H.Chen,W.M.Lien,W.W.Wang,G.D.Lee,L.C.Hsu,K.W. Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), 2015,
Lee,S.Y.Lin,C.H.Lin,L.C.Fu,J.S.Lai,J.J.Luh,andW.S.Chen, pp.1230–1235.
“Assistive Control System for Upper Limb Rehabilitation Robot,” [24] A.Wahrburg,J.Bo¨s,K.D.Listmann,F.Dai,B.Matthias,andH.Ding,
IEEETransactionsonNeuralSystemsandRehabilitationEngineering, “Motor-Current-Based Estimation of Cartesian Contact Forces and
vol.24,no.11,pp.1199–1209,2016. TorquesforRoboticManipulatorsandItsApplicationtoForceCon-
[10] T.Teramae,T.Noda,andJ.Morimoto,“EMG-BasedModelPredictive trol,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering,
ControlforPhysicalHumanRobotInteraction:ApplicationforAssist- vol.15,no.2,pp.879–886,2018.
As-Needed Control,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, [25] P.Y.LiandR.Horowitz,“Passivevelocityﬁeldcontrol(PVFC).Part
no.1,pp.210–217,2018. II.Applicationtocontourfollowing,”IEEETransactionsonAutomatic
[11] J. Lee, M. Kim, and K. Kim, “A control scheme to minimize Control,vol.46,no.9,pp.1360–1371,2001.
muscle energy for power assistant robotic systems under unknown [26] E.B.Brokaw,R.J.Holley,andP.S.Lum,“ComparisonofJointSpace
external perturbation,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and and End Point Space Robotic Training Modalities for Rehabilitation
RehabilitationEngineering,vol.25,no.12,pp.2313–2327,2017. of Interjoint Coordination in Individuals With Moderate to Severe
[12] L. Liu, L. Chien, S. Pan, J. Ren, C. Chiao, W. Chen, L. Fu, and Impairment From Chronic Stroke,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
J.Lai,“Interactivetorquecontrollerwithelectromyographyintention SystemsandRehabilitationEngineering,vol.21,no.5,pp.787–795,
predictionimplementedonexoskeletonrobotNTUH-II,”in2017IEEE 2013.
1748
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 16,2020 at 08:02:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 