 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)  
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
A Novel Portable Lower Limb Exoskeleton for Gravity 
Compensation during Walking 
Libo Zhou, Weihai Chen*, Wenjie Chen*, Shaoping Bai, and Jianhua Wang  
  Abstract—This paper presents a novel portable passive lower  with  elastic  artificial  tendons  was  proposed  to  minimize 
limb exoskeleton for walking assistance. The exoskeleton is designed  human joint work during walking in which artificial tendons 
with built-in spring mechanisms at the hip and knee joints to  act in parallel with the leg and are able to store and redistribute 
realize gravity balancing of the human leg. A pair of mating gears  energy over the human lower limb joints [12]-[14]. 
is used to convert the tension force from the built-in springs into   The other purpose of the spring used in passive exoskeletons 
balancing torques at hip and knee joints for overcoming the  is to compensate the gravity of human body or human limbs. 
influence of gravity. Such a design makes the exoskeleton has a  Research results show that passive exoskeletons with gravity 
compact layout with small protrusion, which improves its safety 
compensation can significantly decrease  users’  muscular- 
and user acceptance. In this paper, the design principle of gravity 
actuation efforts and improve motor learning capability [15], 
balancing is described. Simulation results show a significant 
[16]. A passive lower limb exoskeleton design composed of 
reduction of driving torques at the limb joints. A prototype of 
links and springs can be found in [16], [17]. In the design, a 
single leg exoskeleton has been constructed and preliminary test 
results show the effectiveness of the exoskeleton.  parallelogram mechanism was used to locate the centers of 
mass of the leg and the exoskeleton. The springs were then 
I.  INTRODUCTION  placed at suitable positions to compensate the gravity of the 
Various lower limb exoskeletons have been developed for  system. Another passive assistive device was proposed in [18] 
rehabilitation of patients with dyskinesia of lower limbs [1]-[4].   for sit-to-stand tasks. This device uses auxiliary parallelograms 
Exoskeletons can be grouped into powered exoskeletons and  to obtain the center of mass of the human body which is modeled 
passive exoskeletons based on the usage of power method [4].  as having three degrees of freedom, and the springs are then 
Powered exoskeletons are usually driven through electric motors  added to make the total potential energy of the system constant 
or hydraulic cylinders with battery or external power as energy.  during standing up. To overcome the gravity of human lower 
Rehabilitation training by powered exoskeletons is intuitive and  limb, multiple designs with elastic articulated cable have been 
effective, and many powered exoskeletons have been developed  proposed [19], including perfect gravity balancing of the limb 
[5]-[9]. A limitation of these exoskeletons is that they move in a  using parallelogram with zero free length springs or four-bar 
predetermined trajectory rather than allowing the patients move  mechanism with torsion springs, and the approximate gravity 
under their own control. This prevents the patients to practice  balancing of the limb with two different stiffness linear springs. 
appropriate  movement  patterns  according  to  their  recovery  The working principle of passive exoskeletons is commonly 
situations to promote relearning of typical patterns. Passive  based on the gravity balancing mechanism [20], [21], using 
exoskeletons do not require any external energy source, its  spring to compensate the gravity of the load. This type of design 
movement is entirely dependent on the wearers own actions.  has the advantage of being light. However, the design requires 
Compared with powered exoskeletons, passive exoskeletons  auxiliary instrumentation for real implementation, and the spring 
are usually lighter, cheaper and safer.  will occupy additional space around the balancer during the 
Passive exoskeletons are commonly designed with springs  joint rotation. To avoid the potential interference between the 
and the springs are used for two purposes. One is to store and  mechanical parts, the spring is installed outside the linkages at a 
return  energy  during  each  step.  A  representative  passive  distance from the joint. Such design significantly increases the 
exoskeleton was developed to aid ankle propulsion [10], [11].  structure complexity of the exoskeleton and the outside spring 
The exoskeleton acts in parallel with the user’s calf muscles  increases the risk of possible harm to the wearer. 
and uses a passive mechanical clutch which consists of a  Some designs have tried to embed all mechanical elements 
ratchet and a pawl to engage the spring when the foot is on the  inside the frames of the linkages. A new type interior cam 
ground and disengage it when the foot is in the air. Research  mechanism which installed inside the main rotation joint was 
results show that it helps to reduce the metabolic cost of  proposed as a gravity-balancing mechanism for robot arms [22]. 
walking by 7.2±2.6% for healthy people. A passive exoskeleton  A limitation of the design is that the cam contact may be 
  unstable in dynamic situation. A new gravity compensation 
This research is supported by supported by the National Natural Science  mechanism which consists of an embedded pulley system was 
Foundation of China under Grant No. 51975002 and 61773042.    developed for lower limb rehabilitation [23]. The spring is 
Libo Zhou, Weihai Chen and Jianhua Wang are with the School of 
driven by the pulleys and is installed inside the frames of the 
Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, BJ 
linkages for a safe interaction with the wearer. A shortage of 
100191,  China  (e-mail:  libozhou@buaa.edu.cn;  whchen@buaa.edu.cn; 
jhwangbuaa@126.com).  the balancer is that the design is complicated to include a 
Wenjie Chen is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Automation,  bundle of pulleys and wires. A one-DoF gravity balancer 
Anhui University, HF 230601, China (wjchen_ahu@126.com).  designed with an inverted Cardan Gear Mechanism and a 
Shaoping Bai is with Department of Materials and Production, Aalborg 
planetary gear train has been proposed in [24]. The design 
University, Aalborg 9220, Denmark (e-mail: shb@mp.aau.dk). 
*Corresponding author  makes its mechanical components be integrated as a compound 
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 768
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
rotating  joint  and  achieve  perfect  static  balancing  using  The leg is simplified as a two-linkage mechanism which 
practical tensile spring. However, the free length of the spring  stands for the thigh and the shank in the sagittal plane, and the 
should be equal to the radius of the ring gear in the Cardan  foot is approximated as a point mass m . The model is shown 
3
gear mechanism, as the compensation of a larger gravity  in Fig. 1 (b), where SS is defined as the zero potential energy 
requires  a  stiffer  spring  with  longer  length,  there  is  a  surface.  The  gravitational  potential  energy  of  the  overall 
compromise between the mechanism size and the compensation  human-exoskeleton leg is 
gravity. Besides, the proposed balancer is not suitable for                                                       
          
lower  limb  exoskeleton  due  to  the  lack  of  adjustment 
where   ,   , and    are the gravitational potential energy of 
mechanism for different weight subjects.          
This paper presents a novel passive lower limb exoskeleton  the thigh, shank and foot respectively, and can be obtained as 
for walking assistance of people who lack of motor ability.                                      
               
The leg exoskeleton has two DoFs, one at the hip joint and the           [                     ]                          
other at the knee joint. In the design, a pair of mating gears is                  [                    ]   
            
used to convert the tension force generated by the springs into 
       [                    ]      
torques. All springs are mounted inside the frames of linkages                
in the thigh and the shank, which makes the exoskeleton has a  where   ,    and    are the mass of the thigh, shank and foot 
     
compact layout with small protrusion. The pretension force of  of human leg respectively.    and    are the mass of the 
     
the springs can be adjusted by a lead screw nut mechanism to  thigh and the shank of the exoskeleton respectively.    and    
   
compensate the gravity for different subjects.   are the lengths of the thigh and the shank respectively.    and    
   
In this paper, the design principle is described in detail in  are the distances of the center of mass (COM) of the thigh to the 
Section Ⅱ, which includes a design concept for perfect gravity  hip joint and the COM of the shank to the knee joint for the 
balancing, followed by a simplified design with the parameters  human leg respectively.    and    are the distances of the COM 
   
optimized for approximate gravity balancing. In Section Ⅲ, 
of the thigh to the hip joint and the COM of shank to the knee 
simulations are conducted to show the performance of the 
joint for the exoskeleton leg respectively.    and    are the 
   
simplified exoskeleton on the reduction of driving torque. A 
rotation angles of the hip and knee joints respectively. 
prototype of the simplified exoskeleton and preliminary test 
Equations (1) and (2) yield 
results are shown in Section Ⅳ followed by conclusions of 
this paper in Section Ⅴ.                                               
with  
II.  WORKING PRINCIPLE OF THE NEW DESIGN                              
                   
          
A.  Preliminary design for perfect gravity balancing                                                  
              
Our proposed exoskeleton is designed with linear springs  The working principle of a single joint is shown in Fig. 2. 
for gravity compensation. The perfect gravity balancing is  The design includes a pair of gear, a tension spring, two identical 
defined based on the condition that the overall potential  compression springs and an adjusting mechanism. Of the two 
energy  of  the  human-exoskeleton  system  dependent  on  gears, the pinion (the small gear) has a half of the diameter of 
gravity and the springs remains constant during walking [21].  the gear (the large gear). In the initial position shown in Fig. 2 
The basic components of the exoskeleton with a human leg 
(a), the tension spring is installed passing through the rotation 
are shown in Fig. 1 (a).  
centers of the two gears with one end attached at point B which 
is fixed in the adjustment mechanism and the other end attached 
at point A which is fixed on the pinion. The two identical 
Hip Joint compression springs are free with one end of the spring 
attached at point C or D which is fixed on the gear. The other 
l1 s1 l* SS end clinging to the driving point E which is fixed on the 
1 O1 
Knee  θ1  pinion.  The  adjusting  mechanism  is  used  to  change  the 
Joint m1 preload  of  the  tension  spring.  According  to  the  gear 
m
a1 transmission relationship, the pinion rotates with the gear, 
O2  and the points A and E trace a perfectly straight line [24], with 
l*
θ2  2 s2 the springs extended or compressed. All the three springs are 
designed with the same stiffness k, and an arbitrary operation 
m2 l2 state is shown in Fig. 2 (b).  
ma2 When the gear rotates an angle   , as shown in Fig. 2 (b), 
points A and E move distances     and    respectively, and 
   
m the distances can be obtained as 
3
                                                  
   
                                                        
   
   
where r is the radius of the pinion. 
(a)                                                      (b) 
For the tension spring, its elastic potential energy when 
Fig. 1. Model of the human-exoskeleton leg. (a) Basic components of the 
exoskeleton with a leg. (b) Various terms and parameters.  the gear at angle    is  
 
769
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
Hip 
Point A The gear  base Hip joint
The pinion 
Point C Dporiivnitn Eg  Ck E r A Δl1 xk1 x
s1 2r k1
Point D k k1 k1
D Knee  y y
Compressio Compression  base θ1  θ1 
n spring 1 spring 2 k θ1  l1 H3 r2 H2 Aulxinilkiary  H3 r2 H2
Knee  k2
Tension  B joint
spring
Point B θ2  k2 θ2  k2
Adjusting 
Mechanism  θ3  θ3 
(a) (b)
Fig. 2. Basic working principle of the design. (a) Initial position. (b) 
Rotates at an arbitrary angle   .   
 
                                                    
       
where    is  the  deformation  of  the  spring  due  to  the  (a) (b)  
pretension force at initial position.  Fig. 3. Kinematic model of the lower limb exoskeleton. (a) Original design 
for gravity compensation. (b) Simplified design for approximate gravity 
For the compression spring, it is free at the initial position, 
compensation. 
and its elastic potential energy at angle    is 
 
   
                                                                                                       
where    and    are the stiffness of the springs,    and    are 
The overall elastic potential energy due to the springs is         
the radii of the pinions in the hip and knee joints respectively. 
                                                  
       and    are the initial deformations of the tension springs 
     
Combining Eq. (4)-Eq. (8), the elastic potential energy   is  in the thigh and the shank respectively. The other parameters 
  of    and    are defined in Eq. (2). 
                                                
        From Eq. (10), we can find that if the coefficients of terms 
containing  trigonometric  variables  vanish,  i.e.,       
A kinematic representation of the lower limb exoskeleton     
       , then  the  total potential energy is given by 
robot is shown in Fig. 3 (a). It includes a 1-DOF hip joint     
     , which is a constant. Therefore, the total potential 
module and a 1-DOF knee joint module. As the motion of the   
energy becomes configuration independent, and a perfect 
knee joint is in single direction which referred as flexion 
gravity balancing is achieved. These conditions yield 
motion while the motion of the hip joint includes both flexion 
                        
and extension motions, only one compression spring is installed                       
             
in the knee joint and two identical compression springs are                       
                 
installed in the hip joint. A lightweight auxiliary link is designed                                              
in parallel with the thigh, and thus a parallelogram mechanism                
with its rotation joints at point                is formed.  Hence, if the springs with stiffness given by (11) are used, the 
     
The parallelogram mechanism can ensure the knee base is  mechanism can realize gravity-balanced. After the springs are 
parallel to the hip base which is in a horizontal position.  selected, the initial deformations of the tension springs     and 
 Referring to the kinematic model shown in Fig. 3 (a),      can be adjusted to vary the level of gravity balancing. 
where       is the fixed-coordinate frame with its original 
B.  Approximate Gravity Balancing for Lower Limb 
located at point O. The horizontal plane which goes through the 
The method presented above provides a perfect gravity 
x-axis is defined as the zero potential energy surface. Thus, the 
balancing  system  with  built-in  springs  for  the  leg.  A 
rotation angles of the gears in the hip and knee joints are     
  limitation of the method is that it requires both tension springs 
and         . 
      and  compression  springs  and  these  must  have  the  same 
Referring to Eq. (3) and Eq. (9), we can get the total 
stiffness for each joint. This section presents a method for 
potential energy of the human-exoskeleton system is 
approximate  gravity  balancing  of  leg  with  only  tension 
                                                springs, which makes the proposed design more compact than 
with  the previous ones. The parameters of the design are optimized 
                             to minimize the variations of the total potential energy of the 
                   
   human-exoskeleton leg. 
                                                 
               Fig. 3 (b) shows the model of the simplified lower limb 
                    exoskeleton. Compared with the previous design shown in 
                  Fig. 3 (a), only a tension spring is used for each joint in this 
          
770
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
design. Through Eq. (4) and Eq. (6), the overall elastic potential 
energy of the exoskeleton is  
                                 
             
                                                                    1 11
with  2
Hip joint
                  3
          
           12
     
                 
          
           4
     
 
               
          13
  5
                    6 Knee joint 14
8
The total potential energy of the human-exoskeleton is 
                                                                    7 9
            
                                          
                
10
where parameters of   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,    and    are 
                 
defined in Eq. (3) and Eq. (13).    
(a)                                                  (b) 
Variation of the total potential energy of the human-  Fig. 4. Mechanism model of the exoskeleton. (a) Front view. (b) Rear view. 
exoskeleton system leads to the increment of the balancing  1-Gear 1, 2-Pinion 1, 3-Wirerope 1, 4-Tension spring 1, 5-Adjusting mechanism 
torque at human lower limb joints. To reduce this torque  1, 6-Gear 2, 7-Pinion 2, 8-Wirerope 2, 9-Tension spring 2, 10-Adjusting 
mechanism 2, 11-Encoder sensor 1, 12-Auxiliary link, 13-Length adjusting 
increment, the variation of the total potential energy Q should be 
mechanism, 14-Encoder sensor 2. 
minimized for the whole walking gait. 
As shown in Eq. (13), the total potential energy   is a  at the human joints to drive the limbs was obtained to show the 
function of the hip and knee joints angle variables {     },  performance of the exoskeleton. 
   
and also of the design parameters such as the radii of the  The variations of torques at the limb joints during a gait 
pinions    and   , the initial deformations of the tension  cycle are shown in Fig. 5. It can be seen that for the unbalanced 
   
springs    and   , and the spring stiffness    and   . It is  human-exoskeleton system of which the spring stiffness is set 
         
as zero, the maximum torque to drive the lower limb is about 
necessary to find the suitable design parameters to minimize 
15 Nm for the hip joint and 6 Nm for the knee joint. It also 
the variation of the total potential energy.  
reaches nearly 15 Nm and 5.5 Nm for the hip joint and knee 
Hence, the total potential energy at n points among the 
whole walking gait cycle {     } is evaluated, named   ,  joint  respectively  without  exoskeleton.  For  the  balanced 
     
human- exoskeleton system, we can find that the maximum 
and the average potential energy of the n points are then 
calculated, defined as  ̅. The optimization problem is  torque is reduced to about 3.5 Nm for the hip joint and 1.5 Nm 
for the knee joint, which is only about one quarter of the 
∑       ̅  
                                   maximum  torque  when the human-exoskeleton system is 
   
                         unbalanced. The averaged absolute values of the torque at the 
                                
       hip and knee joints are shown in Fig. 6. We can find that the 
average absolute torques are reduced from 6.95 Nm (without 
III.  SIMULATIONS WITH MATLAB/SIMMECHANICS  exoskeleton) to 1.46 Nm for the hip joint and 2.22 Nm 
(without exoskeleton) to 0.74 Nm for the knee joint.  
A CAD model of the simplified lower limb exoskeleton 
was built by Solidworks, as shown in Fig. 4. The spring is  TABLE Ⅰ. PARAMETERS OF THE DEVELOPED LOWER LIMB EXOSKELETON 
connected with the pinion by a wire rope. The adjusting  Param.  Value  Param.  Value 
mechanism is a lead screw nut mechanism which can be used  Radius of pinion 1 (mm)  27  Radius of pinion 2 (mm)  20.25 
to adjust the initial deformation of the tension spring. A  Original length of  Original length of 
150  100 
length adjusting  mechanism  with double guide rods  was  tension spring 1 (mm)  tension spring 2 (mm) 
designed for the adjustment of the thigh length and two  Stiffness of tension  10.79  Stiffness of tension  6.75 
spring 1 (N/mm)  spring 2 (N/mm) 
ultra-small magnetic encoder sensors are installed to measure 
Initial tension of  Initial tension of tension 
the rotation angles of the hip and knee joints. The design  123.6  34.3 
tension spring 1 (N)  spring 2 (N) 
parameters of the exoskeleton are listed in Table Ⅰ.      
The exoskeleton was then attached to a human model. The 
TABLE Ⅱ.  PARAMETERS OF THE HUMAN-EXOSKELETON SYSTEM IN 
parameters of the mass and the center-of-mass of the human-  THE SIMULATIONS 
exoskeleton model obtained in the Solidworks are shown in  Param.  Value  Param.  Value  Param.  Value 
Table Ⅱ. The human-exoskeleton model was then imported      6.838 kg      3.102 kg      0.846 kg 
into SimMechanics for simulation. In the simulation, the input 
     1.060 kg       0.628 kg      440 mm 
signals are the trajectories of hip and knee joints according to the 
general human gait [2], [25] and the initial deformations of the      400 mm       194 mm       179 mm 
tension springs in the thigh and the shank are obtained after      173 mm      104 mm  g  9.8 N/kg 
optimization shown in Eq. (14). The torque additional required  All parameters are defined in Section Ⅱ. A. 
 
771
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
(ATI MINI 45) was installed to measure the assistive force 
20  
provided by the designed mechanism with a maximum force 
Balanced leg & exoskeleton
15 Without exoskeleton of 145 N and a resolution of 1/128 N. The data of the measured 
m) Unbalanced leg & exoskeleton force was then transformed to the torque at the joint multiplied 
N 10 by the arm of the force. The experiments were conducted when 
hip Joint ( 5 tmhem i,n aitnidal  4d0e fmormm aatniodn t hoef  tdhaet as pwriansg r eisc oserdt aeds  0a tm inmte, r1v0a lms mof,  2100  
e at the  0 dtheeg rieneitsi awl hdeenfo trhme astpiorinn gosf  athree  usnpdrienrg t eisn s0i omn.m I,t  tihs en odtaetda  tmhaeta swuhreedn  
u
orq -5 reflects the torque that overcomes the gravity of the prototype. 
T
Fig. 8 shows the torque provided by the designed mechanism. 
-10
It should be noted that the data when the spring is free is not 
recorded  during  the  experiment.  As  seen  in  Fig.  8,  the 
-15  
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 experimental results are generally in accordance with the 
Time (s)
(a) desired torque. The errors are small, which are mainly due to 
the physical limitations of the test platform, such as gear 
4  
Balanced leg & exoskeleton backlash, internal friction and material deformation. 
3 Without exoskeleton
2 Unbalanced leg & exoskeleton TABLE Ⅲ. PARAMETERS OF THE DEVELOPED ONE DOF PROTOTYPE. 
m) Param.  Value  Param.  Value 
oint (N 01 Radius of pinion (mm)  20.25  Otenrisgiionna ls plerninggth ( mofm )  100 
e j
ue at the kne ---321  Ssptirfifnnge s(Ns o/mf tmen) sion  0.56  Itennitsiiaol nt esnpsriionng  o(Nf )  10.49   
q
or
T -4
-5 1
-60  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2 + 6
Time (s)
(b)  
3
Fig. 5. Varying torques required at the lower limb joints. (a) At the hip 
joint. (b) At the knee joint. The period length of the gait cycle is 5 s.  7
 
4
8   8
Balanced leg & Exo 5
7
Without Exo
Unbalanced leg &  Exo (a) (b)  
6
m) Fig. 7. Test platform for a single joint. (a) Front view. (b) Rear view. The 
N green arrow in (b) indicates the positive direction. 1- Pinion, 2- Gear, 
ue ( 5 3-Wirerope, 4-Tension spring, 5-Preload adjusting mechanism, 6-Index 
bs torq 4 plate, 7- Fixing connecting bar, 8-Force/Torque sensor.   
g a 3 2000  
v
A C0 = 0 mm
2 1500 C0 = 10 mm
C0 = 20 mm
1 m) 1000 C0 = 40 mm
m
0   N.
Hip joint Knee joint   ue ( 500
q
Fig. 6. Average absolute torque at the human hip and knee joints.  or
  nt t
oi 0
IV.  PROTOTYPING AND EXPERIMENT  J
A.  Characterization Experiment  -500
The designs of the hip joint and knee joint share the same 
-1000  
working principle. A characterization experiment on a single  -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
joint was conducted to verify the performance of the design.  Joint angle (Degree )  
The parameters of the designed joint are shown in Table Ⅲ  Fig. 8. Experimental results of the torque versus the angle of the joint. 
and the experiment setup is shown in Fig. 7. An index plate with  The solid lines stand for the desired torque while the scattered points 
mounting holes at intervals of 10 degrees was installed and fixed  stand for the measured torque at several positions when  0 =10   , 20 
  , and 40mm. The solid line for   = 0 is   = -680 sin , which is the 
0 1
in the base. The fixing connecting bar can be fixed at different 
fitting curve of the measured data. The desired torque is obtained by 
positions through the mounting holes. A Force/Torque sensor  differential of Eq. (6). 
 
772
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
[4]  Z.  Lovrenovic,  and  M.  Doumit,  ―Review  and  analysis  of  recent 
development of lower extremity exoskeletons for walking assist,‖ IEEE 
EMBS Int. Student Conf. (ISC), Ottawa, Canada, May 29-31, 2016, pp.1-4. 
[5]  M. Talaty, A. Esquenazi, and J. E. Briceño, ―Differentiating ability in 
users of the RewalkTM Powered Exoskeleton: An analysis of walking 
kinematics,‖ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., Seattle, WA, Jun. 
24-26, 2013, pp.1-5. 
[6]  A. Tsukahara, Y. Hasegawa, K. Eguchi, Y. Sankai, ―Restoration of gait 
for spinal cord injury patients using HAL with intention estimator for 
preferable swing speed,‖ IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 
23, no. 2, pp. 308-318, Mar. 2015. 
[7]  Y. T. Pan, Z. Lamb, J. Macievich, and K. A. Strausser, ―A vibrotactile 
feedback device for balance rehabilitation in the EksoGTTM robotic 
exoskeleton,‖ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatronics, 
Enschede, The Netherlands, Aug. 26-29, 2018, pp.569-576. 
  [8]  M. Munera, A. Marroquin, L. Jimenez, J. S. Lara, C. Gomez, S. 
(a)                   (b)                           (c)                              (d)         Rodriguez, L. E. Rodriguze, and C. A. Cifuentes, ―Lokomat therapy in 
Fig. 9. Photographs of the exoskeleton prototype with a subject. (a)  Colombia: current state and cognitive aspects,‖ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. 
Standing position. (b)  Leg flexion position. (c) Leg extension position.  Rehabil. Robot., London, UK, July 17 -20, 2017, pp. 394-399. 
(d) With a shell mounted.   [9]  Y.  Stauffer,  Y.  Allemand,  M.  Bouri,  J.  Fournier,  R.  Clavel,  P. 
 
Metrailler, R. Brodard, and F. Reynard, ―The WalkTrainer—A New 
B.  Prototype  Generation of Walking Reeducation Device Combining Orthoses and 
Muscle Stimulation,‖ IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 17, 
A prototype with only one leg has been developed with the 
no. 1, pp. 38-45, Feb. 2009. 
dimensions of the prototype are described in Table Ⅰ. The  [10] M. B. Wiggin, G. S. Sawicki, S. H. Collins, ―An exoskeleton using 
prototype is made of resin, carbon fiber plate and aluminum  controlled energy storage and release to aid ankle propulsion,‖ in Proc. 
and its weight is about 2.2kg. This leg exoskeleton fits persons  IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., ETH Zurich Science City, Switzerland, 
Jun. 29-Jul. 1, 2011, pp.1-5. 
from 1.60 m to 1.90 m tall, which covers more than 90% of 
[11] S. H. Collins, M. B. Wiggin, and G. S. Sawicki, ―Reducing the energy 
corresponding adult males [26]. Usability testing on Standing  cost of human walking using an unpowered exoskeleton,‖ Nature, vol. 
position, Leg flexion position, Leg extension position has been  522, no. 7555, pp. 212–215, Jun. 2015. 
conducted on a healthy subject (Male, 25 years old, 180 cm in  [12] A. J. van den Bogert, ―Exotendons for assistance of human locomotion,‖ 
Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 2, p. 17, Oct. 2003. 
height, 63 kg in weight), as shown in Fig. 9. 
[13] W. van Dijk, H. van der Kooij, and E. Hekman, ―A passive exoskeleton 
with artificial tendons: Design and experimental evaluation,‖ in Proc. 
V.  CONCLUSION  IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., ETH Zurich, Switzerland, Jun. 27- Jul. 
01, 2011, pp. 1–6. 
This paper presents a novel design of a portable passive  [14] W. van Dijk and H. V. der Kooij, ―XPED2: A passive exoskeleton with 
lower limb exoskeleton for gravity balancing of a human leg  artificial tendons,‖ IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 56–61, 
during walking. The design features the capability of balancing  Dec. 2014. 
the gravity of lower limb with built-in spring mechanisms. In  [15] T. Rahman, W. Sample, R. Seliktar, M. T. Scavina, A. L. Clark, K. 
Moran, and M. A. Alexander, ―Design and Testing of a Functional Arm 
this work, the design principle of gravity balancing is described. 
Orthosis in Patients With Neuromuscular Diseases,‖ IEEE Trans. 
A model of the human-exoskeleton system is developed and  Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 244-251, Jun. 2007. 
validated  by  numerical  simulations.  A  characterization  [16] S. K. Banala, S. K. Agrawal, A. Fattah, V. Krishnamoorthy, W. L. Hsu, 
experiment  on  a  single  joint  is  conducted  to  verify  the  J. Scholz, and K. Rudolph, ―Gravity-Balancing Leg Orthosis and Its 
Performance  Evaluation,‖  IEEE  Trans.  Robot.,  vol.  22,  no.6, 
performance of the design followed by a prototype of single leg 
pp.1228-1239, Dec. 2006. 
exoskeleton with usability tests to show its effectiveness.   [17] S. K. Agrawal, and A. Fattah, ―Theory and design of an orthotic device 
The main contribution of the work lies in the novel design  for full or partial gravity-balancing of a human leg during motion,‖ IEEE 
of an exoskeleton with built-in spring mechanisms for gravity  Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 157-165, Jun. 2004. 
balancing. This enables the springs embedded inside the frames  [18] A. Fattah, S. K. Agrawal, G. Catlin, and J. Hamnett, ―Design of a passive 
gravity-balanced assistive device for sit-to-stand tasks,‖ J. Mech. Des., 
of linkages in the thigh and the shank, which makes the 
vol. 128, no.5, pp. 1122-1129, Sep. 2006. 
exoskeleton has a compact layout with small protrusion.  Future  [19] A. Alamdari, R. Haghighi, and V. Krovi, ―Gravity-balancing of elastic 
research work will focus on the quantitative evaluations of the  articulated-cable leg-orthosis emulator,‖ Mech. Mach. Theory, vol. 131, 
exoskeleton, such as the acquisition of electromyography data  pp.351-370, Jan. 2019. 
[20] R. H. Nathan, ―A constant force generation mechanism,‖ ASME J. 
involved in the movement of leg. Besides, the exoskeleton is 
Mech. Transm. Autom. Des., vol. 107, no.4, pp. 508-512, Dec. 1985. 
to be constructed with two legs, and the metabolic cost of  [21] V. Arakelian, ―Gravity compensation in robotics,‖ Adv. Robot. vol. 30, 
human will be measured to verify its performance.  no. 2, pp. 79-96.  
[22] K. Koser, ―A cam mechanism for gravity-balancing,‖ Mech. Res. 
Commun., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 523-530, Jun. 2009. 
REFERENCES 
[23] T. Nakayama, Y. Araki, and H. Fujimoto, ―A new gravity compensation 
[1] S. Bai, G. S. Virk and T. Sugar, Wearable Exoskeleton Systems: Design,  mechanism for lower limb rehabilitation,‖ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. 
Control and Applications, Institution of Engineering & Technology,  Mechatron.Autom., Changchun, China, Aug. 9- 12, 2009, pp. 943-948. 
2018, pp. 5-50.  [24] Y. C. Hung and C. H. Kuo, ―A novel one-DoF gravity balancer based on 
[2] L. Zhou, W. Chen, J. Wang, S. Bai, H. Yu, and Y. Zhang, “A Novel  cardan gear mechanism,‖ in New Trends in Mechanism and Machine 
Precision Measuring Parallel Mechanism for the Closed-loop Control of  Science: Theory and Industrial Applications, P. Wenger, and P. Flores, 
a Biologically Inspired Lower Limb Exoskeleton, ‖ IEEE/ASME Trans.  Eds, Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017  pp. 261-268. 
Mechatron., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 2693-2703, Dec. 2018.  [25] J. Perry MD, Gait Analysis: Normal and Pathological Function, Slack 
[3] W. Meng, Q. Liu, Z. Zhou, Q. Ai, B. Sheng, and S. Xie, ―Recent  Incorporated, Thorofare, 1992, pp. 309–311. 
development of mechanisms and strategies for robot-assisted lower limb  [26] R. L. Huston, Principles of Biomechanics, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
rehabilitation,‖ Mechatronics, vol. 31, pp. 132–145, 2015.  2009, pp. 24-26. 
773
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 