2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Impedance Control of a Transfemoral Prosthesis using Continuously
Varying Ankle Impedances and Multiple Equilibria
Namita Anil Kumar1, Woolim Hong1, and Pilwon Hur2
Abstract—Impedance controllers are popularly used in the [18]. During testing, these estimates were tuned. Though
ﬁeld of lower limb prostheses and exoskeleton development. successful, this approach mandated the manual tuning of
Suchcontrollersassumethejointtobeaspring-dampersystem
several parameters. The study [19] implemented a series
describedbyadiscretesetofequilibriaandimpedanceparam-
elastic actuator to modulate the impedance of the ankle
eters. These parameters are estimated via a least squares opti-
mizationthatminimizesthedifferencebetweenthecontroller’s joint in a transtibial prosthesis. Assuming the ankle to be
output torque and human joint torque. Other researchers a spring-damper system, the study estimated the stiffness
have used perturbation studies to determine empirical values parameters using a least squares optimization approach.
for ankle impedance. The resulting values vary greatly from
The study, [20], proposed an ankle-foot exoskeleton that
the prior least squares estimates. While perturbation studies
aided stroke patients in combating foot-drops. The system
are more credible, they require immense investment. This
paper extended the least squares approach to reproduce the was manipulated using an impedance controller that was
results of perturbation studies. The resulting ankle impedance automatically tuned using a simple algorithm. Other notable
parametersweresuccessfullytestedonapoweredtransfemoral attempts at estimating joint impedance during walking are
prosthesis,AMPROII.Further,thepaperinvestigatedtheeffect
[21] and [22]. The former proposes quasi-stiffness, which
of multiple equilibria on the least squares estimation and the
estimatesjointstiffnessbycalculatingtheslopeofthetorque
performance of the impedance controller. Finally, the paper
usestheproposedleastsquaresoptimizationmethodtoestimate vs.anglecurveduringstance.Thelattersolvedaconstrained
knee impedance. optimization problem where the joint impedance was the
decision variable and the dynamics of a humanoid bipedal
I. INTRODUCTION
served as constraints. A common attribute of these studies
The ﬁeld of prosthesis design has been growing consid- is that the estimated impedance does not vary smoothly and
erably over the past years, addressing the needs of both continuously throughout the gait cycle. This paper will refer
transtibial and transfemoral amputees [1]–[3]. Upon under- to the above group of estimation methods as theoretical
standing the limitations of passive prostheses, researchers approaches.
have made strides to develop powered prostheses [4]–[13].
In the ﬁeld of science, the most accepted method of
These prostheses implement control strategies that fall into
identifying a system’s parameters is via experiments by
two major groups: impedance controllers that attempt to
inducingperturbations.Thispaperwillrefertosuchmethods
mimic human joint impedance [7], [14] and trajectory-
as empirical approaches. With the objective of empirically
tracking controllers that follow optimized joint trajectories
determining the ankle impedance while walking, researchers
[10],[15]–[17].Ofthetwoclasses,theformerhasdisplayed
conducted experimental studies on the ankle [23]–[25].
greater promise in mimicking human-like gait kinetics. As
These studies perturbed the ankle at various instances of
stated in [7], an impedance controller enables the user to
the gait cycle. The ankle’s response to the perturbation
interact with the device much like in the case of healthy
was gathered and analyzed to evaluate empirical values for
walking. An impedance controller consists of parameters
stiffnessanddamping.Itwasreportedthattheanklestiffness
pertainingtostiffness,dampingandtheequilibriumangleof
increases upon heel-strike until terminal-stance, following
the joints. By modulating these parameters, the joint torque
which the stiffness reduces until toe-off and maintains an
required for support and propulsion of the human body can
almost constant value during swing phase. The damping
begenerated.Accordingto[7],researcherssectionedthegait
parameter was observed to be high during heel-strike and
cycle into 4-6 phases based on kinematic changes observed
toe-off. Unlike the results of many theoretical approaches,
in a healthy human gait cycle (refer Fig. 1). Each phase
theempiricalimpedanceparametersvariedcontinuouslyand
has a set of three constant values–stiffness, damping, and
the equilibrium angle. These values were initially estimated
usingaleastsquaresoptimizerthatreducedtheerrorbetween
thetorqueoftheimpedancecontrollerandhumantorquedata
*Thisworkwasnotsupportedbyanyorganization
1Namita Anil Kumar and Woolim Hong are with the Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
{ }
77843,USA namita.anilkumar,ulim8819 @tamu.edu
2Pilwon Hur is with faculty of the Department of Mechanical En-
gineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA
pilwonhur@tamu.edu Fig.1. Gaitcyclewithimportantkinematicchanges
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1755
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLEI
smoothly throughout the gait cycle. The ﬁrst objective of
this paper is to bridge the gap between the theoretical and THEFOURSETSOFMULTIPLEEQUILIBRIATHATRESULTEDFROM
empirical approaches by extending the least squares method SECTIONINGTHEGAITAREASFOLLOWS.
proposedby[7]toproduceresultsthatconformtothetrends
reportedin[23]–[25].Speciﬁcally,thestiffnessanddamping Setlabel Sectionsofthegaitcycle
parameters will be allowed to vary continuously throughout SetA 0%-13% 13%-40% 40%-63% 63%-100%
SetB 0%-40% 40%-63% 63%-100%
thegaitcycle.But,itmustbeemphasizedthattheseestimates
SetC 0%-60% 63%-100%
aresolelyforthepurposeofdesigningimpedancecontrollers SetD 0%-100%
and will differ, in magnitude, from those of healthy human
walking.
In [14], researchers successfully implemented nonlinear
impedance parameters to control the ankle and knee of a τ . Per [23]–[25], the stiffness and damping parameters
data
transfemoral prosthesis. The ankle’s equilibrium angle and continuously vary throughout the gait cycle in a smooth
knee stiffness varied as a function of the vertical force manner. Most of the variation in the impedance parameters
measured by a load cell. Unfortunately, to the authors’ is observed during the stance phase, while the parameters
knowledge,therehavebeennopublishedattemptsatempiri- adopt an almost constant value during the swing phase. To
callyestimatingkneeorhipimpedanceduringthegaitcycle permit the continuous variation of stiffness and damping,
via perturbation studies. Any insight gained in this matter is while maintaining minimal decision variables, the stiffness
limitedtotheswingphase[26].Possiblereasonsforthisgap and damping parameters were represented by polynomials
inknowledgeare(i)thehugeinvestmentrequiredtoconduct during the stancephase. The orders ofthe polynomials were
perturbationstudies,and(ii)thegrandchallengeofisolating adjustedtogetabetterﬁt(i.e.,reducethedifferencebetween
the effects induced by the perturbation to the joint being τ and τ ). During the swing phase, the impedance pa-
data
studied. Thus, the research community would highly beneﬁt rameters were assigned constant values: k and d .
swing swing
from theoretical approaches to estimating impedance. It is Supposing m and n represent the order of the stiffness
expectedthattheleastsquaresoptimizationmethodproposed and damping polynomials, the impedance parameters at any
in this study can be used to estimate the required knee and instant during the g(cid:40)a(cid:80)it cycle are determined as follows.
hip impedance for impedance control in assistive devices.
≤
Teshteimcaotnecolufdkinngeeseicmtipoendaonfcteh.isTphaepreerspurlteisnegntismapepdrealnicmeinwairlyl K(t)=(cid:40)(cid:80)mi=0kiti for 0 t≤<0≤.63 (2)
k for 0.63 t 1
be compared with other literary works. swing
≤
Arecentstudyby[27]proposedacontinuumofequilibria n d ti for 0 t<0.63
D(t)= i=0 i ≤ ≤ (3)
in contrast to the discrete set of equilibria implemented in d for 0.63 t 1
swing
[7]. The study also estimated the impedance of the knee
joint using a theoretical approach. This study has raised Note that t=0 is equivalent to 0% of the gait cycle, while
questions regarding the effect of multiple equilibria on the t = 1 signiﬁes 100% of the gait cycle. In accordance with
performance of impedance controllers. The second objective [18],itisassumedthatswingphaseoccursat63%ofthegait
of this paper is to ﬁll this gap in knowledge by investigating cycle. Per the requirement for continuity in the impedance
the role of multiple equilibria on the proposed least squares parameters,k =k andd =d .Muchlike[7],the
swing 0 swing 0
estimation method. The validity of the resulting impedance gait is sectioned based on kinematic changes, making θ a
eq
willbeassessedviaimplementationonanexistingprosthesis set of angles. The optimization problem can be summarized
AMPRO II. Additionally, attempts will be made to reduce as follows.
the required tuning process during implementation.
(cid:107) − (cid:107)
II. LEASTSQUARESESTIMATIONOF min τ τ (4)
data 2
IMPEDANCEPARAMETERS θeq,ki,di ≥ ≥
Subject to: K(t) 0 D(t) 0 (5)
The optimization problem solved in this paper is funda-
K(0)=K(1) D(0)=D(1) (6)
mentally similar to the one used by [7]. The lower limb
jointsaremodeledasaspring-dampersystem.LetK andD Continuity at K(0.63) and D(0.63) (7)
| |≤
representthestiffnessanddampingofthejoint,respectively. ∆τ/∆t c (8)
The generated torque can be calculated as follows.
− The constraints listed in (5) force the positivity of the
τ =K(θ θ )+Dθ˙ (1)
eq impedance parameters. Further, (6) ensures that the param-
In (1), θ and θ˙ signify the position and velocity of the eters maintain continuity between gait cycles and at the
joint, while θ is the equilibrium angle of the joint. It is stance-to-swing transition. The last constraint, (8), forces
eq
desired that the generated torque be similar to that found in the resulting τ to be continuous using a Lipschitz constant,
healthy human walking [18], say τ . Thus, the optimiza- c. Additional bounds were added, as needed, to restrict the
data
tion problem minimizes the error between the torque τ and value of the equilibrium angles.
1756
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLEII
SETSOFMULTIPLEEQUILIBRIAINRADIANSRESULTINGFROMTHE
OPTIMIZATION
Setlabel 0%-13% 13%-40% 40%-63% 63%-100%
SetA 0.0294 -0.3428 -0.3491 0.3029
SetB -0.4258 -0.4363 0.0000
SetC -0.4363 0.1453
SetD -0.4655
of the stiffness and damping parameters was not sensitive to
the equilibria set. Fig. 2 depicts the stiffness and damping
parameters.Thecorrespondingtorques,τ,hasbeenpresented
in the Appendix. It is evident that all sets of parameters
attained a suitable cost to the optimization problem. While
thetrendofthestiffnessparameter,duringstance,resembled
thatreportedby[23]–[25],thevaluesareconsiderablylower.
The trend of the damping parameters, on the other hand, did
not entirely conform to the results presented in [23]–[25].
Though it portrayed high damping post heel-strike, there is
little to no damping during terminal-stance. Better results
could be attained by increasing the order of the damping
parameter or using a different optimizer. Yet, it must be
notedthatthisoptimizationproblemisconcernedwithﬁtting
the torque generated by a simple spring-damper model to
the torque generated by the overly redundant human body.
Fig. 2. Optimization results. Top: Stiffness curves, Bottom: Damping Clearly,discrepanciesaretobeexpected.Thesolepurposeof
curves. The associated polynomial coefﬁcients have been included in the thisproblemistodesignacontrollerthataidsamechatronic
Appendix(TableIV).
system emulate a human being.
Table II presents the equilibrium angles that resulted
A. Multiple Equilibria from the optimization. Sets A to C showed similarities by
having the ankle plantarﬂexed during terminal-stance and
To study the impact of multiple equilibria on the
dorsiﬂexedduringswing.Theplantarﬂexedanglehelpsstore
impedancecontroller,foursetsofequilibriawereestablished.
the potential energy needed for push-off. The dorsiﬂexed
The ﬁrst set echoes the one found in [7]. The gait cycle
swing equilibrium angle ensures foot clearance to avoid
is sectioned in accordance with the foot contact sequence
trips. Theequilibrium angle for Set D resembled afoot-drop
duringthestancephase.Theﬁrstphaseinitiatesatheel-strike
condition–the state a human foot would conform to when
(0%) and continues until foot-drop (13%), followed by the
physically unconstrained. It was anticipated that the foot-
second phase that terminates at heel-off (40%). The third
drop condition would pose a challenge during swing phase.
phase exists between heel-off and toe-off (63%). Unlike [7],
It is likely that certain compensatory actions will be needed
the swing phase of the gait cycle is not sectioned. This set
to ensure sufﬁcient foot clearance during swing.
ofequilibriahasbeenlabeledasSetA.Oneoftheobjectives
of this paper is to reduce the number of impedance control
III. TESTINGMETHODOLOGY
parameters that require tuning. The number of equilibria
contributesheavilytothenumberoftuningparameters.Thus, The proposed sets of impedance parameters were tested
in this paper, we expect to determine the minimum number on a custom-built powered transfemoral prosthesis shown in
ofequilibriarequiredtogeneratenaturalhuman-likewalking Fig. 3. AMPRO II (Fig. 3) has an actuated ankle and knee
(both kinematically and kinetically). The remaining three joint, and a passive spring-loaded toe joint. While the pro-
sets of equilibria implement fewer sections of the gait cycle. posed impedance controller was implemented at the ankle, a
Table I lists said sets. The sectioning proposed in Set B is previously published controller–a hybrid of impedance and
similar to the one proposed by [23]. trajectory tracking–was used to manipulate the knee. The
latterhasbeendiscussedin[28].Theprosthesiswasoperated
B. Results of the optimization
under a time-based scheme that utilizes a parameter that
The minimum order of the stiffness and damping polyno- linearlyincreasesfrom0to1asthegaitprogressesfrom0%
mials required to lower the optimal cost was determined to to 100%. This parameter is used to identify the progress in
be4.Thisstudyﬁxedtheorderofthestiffnessanddamping thegaitcycle.Aforcesensorplacedundertheheelwasused
polynomial to be the same. It was observed that the trend toinitializetheparameter.Totheauthors’knowledge,current
1757
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLEIII
state-basedcontrolschemeshavelimitationsthatareyettobe
THETUNEDSETSOFEQUILIBRIAINRADIANS
overcome[28],[29].Forinstance,thestudy[29]investigated
theusageofthighangleasanindicator(orphasevariable)of
gaitprogression.Itwasdemonstratedthattheresultingphase Setlabel 0%-13% 13%-40% 40%-63% 63%-100%
variable does not display the ideal linear behavior during SetA 0.0100 -0.0875 -0.3490 0.0873
SetB -0.1745 -0.2617 0.0000
terminal-stance, making state identiﬁcation difﬁcult. Since
SetC -0.2617 0.1452
the focus of this study was to evaluate the performance of SetD -0.2617
continuouslyvaryingimpedanceparameters,itwaspreferred
the performance be unaffected by the possible inaccuracies
of state-based control. Further, it was unclear whether the
equilibrium angles were tuned to reduce the magnitude of
stiffness at AMPRO II’s toe joint would impact the ankle’s
the plantarﬂexed angles. The tuned equilibrium angles have
performance. To study the effect of each impedance con-
been documented in Table III. In addition, the stiffness and
troller, in an isolated manner, the toe joint was restrained
using a rigid element. Future studies will investigate the damping curves were scaled down by factors α and β,
respectively. This was done to limit the push-off assistance
impact of toe stiffness on the generated gait.
based on the participant’s comfort and to abide by the mo-
A. Experimental protocol tor’sratedtorquespeciﬁcations.Amajordrawbackofscaling
was that the stiffness during swing phase was no longer
To validate the proposed idea, an indoor experiment was
sufﬁcient to transition from the plantarﬂexed equilibrium
designed using the aforementioned powered prosthesis in
angleduringterminal-stancetotheswingdorsiﬂexionangle.
Fig. 3. A healthy young subject (male, 170cm, 70kg) par-
ticipated in the experiment using an L-shape simulator that Thus, a constant stiffness term (γ) was uniformly added
to the stiffness curve. The following equations describe the
helpedemulateprostheticwalking.Thesubjectwasaskedto
tuning process.
walkonatreadmillathispreferredwalkingspeed(0.7m/s).
The subject’s safety was assured by handrails located on
K (t)=αK(t)+γ (9)
eithersideofthetreadmill.Theexperimentprotocolhasbeen tuned
D (t)=βD(t) (10)
reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board tuned
(IRB) at Texas A&M University (IRB2015-0607F). The scaling factors (α and β) were reduced until certain
dorsiﬂexion was observed during the mid-stance phase. The
B. Tuning
term γ was increased until the ankle displayed dorsiﬂexion
The recruited subject showed considerable height dif- duringtheswingphase.Notethatγ wasnotrequiredforSet
ference between his limbs while wearing the prosthesis. D since the equilibrium angle remained constant throughout
In an attempt to solve this issue, the subject was asked the gait cycle. The stiffness curve for Set A was scaled by
to wear boots during the experiments; unfortunately, the a factor of α = 0.4, while α = 0.5 for the remaining
difference in height still persisted. This height difference sets. Further, while β = 0.2 for Set A, β = 0.166 for the
signiﬁcantly limited the amount ankle dorsiﬂexion observed remaining sets. The constant term γ was equal to 20 for all
in the prosthetic during mid-stance. In compensation, the sets. These scaling factors will change based on the subject.
In the case of emulator studies, the subject’s center of mass
is displaced from the frontal plane–forcing the subject to
adoptacautiousgaittoavoidinstabilities.Thus,thestiffness
and damping curves are scaled down considerably. On the
other hand, the factors will likely be higher in the case of
amputees due to the center mass being located closer to the
frontal plane. Though Set D did not necessitate a constant
term,thetermwasimplementedintheinterestofconducting
asystematicstudywherethestiffnesscurvesofeachsetwere
approximately of same magnitude.
IV. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
Figure 4 presents the average angular trajectory, torque,
and power of the ankle for all four sets of impedance
parameters.Theaveragedvaluesrepresent15-20consecutive
gait cycles. A Butterworth ﬁlter was used to process the
data. The standard deviation was well-bounded, indicating
the consistency of the observed results. Barring Set D, the
trendofthekinematicanddynamiccurvesaresimilaracross
the impedance sets. The trend also bears a resemblance to
Fig.3. AMPROII–acustom-builtpoweredtransfemoralprosthesis healthy human data reported in [18].
1758
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 4. Averaged results of the experiments. Left: Ankle angle, Middle: Ankle torque, and Right: Ankle power. The sections of the torque curve
correspondingtofoot-dropandheel-offhavebeenenlarged.
On the other hand, the magnitude of the results was challengewhiletestingSetD.Speciﬁcally,theconstantfoot-
substantiallylowerincomparison.Itisstronglybelievedthat droppedequilibriumangleintroducedgaitabnormalitiessuch
the height difference explained in Section III-B is the key as exaggerated hip extension at toe-off. In preparation for
reasonbehindthesediscrepancies.Thefollowingsubsections the over-extended hip angle, the subject forcibly maintained
compare the performance of each impedance set in terms of a dorsiﬂexed ankle beyond peak stiffness (which occurs at
kinematics and dynamics of the generated gait. Following 50%ofthegaitcycle).Whentoe-offeventuallyoccurred,the
which, the limitations of this study have been discussed. stiffness was thus insufﬁcient to quickly restore the ankle to
the plantarﬂexed equilibrium.
A. Comparison of kinematics
It should be emphasized that the stiffness and damping B. Comparison of dynamics
curves portrayed similar trends across all sets of impedance.
Set A and B resulted in higher torque during terminal-
Thus, the kinematics of the generated gait was dictated by
stance in comparison to the other sets. This is likely due to
the equilibrium angles. The following observations form the
higher dorsiﬂexion in mid and terminal-stance (as discussed
basis of this claim: (i) Set A displayed lesser plantarﬂexion
inSectionIV-A).Asaconsequence,thecorrespondingpower
proceeding heel-strike in comparison to the other sets owing
was higher in Set A and B. Most interesting to note was the
to the dorsiﬂexed equilibrium angle between heel-strike and
abrupt change in the torque corresponding to Set A at foot-
foot-drop. Set C displayed foot slap (steep plantarﬂexion)
drop (13%). Such a change was not observed in the results
proceedingheelstrike.Increasingdampingcouldcounterthis
of the other sets. This is undoubtedly a consequence of the
issue. (ii) Lesser dorsiﬂexion was observed during terminal-
change in Set A’s equilibrium angle at foot-drop. Similar
stance in Set C and D. Unlike these sets, Set A and B
behavior was observed at heel-off (40%) in the results of
increase the plantarﬂexed equilibrium angle in increments.
bothSetAandB.Thus,fewerchangesinequilibriumangles
It is likely that such an incremental ascension assisted the
ensure a smoother torque output. Further, the re-positioning
subject in achieving higher dorsiﬂexion during mid- and
of the ankle joint to the swing dorsiﬂexed angle resulted
terminal-stance (iii) The variance in ankle angles, among
in positive torque at the beginning of the swing phase for
sets, at the beginning and end of the gait cycle is due to
Sets A to C. In regards to the power curves, Set A’s power
varying swing equilibrium angles. It would be beneﬁcial to
outputdisplaysanaberrantincrease atheel-off.Thebacking
implement a higher swing equilibrium angle since it ensures
rationaleisthehighvelocityarisingfromthehastenedpush-
sufﬁcient foot clearance during swing (iv) Plantarﬂexion at
off detailed in Section IV-A. Finally, the push-off power
push-off was greater in Set A due to the higher equilibrium
associated with Set D was signiﬁcantly lower due to the
angle. Additionally, Set A showed an earlier descent from
previously discussed delayed push-off.
dorsiﬂexion to plantarﬂexion at heel-off (40%). A plausible
explanation is that the combined effect of heightened stiff-
C. Limitations of this study
ness and higher plantarﬂexion forced an earlier push-off (v)
Evidently, Set D showed an absence of dorsiﬂexion during The aforementioned height difference between the sub-
swing phase due to the plantarﬂexed equilibrium angle. As ject’s limbs forced him to adopt a limb; i.e., a shorter
anticipated,thefoot-dropequilibriumangleofSetDresulted step length and longer stance phase on the limb without
in few stumbles during the swing phase [30]. the prosthetic. A major drawback of these gait asymmetries
A kinematic abnormality that cannot be overlooked is the was insufﬁcient loading of the prosthetic ankle during mid-
absenceofpush-offinSetD.Asstatedearlier,theimpedance stance; resulting in the reduced dorsiﬂexion. Further, the
controlstrategywasimplementedusingatimeparameterthat swing equilibrium angle could have been tuned in a more
linearly increased as the gait progressed. With that being systematicmanner;i.e.,theimposedswingdorsiﬂexedangle
said, the success of time-based control heavily depends on could have been uniform across all sets. Finally, the usage
thesubject’sabilitytosynchronizehis/hergaitwiththetime of time-based control enforced the stringent requirement of
parameter. This synchronization task proved to be a mighty gait synchronization on the subject.
1759
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. V. CONCLUSION during the stance phase followed by trajectory tracking
during swing [28].
Thisstudyproposedaleastsquaresapproachtoestimating
In regards to the knee, a preliminary estimation of knee
ankle impedance based on the work of [7] for the purpose
impedance during stance has been presented in Fig. 5. The
of designing impedance controllers. The resulting stiffness
estimation utilized the sectioning proposed in Set B. The
values followed a trend consistent with perturbation studies
optimizedequilibriumangleswere0.1413radofkneeﬂexion
[23]–[25]. The estimated impedance parameters were not
during initial stance, followed by 0.1968 rad until toe-off.
sensitive to the number of equilibria enforced. On studying
The result is consistent with the values implemented by [7]
theeffectofmultipleequilibriaontheimpedancecontroller’s
and [27]. Considering the extensive knee movement during
performance,thefollowingresultswererevealed:(i)Multiple
swing, it may be more desirable to use trajectory tracking
equilibria during the mid and terminal-stance phase that
during swing. Another path worthy of investigation is the
increase the plantarﬂexed equilibrium angle (in increments)
concept of a continuum of equilibria proposed by [27]. For
can assure more ankle dorsiﬂexion during mid-stance. Con-
starters, one could implement a polynomial curve ﬁtted to
sequently, the generated torque and power at push-off are
the current discrete equilibria.
higher (ii) Abrupt changes in torque can be expected at
the instances when the equilibrium angle switches. Such APPENDIX
changesimpacttherobustnessofthesystemtoperturbations.
Thefollowingﬁguredepictstheﬁtattainedusingtheleast
This ideology is the motivation behind studies in continuum
squares optimization. Also included is human torque data
of equilibria [27] (iii) While overly plantarﬂexed equilib-
from [18]. Table IV presents the optimized coefﬁcients of
rium angle during terminal-stance results in higher push-
the stiffness and damping polynomials.
off torque, it can give rise to premature push-off (iv) Most
importantly, a single equilibrium angle during stance phase
issufﬁcienttogeneratehuman-likekinematicsanddynamics
at the cost of lower mid-stance dorsiﬂexion and foot slap at
heel-strike.Amputeestudieswillbeconductedtoidentifythe
mostsuitableequilibriasetbasedontheobservedkinematics,
kinetics, and metabolic cost.
VI. FUTUREWORK
To overcome the above-listed limitations, a state-based
control scheme will be implemented to enable ﬂexibility
in gait speed. The basis of such a control scheme can be
found in [28]. Current efforts are targeted at overcoming the
limitationsofthecontrolschemebyusingsensor-fusion.This
paperassumedtheorderofthestiffnessanddampingpolyno-
mialstobethesameduringthestancephase.Futureattempts
will investigate the validity of this assumption. Presently, Fig. 6. The torque τ generated from the optimization in comparison to
humantorquedata[18]
a height adjustable prosthesis is under development. This
prosthesiswillbeusedinallfuturestudiesoftheimpedance
controller. Based on this study, an automated tuning algo- TABLEIV
rithm will be developed and consecutively implemented on THECOEFFICIENTSOFTHEPOLYNOMIALCURVES
a transfemoral prosthesis. The dorsiﬂexion observed during
mid-stancewillserveastheprimaryindicationofwell-tuned
Stiffness
stiffness and damping parameters. Further, the impedance Setlabel k4 k3 k2 k1 k0
parameters proposed in this study will be used in a hybrid SetA -29870.57 28322.46 -7061.82 586.04 2.21
control strategy that would implement impedance control SetB -19977.92 17340.71 -3424.51 199.97 0.32
SetC -19822.71 17146.19 -3333.05 181.16 0.75
SetD -16520.32 14144.17 -2596.67 136.56 0.00
Damping
Setlabel d4 d3 d2 d1 d0
SetA -22.45 88.08 -76.20 18.76 0.12
SetB -140.21 261.35 -158.46 31.21 0.12
SetC -164.32 303.05 -181.22 35.04 0.18
SetD -171.23 311.36 -182.97 34.53 0.26
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Fig. 5. Preliminary estimation of knee impedance using the proposed
The authors thank Kenny Chour for his assistance during
theoreticalapproach.Theestimationwaslimitedtothestancephaseofthe
gaitcycle.Left:Stiffness,Right:Damping experimentation.
1760
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [15] R.D.Gregg,T.Lenzi,L.J.Hargrove,andJ.W.Sensinger,“Virtual
constraint control of a powered prosthetic leg: From simulation
to experiments with transfemoral amputees,” IEEE Transactions on
[1] J.Perry,L.A.Boyd,S.S.Rao,andS.J.Mulroy,“Prostheticweight
Robotics,vol.30,no.6,pp.1455–1471,2014.
acceptance mechanics in transtibial amputees wearing the single
[16] V.Paredes,W.Hong,S.Patrick,andP.Hur,“Upslopewalkingwith
axis,seattlelite,andﬂexfoot,”IEEETransactionsonRehabilitation
transfemoral prosthesis using optimization based spline generation,”
Engineering,vol.5,no.4,pp.283–289,1997.
in2016IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsand
[2] S. Blumentritt, H. W. Scherer, U. Wellershaus, and J. W. Michael, Systems(IROS),Oct2016,pp.3204–3211.
“Design principles, biomechanical data and clinical experience with [17] A.E.MartinandR.D.Gregg,“Stable,robusthybridzerodynamics
a polycentric knee offering controlled stance phase knee ﬂexion: a control of powered lower-limb prostheses,” IEEE Transactions on
preliminaryreport,”JPO:JournalofProstheticsandOrthotics,vol.9, AutomaticControl,vol.62,no.8,pp.3930–3942,2017.
no.1,pp.18–24,1997. [18] D. A. Winter, Biomechanics and motor control of human movement,
[3] D. Romo, “Prosthetic knees,” Physical medicine and rehabilitation 4thed. Wiley,2009.
clinicsofNorthAmerica,vol.11,pp.595–607,vii,2000. [19] M.F.Eilenberg,H.Geyer,andH.Herr,“ControlofaPoweredAnkle-
[4] S.K.Au,H.Herr,J.Weber,andE.C.Martinez-Villalpando,“Powered FootProsthesisBasedonaNeuromuscularModel,”IEEETransactions
ankle-footprosthesisfortheimprovementofamputeeambulation,”in onNeuralSystemsandRehabilitationEngineering,vol.18,no.2,pp.
200729thAnnualInternationalConferenceoftheIEEEEngineering 164–173,2010.
inMedicineandBiologySociety,Aug2007,pp.3020–3026. [20] J. Blaya and H. Herr, “Adaptive Control of a Variable-Impedance
[5] T.Lenzi,M.Cempini,J.Newkirk,L.J.Hargrove,andT.A.Kuiken, Ankle-Foot Orthosis to Assist Drop-Foot Gait,” IEEE Transactions
“A lightweight robotic ankle prosthesis with non-backdrivable cam- onNeuralSystemsandRehabilitationEngineering,vol.12,no.1,pp.
basedtransmission,”in2017InternationalConferenceonRehabilita- 24–31,2004.
tionRobotics(ICORR),July2017,pp.1142–1147. [21] K.Shamaei,G.S.Sawicki,andA.M.Dollar,“EstimationofQuasi-
[6] E.C.Martinez-Villalpando,J.Weber,G.Elliott,andH.Herr,“Design StiffnessoftheHumanKneeintheStancePhaseofWalking,”PLOS
of an agonist-antagonist active knee prosthesis,” in 2008 2nd IEEE ONE,vol.8,no.3,2013.
RAS EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and [22] Y.HuandK.Mombaur,“Analysisofhumanlegjointscompliancein
Biomechatronics,Oct2008,pp.529–534. differentwalkingscenarioswithanoptimalcontrolapproach,”IFAC-
[7] F.Sup,A.Bohara,andM.Goldfarb,“Designandcontrolofapow- PapersOnLine,vol.49,no.14,pp.99–106,2016.
ered transfemoral prosthesis,” The International Journal of Robotics [23] E. J. Rouse, L. J. Hargrove, E. J. Perreault, and T. A. Kuiken,
Research,vol.27,no.2,pp.263–273,2008. “EstimationofHumanAnkleImpedanceDuringtheStancePhaseof
[8] N.ThatteandH.Geyer,“Towardslocalreﬂexivecontrolofapowered Walking,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
transfemoralprosthesisforrobustamputeepushandtriprecovery,”in Engineering,vol.22,no.4,pp.870–878,2014.
2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and [24] H.Lee,E.J.Rouse,andH.I.Krebs,“SummaryofHumanAnkleMe-
Systems,Sep.2014,pp.2069–2074. chanicalImpedanceDuringWalking,”IEEEJournalofTranslational
EngineeringinHealthandMedicine,vol.4,pp.1–7,2016.
[9] M.Windrich,M.Grimmer,O.Christ,S.Rinderknecht,andP.Beck-
[25] A.L.ShorterandE.J.Rouse,“MechanicalImpedanceoftheAnkle
erle, “Active lower limb prosthetics: a systematic review of design
duringtheTerminalStancePhaseofWalking,”IEEETransactionson
issuesandsolutions,”BiomedicalEngineeringOnline,vol.15,no.3,
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 26, no. 1, pp.
p.140,2016.
135–143,2018.
[10] H. Zhao, J. Horn, J. Reher, V. Paredes, and A. D. Ames, “First
[26] B.Koopman,E.H.VanAsseldonk,andH.VanDerKooij,“Estimation
steps toward translating robotic walking to prostheses: a nonlinear
ofHumanHipandKneeMulti-JointDynamicsUsingtheLOPESGait
optimization based control approach,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 41,
Trainer,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.32,no.4,pp.920–932,
no.3,pp.725–742,2017.
2016.
[11] V.Azimi,T.Shu,H.Zhao,E.Ambrose,A.D.Ames,andD.Simon,
[27] A. Mohammadi and R. D. Gregg, “Variable impedance control of
“Robust control of a powered transfemoral prosthesis device with
powered knee prostheses using human-inspired algebraic curves,”
experimental veriﬁcation,” in 2017 American Control Conference
JournalofComputationalandNonlinearDynamics,vol.14,pp.1–10,
(ACC),May2017,pp.517–522.
2019.
[12] T. Elery, S. Rezazadeh, C. Nesler, J. Doan, H. Zhu, and R. D. [28] W.Hong,V.Paredes,K.Chao,S.Patrick,andP.Hur,“Consolidated
Gregg, “Design and benchtop validation of a powered knee-ankle controlframeworktocontrolapoweredtransfemoralprosthesisover
prosthesiswithhigh-torque,low-impedanceactuators,”in2018IEEE inclined terrain conditions,” in 2019 International Conference on
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),May2019,pp.2838–2844.
2018,pp.2788–2795. [29] S. Rezazadeh, D. Quintero, N. Divekar, and R. D. Gregg, “A phase
[13] A.F.Azocar,L.M.Mooney,L.J.Hargrove,andE.J.Rouse,“Design variableapproachtovolitionalcontrolofpoweredknee-ankleprosthe-
and characterization of an open-source robotic leg prosthesis,” in ses,”in2018IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobots
20187thIEEEInternationalConferenceonBiomedicalRoboticsand andSystems(IROS),Oct2018,pp.2292–2298.
Biomechatronics(Biorob),Aug2018,pp.111–118. [30] N. J. Rosenblatt, A. Bauer, D. Rotter, and M. D. Grabiner, “Active
[14] N.P.Fey,A.M.Simon,A.J.Young,andL.J.Hargrove,“Controlling dorsiﬂexing prostheses may reduce trip-related fall risk in people
kneeswinginitiationandankleplantarﬂexionwithanactiveprosthesis with transtibial amputation,” Journal of Rehabilitation Research &
on level and inclined surfaces at variable walking speeds,” IEEE Development,vol.51,no.8,2014.
JournalofTranslationalEngineeringinHealthandMedicine,vol.2,
pp.1–12,2014.
1761
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 