2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Demonstration of Autonomous Nested Search for Local Maxima
Using an Unmanned Underwater Vehicle
Andrew Branch1, James McMahon2, Guangyu Xu3, Michael V. Jakuba4, Christopher R. German4, Steve Chien1,
James C. Kinsey4, Andrew D. Bowen4, Kevin P. Hand1, Jeffrey S. Seewald4
Abstract—Ocean Worlds represent one of the best chances
for extra-terrestrial life in our solar system. A new mission
conceptmustbedevelopedtoexploretheseoceans.Thismission
would require traversing the 10s of km thick icy shell and
releasingasubmersibleintotheoceanbelow.Duringthetransit
of the icy shell and the exploration of the ocean, the vehicle(s)
would be out of contact with Earth for weeks or potentially
months at a time. During this time the vehicle must have
sufﬁcient autonomy to locate and study scientiﬁc targets of
interest.Onesuchtargetofinterestishydrothermalventing.We
havepreviouslydevelopedanautonomousnestedsearchmethod Fig. 1: Notional Europa submersible mission showing the communication
to locate and investigate sources of hydrothermal venting by pathwayfromthesubmersiblevehicletoEarth.Approximateicethickness
locating local maxima in hydrothermal vent emissions. In this andoceandeptharelabeled.
work we demonstrate this approach on board an OceanServer
vehicle would also be operating in a signiﬁcantly more dy-
Iver2AUVinChesapeakeBay,MDusingsimulatedsensordata
namic environment than previous surface operation mission
from a hydrothermal plume model. This represents the ﬁrst
step towards the deployment of this approach in conditions (e.g. Mars rovers), preventing the use of traditional human
analogous to those that we might expect on an Ocean World. in the loop operations. Due to these constraints, the vehicle
would need to operate fully autonomously for weeks or
monthsatatime.Duringthisexplorationmissionthevehicle
I. INTRODUCTION wouldberequiredtoautonomouslylocate,detect,andsurvey
A speciﬁc targets of scientiﬁc interest. One potential target
T least eight bodies in our solar system are thought to
of scientiﬁc interest is hydrothermal venting. Evidence for
harbor liquid oceans. In some cases, such as Europa
hydrothermal venting has been found on one Ocean World,
and Enceladus, this ocean is perhaps habitable and encased
Enceledus [2], [3]. On Earth, these geological phenomena
inanicyshellkilometersthick[1].Toexploretheseoceansa
harbor unique ecosystems and are potentially critical to the
newmissionconceptmustbedevelopedusingicepenetrating
origin of life. Similar vents on Ocean Worlds could be the
submersible vehicles. A notional mission concept for such
best chance at extra-terrestrial life in our Solar System.
a mission is outlined in Figure 1. This concept contains
We have previously developed a fully autonomous nested
three main components. A submersible vehicle, an under-
search strategy for the localization of hydrothermal venting
ice base station, and a surface relay. Long mission duration
based on a human-in-the-loop three phase nested search
– one or more years to transit the icy shell and a one year
commonlyusedintheﬁeld[4],[5].Thisworkpresentsaﬁeld
exploration mission – requires a low power vehicle, limiting
demonstrationofthispreviouslydevelopedfullyautonomous
thepotentialinstrumentsonboard.Thevehiclewouldideally
search strategy. In June 2019 we deployed an Iver2 AUV
travel hundreds or thousands of kilometers from the base
in Chesapeake Bay to test this search strategy. As there is
stationwhilestillbeingabletoreturntotransmitdatathrough
no hydrothermal venting in the deployment area, we used
the under-ice base station and back to Earth. When the
simulated data from an FVCOM based hydrothermal plume
surface relay does not have line-of-sight to Earth ground
model [6].
stations (approximately 42.5 hours and 33 hours per orbital
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
period of Europa and Enceledus respectively) and when the
discuss the structure of hydrothermal venting, the hydrother-
submersiblevehicleisdistantfromtheunder-icebasestation,
mal plume model, and our nested search approach. Finally
no communication with the vehicle would be feasible. The
we discuss the experiment, results, and future work.
1JetPropulsionLaboratory,CaliforniaInstituteofTechnology,4800Oak
GroveDrPasadena,CA
2Code7130,PhysicalAcousticsBranch,NavalResearchLaboratory,4555
OverlookAveSWWashington,DC
3Applied Physics Laboratory, University of Washington, 1013 NE 40th
St,Seattle,WA
4Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 266 Woods Hole Rd, Woods
Hole,MA
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1888
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. II. RELATEDWORK inclusion on a submersible mission to an Ocean World due
to their compact form factor (100s of grams) and low power
Adaptive sampling and control of autonomous underwater
consumption (10s of milliwatts).
vehicleshasbeenextensivelystudied,includingfoundational
work with the Autonomous Ocean Sampling Network [7],
[8], [9], [10], [11].
Hydrothermal vent localization on Earth is often done
~10 km
with a non-autonomous three-phase nested search [4]. [12]
~100 m
demonstrates this method in a number of cruises. [13]
Overshoot
presents a method to autonomously revisit areas of interest
after the primary mission is completed. [14] uses occupancy Non-Buoyant Plume Pacific Atlantic
grid mapping in order to localize vents. [15] uses a trigger m m
based approach in order to gather higher resolution data in Buoyant Plume Entrainment ~150  ~300 
areas of strong sensor readings. These three approaches are
notfullyautonomousandrequirehumanstodevelopthebase
mission used. Fig.2:Demonstrationofahydrothermalplumeperformedinanaquarium
[16]ﬁeldtestsastrategyinspiredbymothsinordertotrace tank. The buoyant and non-buoyant components of the hydrothermal vent
plumearelabeledwithapproximatescales.ImagecourtesyofC.German,
chemical plumes. [17] and [18] use moth based strategies in
WHOI
order to localize hydrothermal venting. These methods are
IV. HYDROTHERMALPLUMEMODEL
susceptible to local maxima from plume ﬂuid that detached
from the main plume source and can be misled by changes A simulation environment was developed using a hy-
in tidal currents. Our method reduces the issues posed from drothermalplumedispersionsimulationandavehiclemodel.
localmaximaandtidalcurrentsbyperformingcoarsesurveys A numerical simulation of hydrothermal plume dispersion is
overtheplumeextentbeforeprogressivelyreﬁningregionsof performedusingFVCOM[6],anocean-circulationmodel,at
high plume concentration, as opposed to following gradients Axial Seamount on the Juan de Fuca Ridge. The abundant
upstream. [19] uses a belief-maximization algorithm to ﬁnd lavasupplytoAxialsupportsvigoroushydrothermalsystems
a target of interest in simulation. Additionally, the above and frequent volcanic activity, which have drawn extensive
approaches have been tested in idealized plume simulation on-going scientiﬁc research that makes Axial one of the
environments. Our hydrothermal plume simulation provides best-studied seamounts on this planet. A snapshot of this
more realistic plume dynamics for initial testing. simulation is shown in Figure 3. The unstructured grid
employed in FVCOM supports grid size variation, therefore,
proves efﬁcient for the simulation of motion over a broad
III. HYDROTHERMALVENTING
rangeoflengthscales.Inaddition,FVCOMsupportstheuse
Hydrothermal venting produces a plume which can be of large-scale ocean circulation and tidal model outputs to
used to locate the source. The structure of the plume is drive ﬂow across a broad range of frequencies inside the
shown in Figure 2. Hydrothermal ﬂuid exiting the vent model domain [27].
is less dense than the surrounding water, resulting in the Our model domain covers 300 by 300 km, centered on
formationofabuoyantplume.Duetoentrainment,theplume the Axial Seamount caldera and is open to ﬂow across all
is continuously diluted by the ambient water column and four sides of that region. Horizontal resolution varies from
expands from ~10 cm at the vent source to ~100 m at 200 m within a 10 by 10 km region enclosing Axial’s
equilibrium. Upon reaching equilibrium, the plume expands caldera to 10km at the domain’s boundary. The vertical
horizontally — ten to hundreds of kilometers — to form the dimensionhas127uniformlydistributedlayers,covering the
non-buoyant plume [20]. The non-buoyant plume height is full water column. This results in a ~12 m layer thickness
a function of the properties of the hydrothermal vent ﬂuid above Axial’s summit. The duration of the simulation is 58
as well as the surrounding water column [21]. In the Paciﬁc days with model outputs sampled hourly. We add a seaﬂoor
the non-buoyant plume is normally observed at 100-150 m heat source of 1 gigawatt at the center (0,0) of the model
above the seaﬂoor, while in the Atlantic it is normally closer domain inside Axial’s caldera. The model output consists of
to 200-400 m [22]. current,temperature,salinity,andapassivetracer,dye,which
Hydrothermal plumes are the main source of information is released at the vent source. This tracer has a value range
when localizing venting. However, tidal ﬂows lead to local of [0,100]. After 30 days the tracer content in a 20 by 20
maxima [23], turbulent ﬂow disrupting smooth gradients, kmregionsurroundingtheventsourcereachesaquasi-steady
differing vent types and strengths, and an unknown number state.Ina50by50kmregionsurroundingtheventsourceno
of sources increase the difﬁculty of determining the plume quasi-steadystateisreachedbeforetheendofthesimulation.
source. More information about this model can be found in [5].
[4] uses three primary sensors in the detection of hy-
drothermal plumes: temperature, optical backscatter [24], V. SPATIALNESTEDSEARCH
[25], and a chemical sensor such as oxidation-reduction Given a vehicle’s starting location, the goal is to produce
potential [26]. These sensors may be good candidates for a control strategy that results in locating the hydrothermal
1889
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. andacross track.Eachtracklineofthelawnmowerpattern
consists of sections with length equal to the spacing. At
least min sections sections are completed per track line. If
sections limitsectionshaveaverageplumestrengthsbelow
plume and the sections have monotonically decreasing
t
average plume strengths, then the track line is completed
and the next track line is commenced. min sections and
sections limit are manually speciﬁed search parameters. If
themaximumvalueofanentiretracklineislessthanplume
(a) Snapshottakenat1400mdepth (b) W-Etransectacrossthecenterof t
then the current lawnmower survey is ended and the next
themodeldomain
begins. The data from each dynamic lawnmower is binned
Fig.3:ModelsnapshottakenonMar1,201100:00UTCofthesimulated
into survey bins.
concentration(normalizedbythesourcevalue)ofaneutrallybuoyanttracer
originating from a hydrothermal vent source of 1 GW heat ﬂux located An example dynamic lawnmower is shown in Figure 4.
insidethecalderaofAxialSeamountatcoordinatecenter. The plot is subdivided into track line sections. The average
plume strength is listed in each section; a green background
vent. The vent is considered found when the region around indicates that the average plume strength is greater than the
the vent has been surveyed at a speciﬁed resolution. The speciﬁedthreshold,plume .Twoboundariestothesurveyare
t
strategy mimics the ﬁeld-proven methods of [4]. Due to shown. Upon reaching the right-most boundary, the vehicle
the limited resolution of the simulation environment, we completes the current trackline. The boundaries correspond
focus speciﬁcally on search in the non-buoyant plume. (The to the shared edges of the four quadrants deﬁned during the
buoyant plume is approximately 100 m, placing it below search process.
our 200 m resolution). This corresponds to the ship based Upon the completion of each dynamic lawnmower, local
CTD casts and — to some extent — phase 1 of the [4] maxima of survey bins are found. A maximum is declared
method. Our strategy allows for the localization of plume when the 8 neighboring bins of the same resolution have a
sourceswithdifferingstrengthsandmaintainsarobustnessto max plume detection value less than that of the center bin.
local maxima in vent ﬂuid concentrations and to small scale Once a maximum has been found a nested ”lawnmower”
turbulence. We do this by performing a coarse search over survey begins. An example of this process is shown in
the plume extent and then progressively reﬁne the resolution Figure 5. The local maximum — shown in green — and
of surveys in regions of highest plume strength. Before we its neighbors are subdivided into smaller bins with one-third
can search for hydrothermal venting, we must have some the side length of their parents. A lawnmower with spacing
method for detecting plumes. Ideally this would involve equal to one-third that of the previous lawnmower survey
modeled sensors for temperature, optical backscatter, and and with track lines centered on each row of nested bins
oxidation reduction potential. However, currently we only is initiated. The new nested lawnmower survey covers the
usethepassivetracerinthemodelasadirectmeasureofthe local maximum and all surrounding neighbors. If any bin
hydrothermal plume. This is an area of future improvement. has previously been surveyed at the current resolution it will
Thedescriptionofthealgorithmfrom[5]isincludedhere. not be surveyed again. If multiple local maxima have been
A spiral is initiated at the start location. The horizontal found, they are prioritized on plume strength. This process
spacing of the spiral is manually selected to be the expected repeats recursively until a survey spacing of final spacing,
size of the feature, insuring it is seen during this initial is reached. If no local maxima are found during a dynamic
survey. During this spiral the vehicle completes vertical lawnmower, or all local maxima have been exhausted before
proﬁles through the extent of the water column. When the the survey spacing offinal spacing is reached, then the
max plume strength value of a single proﬁle exceeds the dynamiclawnmowersresume. Afteralldynamic lawnmower
speciﬁedthreshold,plume inAlgorithm1,thesecondphase surveys are completed the spiral is resumed. Another set of
t
of surveys begins. The height of the detected feature, p , is dynamiclawnmowersisstartedifaplumeisdetectedoutside
h
determined by binning the data from the vertical proﬁle, p , of the previously searched area.
d
at a 10 m resolution and selecting the bin with the largest
average value. The subsequent surveys are performed at a
VI. EXPERIMENT
depth of p .
h
A. Vehicle
During the second phase of surveys, the search space
is partitioned into bins, survey bins, of size spacing . The vehicle used to demonstrate the autonomous nested
0
These bins are separated into four quadrants centered on search algorithm is an OceanServer Iver2 AUV (see ﬁg.6).
the corner of the bin closest to the location of the plume The Iver2 AUV is a lightweight vehicle that employs several
detection. A dynamic lawnmower survey is executed in each sensors for navigation and data collection. Speciﬁcally, the
of the four quadrants. The dynamic lawnmower algorithm AUVusesaninternalcompass,dopplervelocitylogs(DVL),
is outlined in Algorithm 2. The spacing of the lawnmower and GPS receiver to estimate the current position while on
pattern, track spacing, is speciﬁed beforehand. The direc- the surface (GPS) and underway (compass + DVL). Inter-
tion of the lawnmower pattern is deﬁned by along track nally, the AUV is equipped with two computers operating
1890
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Algorithm 1 Autonomous Nested Search
procpvelidasuirnetseNdE←S←TEeDmepmStEypAtsyRtaCsceHkt
psularnvse.ypubisnhs(s←pirbiansl)ofsizespacing0
whileplans.size>0andnottimedoutdo
ExecuteorContinueplans.top()
ifexecutingspiralthen
Waituntilendofverticalproﬁle
pd←←Getdatafromproﬁle
difdb>inm=s←a←pxl(uppmdr)oeftialneddd.altoacabtininoednanto1t0emxpeltoerresdanthdenaveraged
p(xh,y)←mabxin(cboirnnesr)cl.ohseesitgtohdt.position ◦ ◦
plans.push(dynamiclawnmower(x,y,ph,9−0 ,◦0 ,◦spacing0))
plans.push(dynamiclawnmower(x,y,ph,−90◦,0 ,◦spacing0))
plans.push(dynamiclawnmower(x,y,ph, 9◦0 ,18◦0 ,spacing0))
plans.push(dynamiclawnmower(x,y,ph,90 ,180 ,spacing0))
Executeplans.top()
else
whileplans.top()isnotcompleteddo
Wait
surveydata←Getdatafromlatestsurvey
surveybi←ns.adddata(surveydata)
maxima getbinmaxima(surveybins)
sortmaxima
forbininmaximado
ifbinnotinvisitedthen
Partitionbinandbin.neighbors() Fig. 4: Plot showing an example dynamic lawnmower survey. The survey
visited.add(bin) area is partitioned into regions representing sections of each track line.
plans.push(nestedlawnmower(bin))
break Regions shaded green have an average plume strength over the speciﬁed
whilep←lans.size>0andplans.top()iscompletedo threshold. The average value is labeled in the upper left corner of each
f plans.pop()
iff.spacing<finalspacingandfcontainsventsourcethen region. The two survey boundaries are shown as thick black lines on the
returnFailruerteurnSuccess right and bottom of the plot. The starting location is marked with a black
star.
Algorithm 2 Execute Dynamic Lawnmower
procedureEXEC←UTEDYNAMICLAWNMOWER(x,y,∗h,alongtrack,acrosstrack,trackspacing)
startx←x+cos(alongtrack) ∗trackspacing/2
starty y+sin(acrosstrack) trackspacing/2
Goto(startx←,starty,h)
currtrack ←0
currsectio←n 0
csoecmtipolneteddata←Faelmspetylist
Startcurrenttracklineonheadingalongtrack
whilenotcompleteddo
Donextsectiononcurrenttrack
sectiondata[c←urrsection]←Getdatafromlastsection
currsection currsection+1
ifcurrsection>=minsectionsorsurveyboundaryreachedthen
ifavg(sectiondata[i])<plumetforlastsectionslimitsectionsandmonotoni-
callydecreasingthen
←
currtrack currtrack+1
ifmax(section←data)<plumethreshthen
csoecmtipolneteddata←Treumeptylist Fig.5:Exampleoftheplanningprocessforthenestedlawnmowersearch.
Traveltrackspacingonheadingacrosstrack The search space is divided into square bins with sides equal to the
ifcurrtrackiseventhen lawnmower spacing. Upon ﬁnding a local maximum bin, the bin and all
Startnexttracklineonheadingalongtrack
else itsneighborsaresubdividedintonestedbinsofone-thirdthesidelength.A
Startnexttracklineonheading−alongtrack lawnmowerpatternisthenexecutedsuchthateachtracklineiscenteredon
arowofbins.Thevehiclepathandobservedtracerisplotted.Theplanned
nestedlawnmowerisshowindarkred.Thestartinglocationismarkedwith
in a frontseat-backseat conﬁguration. The frontseat, a main a black star. Note that the measured passive tracer does not remain the
sameonsubsequentmeasurementsofthesamelocationduetothetemporal
vehicle computer developed by OceanServer, controls the
variationinﬂuidconcentrations.
actuationofthevehicleandgeneratesthenavigationsolution
mission. IvP Helm then arbitrates between safety behaviors
(Geodesic coordinates, heading, speed, depth/altitude). The
(battery monitoring, region monitoring, etc.) and waypoints
backseat computer is built in-house and runs the MOOS-
that deﬁne the nested search plan resulting in the desired
IvP autonomy architecture onboard a PC104 stack running
heading, depth, and speed.
Ubuntu 18.04 on an Intel Core-i7 (2.4 GHz) with 4 GB of
RAM. The architecture of the autonomy system leverages
B. Mission Setup
MOOS-IvP to handle the passing of data between different
processes and to arbitrate several behaviors in order to Two operational constraints required the modiﬁcation of
generate a desired navigation solution (Heading, Depth, and the hydrothermal model, vehicle endurance and water depth.
Speed). The Iver2 AUV used in the experiment has an endurance
In this work we add two main components to MOOS- of 25-30 km. This is not sufﬁcient for a convincing test
IvP: (i) The Nested Search Planner application, and (ii) the of the nested bin search given the size of the hydrothermal
FVCOM plume simulator app (see ﬁg.7). The navigation plume model. To compensate for this, the model was scaled
solution generated by the frontseat is passed through to both in the xy direction by a factor of 1/8, resulting in a model
the planning and simulator app. Simulated sensor readings resolution of 25m. An experiment area of 1.5 km by 1.5 km
from the FVCOM simulation are also passed forward to was also deﬁned to focus the search and prevent the vehicle
the planning application which then generates updated plans from travelling too far from the shore. The water depth in
for the IvP Helm to follow throughout the course of the this experiment region was approximately 7 meters deep.
1891
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. demonstrate the algorithm running on board an AUV and
prepare for deployments without a plume model. The results
of the modiﬁcation of the model can be seen in Figure 8.
Analysis in simulation of the search method can be found
here, [5].
WedeployedtheAUVfromshoreeachdayfromJune4th
to June 7th. The proﬁle of a single run is as follows. The
vehicle traversed near the surface to the target experiment
region, performed the autonomous nested search described
Fig. 6: Iver2 AUV parked on the shore at NRL’s Chesapeake Beach
Detachmentafterperforminganexperiment. previously then returned to the shore for recovery. The
resolution of the spiral and initial lawnmowers was set to
200m and 150m respectively, with a ﬁnal survey goal of
FVCOM Model 
Server 25m,thesameresolutionasthemodiﬁedhydrothermalplume
model. If the vehicle was unable to locate the hydrothermal
MOOSDB vent before a speciﬁed timeout it would return to shore. The
Nested Search  Simulated Sensor  Current State  vehicle maintained accurate localization by surfacing every
Planner Measurement Estimate OceanServerUVC
(Iver2 control) 10 minutes for a GPS ﬁx. Each day the location of the
Nested Search  Desired 
Trajectory Navigation hydrothermalventandthestartinglocationofthevehiclewas
set.Thelocationofthehydrothermalplumewasmodiﬁedby
IvPHelm
moving the origin of the model in the experiment region. In
Fig. 7: Simpliﬁed version of the autonomy architecture showing the main totalweperformed5runsonthevehicle.Wealwaysstartthe
components required for autonomous nested search using an OceanServer
vehicle south of the hydrothermal vent. Due to the design of
Iver2AUV.
the algorithm, this results in shorter distances travelled and
As the original hydrothermal plume model is approximately allowed us to better demonstrate the search algorithm while
1400 meters deep at the vent site it could clearly not be remaining within the vehicle’s endurance.
used in this form. In addition the bathymetry of the model
seaﬂoor is not as ﬂat at the experiment operation region. VII. RESULTS
To compensation for this we removed the portion of the A total of 5 runs were run over the 4 days of the
model in the vertical direction that contains no hydrothermal experiment. On the ﬁrst day, 2 runs were performed with
plume and uniformly selected 9 layers from the remaining the primary goal of testing the interface between the nested
portion of the model. This resulted in a modiﬁed model search planner. There were no issues with the interface
with 9 layers with a 0.66 meter layer size, for a total of betweentheplanner,themodel,andthevehicle.Theprimary
6 meters of vertical depth. We also gave the model a ﬂat goal of all subsequent runs was to demonstrate the nested
seabedbymakingthelayersofuniformheight.Thisresulted search planner. The experiment region was set to 1.5 by 1.5
in a model that ﬁt in our experiment region and with a kilometers and the run timeout was set to 3.5 hours. These
vertical resolution within the vehicles ability to maintain parameters ensure that the vehicle has the opportunity to
depth.Wedonotethatthisextrememodiﬁcationofthemodel demonstrate the nested search algorithm while still returning
isnotideal.However,visualinspectionoftheresultingmodel to the shore before the end of the vehicles endurance. On
showsthattheimportantfeaturesforourparticularalgorithm the day 2 run, Figure 9, we see intermittent data sampled
are still present (multiple local maxima and varying plume from the model. The search algorithm selected the height of
strength with depth). The goal of this experiment was to the lawnmower surveys to be at the bottom of the model.
As the vehicle is not able to perfectly hold depth it was
periodically at a depth lower than the model, resulting in no
valid data. There is also a known issue with this methods
performance, as currently implemented, when searching in
the death direction. The depth at which all lawnmower sur-
veysareperformedindeterminedonlyonceduringtheinitial
contact with the plume. As the plume depth varies based on
water density and location, the vehicle is not guaranteed to
maintain contact with the strongest depth band of the plume
throughoutthesearch.Thiscanresultinfailuretoidentifythe
plume source. For the purposes of the remaining runs in this
demonstrations, the depth at which the lawnmower surveys
were performed was ﬁxed to be roughly the center of the
plume. In future iterations we want to improve the search
Fig. 8: Snapshot taken at 7 m depth of the modiﬁed hydrothermal plume
model. The plume concentration is plotted in the form of the neutrally algorithm to also search in the depth direction throughout
buoyanttracer.Atthisdepthweseethelargestplumedispersion. the entire run to maintain contact with the plume.
1892
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. During all runs we see similar behavior. The vehicle
performsaspiraluntilcontactingtheplume,thenperformthe
dynamiclawnmowerbehavioruntilalocalmaximumisseen,
ﬁnallytheyperformnestedlawnmowersurveysatsubsequent
local maxima until the ﬁnal survey size is reached.
The day 2 run can be seen in Figure 9 and the day 3
(top) and day 4 (bottom) runs can be seen in Figure 10.
Theday4runresultedinthemostinterestingdemonstration.
We see the vehicle performing the dynamic lawnmower then
transitioningtothenestedsurvey.Thelargestmaximumseen
at this point is south of the hydrothermal vent location,
resulting in a nested lawnmower survey that does not cover
theventlocation.Uponcompletion,thislawnmowersurveyis
extendedfurthernorthtocoveranadditionallocalmaximum
thatisco-locatedwiththeventsite.Thisbehaviorisexpected
in real operations due multiple local maxima in the plume
that are not associated with the vent location.
Fig. 10: (top) Day 3 run. (bottom) Day 4 run. Sensed plume strength is
plotted.
be explored for their applications to Ocean Worlds: thermo-
clines [28], [29], [30], ocean fronts [31], [32], algal bloom
Fig.9:Day2Run.Sensedplumestrengthisplotted.
patch[33],[34],[35],[36],andsubmesoscalestructures[37].
VIII. FUTUREWORK Autonomous science is only one autonomy task required
The primary future work to be completed is full real by an ocean worlds submersible. The vehicle would also be
world testing at a hydrothermal venting site. In addition to required to handle resource constraints, selectively choose
more testing, the algorithm can be improved in a number of which data to transmit back to Earth over the limited band-
ways.Thelawnmowersurveyscanbeimprovedtoguarantee width, and perform underwater navigation.
closing contours for local maxima, the search can include a
depth component through the duration of the run, temporal IX. CONCLUSION
variation in the plume from should be accounted for, and
Wedemonstratedanautonomousnestedsearchmethodfor
other search strategies should be developed for comparison.
hydrothermal venting, based on a ﬁeld tested manual three-
This work was originally developed for the localization
phase search approach [4]. We deployed an OceanServer
of hydrothermal venting. However, as the search operates by
Iver2 AUV into Chesapeake Bay, MD running the nested
locating local maxima, a similar approach could be applied
search method on board as well as a hydrothermal plume
in other underwater vehicle search problems. The approach
model to simulate the required sensor data. Over a 1 week
could be applied to any oceanographic measure such as
period we ran 5 mission on board the vehicle demonstrating
temperature, salinity, chlorophyll, or other chemical sensors.
the performance of the algorithm.
An additional application is acoustic source localization.
Given some acoustic source determine the location of that
source based on the strength of the received sound wave. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Adaptationsof thisalgorithmforother useswillalso expand PortionsofthisworkwereperformedbytheJetPropulsion
the potential for real world experiments. Laboratory,CaliforniaInstituteofTechnology,undercontract
Hydrothermal venting is not the only target of interest. with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
While not all ocean processes on Earth are expected to recur Portions of this work were funded by the Naval Research
onotheroceanworldsdistantfromthesun,thefollowingcan Laboratory and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
1893
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [15] G. Ferri, M. V. Jakuba, and D. R. Yoerger, “A novel trigger-based
method for hydrothermal vents prospecting using an autonomous
underwaterrobot,”AutonomousRobots,vol.29,no.1,pp.67–83,2010.
[1] NationalAeronauticsandSpaceAdministration.(2018)Oceanworlds.
[16] J.A.Farrell,S.Pang,andW.Li,“Chemicalplumetracingviaanau-
[Online].Available:https://www.nasa.gov/specials/ocean-worlds
tonomousunderwatervehicle,”IEEEJournalofOceanicEngineering,
[2] H.-W.Hsu,F.Postberg,Y.Sekine,T.Shibuya,S.Kempf,M.Hora´nyi, vol.30,no.2,pp.428–442,2005.
A. Juha´sz, N. Altobelli, K. Suzuki, Y. Masaki, et al., “Ongoing
[17] S. Pang, “Plume source localization for auv based autonomous hy-
hydrothermalactivitieswithinenceladus,”Nature,vol.519,no.7542,
drothermalventdiscovery,”inOCEANS2010. IEEE,2010,pp.1–8.
p.207,2015.
[18] Y. Tian, A. Zhang, W. Li, J. Yu, Y. Li, and J. Zeng, “A behavior-
[3] J.H.Waite,C.R.Glein,R.S.Perryman,B.D.Teolis,B.A.Magee,
basedplanningstrategyfordeep-seahydrothermalplumetracingwith
G. Miller, J. Grimes, M. E. Perry, K. E. Miller, A. Bouquet, J. I.
autonomousunderwatervehicles,”inOCEANS2014-TAIPEI. IEEE,
Lunine, T. Brockwell, and S. J. Bolton, “Cassini ﬁnds molecular
2014,pp.1–10.
hydrogen in the enceladus plume: Evidence for hydrothermal
[19] Z. Saigol, R. Dearden, J. Wyatt, and B. Murton, “Belief change
processes,”Science,vol.356,no.6334,pp.155–159,2017.[Online].
maximisationforhydrothermalventhuntingusingoccupancygrids,”in
Available:http://science.sciencemag.org/content/356/6334/155
ProceedingsoftheEleventhConferenceTowardsAutonomousRobotic
[4] C.R.German,D.R.Yoerger,M.Jakuba,T.M.Shank,C.H.Langmuir,
Systems(TAROS-10),2010,pp.247–254.
andK.-i.Nakamura,“Hydrothermalexplorationwiththeautonomous
[20] C. German and W. Seyfried, “Hydrothermal processes,” Treatise on
benthicexplorer,”DeepSeaResearchPartI:OceanographicResearch
geochemistry,vol.8,pp.191–233,2014.
Papers,vol.55,no.2,pp.203–219,2008.
[21] J.S.Turner,Buoyancyeffectsinﬂuids. CambridgeUniversityPress,
[5] A. Branch, G. Xu, M. V. Jakuba, C. R. German, S. Chien,
1979.
J. C. Kinsey, A. D. Bowen, K. P. Hand, and J. S.
[22] K.G.SpeerandP.A.Rona,“Amodelofanatlanticandpaciﬁchy-
Seewald, “Autonomous nested search for hydrothermal venting,”
drothermalplume,”JournalofGeophysicalResearch:Oceans,vol.94,
in Workshop on Planning and Robotics, International
no.C5,pp.6213–6220,1989.
Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS
PlanRob 2018), Delft, Netherlands, June 2018. [Online]. Available: [23] S. R. Veirs, “Heat ﬂux and hydrography at a submarine volcano:
Observations and models of the main endeavour vent ﬁeld in the
https://ai.jpl.nasa.gov/public/papers/branch planrob2018 hydrothermal.pdf
northeastpaciﬁc,”Ph.D.dissertation,UniversityofWashington,2003.
[6] C. Chen, H. Liu, and R. C. Beardsley, “An unstructured
[24] E.T.Baker,C.R.German,andH.Elderﬁeld,“Hydrothermalplumes
grid, ﬁnite-volume, three-dimensional, primitive equations ocean
model: Application to coastal ocean and estuaries,” Journal overspreading-centeraxes:Globaldistributionsandgeologicalinfer-
of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. ences,”Seaﬂoorhydrothermalsystems:Physical,chemical,biological,
andgeologicalinteractions,pp.47–71,1995.
159–186, 2003. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-
0426(2003)020¡0159:AUGFVT¿2.0.CO;2 [25] E. T. Baker and C. R. German, “On the global distribution of
hydrothermalventﬁelds,”Mid-oceanridges,pp.245–266,2004.
[7] T. B. Curtin, J. G. Bellingham, J. Catipovic, and D. Webb,
“Autonomous oceanographic sampling networks,” Oceanography, [26] K.Nakamura,S. Veirs,C.P.Sarason, R.E.McDuff,F. Stahr,D.R.
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 86–94, 1993. [Online]. Available: Yoerger,andA.M.Bradley,“Electrochemicalsignalsinrisingbuoyant
http://www.jstor.org/stable/43924649 plumesandtidallyoscillatingplumesatthemainendeavourventﬁeld,
juande fucaridge,” EOS,Transactions ofthe AmericanGeophysical
[8] T. B. Curtin and J. G. Bellingham, “Progress toward
Union,vol.81,no.48,2000.
autonomous ocean sampling networks,” Deep Sea Research
Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanography, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. [27] L. Zheng and R. H. Weisberg, “Modeling the west
62 – 67, 2009, aOSN II: The Science and Technology of ﬂorida coastal ocean by downscaling from the deep ocean,
an Autonomous Ocean Sampling Network. [Online]. Available: across the continental shelf and into the estuaries,” Ocean
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967064508002531 Modelling, vol. 48, pp. 10 – 29, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500312000327
[9] S. Ramp, R. Davis, N. Leonard, I. Shulman, Y. Chao, A. Robinson,
J. Marsden, P. Lermusiaux, D. Fratantoni, J. Paduan, F. Chavez, [28] N.A.CruzandA.C.Matos,“Adaptivesamplingofthermoclineswith
F. Bahr, S. Liang, W. Leslie, and Z. Li, “Preparing to autonomousunderwatervehicles,”inOCEANS2010. IEEE,2010,pp.
predict: The second autonomous ocean sampling network (aosn- 1–6.
ii) experiment in the monterey bay,” Deep Sea Research Part [29] Y. Zhang, J. G. Bellingham, M. Godin, J. P. Ryan, R. S. McEwen,
II: Topical Studies in Oceanography, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. B. Kieft, B. Hobson, and T. Hoover, “Thermocline tracking based
68 – 86, 2009, aOSN II: The Science and Technology of onpeak-gradientdetectionbyanautonomousunderwatervehicle,”in
an Autonomous Ocean Sampling Network. [Online]. Available: OCEANS2010. IEEE,2010,pp.1–4.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967064508002609 [30] L. Sun, Y. Li, S. Yan, J. Wang, and Z. Chen, “Thermocline tracking
[10] P. Haley, P. Lermusiaux, A. Robinson, W. Leslie, O. Logoutov, using a portable autonomous underwater vehicle based on adaptive
G.Cossarini,X.Liang,P.Moreno,S.Ramp,J.Doyle,J.Bellingham, threshold,”inOCEANS2016-Shanghai. IEEE,2016,pp.1–4.
F. Chavez, and S. Johnston, “Forecasting and reanalysis in [31] A. Branch, M. M. Flexas, B. Claus, E. B. Clark, A. F. Thompson,
the monterey bay/california current region for the autonomous S.Chien,J.C.Kinsey,D.M.Fratantoni,Y.Zhang,B.Kieft,B.Hob-
ocean sampling network-ii experiment,” Deep Sea Research Part son, and F. P. Chavez, “Front delineation and tracking with multiple
II: Topical Studies in Oceanography, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 127 underwatervehicles,”J.FieldRobotics,p.submitted,2018.
– 148, 2009, aOSN II: The Science and Technology of [32] N. A. Cruz and A. C. Matos, “Autonomous tracking of a horizontal
an Autonomous Ocean Sampling Network. [Online]. Available: boundary,”inOceans-St.John’s,2014. IEEE,2014,pp.1–6.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967064508002634 [33] M. A. Godin, Y. Zhang, J. P. Ryan, T. T. Hoover, and J. G. Belling-
[11] N.E.Leonard,D.A.Paley,F.Lekien,R.Sepulchre,D.M.Fratantoni, ham, “Phytoplankton bloom patch center localization by the tethys
and R. E. Davis, “Collective motion, sensor networks, and ocean autonomous underwater vehicle,” in OCEANS’11 MTS/IEEE KONA,
sampling,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 1, pp. 48–74, Jan Sept2011,pp.1–6.
2007. [34] D. Magazzeni, F. Py, M. Fox, D. Long, and K. Rajan, “Policy
[12] D.R.Yoerger,A.M.Bradley,M.Jakuba,M.A.Tivey,C.R.German, learning for autonomous feature tracking,” Autonomous Robots,
T. M. Shank, and R. W. Embley, “Mid-ocean ridge exploration with vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 47–69, Jun 2014. [Online]. Available:
anautonomousunderwatervehicle,”Oceanography,vol.20,no.4,pp. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-013-9375-7
52–61,2007. [35] J. Das, F. Py, T. Maughan, T. OReilly, M. Messie´, J. Ryan, G. S.
[13] D. R. Yoerger, M. Jakuba, A. M. Bradley, and B. Bingham, “Tech- Sukhatme,andK.Rajan,“Coordinatedsamplingofdynamicoceano-
niquesfordeepseanearbottomsurveyusinganautonomousunderwa- graphic features with underwater vehicles and drifters,” The Interna-
tervehicle,”TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,vol.26, tionalJournalofRoboticsResearch,vol.31,no.5,pp.626–646,2012.
no.1,pp.41–54,2007. [36] S.Petillo,H.Schmidt,andA.Balasuriya,“Constructingadistributed
[14] M.JakubaandD.R.Yoerger,“Autonomoussearchforhydrothermal auvnetworkforunderwaterplume-trackingoperations,”International
ventﬁeldswithoccupancygridmaps,”inProc.ofACRA,vol.8,2008, Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 2012, pp. Article ID
p.2008. 191235,12pp,2012.
1894
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [37] M. M. Flexas, M. I. Troesch, S. Chien, A. F. Thompson,
S. Chu, A. Branch, J. D. Farrara, and Y. Chao, “Autonomous
sampling of ocean submesoscale fronts with ocean gliders and
numerical model forecasting,” Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic
Technology, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 503–521, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH-D-17-0037.1
1895
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 