2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Aerial Manipulation using Model Predictive Control
for Opening a Hinged Door
Dongjae Lee1, Hoseong Seo1, Dabin Kim1, and H. Jin Kim2
Abstract—Existing studies for environment interaction with
an aerial robot have been focused on interaction with static
surroundings. However, to fully explore the concept of an
aerial manipulation, interaction with moving structures should
also be considered. In this paper, a multirotor-based aerial
manipulator opening a daily-life moving structure, a hinged
door, is presented. In order to address the constrained motion
ofthestructureandtoavoidcollisionsduringoperation,model
predictive control (MPC) is applied to the derived coupled
system dynamics between the aerial manipulator and the door
involving state constraints. By implementing a constrained
versionofdifferentialdynamicprogramming(DDP),MPCcan
generate position setpoints to the disturbance observer (DOB)-
based robust controller in real-time, which is validated by our
experimental results. Fig.1:Acompositeimageofanaerialmanipulatoropeninga
hinged door in the direction of the blue arrow. A transparent
I. INTRODUCTION ﬁgure is the initial state of the system, and a vivid ﬁgure
represents the desired state of the system.
Physical interaction with a surrounding environment has
been a research topic of growing interest in aerial robotics.
[1] Most studies have been carried out with a hardware contains its own dynamics which often entails signiﬁcant
platform called unmanned aerial manipulator (UAM), an force/torquereaction.Withoutpropermodelingorestimation
unmanned aerial vehicle attached with one or more manip- on the movement of the structure, it cannot be guided to the
ulators, with which various real-life applications are investi- desired position; furthermore, collision avoidance with this
gated such as maintenance tasks [2] and autonomous sensor dynamic structure cannot be guaranteed which is necessary
installation and retrieval operation [3]. One compelling em- for safe operation.
ployment could be an interaction with a moving structure As part of such topics, this paper handles the problem of
in the surroundings. Although most of the latest works on a UAM opening a hinged door. It deals with a particular
UAM physical interaction [4], [2], [5] have focused on an application of a multirotor-based UAM operating a mov-
inspection on a static structure, further expansion of the able structure like doors, windows, and heavy cargo. This
capability of an aerial robot cannot be overlooked. If we problem requires additional consideration on the movement
can facilitate a UAM to move any movable surrounding of the structure which would involve intrinsic constraints,
structure, a more exhaustive exploration can be performed which is, in our case, a hinge constraint. Moreover, crash
by accessing once unreachable places, pushing or pulling a prevention with a dynamic structure, the door, and a static
movable structure; also, a more active response to disaster structure, a doorframe, is considered along with a self-
or rescue operation can be achieved with its augmented collision avoidance in generating a collision-free trajectory.
versatility. After modeling the combined dynamics of the UAM and
There are at least two additional issues in addressing thehingeddoor,weappliedmodelpredictivecontrol(MPC)
a movable structure compared to an interaction with a to ensure dynamic feasibility and collision avoidance of a
static counterpart: 1) structure dynamics, and 2) collision generated trajectory. State constraints which are formulated
avoidance.Contrarytoastaticstructure,amovablestructure from kinematic relationships are imposed on the optimal
control problem, and the generated trajectory from MPC
*ThismaterialisbaseduponworksupportedbytheMinistryofTrade, is tracked by a disturbance observer-based robust controller
Industry&Energy(MOTIE,Korea)underIndustrialTechnologyInnovation designed in [6].
Program.No.10067206,‘DevelopmentofDisasterResponseRobotSystem
forLifesavingandSupportingFireFightersatComplexDisasterEnviron-
ment’. A. Related Works
1Dongjae Lee, Hoseong Seo, and Dabin Kim are graduate students
In[2],toolhandlingaerialmanipulatorissuggestedwhile
of the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Seoul
{
National University, Seoul, South Korea ehdwo713, hosung37, incontactwithaverticalsurface.Foracontact-basedinspec-
}
dabin404 @snu.ac.kr tiontask,amotionplanningalgorithmpresentedin[7]isval-
2 H. Jin Kim is a faculty of the Department of Mechanical and
idatedwithexperimentsusingamultidirectionalthrustaerial
Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
hjinkim@snu.ac.kr vehicle [8]. An omnidirectional aerial vehicle for contact-
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1237
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:56:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. basedinspectiononacurvedsurfaceispresentedin[5]with
state estimation and disturbance rejection. However, none of
these considers a moving structure, and since the planner
suggested in [7] is based on a sampling-based method, it
cannot be applied for an online scenario.
There exist some studies about an aerial manipulator
coping with a movable structure. In [9], a dual-armed aerial
manipulatorisemployedtoperformthreedifferenttasks,and
the one about a movable structure is a valve-turning task.
However, in this scenario, only a rotational motion in the z-
axis is required for the task, and certainly, more issues have
tobeconsideredforlessconstrainedtasks.In[10],theauthor
presentsanexperimentofanaerialmanipulatoroperatingan
unknown drawer. Coupled dynamics between the UAM and
Fig.2:Referenceframesoftheaerialmanipulatorinthedoor
the drawer are derived, and the desired force is computed
opening scenario
through the velocity of the drawer. However, a structure
with only a translational motion is considered, and collision
avoidance is not explicitly addressed. In [11], an aerial deliberation on the movement of the structure as well.
vehicle opens a hinged door with a proposed mechanism. Furthermore, to assure safe operation, constraints on colli-
Though suitable for this particular purpose, versatility that a sion avoidance should be reﬂected. Such collision avoiding
general UAM contains seems to lack in this approach. constraints in this scenario would involve avoiding collision
MPC has been utilized not only as an optimal controller with a door, a doorframe, and itself.
for aerial vehicles but also as an optimal planner. In [12], an To satisfy the need for both being aware of the structure’s
explicit MPC is used to generate ofﬂine control policies for movement and generating a constraint-abiding trajectory,
anaerialmanipulatorinteractingwithastaticstructure.Later, MPC is applied. An integrated model of the coupled dy-
in [13], MPC with SLQ is presented for an online optimal namicsbetweentheUAMandthehingeddoorisdeveloped,
control input computation. Similar techniques are applied in and three independent constraints are applied to the optimal
manyotherpaperstoproduceanonlineoptimaltrajectoryfor control problem.
amultirotorwithasuspendedload[14],andforamultirotor Following assumptions are made throughout this paper:
withanetworkdelay[15].Inthispaper,MPCisutilizedasa • The weight of the robotic arm attached to the bottom
sub-optimal planner generating a trajectory complying with of the multirotor is negligible compared to that of the
dynamics and constraints. whole system.
• Servomotors in the robotic arm have negligible dy-
B. Contributions
namics and are assumed to follow the desired velocity
To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the ﬁrst command with little time delay.
attempt for a UAM to open a hinged door while avoiding • The end-effector’s tip and the door’s surface are rigidly
collisions. Simpliﬁed dynamics and state constraints are connected.
formulated to construct an MPC problem, and by adopting • Physical properties of the door (i.e., mass moment of
a constrained version of differential dynamic programming, inertia, width, height, and position) are known.
dynamically feasible and online-applicable trajectories sat- With the followed assumptions, equations of motion and
isfying constraints are generated. Finally, our proposed ap- constraints for the system are developed.
proach is validated through real experiments.
III. EQUATIONSOFMOTION
C. Outline
In this section, equations of motion (EoM) of the whole
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, prob- system including the multirotor-based UAM and the hinged
lem description with general assumptions throughout the door are derived. A general dynamical model of the system
paper are explained. Kinematics, dynamics and simpliﬁed is ﬁrst introduced by Lagrange equation, and a simpliﬁed
dynamics are all derived in Section III. In Section IV, dynamics is then suggested for real application.
problem formulation for MPC with various state constraints
A. Notations
guaranteeingcollision-freetrajectoriesarepresented.Control
framework, experimental setup and results are explained in In order to clarify further derivations, basic notations for
Section V, while conclusions are drawn in Section VI. variables and parameters that describe the system are prede-
ﬁned. Other additional variables and parameters adopted for
II. PROBLEMDESCRIPTION
notational simplicity are deﬁned across the paper.
∈ R
This paper considers the problem of a UAM opening a The position of the UAM P 3, the lower part of the
∈ R ∈ R
hinged door. Unlike interaction with a static structure, the door hinge P 3, and the end-effector P 3 are
h e
problem of interacting with a movable structure requires all expressed in the inertial world frame F centered at
W
1238
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:56:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. O . The attitude of the aerial vehicle and the angle of the The entire system’s EoM from the equation (3) combined
W ∈ R
door are each denoted by ZYX Euler angle Φ 3 and with the motions of the servomotor is as follows:
∈ R  
α 1 in F . For the rotational velocity of the aerial
W q˙
vehicle in the vehicle’s body frame F centered at O , − −
Ω∈R3 isemployed.O ispositionedaBtthecenterofmaBss x˙ =f(x,u)= Mq 1( (Cqq˙ +Gq)+τ) (4)
B ··· H˙
(CoM) of the UAM. η , where i=1, ,4, describes each d
i
servomotor angle composing the multirotor-attached robotic where M , C , and G are mass, Coriolis, and gravitational
q q q
a∗rminFB,andtheyareconcatenatedasH.Conventionally, matrices induced from the equation (3), and τ = τq +τext
˙ deno∗tes an element-wise time derivative of an arbitrary with τext denoting unmodeled forces and torques from the
matrix .Amongthesevariables,statevariablesthatdescribe manipulator and the door. Detailed derivation can be found
the coupled EoM of the UAM and the hinged door are in [16] where a sufﬁciently slow servomotor speed during
deﬁned as x = [Φ α Φ˙ α˙ H]T ∈ R12, while inputs to the the entire horizon is assumed. Since servomotors are speed-
systemaredeﬁnedasu=[f TH˙ ]T ∈R8 wheref ∈R1, controlled, with a proper control strategy assuring input
T ∈ R3, and H˙ ∈ R4 eachtdenotdes a thrust, torquetof the limits, the assumption can be satisﬁed.
d
multirotor, and a desired servomotor speed all in F .
∈R ∈R ×B ∈
Parameters for the UAM are m 1, I 3 3, l D. Simpliﬁed Dynamics
R A A i
1, which are mass, mass moment of inertia at O , and ith
B A simpliﬁed dynamical model for the whole system is
roboticarm’slinkagelength,respectively.Fortheparameters
∈ R derived in this subsection. Necessity for the simpliﬁed dy-
of the door, mass moment of inertia at P I 1, the
h D ∈R namics can be summarized as follows. Since our approach
shortest distance from P to the door hinge D 1, the
e V to handle the door opening scenario with a UAM includes
projecteddistanceoftherelativepositionvectorbetweenP
∈ R e an optimal planner in a receding horizon manner, a more
and P to the door hinge D 1, and the door width
∈hR ∈HR concise model though including all sufﬁcient information of
D 1 and height D 1 are used. Additionally,
w ∈ R h the system dynamics would be more advantageous in terms
R 1 is used to describe the radius of the multirotor
A of computation time. With some additional assumptions, the
including blades in the XY plane of the frame F .
B number of system states can be reduced, and numerical
B. Kinematics matrix inversion is no longer required which is mandatory
in the equation (4).
To derive a uniﬁed dynamical model of the UAM and the
door while assuring that constraint forces do not appear, La- The simpliﬁed version is derived with the following two
grangedynamicsareemployed.Requiredkinematicrelations assumptions:
for the derivation are listed in this subsection. • Multirotor’s rotational dynamics is negligible.
WitharotationmatrixR fromtheframeF toF and • UAM is in a quasi-static state in translational motion
t B W
a position vector d of the end-effector from O described during its operation.
B
in F , the kinematic constraint between the UAM and the
B The ﬁrst assumption can be justiﬁed from the fact that a
door can be written as the following:
multirotor’s low rotational inertia and its ability to generate
P+R d=P +[D cosα D sinα D ]T (1) high torque ensure that the onboard controller is able to
t h V V H
control the angular velocity of the vehicle sufﬁciently fast.
∈ R
Deﬁning a new conﬁguration vector q = [Φ α]T 4, Several other papers [17], [18] include this assumption in
Jacobian matrices mapping q˙ to P˙, Ω, and α˙ can be written their dynamical model for multirotor planning. Secondly,
−
as P˙ = Jtq˙ Rtd˙, Ω = Jrq˙, and α˙ = Jαq˙. Note that q considering the door’s relatively higher inertia compared to
is chosen to describe the dynamic behavior of the multirotor
that of the UAM, the second assumption can be assumed
andthedoorindependentfromthemotionoftheroboticarm,
without losing generality. Similar research carried out for
basedontheassumptionofnegligibleservomotordynamics.
operating a drawer with a UAM in [10] also assumed this
C. Dynamics quasi-static motion to generate the desired path. Thanks to
the ﬁrst assumption, we can redeﬁne the states and inputs
To apply Lag(cid:16)range equation about q and q˙, (cid:17)kinetic and for the system as x = [Φ α α˙ H]T ∈ R9, and u =
potential energies are calculated as follows: ∈ R s s
[f Ω H ]T 8, where Ω denotes a desired angular
t d d d
K 1 velocity of the UAM in F . Furthermore, according to
= P˙TM P˙ +ΩTI Ω+α˙TI α˙ , B
2 A A D (2) the second assumption, introducing an action-reaction force
P
=m gPTe F between the UAM and the hinged door, F can be
A 3 R R
written as F = mge +f R e where g is a gravitational
where M = diag(m ,m ,m ), and e = [0 0 1]T. By R 3 t t 3
A A A A 3 acceleration.Then,thenominaldynamicsofthehingeddoor
calculatingtheLagrangeequationwithexternalforcesτ ,the −
q can be represented as I α¨ = n TF D where n =
EoMofthemultirotorandthedoorcanbedrawnanalytically − D D R V D
[sinα cosα 0]T stands for a unit normal vector to the
from the below equation:
door surface pointing to the opposite direction to the UAM.
L L
d∂ − ∂ L K−P Therefore, the door’s angular acceleration can be rearranged
dt∂q˙ ∂q =τq, = , (3) as α¨ =g(Φ,α)ft, and the whole system dynamics with the
1239
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:56:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
redeﬁned states x and inputs u are as follows:
s s 
 
W(Φ)Ω 
d
α˙
x˙ =f (x ,u )= (5)
s s s s g(Φ,α)f
t
H˙
d
where W(Φ) is a mapping matrix such that Φ˙ =W(Φ)Ω.
IV. TRAJECTORYGENERATIONUSING
MODELPREDICTIVECONTROL
This section contains ingredients and recipes for a model
Fig. 3: Conﬁguration of the robotic arm.
predictive control problem that produces a desired trajectory
totherobustcontroller.Startingwithaproblemformulation,
X
hard constraints for avoiding a collision, and an optimal state constraint set as in equation (6). No hard constraints
control solver yielding a sub-optimal solution in less than on inputs are considered in this paper; therefore, the input
U R
a second, thus enabling a real-time application are presented constraint set is set to be = nu. First of all, unlike
sequentially.Bysolvinganoptimalcontrolproblematevery a general multirotor, our UAM’s additional freedom in the
time interval, our MPC algorithm could generate a dynam- robotic arm should be carefully managed to avoid a crash
ically feasible and safe trajectory applicable to a real-world between the multirotor airframe and the robotic arm. To
experiment. ensurethisself-collisionavoidance,followingconstraintsare
devised:
≤
A. Problem Formulation S3 0
z ≤
Consideringadiscretizationovertimewithatimeinterval S4 0 (8)
∆t, for the given time horizon H , an initial state x , and z ≤
an initial input sequence U = {uO ,··· ,u − }kat the dz 0
kth time element, the MPCkproblekm can bke+fHoOrmu1lated as where S3, S4, and d are position vectors of the 3rd ser-
(cid:88)
follows: vomotor, the 4th servomotor, and the end-effector of the
− robotic arm described in F while having their origins at
mUikn Jk =lf(xk+HO)+k+iH=Ok 1l(xi,ui)∆t, OthBirdacsoimnptohneeFnitgo.f3a, avnedctothrBe∗s.uSbisnccreipOt zBiins∗azssudmeneodtetsotbhee
s.t. x =f (x ,u ), (6) centered at the CoM of the multirotor, and these vectors
k+∈1X D k k are all described in F , the above constraints imply that
x , B
k the robotic arm must always stay below the airframe of the
∈U
uk multirotor. Note that all three position vectors S3, S4, and
where fD(xk,uk), X ⊂ Rnx, and U ⊂ Rnu each denotes d are a function of H which can be derived with forward
kinematics; therefore, these constraints can be formulated
a discretized dynamics, a state constraint set, and an input
only with system states.
constraintsetwithn =9andn =8.Dynamicsf ,states
x , and inputs u axre discretizeud based on the siDmpliﬁed The second constraint(cid:110), whi(cid:16)ch i(cid:2)s avoiding co(cid:3)llis(cid:17)io(cid:111)n with
k k
the door, is constructed as follows:
model in equation (5). Since the door’s state is included in
thesystemstatesxk,throughthequadraticcostfunctionwith nT(R d)≥R max nT R cosθ sinθ 0 T (9)
respect to state and input error, state and input trajectories D t A D t
θ
for opening the door while spending minimum energy can In equation (9), the left-hand side indicates the shortest
be generated. The terminal cost l and the stage cost l are distancebetweentheCoMoftheUAMandthedoorsurface,
f
deﬁned with each variable’s desired value denoted with a and the right-hand side quantiﬁes the distance between the
superscript of d as follows: CoM of the UAM and the multirotor’s airframe closest to
∈R
the door surface. If we introduce nB =RTn 3, a door
1(cid:107) − (cid:107) D t D
l (x )= x xd 2, surface unit normal vector(cid:113)in F , the equation (9) can be
f k+HO 2 k+HO k+HO L (7) arranged as follows: B
1(cid:107) − (cid:107) 1(cid:107) − (cid:107)
l(xi,ui)=2 xi xdi 2Q+ 2 ui udi 2R (nB)Td≥R (nB )2+(nB )2 (10)
D A Dx Dy
B. Hard Constraints
Since all variables in this constraint are functions of states
To ensure a safe operation for the scenario, several hard
x only, this second constraint can also be formulated only
constraints on states should be considered. In this section, s
with the system states.
three types of constraints for collision avoidance are han-
The last doorframe avoiding constraint is formulated as
dled: self-collision avoidance, door collision avoidance, and
the following:
doorframe collision avoidance. These constraints are ﬁrst
≤ ≤ −
derived using kinematic relationship and organized into a P +R P P +D R (11)
Hy A y Hy w A
1240
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:56:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. converter, using a similar process as in the equation (13).
Among the series of desired position and velocity for both
the multirotor and the robotic arm’s servomotors, the ﬁrst
arrived desired setpoints are subscribed to the controller as
new setpoints. The robotic arm in the ﬂow chart contains an
inherent velocity controller, and therefore desired velocity is
depicted to be directly published to the robotic arm.
Stabilityisoneoftheinevitableandchallengingproblems
in controlling an aerial manipulator. Although the input
trajectory subscribed from MPC could be directly applied
to the ﬂight controller (FCU) for attitude control, which is
Pixhawk2inourcase,itishardtoguaranteestabilityduring
ﬂight. Consequently, we adopt a disturbance observer-based
Fig. 4: Overall control and planning structure of the aerial
robust controller implemented in [6] for position control
manipulation system.
where its stability is fully analyzed along with experimental
validations.Thiscontrollergeneratesthedesiredattitudeand
angular velocities again to the ﬂight controller by which we
∗
where su∗bscript y of y denotes the second component of can ensure the aerial manipulation’s stability.
a vector . This equation can be further organized and can
only be expressed with states as B. Experimental Setup
≤ ≤ − We use a DJI F550 multirotor frame with 2312E mo-
D sinα+R +D dW D sinα R (12)
V A w y V A tors controlled by 420Lite electronic speed controllers. The
where dW(Φ,H) = R d is the end-effector position vector robotic arm is composed of ROBOTIS dynamixel XH430
t
from the CoM of the UAM described in the frame F . series, and frames of OPEN MANIPULATOR-X. As the
W
onboard computer, Intel NUC running Robot Operating
C. Optimal Control Solver
System (ROS) in Ubuntu 16.04 executes MPC-based tra-
Based on the problem and constraints formulated in the jectory planner, DOB-based robust position controller, and
subsection IV-A and IV-B, the existing algorithm of the navigationalgorithmwithVICON.AsinFig.4,thevehicle’s
constrained version of differential dynamic programming in attitude is controlled by the onboard low-level controller in
[19] is employed to handle nonlinear dynamics with state Pixhawk2.Inaddition,toaddressarealisticscenario,adoor
constraints.Thissolvercouldgenerateanoptimizednominal with its width and height of D =1.2 m, and D =1.6 m
w h
trajectory satisfying constraints in about 30 Hz with a time isemployed.Theweightofthedoorisabout11kg,andwith
horizon of 1 second. these values, the mass moment of inertia of the door can be
≈
calculated as I 5.28 kgm2.
V. EXPERIMENTS D
Weight matrices, desired ﬁnal states and inputs for the
A. Control Framework
optimal problem are designed as
Overall control framework is illustrated in the Fig. 4. Φ,
L=Q=diag[5 5 3 9 8 0.05 0.1 0.1 0.1],
α, α˙, and H with f as their superscript denotes ﬁnal target
statesxf.SinceonlyobservablestatesfromtheUAMareP, R=diag[0.1 5 5 13.5 10 10 10 10], (14)
s −
P˙,Φ,Ω,H,andH˙,sta(cid:32)tesforthedoorhavet(cid:33)obeconverted 7π π π − π
x =[0 0 0 0 0]T
in state converter in Fig. 4 as: f 18 9 2 2
α=arctan −−PPhhxy++PPxy++ddWxWy wxandkhd+eHrαe˙O=x=f0.dxefn.otWese aseﬁtntahledinesitiiraelddsotoatrestwatheicahsisαu=sedπ/a2s
P˙x−+dWRx+d˙Wx , if α(cid:54)=nπ (13) C. Results
D sinα
α˙ = P˙ +dVW +d˙W In the experiment, an aerial manipulator pushing a cus-
y Ry y , otherwise tomized hinged door is conducted. Thanks to the capability
D cosα
V of considering the state constraints in planning trajectory,
where n ∈ Z, d˙W = R d˙, and dW = R Ωˆd. ˆ∗ is a hat the aerial manipulator successfully opens the door without
t R t
operator describing a cross product between two vectors as collision as illustrated in Fig. 1. The history of the states
×
aˆb=a b. This state conversion is based on the kinematic during the experiment is described in Fig. 5. As expected,
equation (1) and its time derivatives. thedoorangleαtendstoconvergetothedesiredﬁnalvalue,
After the MPC module receives all state information, it implying that the door is sufﬁciently opened. Furthermore,
generates state and input trajectories for certain time steps followed by the changes in the door angle α, the vehicle’s
H∆t. These trajectories are translated back into the aerial yaw motion ψ rotates accordingly. However, discrepancies
manipulation’s desired position and velocity by the state betweenthedesiredandmeasuredstates,especiallyinαand
1241
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:56:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [2] H.W.Wopereis,W.L.VanDeRidder,T.J.Lankhorst,L.Klooster,
E.M.Bukai,D.Wuthier,G.Nikolakopoulos,S.Stramigioli,J.B.En-
gelen,andM.Fumagalli,“Multimodalaeriallocomotion:Anapproach
to active tool handling,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine,
vol.25,no.4,pp.57–65,2018.
[3] S. Hamaza, I. Georgilas, M. J. Fernandez, P. J. Sanchez-Cuevas,
T. Richardson, G. Heredia, and A. Ollero, “Sensor installation and
retrieval operations using an unmanned aerial manipulator,” IEEE
RoboticsandAutomationLetters,2019.
[4] K.Alexis,G.Darivianakis,M.Burri,andR.Siegwart,“Aerialrobotic
contact-basedinspection:planningandcontrol,”AutonomousRobots,
vol.40,no.4,pp.631–655,2016.
[5] K. Bodie, M. Brunner, M. Pantic, S. Walser, P. Pfa¨ndler, U. Angst,
R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “An omnidirectional aerial manip-
ulation platform for contact-based inspection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.03502,2019.
[6] S.Kim,S.Choi,H.Kim,J.Shin,H.Shim,andH.J.Kim,“Robust
controlofanequipment-addedmultirotorusingdisturbanceobserver,”
IEEETransactionsonControlSystemsTechnology,vol.26,no.4,pp.
1524–1531,2017.
[7] M.Tognon,E.Cataldi,H.A.T.Chavez,G.Antonelli,J.Corte´s,and
A.Franchi,“Control-awaremotionplanningfortask-constrainedaerial
manipulation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 3,
pp.2478–2484,2018.
[8] M. Tognon, H. A. T. Cha´vez, E. Gasparin, Q. Sable´, D. Bicego,
A. Mallet, M. Lany, G. Santi, B. Revaz, J. Corte´s, et al., “A truly-
redundantaerialmanipulatorsystemwithapplicationtopush-and-slide
inspectioninindustrialplants,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,
vol.4,no.2,pp.1846–1851,2019.
[9] M. Orsag, C. Korpela, S. Bogdan, and P. Oh, “Dexterous aerial
robots—mobile manipulation using unmanned aerial systems,” IEEE
Fig. 5: History of the states during the door opening experi-
TransactionsonRobotics,vol.33,no.6,pp.1453–1466,2017.
ment. The black line represents measured value. The dashed [10] S.Kim,H.Seo,andH.J.Kim,“Operatinganunknowndrawerusing
red line describes the predicted state from the MPC module. an aerial manipulator,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference on
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2015,pp.5503–5508.
The green line represents the desired state of the system x .
f [11] H. Tsukagoshi, M. Watanabe, T. Hamada, D. Ashlih, and R. Iizuka,
All units on the y axis are degree. “Aerial manipulator with perching and door-opening capability,” in
2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE,2015,pp.4663–4668.
ψ, occur due to the fact that the assumption 3 happens to [12] G.Darivianakis,K.Alexis,M.Burri,andR.Siegwart,“Hybridpredic-
be violated intermittently during the experiment. Although tive control for aerial robotic physical interaction towards inspection
it is assumed that the end-effector is ﬁrmly attached to the operations,” in 2014 IEEE international conference on robotics and
automation(ICRA). IEEE,2014,pp.53–58.
door surface, uncertainty in door parameters and unmodeled
[13] M. Neunert, C. De Crousaz, F. Furrer, M. Kamel, F. Farshidian,
dynamics between the UAM and the door seem to cause a R. Siegwart, and J. Buchli, “Fast nonlinear model predictive control
fasterdoormovementwhichresultsinadetachmentbetween foruniﬁedtrajectoryoptimizationandtracking,”in2016IEEEinter-
nationalconferenceonroboticsandautomation(ICRA). IEEE,2016,
the door surface and the end-effector. Force control strategy
pp.1398–1404.
like impedance control seems to be capable of handling this [14] C.Y.Son,H.Seo,T.Kim,andH.J.Kim,“Modelpredictivecontrol
problem, and we leave it as a future work. ofamulti-rotorwithasuspendedloadforavoidingobstacles,”in2018
IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA).
VI. CONCLUSION IEEE,2018,pp.1–6.
[15] D. Jang, J. Yoo, C. Y. Son, H. J. Kim, and K. H. Johansson,
In this paper, a systematic methodology for an aerial “Networked operation of a uav using gaussian process-based delay
manipulator operating a hinged door is presented. Coupled compensation and model predictive control,” in 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2019, pp.
equationsofmotionencompassingtheaerialmanipulatorand
9216–9222.
thehingeddoorareﬁrstderivedandlatersimpliﬁedtobeap- [16] D. Lee, D. Jang, H. Seo, and H. J. Kim, “Model predictive control
plicabletoanonline-solvableoptimalcontrolproblem.State for an aerial manipulator opening a hinged door,” in 2019 19th In-
ternationalConferenceonControl,AutomationandSystems(ICCAS).
constraints guaranteeing a safe trajectory are proposed, and
IEEE,2019,p.toappear.
the formulated MPC problem is solved with a constrained [17] D.BrescianiniandR.D’Andrea,“Computationallyefﬁcienttrajectory
DDP algorithm. Generated trajectory is then tracked by a generationforfullyactuatedmultirotorvehicles,”IEEETransactions
onRobotics,vol.34,no.3,pp.555–571,2018.
DOB-basedrobustcontroller,whichprovidesstabilityduring
[18] H. Seo, D. Lee, C. Y. Son, C. J. Tomlin, and H. J. Kim, “Robust
execution. For future studies, along with the one mentioned trajectory planning for a multirotor against disturbance based on
in the subsection V-C, a robotic arm with higher degrees of hamilton-jacobireachabilityanalysis,”in2019IEEE/RSJInternational
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2019,
freedom in the end-effector is anticipated to provide better
p.toappear.
maneuverability while in interaction. [19] B. Plancher, Z. Manchester, and S. Kuindersma, “Constrained un-
scented dynamic programming,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International
REFERENCES ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2017,
pp.5674–5680.
[1] F. Ruggiero, V. Lippiello, and A. Ollero, “Aerial manipulation: A
literaturereview,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.3,no.3,
pp.1957–1964,2018.
1242
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:56:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 