2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Minimal Work: A Grasp Quality Metric for Deformable Hollow Objects
Jingyi Xu1,2, Michael Danielczuk1, Jeffrey Ichnowski1, Jeffrey Mahler1, Eckehard Steinbach2, Ken Goldberg1
Abstract—Robotgraspingofdeformablehollowobjectssuch
as plastic bottles and cups is challenging, as the grasp should
resist disturbances while minimally deforming the object so
as not to damage it or dislodge liquids. We propose minimal
work as a novel grasp quality metric that combines wrench
resistance and object deformation. We introduce an efﬁcient
algorithm to compute the work required to resist an external
wrench for a manipulation task by solving a linear program.
Thealgorithmﬁrstcomputestheminimumrequiredgraspforce
and an estimation of the gripper jaw displacements based on
the object’s empirical stiffness at different locations. The work
done by the jaws is the product of the grasp force and the Fig. 1: Plastic cup example. Left: stiffness of cup, blue
displacements. Grasps requiring minimal work are considered indicates high stiffness and red indicates low stiffness. Intu-
to be of high quality. We collect 460 physical grasps with a
itively, the cup is stiffer near the rim and bottom, where the
UR5 robot and a Robotiq gripper. We consider a grasp to be
shape provides reinforcement. Middle: three planned grasps,
successful if it completes the task without damaging the object
ordislodgingthecontent.Physicalexperimentssuggestthatthe shownascylindersrepresentingthegraspaxisforaparallel-
minimalworkqualitymetricreaches74.2%balancedaccuracy, jaw gripper, where green indicates high quality and red
a metric that is the raw accuracy normalized by the number indicates low quality according to the minimal work metric.
of successful and failed real-world grasps, and is up to 24.2%
Right: execution of the highest quality grasp according to
higher than classical wrench-based quality metrics.
the minimal work grasp metric with a Robotiq gripper.
I. INTRODUCTION
Forrigidobjects,wrench-basedqualitymetrics[8,16]are
rigid. We use the Robust Efﬁcient Area Contact Hypothesis
widely used to optimize grasp placements and to estimate
(REACH) model [6] to estimate the contact area and the
grasp success [11, 25], since they quantify grasps and are
pressure distribution and model the friction wrenches of
suitable for both general and task-oriented grasps. However,
the non-planar area contacts with a 6D ellipsoidal limit
grasping deformable objects is more challenging. In addi-
surface[33].Weformulateanoptimizationproblemtosolve
tion to resisting external disturbances, grasps should also
for the minimum grasp force subject to the contact friction
minimize the deformation of the object to avoid damage or
wrench constraints. The jaws’ displacements are approxi-
dislodging liquids, for instance, when grasping plastic cups
mated as the object’s deformation when using the computed
and bottles. Existing grasp planning for deformable objects
minimalgraspforce.Theproductofthesedisplacementsand
focuses on either holding planar deformable objects [9, 12,
the minimum grasp force is the minimal work necessary to
26] or lifting 3D objects with a pre-selected grasp place-
resist the external wrench.
ment [18, 34]. The former papers do not consider gravity, as
This paper provides the following contributions:
theyoperateintheplane,whilethelatterdonotincorporatea
quality metric for comparison to other grasp placements and 1) A novel minimal work grasp quality metric for 3D
cannot be applied to other tasks besides lifting the object. deformable hollow objects that considers both grasp
We propose the minimal work quality metric, a novel wrench resistance and object deformation.
quality metric that considers both task-speciﬁc wrench re- 2) An efﬁcient algorithm to compute the minimal work
sistance and object deformation. Figure 1 shows an example quality metric for a task-speciﬁc 6D external wrench
ofplannedgraspsforaplasticcupwiththeproposedmetric. by solving a linear program.
To compute the quality of a grasp, we decouple the wrench 3) Physical experiments that suggest predicting grasp
analysis and object deformation computation so that the success with the minimal work quality metric leads
grasp quality can be efﬁciently computed without using to74.2%balancedaccuracy,24.2%and12.7%higher
Finite Element Method (FEM) simulation or repeatedly de- than when predicting with the grasp wrench resistance
termining wrench resistance. We ﬁrst estimate the minimum metric and the minimal force metric, respectively.
grasp force required to resist a speciﬁed external wrench
without considering deformation by assuming the object is II. RELATEDWORK
Wesummarizerelatedworkinwrench-basedgraspquality
1The AUTOLAB at UC Berkeley, CA, USA. 2Technical University of
metrics for rigid objects and grasp planning for deformable
Munich,ChairofMediaTechnology,Germany.Email:{jingyixu,mdaniel-
czuk,jefﬁ,jmahler,goldberg}@berkeley.edu,eckehard.steinbach@tum.de objects.Excellentsurveysforcontactmodelingcanbefound
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1546
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. in [2, 13, 27, 31], for grasp quality metrics in [28], and for the gravity is not considered and a point contact model is
deformable object manipulation in [29]. used for friction analysis. Lin et al. [17, 18] addressed the
problem of lifting a deformable object based on an object
A. Grasping Rigid Objects
mesh model and jaw positions. An FEM formulation com-
A common grasp quality metric, force closure [24], eval- putestheobjectdeformationbasedonthejawdisplacements.
uates a grasp by whether it can resist any external 6D The object will be lifted if the majority of the contact
disturbancewrenchwithanarbitrarilylargegraspforce.The points are sticking. Similarly, Zaidi et al. [34] used FEM
volume of the grasp wrench space (GWS) [16] and the ǫ- simulations to manipulate objects with large deformations,
metric [8] are also widely used to quantify grasp quality. such as objects made of foam or rubber. Alt et al. [1]
While the volume reﬂects the quality of the entire grasp, also used FEM simulations and heuristics to plan grasps for
the ǫ-metric identiﬁes the weakest point of a grasp, as ǫ is deformable hollow objects.
the shortest distance between the origin and any facet of Inspired by [9] and [12], the proposed minimal work
the GWS. The GWS used to evaluate grasps is typically quality metric optimizes grasp placements to manipulate
constructed with a bounded sum-magnitude of grasp forces 3D deformable hollow objects. Furthermore, the metric is
for computational efﬁciency. Krug et al. [14] suggest that suitable for tasks that can be modeled as target wrenches to
such a construction is over-conservative for fully actuated be resisted.
grippers, as the force of each jaw is limited independently.
Task-orientedgraspqualitymetricsarewell-suitedforspe- III. PROBLEMSTATEMENT
ciﬁc tasks with known external disturbances. A task wrench
We consider the problem of grasp planning and grasp
space (TWS) describes expected disturbance wrenches dur-
success prediction for 3D deformable hollow objects with
ing the manipulation and is typically modeled as the set
compliant jaw pads based on the ability of a grasp to resist
of all possible wrenches that will be imposed on an object
target wrenches and the deformability of the object at the
during a task [3, 25], or a 6D ellipsoid [16]. The quality
grasp location.
of a grasp is the maximum scale of the TWS such that it
remains within the GWS [16]. In contrast, the grasp quality
A. Assumptions
can also be measured with the minimal force required for a
task [10] or minimal coefﬁcient of friction [11]. Boyd and We make the following assumptions:
Wegbreit[4]efﬁcientlycomputedtheminimalgraspforceby 1) Quasi-static analysis and Coulomb friction with a
formulating a semideﬁnite programming problem. Lin and known coefﬁcient of friction.
Yu [19] observed that some disturbance wrenches happen 2) The geometry and the stiffness are known for the
more often than others during task execution and selected objects to be grasped.
the grasp whose corresponding GWS covers most frequent 3) Alinearelasticmodel(linearstiffness)ofsoftjawpads
disturbances. They extend their analysis to select the grasp and objects.
which additionally minimizes the required motion effort of 4) Object’s local deformation is small such that the con-
the end effector to fulﬁll a certain task [20]. tact proﬁle remains unchanged during the grasp.
B. Grasping Deformable Objects
B. Notation
Manipulating deformable objects has been an active area,
with applications such as food handling [21], fabric manip- • w ∈ R6: a contact wrench, consisting of a 3D force
and a 3D torque.
ulation [15, 30], and elastic rod manipulation [5]. When
a frictionless grasp immobilizes a rigid object, it is de- • Ci: the constraint set that limits the maximum possible
frictionwrenchandthewrenchimpressedbythenormal
ﬁned as form closure. Gopalakrishnan and Goldberg [9]
pressure of the i-th contact.
generalized this concept to holding deformable objects with
frictionless contacts, where a grasp is deﬁned as deform • W: the work performed by the gripper jaws
closure when positive work is required to release the object. • t∈R6: a target wrench to be resisted by a grasp
Wakamatsu et al. [32] introduced the bounded force closure
C. Metrics
metrictograspdeformableobjects,whichguaranteesaforce
closure grasp under a maximal allowable external force. We consider a grasp to be successful if it completes the
Delgado et al. [7] reduced object deformation for a holding manipulationtaskwithoutdamagingtheobjectordislodging
taskbycomputingthemaximumallowedforcetobeexerted contents and to be failed otherwise. The predicted grasp
on an object. Jia et al. [12] proposed a grasping strategy to success is binary and evaluates to 1 if the metric is higher
squeezedeformableplanarobjectsbasedonworkperformed than a threshold. We use balanced accuracy to evaluate the
by the jaws. When two jaws squeeze and immobilize an predictions made by a given metric by comparing them with
object,andathirdjawtriestobreakthegraspbypushingthe real-worldgraspsuccesslabels.Balancedaccuracyissuitable
object,thestrategyselectsthetranslationsofthetwopushing for imbalanced datasets and is computed by weighting each
jaws that minimize the required work to balance the object. sample with the inverse prevalence of its true class when
Since the metric targets planar objects, the 3D geometry or ﬁnding accuracy.
1547
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. IV. MINIMALWORKGRASPQUALITYMETRIC
To evaluate a grasp candidate, we compute the minimal
workofthegripperjawsrequiredtocompleteamanipulation
task. We ﬁrst model the frictional contacts and compute the
minimal grasp force by solving a linear program (LP). We
then estimate the object deformation based on the force and
object stiffness at the contact locations. The work of each
gripper jaw is the product of the grasp force and the jaw
displacement. The sum of the work of each jaw forms the
work of the grasp.
Theproposedalgorithmtocomputetheminimalworkcan Fig. 2: Contact proﬁle with an enlarged view obtained by
use different contact models and object stiffness acquisition the Robust Efﬁcient Area Contact Hypothesis (REACH)
methods.WeusetheREACHmodel[6]toobtainthecontact model [6]. The contact area consists of triangles and the
proﬁle and a 6D ellipsoidal limit surface [33] to model the redder colors represent higher pressure due to larger defor-
maximal friction wrench thatcan be applied at each contact. mation of the soft jaw pad at that point.
Thestiffnessiscollectedempiricallybygraspingeachobject
at a set of locations with a physical robot. Details can be
found in Sections V and VI-A. A. REACH: Contact Proﬁle
For a grasp with N contacts, we denote G ∈ R6×6N as
Danielczuk et al. [6] proposed the Robust Efﬁcient Area
the grasp matrix, w ∈R6 as the wrench applied at the i-th
i
contact, and F =[F ,...,F ]T as a vector of grasp forces, Contact Hypothesis (REACH) model for contact proﬁle
1 N
estimation between soft jaw pads and rigid objects. Given
where F is the grasp force at the i-th contact. The minimal
i
an object’s geometry modeled as a triangular mesh, the
required grasp force to resist a target wrench t is:
contact area is computed as the constructive solid geometry
min F •1N intersection of the extruded polygon of the jaw with the
F,w1,...,wN
object. The intersection estimates the deformation of the
 
w
1 soft pad around the object at each point on the contact
subject to G ... =−t, (1) and the pressure distribution linearly scales with the gripper
  pad deformation. The REACH model thus provides the
w
N
contactarea,consistingofatriangularmesh,andthepressure
w ∈C ,∀i∈{1,...,N}.
i i distribution over each triangle of the contact area mesh, as
Denoting di as the displacement of the i-th jaw and si illustrated in Figure 2.
as the object stiffness at the i-th contact, the work W is We use the REACH model to estimate the proﬁle for
computed based on Hooke’s law: contact between compliant jaw pads and deformable hollow
N objects due to its computational efﬁciency compared to the
F
W =XFi•di, with di = si +ǫ, (2) Finite Element Method. We note that the obtained contact
i=1 i proﬁles may not be accurate for objects with low stiffness
whereǫisasmallpositivenumber,whichallowstheminimal since the model assumes that the deformation is small such
work quality metric to also apply to rigid objects or objects that the contact proﬁle remains constant during the grasp.
containing a rigid part. In this case, the displacement d is
i
B. 6D Ellipsoidal Limit Surface
equaltoǫandtheminimalworkgraspqualitymetricreduces
to the minimal force metric. Grasps with compliant jaws may result in a non-planar
Denoting W as the maximal work, we compute the contactarea,wherethefrictionwrenchappliedatthecontact
max
minimal work grasp quality qw with: is six-dimensional (6D). This work uses the 6D ellipsoid
W proposed in [33] as the limit surface model to represent the
q =1− . (3)
w W constraintsonthefrictionwrenchthatcanbeappliedateach
max
contact. Note that other friction models are applicable to the
W is for normalization and is selected based on the
max
proposed work computation algorithm as well.
collected data.
We brieﬂy summarize the algorithm to determine the 6D
V. ALGORITHM ellipsoid and the friction constraints. For a given contact
To compute the minimal required grasp force, classical area and pressure distribution, possible friction wrenches
wrench-based grasp analysis algorithms ﬁrst model the pos- are obtained by sampling the instantaneous relative motion,
sible friction and normal wrenches for each contact and deﬁned as body twist in screw theory [23]. The direction of
then estimate the total wrench that a grasp can exert on an frictional force of each triangle is obtained by projecting the
object [4]. This wrench estimation highly depends on the velocity onto the triangle plane, while the magnitude is the
contact proﬁles. We ﬁrst describe the method used in this product of the coefﬁcient of friction and the normal force
work to estimate contact area and pressure distribution. applied at the triangle. The frictional torque is computed
1548
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. with respect to the friction-weighted center of pressure. By
summing up the friction contributions of each triangle, we
obtain a friction wrench of the contact for each sampled
twist.
Wethenﬁtthesampledfrictionwrenchestoa6Dellipsoid
by solving a convex optimization problem. Given the ellip-
soid matrix A ∈ R6×6, possible friction wrenches w ∈ R6
of the contact are constrained by:
wTAw ≤1. (4)
Fig. 3: Robotiq gripper repeatability test. The repeatability
For computational efﬁciency, we determine the linearized is high at poses 4 and 5, where the object is rigid and wide,
constraintsC ofthei-thcontactbyevenlysamplingthesur- but lower at poses 1-3, where the object is more deformable
i
face of the corresponding ellipsoid at M points p∈R6×M. and narrower.
Each point and its outward normal form a hyperplane.
Denoting w⊥ ∈R6 as the wrench impressed by the normal
i
pressure and n as the normals of the ellipsoid represented An object with an open lid is grasped at ﬁve locations,
i
byA atthepointsp ,thefrictionwrenchofthei-thcontact each with different stiffness. Figure 3 shows the mean and
i i
is constrained to the interior of the M hyperplanes: standard deviation of the gripper opening at each grasp
location with different closing speeds ranging from 0 to
Ci ={wi ∈R6 | ni•(cid:0)wi−w⊥i (cid:1)≤ni•pi}, (5) 255, where 0 is the lowest speed. Although the absolute
with n =A p .
i i i gripperopeningandthecollectedobject’sstiffnessmeasure-
We compute the minimal grasp force required to resist the ments may not be highly accurate, the relative stiffness is
target wrench t by substituting Equation (5) into (1). reasonable, allowing for accurate comparison between grasp
qualities when computing optimal grasp placements.
VI. EXPERIMENTSANDRESULTS
B. Baseline Metrics
We describe the object’s stiffness acquisition required to
computework.Wefurthershowplannedgraspsinsimulation We compare the proposed minimal work grasp quality
and physicalgrasp predictionresults with theproposed min- metric with two baseline metrics.
imal work quality metric compared to two baseline metrics. 1) Graspreliabilitymetric qr: Wedeﬁne abinaryreward
R that describes the predicted grasp success. R = 1 if the
A. Acquisition of Object Stiffness grasp is able to resist the target wrench t ∈ R6 without
We estimate the object’s stiffness using its 3D mesh exceeding the maximum closing force and R=0 otherwise.
and physical experiments. One can use the Finite Element The metric addresses uncertainties in actuation by using
Analysis to compute the object’s deformation with a closing Monte-Carlo sampling over the grasp pose similar to Dex-
forceofthegripper.However,thestiffnessofhollowobjects Net 1.0 [22]. More speciﬁcally, we add isotropic Gaussian
such as plastic bottles and cups highly depends on the wall uncertainty in gripper translation and rotation, resulting in
thickness,thegeometry,andmaterialoftheobject,whichare K perturbations for each grasp pose. The grasp quality q
r
non-trivialtosimulate.Therefore,weuseaphysicalrobotto of the pose is the average reward over the K perturbations:
collect object’s stiffness at different locations in this work.
K
1
We estimate the object’s stiffness based on 1) a known q = XR .
gripper closing force F , 2) the gripper opening L when r K k
c s k=1
it ﬁrst makes contact with the object, and 3) the gripper
2) Minimal force metric q : The grasp quality is the
opening L when F is reached. We ﬁrst plan antipodal f
e c averaged minimal required grasp force F to resist t given
grasps in simulation for each object. The minimal distance
the maximal force limit F :
between the 3D object mesh and the gripper jaw along the max
grasp axis provides an estimation of L . F
s q =1− ,
Ateachplannedgrasplocation,theRobotiq2F-85gripper f Fmax
closeswithaminimalpossibleforceFc =20N.Theobject’s where Fmax is determined experimentally.
stiffness s at the location i, the intersection point of the
i
grasp axis and the object surface is s = F /(L −L ). C. Grasp Planning in Simulation
i c s,i e,i
We repeat each grasp 5 times and select the median of the We plan grasps on ﬁve objects based on their 3D meshes
collected gripper opening after reaching F as L . and the interpolated stiffness maps, as shown in Figure 4(a)
c e,i
We note that the actual grasp force of the Robotiq gripper and (b), where two objects are 3D printed using NinjaFlex
depends on the object’s material and the gripper closing TPU ﬂexible ﬁlament to provide diversity in object shape
speed, so we measure the repeatability of the deformation and material. Note that some inaccuracies of the measured
measurements by varying the gripper closing speed for a set stiffness exist, such as the rigid cap of the object 1 and the
of grasps. neck of object 2.
1549
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. soft hard Reliability Min. Force Min. Work Reliability Min. Force Min. Work
1
2
3
4
5
(a) (b) (c) A lifting task  (d) A lifting and rotation task 
Fig.4:Plannedgraspsforﬁvephysicalobjectswiththreemetrics:graspreliability,minimalforce,andtheproposedminimal
work. Objects 2 and 4 are 3D printed using NinjaFlex TPU ﬂexible ﬁlament. (a) The ﬁve objects used in simulated and
physicalexperiments.(b)Theinterpolatedstiffnessmapforeachobject,whereredislowstiffnessandblueishighstiffness.
(c-d) The planned grasps for a lifting task and a lifting and 90◦ rotation task, respectively. Each colored line represents a
graspaxisfortheparallel-jawgripper,andthecolorindicatesqualityaccordingtothegivenmetric.Redindicateslowquality,
while green is high quality. While the grasp reliability and the minimal force metrics only consider wrench resistance, the
proposed minimal work metric computes grasps that resist gravitational disturbances without causing large deformations.
We sample antipodal grasp candidates and compute grasp among all object poses is selected as the value for each
quality for 1) vertical lifting and 2) lifting and 90◦ rotation metric. The colored lines represent the grasp axes; green
tasks. Three quality metrics are compared: grasp reliability, indicates high quality under the given metric, while red
minimal force, and the proposed minimal work, as shown indicates low quality. Figure 4 suggests that the planned
in Figure 4(c) and (d). We model the two tasks with a 6D graspsusingtheproposedminimalworkqualitymetricavoid
gravity wrench to be resisted under one and three object causing large deformations of the object while resisting the
poses obtained by discretizing the manipulation trajectory, gravitational disturbances of the manipulation tasks.
respectively, since the gravity wrench remains the same for
the vertical lifting task. The lowest quality value of a grasp
1550
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. True Positive True Negative False Positive False Negative TABLE I: Balanced accuracy of three quality metrics: grasp
reliability q , minimal force q , and the proposed minimal
r f
work q .
w
Verticallifting Liftingand90◦ rotation
Object
qr qf qw qr qf qw
1 0.500 0.767 0.833 0.575 0.785 0.875
3 0.500 0.687 0.851 0.516 0.714 0.813
5 0.500 0.392 0.542 0.680 0.630 0.450
All 0.500 0.615 0.742 0.590 0.710 0.713
Fig. 5: Examples of grasp quality predictions with the mini-
mal work quality metric. A grasp is considered successful
VII. DISCUSSIONANDFUTUREWORK
if the manipulation task succeeded while the content is
not dislodged and the object returns to its original shape Thispaperproposesaminimalworkqualitymetrictoplan
after grasping. An inﬂated balloon suggests liquids in the grasps for 3D deformable hollow objects. We evaluate the
container might have been dislodged. proposed metric with real-world grasps for a vertical lifting
and for a lifting and 90◦ rotation task. Physical experiments
suggest that 74.2% and 71.3% balanced accuracy can be
D. Physical Experiments achieved for the two tasks, respectively, up to 24.2% higher
than classical wrench-based quality metrics.
We evaluate the planned grasps for three representative
objects(objects1,3,and5)withphysicalexperimentsforthe A. Limitations
twomanipulationtasks.Weselect46graspposesintotalfor
We note that the proposed method may not perform well
the three objects that cover different regions of each object.
for objects having large deformations due to the linear
Each grasp is repeated ﬁve times for each task, resulting in
stiffness assumption and the simpliﬁed model to acquire
460 total grasps. We consider a grasp to be successful if 1)
contactproﬁles.Toaddressthis,onecansimulatethecontact
the task is completed, 2) the object returns to its original
with the Finite Element Method and ﬁt a strain-stress curve
shape when the grasp force is released, and 3) the content is
for each grasp location by applying different loads. The
not dislodged during the grasp.
algorithms then use the obtained pressure distribution and
Weﬁlledtheobjectswithwettowelstosimulatethemass
the deformed object shape to compute the grasp quality.
of the object ﬁlled with liquid without changing the object’s
Furthermore, one reason for predicted false positives is
stiffness or damaging the electrical devices. Object 1 and 3
that the actual minimal grasp force of the Robotiq gripper is
are sealed with a balloon to infer the content spillage. By
higher than speciﬁed in the planned grasps. This issue can
measuring the balloon’s inﬂation before and after the grasp,
be addressed by mounting force sensors on the gripper to
the content is considered spilled if the inﬂation difference is
execute grasps with the desired grasp force.
larger than a threshold.
We use balanced accuracy, or the accuracy weighted by B. Future Work
the number of successful and failed grasps in the collected Wenotethattheminimalworkgraspqualitymetricisalso
data,toevaluatethepredictionaccuracy.Eachmetric’sgrasp applicable to grasps on rigid objects with compliant gripper
quality prediction is binarized by thresholding the quality at jaws. We intend to further investigate this duality and plan
a threshold σ = 0.5. Table I shows the balanced accuracy grasps for both rigid and deformable objects.
of the three grasp quality metrics for the two manipulation
tasks and Figure 5 shows examples of correct and incorrect VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
predictions for the planned minimal work grasps. The pro- ThisresearchwasperformedattheAUTOLABatUCBerkeleyinafﬁlia-
tionwiththeBerkeleyAIResearch(BAIR)Lab.Theauthorsweresupported
posed metric reaches 74.2% and 71.3% balanced accuracy,
in part by the NSF National Robotics Initiative Award 1734633, National
respectively, for the two tasks, up to 24.2% higher than the Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant
graspreliabilityandtheminimalforcemetrics.However,we No.1752814,andbydonationsfromGoogle,Siemens,AmazonRobotics,
Toyota Research Institute, Autodesk, ABB, Samsung, Knapp, Loccioni,
notethatthebalancedaccuracyfortheminimalworkquality
Honda, Intel, Comcast, Cisco, Hewlett-Packard and by equipment grants
metricisrelativelylowforobject5(aplasticcup)compared from PhotoNeo and NVIDIA. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions
to other objects. This suggests that the proposed algorithm or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Sponsors. We thank our
for minimal work computation may not perform well for
colleaguesProf.GraceGuandKahramanDemirfor3Dprinting,andwho
objects with large deformations. Furthermore, the minimum helped with experiments and provided helpful feedback and suggestions,
graspforcewiththeRobotiqGrippercanbemuchlargerthan especially William Wong, Priya Sundaresan, Harry Zhang, Jackson Chui,
KateSanders.
the planned force and can cause large object deformations
and false positives.
1551
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [24] V.-D. Nguyen, “Constructing force-closure grasps”, Int. Journal of
[1] N. Alt, J. Xu, and E. Steinbach, “Grasp planning for thin-walled RoboticsResearch(IJRR),vol.7,no.3,pp.3–16,1988.
deformableobjects”,inRoboticHands,Grasping,andManipulation [25] N.S.Pollard,“Parallelmethodsforsynthesizingwhole-handgrasps
(ICRAWorkshop),2015. fromgeneralizedprototypes”,MassachusettsInstitutionofTechnol-
[2] A.BicchiandV.Kumar,“Roboticgraspingandcontact:Areview”, ogy,CambridgeArtiﬁcialIntelligenceLab,Tech.Rep.,1994.
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA), vol. 1, [26] I.G.Ramirez-Alpizar,M.Higashimori,M.Kaneko,C.-H.D.Tsai,
2000,pp.348–353. andI.Kao,“Dynamicnonprehensilemanipulationforrotatingathin
[3] C. Borst, M. Fischer, and G. Hirzinger, “Grasp planning: How to deformableobject:Ananalogytobipedalgaits”,IEEETransactions
choose a suitable task wrench space”, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. onRobotics,vol.28,no.3,pp.607–618,2012.
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),vol.1,2004,pp.319–325. [27] E. Rimon and J. Burdick, The Mechanics of Robot Grasping.
[4] S. P. Boyd and B. Wegbreit, “Fast computation of optimal contact CambridgeUniversityPress,2019.
forces”, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1117– [28] M. A. Roa and R. Sua´rez, “Grasp quality measures: Review and
1132,Dec.2007. performance”,Autonomousrobots,vol.38,no.1,pp.65–88,2015.
[5] T.BretlandZ.McCarthy,“Quasi-staticmanipulationofakirchhoff [29] J. Sanchez, J.-A. Corrales, B.-C. Bouzgarrou, and Y. Mezouar,
elastic rod based on a geometric analysis of equilibrium conﬁgu- “Roboticmanipulationandsensingofdeformableobjectsindomes-
rations”, Int. Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), vol. 33, no. 1, tic and industrial applications: A survey”, Int. Journal of Robotics
pp.48–68,2014. Research(IJRR),vol.37,no.7,pp.688–716,2018.
[6] M. Danielczuk, J. Xu, J. Mahler, M. Matl, N. Chentanez, and K. [30] D. Seita, N. Jamali, M. Laskey, R. Berenstein, A. K. Tanwani,
Goldberg,“Reach:Reducingfalsenegativesinrobotgraspplanning P. Baskaran, S. Iba, J. Canny, and K. Goldberg, “Deep Transfer
with a robust efﬁcient area contact hypothesis model”, in Int. S. Learning of Pick Points on Fabric for Robot Bed-Making”, in
RoboticsResearch(ISRR),2019. InternationalSymposiumonRoboticsResearch(ISRR),2019.
[7] A. Delgado, C. A. Jara, D. Mira, and F. Torres, “A tactile- [31] B.SicilianoandO.Khatib,Springerhandbookofrobotics.Springer,
based grasping strategy for deformable objects’ manipulation and 2016.
deformability estimation”, in IEEE International Conference on [32] H.Wakamatsu,S.Hirai,andK.Iwata,“Staticanalysisofdeformable
InformaticsinControl,AutomationandRobotics(ICINCO),vol.2, objectgraspingbasedonboundedforceclosure”,inProc.IEEEInt.
2015,pp.369–374. Conf.RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),vol.4,1996,pp.3324–3329.
[8] C.FerrariandJ.Canny,“Planningoptimalgrasps”,inProc.IEEE [33] J. Xu, T. Aykut, D. Ma, and E. Steinbach, “6dls: Modeling non-
Int.Conf.RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),1992. planar frictional surface contacts for grasping using 6d limit sur-
[9] K.GopalakrishnanandK.Goldberg,“D-spaceanddeformclosure faces”, in https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.06885.pdf,
grasps of deformable parts”, Int. Journal of Robotics Research UnderReview,2018.
(IJRR),vol.24,no.11,pp.899–910,2005. [34] L. Zaidi, J. A. Corrales, B. C. Bouzgarrou, Y. Mezouar, and L.
[10] A.M.HowardandG.A.Bekey,“Intelligentlearningfordeformable Sabourin,“Model-basedstrategyforgrasping3ddeformableobjects
objectmanipulation”,AutonomousRobots,vol.9,no.1,pp.51–58, using a multi-ﬁngered robotic hand”, Robotics and Autonomous
2000. Systems,vol.95,pp.196–206,2017.
[11] J.Jameson,“Analytictechniquesforautomatedgrasps”,PhDthesis,
1985.
[12] Y.-B.Jia,F.Guo,andH.Lin,“Graspingdeformableplanarobjects:
Squeeze, stick/slip analysis, and energy-based optimalities”, Int.
Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 866–897,
2014.
[13] I. Kao, K. Lynch, and J. W. Burdick, “Contact modeling and
manipulation”,inSpringerHandbookofRobotics,Springer,2008.
[14] R. Krug, Y. Bekiroglu, and M. A. Roa, “Grasp quality evaluation
doneright:Howassumedcontactforceboundsaffectwrench-based
qualitymetrics”,inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.RoboticsandAutomation
(ICRA),2017,pp.1595–1600.
[15] Y. Li, Y. Yue, D. Xu, E. Grinspun, and P. K. Allen, “Folding
deformable objects using predictive simulation and trajectory op-
timization”,inProc.IEEE/RSJInt.Conf.onIntelligentRobotsand
Systems(IROS),2015,pp.6000–6006.
[16] Z. Li and S. S. Sastry, “Task-oriented optimal grasping by multi-
ﬁngered robot hands”, IEEE Journal on Robotics and Automation,
vol.4,no.1,pp.32–44,1988.
[17] H.Lin,F.Guo,F.Wang,andY.-B.Jia,“Pickingupsoft3dobjects
withtwoﬁngers”,inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.RoboticsandAutomation
(ICRA),2014,pp.3656–3661.
[18] ——,“Pickingupasoft3dobjectby“feeling”thegrip”,Int.Journal
ofRoboticsResearch(IJRR),vol.34,no.11,pp.1361–1384,2015.
[19] Y.LinandY.Sun,“Graspplanningtomaximizetaskcoverage”,Int.
JournalofRoboticsResearch(IJRR),vol.34,no.9,pp.1195–1210,
2015.
[20] ——, “Task-based grasp quality measures for grasp synthesis”, in
Proc.IEEE/RSJInt.Conf.onIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),
2015,pp.485–490.
[21] P.Long,W.Khalil,andP.Martinet,“Force/visioncontrolforrobotic
cuttingofsoftmaterials”,inProc.IEEE/RSJInt.Conf.onIntelligent
RobotsandSystems(IROS),2014,pp.4716–4721.
[22] J. Mahler, F. T. Pokorny, B. Hou, M. Roderick, M. Laskey, M.
Aubry,K.Kohlhoff,T.Kro¨ger,J.Kuffner,andK.Goldberg,“Dex-
net 1.0: A cloud-based network of 3d objects for robust grasp
planningusingamulti-armedbanditmodelwithcorrelatedrewards”,
inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2016.
[23] R.M.Murray,Z.Li,andS.S.Sastry,Amathematicalintroduction
toroboticmanipulation.CRCpress.
1552
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 