2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Calibrating a Soft ERT-Based Tactile Sensor
with a Multiphysics Model and Sim-to-real Transfer Learning
Hyosang Lee1, Hyunkyu Park1,2, Gokhan Serhat1, Huanbo Sun3, and Katherine J. Kuchenbecker1
Abstract—Tactile sensors based on electrical resistance to-
(a)
mography (ERT) have shown many advantages for imple-
Force
menting a soft and scalable whole-body robotic skin; however,
calibration is challenging because pressure reconstruction is
an ill-posed inverse problem. This paper introduces a method Soft layer
for calibrating soft ERT-based tactile sensors using sim-to-real
tmraondseflerislecaormnpinogsewditohfathﬁrneietesiemlepmleenmtomduelltsipthhyastictsogmetohdeerl.mTahpe Piezoresistive layVer V3
contact pressure distributions to voltage measurements. We Electrodes V 2
optimizedthemodelparameterstoreducethegapbetweenthe Resistance changes I 1 Voltages
simulation and reality. As a preliminary study, we discretized Current
the sensing points into a 6 by 6 grid and synthesized single- (b)
Multiphysics model
andtwo-pointcontactdatasetsfromthemultiphysicsmodel.We
obtainedanothersingle-pointdatasetusingtherealsensorwith Real Simulated cEonledcutrcictiavilt y Piezoresistive Deformation Force
thesamecontactlocationandforceusedinthesimulation.Our voltages voltages model model model
newdeepneuralnetworkarchitectureusesade-noisingnetwork Real-to-sim mapping Inverse function learning
to capture the simulation-to-real gap and a reconstruction
network to estimate contact force from voltage measurements. Fig.1. (a)AnillustrationofthemultiphysicsmodelofoursoftERT-based
The proposed approach showed 82% hit rate for localization tactilesensorcontainingasoftlayerthatlaysontopofapiezoresistivelayer
and 0.51 N of force estimation error performance in single- and(b)ablockdiagramshowingtheproposedcalibrationframework.
contact tests and 78.5% hit rate for localization and 5.0 N of
electrodes are used to inject electrical current and to mea-
force estimation error in two-point contact tests. We believe
sure the corresponding voltages formed around the current
this new calibration method has the possibility to improve the
sensing performance of ERT-based tactile sensors. pathway. An analytic conductivity model is typically used
to calculate the resistance distribution from the applied elec-
trical currents and corresponding measured voltages. This
I. INTRODUCTION
computationalreconstructiontechniquehelpssimplifysensor
Whole-body tactile sensors have received increasing at- fabrication [6] and enhance sensor robustness [10].
tention because people want to use autonomous robots in However, reconstructing the resistance distribution from
unstructured environments where physical contact can occur a set of observed boundary voltage measurements is an
at any location [1]. A biological skin-like compliance is ill-posed inverse problem [11]. Small errors in the voltage
beneﬁcial to whole-body tactile sensors for many reasons measurements can signiﬁcantly distort the reconstructed re-
including seamlessly covering complex geometries, absorb- sistance distribution. Moreover, the sensitivity of the recon-
ing external impacts, and conforming to the contact surface struction varies spatially [12]. Data-driven approaches have
[2].Nevertheless,creatingsoftandscalabletactilesensorsis been actively adopted to improve the reconstruction perfor-
stillchallengingbecausedeployingalargenumberofsensing mance of ERT-based tactile sensors by taking their intrin-
elements requires robust, easy-to-manufacture, and reliable sic nonlinear behavior into account [13], [14]. Speciﬁcally,
electrical connections across a compliant substrate [3]. Martin and Choi [13] pursued a sim-to-real approach by
Electrical resistance tomography (ERT) has shown many using an electrical conductivity model to synthesize voltage
practical advantages for developing soft and scalable tactile data from randomized conductivity distributions. Similarly,
sensors[4]–[9].TheERTmethodreconstructsthecontinuous Park et al. [14] improved the spatial resolution of an ERT-
resistance distribution of an area surrounded by a relatively based tactile sensor using data from electrical conductivity
small number of electrodes. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), these simulation.Theytrainedadeepneuralnetwork(DNN)using
conductivity domain randomization and showed a general-
ized framework for improving the spatial resolution with
1HyosangLee,HyunkyuPark,GokhanSerhat,andKatherineJ.Kuchen-
becker are with the Haptic Intelligence Department, Max Planck Institute which contacts can be detected.
{
forIntelligentSyst}ems,70569Stuttgart,Germany hslee, hkpark, InordertopracticallyuseERT-basedtactilesensorsinreal
serhat, kjk @is.mpg.de
applications, the reconstructed resistance distribution should
2HyunkyuParkisalsowiththeDepartmentofMechanicalEngineering,
KoreaAdvancedInstituteofScienceandTechnology,34141Daejeon,South be calibrated to contact pressures. One possible approach
Koreahkpark93@kaist.ac.kr is constructing an end-to-end mapping using indentation
3Huanbo Sun is with the Autonomous Learning Group, Max
data[15],[16].However,obtainingawell-generalizedneural
Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 72076 Tu¨bingen, Germany
huanbo.sun@tuebingen.mpg.de network is difﬁcult in practice because acquiring sufﬁcient
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1632
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. real data requires an excessive amount of time. Another ap- (a) Neoprene foam
proachreliesonusingsupervisedlearningtomapthesensor Adhesive
Low-resistance 
signal to the imposed physical stimulation [17], [18]. Such
fabric (R ) patches
sim-to-real transfer techniques have been widely adopted Low
High-resistance
to resolve the data deﬁciency problem in many robotics fabric (R )
High
applications, e.g., [19]–[21]. Electrodes
We hypothesize that a multiphysics model of an ERT- Insulating fabric
based tactile sensor can resolve this data deﬁciency problem (b) Pressure
Contact
becausevariousconditionsthatcannotbeeasilytestedinthe resistance
realworldcanbeextensivelyexploredinsimulation.Thispa- R (R )
Low Cont.
perteststhathypothesisbyintroducingamethodforcalibrat-
ingsoftERT-basedtactilesensorsusingtwolearningstages: RHigh
R
real-to-simmappingandinversefunctionlearning.Themap- R High
High
ping between the real and simulated voltages is established Fig.2. (a)Thepiezoresistivestructureusinglow-resistancefabricpatches
through supervised learning. The inverse function relating andhigh-resistancefabricand(b)theworkingprincipleofthepiezoresistive
the voltages to the force is learned from data simulated by structure.
the developed multiphysics model, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
Load cell 20
II. ACOMPUETRATT-IBOANSAELDMTAUCLTTIIPLHEYSSEINCSSOMRODELOFAN XCYIyZnld isnetdanrgtieceral )N( ecroF1126
Indentation
Ata.cWtCileeonfsoderunmcstouirlvaettheFaaatbmwrieucl-ptbirpaehvsyeiosdiucTsslaymctcoilodenesSltefronurscottehrdeusosifntgERneTo-bparesnede Y SeXnsor pofaosnrictdieon     2004  Y    ( m 1m00)         0 0               10X0  (  m  m   )       200
and conductive fabric layers [5]. Fig. 2 (a) illustrates the Fig.3. Therealindentationexperimentalsetup(left)andthecorresponding
ﬁniteelementdeformationmodelinsimulation(right).
structureofthesensorwithﬁvelayers.Thetoplayerisneo-
prenefoamwithathicknessof4mm.Thenextlayerisanad- FE analysis codes developed in MATLAB (Mathworks,
hesivethatgluestheneoprenelayertothelow-resistancefab- USA) and based on linear elastic formulation. Each layer is
ric patches. The patches and a large sheet of high-resistance discretized using 8-noded isoparametric brick elements that
fabricformthepiezoresistivelayer;theyarepressedtogether are assigned isotropic material properties. To increase the
with no adhesive. Under the high-resistance fabric is a sheet calculation accuracy, the FE mesh was designed with our
ofinsulatingfabricwithastitchedcircuitmadeofconductive predeﬁnedtestpointsinmind.Thenodesatthebottomofthe
thread. Twenty-four electrodes are connected to the high- sensor are ﬁxed to the rigid support. Details of the adopted
resistance fabric through the stitched circuit. FE formulation are explained by Liu and Quek [22].
The working principle of the piezoresistive layer is illus- Toenablesupervisedlearning,theindentationexperiments
trated in Fig. 2 (b). The high-resistance fabric provides a are simulated as shown in Fig. 3. In the real situation, the
base resistance between any two electrodes. When a force positionofacylindricalindenterwithadiameterof10mmis
is applied to the neoprene, a corresponding compressive preciselycontrolledbyanXYZstage.Aloadcellinstalledon
pressureisappliedtothelow-resistancefabricpatches.From the indenter measures the indentation force. The indentation
the compression, the contact resistance between the high- positionandforceareidenticallyimposedonthedeformation
resistance fabric and the low-resistance patches decreases in model. In the simulations, four point forces are used instead
the contact region. ofasinglepointforcetoaccountforthecylindricalgeometry
of the indenter. Fig. 3 (right) shows a schematic of the FE
B. Mechanical Deformation Model
model subjected to indentation.
The mechanical deformation of the sensor is calculated
C. Piezoresistive Layer Model
using a ﬁnite element (FE) model. This approach favors
predicting the deformations accurately by realistically sim- The model of the piezoresistive layer was obtained from
ulating the propagation and interaction of the structural a specimen test as a look-up table. We prepared a specimen
stresses. The model is designed to be as simple as possible thatcansimplyrepresenttheworkingprincipleofthesensor.
tocapturetheessentialmechanicswithoutinducingsubstan- The specimen was located on a compressometer, and the
tial computational cost. This model simplicity signiﬁcantly entire surface was pressed several times while the force and
inﬂuences the efﬁciency of generating simulation data. resistance were measured simultaneously.
The sensor is modeled including all ﬁve material lay- Figure4showstherelationshipbetweentheresistanceand
ers shown in Fig. 2 (a). Although the real low-resistance stress applied to the specimen. The result shows that the
patches have a discrete grid structure to prevent current resistance monotonically decreases and begins to saturate as
from traveling between distant contacts, for simplicity their the stress increases over 0.02 MPa. During the cyclic com-
mechanicalbehaviorismodeledasacontinuoussheetsimilar pression test, a small hysteresis effect of 4.7% is observed
to the other layers. For the computations, we use in-house between the loading and unloading curves. This value is
1633
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 20 the electrodes.
Measurement ∂φ
Fitted curve V =φ+Rσ (3)
m) 15 ∂n
h
O where R is the electrode contact resistance.
k
e ( 10 To solve equation (1) with boundary conditions, the con-
c
n ductive domain is discretized into ﬁnite elements. A weak
sista 5 Unloading formulation of equations (1) and (2) results in a system
Re of linear equations. Details of a FE formulation of the
Loading conductivity model are explained by Holder et al. [11].
0
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 Fig. 5 shows the high-resistance fabric with 24 electrodes
Stress (MPa) and the corresponding ﬁnite element model with the same
Fig.4. Theexperimentalresultofthecycliccompressiontest. geometry and electrode conﬁguration. The resistance distri-
butionoftheﬁniteelementconductivitymodelisdetermined
from the piezoresistive layer model. The voltages are mea-
sured from the full current injection pattern, which results
in 6624 voltage measurements for our 24-electrode ERT
High-resistance
system [5].
fabric
III. PARAMETERCHARACTERIZATIONFORTHE
MULTIPHYSICSMODEL
Electrodes 6 by 6 grid Although we limited the multiphysics model’s complexity
tokeepthecomputationalburdenlow,well-chosenmodelpa-
Fig. 5. A photograpic image of the high-resistance fabric layer with 24
electrodes (left) and the ﬁnite element electrical conductivity model with rameters can reduce the gap between simulation and reality.
identicalgeometryandelectrodes(right).Forreference,the6by6gridof This section describes how parameters of the deformation
predeﬁnedsensingpointshasbeenoverlaidontherightimage.
model and the electrical conductivity model were chosen
relativelysmallconsideringthecomplianceofthespecimen. from experiments.
In this paper, we neglected the hysteresis effect and ﬁtted
thepiezoresistivebehaviorasaﬁfth-orderpolynomialcurve. A. Indentation Experiment
In the multiphysics model, these polynomial coefﬁcients are
The indentation setup shown in Fig. 3 (left) was used to
used to compute the sheet resistance change induced by the
gathercalibrationdata.TheXYZstagemovedthecylindrical
surface normal pressure between the high-resistance fabric
indenter to the desired position and pressed it into the
layerandthelow-resistancefabriclayer.Weassumedthatthe
tactile sensor with a commanded indentation depth from 0
piezoresistive behavior is uniform across the entire sensor.
to 4 mm in 0.1 mm intervals. The indentation process was
conductedinaquasi-staticprocess.Ateachindentationstep,
D. Electrical Conductivity Model
the reaction force and voltages from the electrodes were
A ﬁnite element electrical conductivity model is used to stored at a rate of 2 Hz.
calculate the voltages that are measured from the electrodes
oftheERT-basedtactilesensor.Foraconductivedomain(Ω) B. Determination of Mechanical Properties
and its boundary (∂Ω), the continuum version of Kirchoff’s The multi-layer model was calibrated by determining the
lawdescribestherelationshipbetweentheboundarypotential
layer material constants that result in accurate deformation
φandconductivitydistributionσintheregionΩbyassuming values under applied forces. For each layer, two material
direct current and the absence of an interior current source.
parameters need to be determined: the elastic modulus (E)
∇·(σ∇φ)=0inΩ (1) and Poisson’s ratio (ν). The values of Poisson’s ratio are
takenfromtheliterature.Fortheneoprenefoam,itisselected
The current density on the boundary is described as follows. as 0.3, which is a typical value for polymeric foams [23].
∇ · We assumed all the fabric to be lycra, so ν = 0.4 is used,
j =σ φ nin∂Ω (2)
which is approximately the average of the values presented
wherej isthecurrentdensityandndenotestheoutwardunit in the literature [24]. A polychloroprene-based adhesive is
normal vector to ∂Ω. We calculate voltages using equation used as the glue chemical, which is nearly incompressible
(1) and (2) with the known conductivity distribution and (ν =0.495) [23] and has a Young’s modulus of 1.0 MPa.
current density at the boundary. The elastic moduli of neoprene (Eneo) and lycra fabric
In the practical situation, current injection and voltage (Elyc) are determined by minimizing the error between the
measurement are done through only a small number of elec- indentation displacement values (eind) obtained through the
trodes. The sewn electrodes can contain a contact resistance indentation experiments and FE analyses. Since the indenter
between the high-resistance fabric and the electrode. This support is not perfectly ﬁrm, its stiffness (kind) is calculated
contact resistance reduces the voltage (V) measured from by applying pseudo indentation on a rigid aluminum block
1634
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 6   VVRSiemal 5
4
V)2
s (0 0
olt
V-2
-4
-6 -5
4500 4540 4580
0 2000 4000 6000
Faifgu.n6c.tioTnhoefeErrnoerosaunrfdacEelyocf.measuredandsimulatedindentationdepthsas 46   VVRSiema l(optimized) 5
TABLEI V)2
THEMATERIALPROPERTIESASSIGNEDTOTHEFINITEELEMENTMODEL. olts (0 0
V-2
Material Young’s modulus (MPa) Poisson’s ratio
-4
Neoprene foam 0.028 0.300 [23]
Lycra fabric 0.344 0.400 [24] -6 -5
0 2000 4000 6000 4500 4540 4580
Glue 1.000 [25] 0.495 [23] Voltage measurement index
Fig. 7. The effect of the electrode contact resistance optimization. Each
anddividingthemeasuredforcevaluebytheinputdisplace-
plotshowsall6624voltagemeasurementsneededforasinglescanofthe
ment. Since the indenter and sensor are connected in series, tactilesensor.
the total stiffness of the setup (ktot) satisﬁes the relation: (a) 10-3 (b) 10-3
1 1 1 6 12 5
= + (4)
wmvaheluenreteaslbkinysednkesniesnta.tthFioeigns.td6iefkfsptnhotehotsswsasortefkhicetnhadelecrrusoelranktssesuoedrnrf.bayFceidnoiavflildmyi,netaghsetuhreeexdfpoaernrcide- Y position 2345 46810 RMSE  (V) RMSE  (V)234
simulated indentation depths as a function of Eneo and Elyc. 1 2 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Table 1 presents the ﬁnal material property values assigned
(c) X position Indentation force (N)
to the FE model.
C. Electrode Contact Resistance Optimization olts (V)00.5   ΔΔVVRSiemal
V
We characterized the 24 electrode contact resistances -0.5
0.04
using an optimization method because these parameters are V)
difﬁculttomeasuredirectly.Thecostfunctionwasdeﬁnedto olts ( 0
V
-0.04
be the L2-norm of the error between the measured voltages 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
(VReal) and the simulated voltages (VSim). Voltage measurement index
(cid:107) − (cid:107) Fig.8. (a)AheatmapoftheRMSEofthevoltagedifferenceforthe6by
ar·g··min VReal VSim 2 (5) 6gridlocations,(b)theaverageRMSEofthevoltagedifferencedepending
R1 R24 on the indentation force, and (c) two sample results from the location
where R to R are the 24 electrode contact resistances. (1,6)showingthemaximumerror(top)andthelocation(4,3)showingthe
1 24 minimumerror(bottom).
VReal was obtained when the sensor was not compressed.
The sheet resistance of the high-resistance fabric is known root mean square error (RMSE) of the voltage difference
as 18 kOhm/square. Assuming homogeneous resistivity of between∆VRealand∆VSimiscalculatedusingthedatafrom
the fabric, we can estimate the simulated voltages that the indentation experiment shown in Fig. 3. Each of the 6
correspond to the real situation. A direct searching method by 6 grid locations shown in Fig. 5 (right) was indented up
was used to ﬁnd the best-ﬁtting resistance values. Fig. 7 to 4 mm indentation depth.
shows a comparison of VReal and VSim from the initial Fig. 8 (a) shows the RMSE of the voltage difference
guessedvaluesof10Ohm(top)andwithoptimizedelectrode depending on the contact location. The contact location on
contactresistances(bottom).Modifyingtheelectrodecontact the left-top corner showed the highest error. We believe that
resistances reduces the estimation error. theleft-topareaoftherealsensorismoresensitivecompared
to the other areas due to fabrication inaccuracies.
D. Multiphysics Model Evaluation
Fig. 8 (b) shows the average RMSE of the voltage dif-
The voltage changes (∆V), which are the difference ference according to the indentation force. The estimation
betweenthevoltages(V)beforeandaftertheappliedcontact error tends to increase with the indentation force. This
pressure distribution, are calculated from the multiphysics result implies that the model error tends to increase when
model in the same way as the voltage changes are measured deformations are large.
in reality. For the evaluation of the multiphysics model, the Fig. 8 (c) depicts the voltage readings with maximum and
1635
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. minimum error. It is observed from the maximum error case
that ∆VReal is much larger than ∆VSim. This result means
ttthoreenthrdeessisosiftmantuhcleeatridoeeancl.revBaouslettadtghmeeocmrheaunilntgipethhs.yesTriechaselmscieotnudtaertaliolcnaarpcetoaumroepsfarttehhdee 36 neuronsBatch NormSigmoid 36 neuronsBatch NormSigmoid 36 neuronsSigmoid
sFuenrnossmtrourctthtueernedmdsinntoiomiseuhmaavnederblreiosarsscceaorsmreo,pr,a∆raeVsdRtsoheaol∆wsVneeSmiimns,Fstoiogw.ine8ctlru(iade)de. 6624 input 1200 neuronsReLU 1176 neuronsReLU 1200 neuronsReLU 6624 output Localization Network×36 output
to close this simulation-to-real gap using learning.
IV. DNNMODELFORSIM-TO-REALLEARNING 36 neuronsBatch NormReLU 36 neuronsBatch NormReLU 36 neuronsReLU
WeusedtwoDNNs(de-noisingnetwork,forceestimation
network)toimprovethecalibrationperformanceofthetactile De-noising Network Force Estimation Network
sensor.Eventhoughweconstrainthedirectionofthecontact
force to be along the surface normal, an enormous number Fig. 9. A diagram of the DNN architecture for contact localization and
of contact combinations is possible. As a preliminary study forceestimation.
for this paper, we discretized the sensor domain into a 6 by B. Simulation Data Synthesis
6uniformgridandfocusedoncontactlocalizationandforce
For the force estimation network, the indentation experi-
estimation for one-point and two-point contact. The grid
ment was simulated by virtually pressing every grid point.
size was chosen to be similar to the number of electrodes,
The indentation force was divided into 100 steps up to 10
as this value theoretically limits the amount of meaningful
N. All the possible position and force combinations were
information that can be extracted from the sensor [11].
simulatedforone-pointcontact;3600trialsweresynthesized
A. DNN Architecture as a result. The two-point contact cases were randomly
selected from the grid points. The amount of force in each
We designed a novel architecture for high-performance
grid point was also randomly modulated. As a result, 32400
calibration that consists of a de-noising network and a force
trials were synthesized for the two-point case.
estimation network (see Fig. 9). The de-noising network
Separately, another dataset was synthesized for the de-
is a modiﬁed de-noising autoencoder (DAE) [26]. This
noising network. This dataset was obtained by simulating
network removes noise from real voltage measurements
the identical indentation condition of the real experiment, in
and ﬁts the signals to the corresponding simulated voltage
which each grid point was pressed until 4 mm indentation
measurements. The force estimation network is designed
depthwitheightintervals.Becauseourindenterhasonlyone
to separately tackle localization and force estimation. This
end-effector, we did not record real two-point contact data.
designconstrainsthenumberofcontactpointsandhelpsthe
Alternatively,wetookdatafromsimulatedtwo-pointcontact
DNN model efﬁciently learn to estimate the force.
and added Gaussian noise modeled from the real one-point
Theforceestimationproceedsinthefollowingorder.First,
contact data. In total, a dataset with 2124 trials (324 one-
the location(s) of the contact(s) are identiﬁed from multi-
point contacts from reality + 1800 two-point contacts from
labelclassiﬁcation.Inthisstage,theresultisabinaryanswer
simulation) was generated for learning the gap between real
at each point in the 6 by 6 grid. The subsequent training
and simulation.
estimatestheforcemagnitudeofthegridlocationsthatwere
previously identiﬁed as having a contact. C. Training Procedure
The localization part has two layers each with 36 neurons All the training was conducted with the adaptive moment
andasigmoidactivationfunction.Theoutputlayeralsouses estimation (ADAM) optimizer [29]. The mini-batch was
a sigmoid activation function. The threshold of the sigmoid set to 32 to effectively generalize the training [30]. All
activationfunctionwassetto0.5.Thetrainingwasconducted trials were divided into a training set and a validation set
withthebinarycross-entropylossfunctionthatiscommonly with a ratio of 0.85 to 0.15. The training proceeded until
used in multi-label classiﬁcation [27]. convergence or 100 epochs.
The force estimation part has two layers with 36 neurons
D. Evaluation
and a rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) function [28]. The ReLU
activationwaslocatedattheendoftheoutputlayerbasedon To evaluate the calibration framework, we created a test
the assumption that contact forces are always non-negative. dataset from the real sensor. It should be noted that the
The mean square error (MSE) was used as a loss func- test set was not included in the training or validation sets.
tion. Batch normalization was applied to all hidden layers Moreover, the test set was generated with an indentation
for robust convergence during training. The outputs of the experiment with different depths. The one-point contact test
force estimation layer and localization layer are multiplied set was obtained from the XYZ stage over 36 grid locations
element-wise as a binary mask, so grid locations that are with 8 different indentation depths. The two-point contact
not identiﬁed from the localization layer always output an test set was manually conducted over 14 cases using two
estimate of zero contact force. 500 g weights.
1636
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Real
10F
o
rc
Estimated e
0  (N
Localization Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No )
RMSE (N) 3.90  3.51 2.19 5.01 9.34 5.61 8.77 2.45 4.80 3.64 2.53 7.36 5.33 5.47
Fig.11. Two-pointcontacttestresultsfor14sampletrials.
(a) (b) r=0.95 optimizedtoestimatevoltagemeasurementsclosetothereal
100 10
6 N) voltagemeasurements.Wetriedtobalancemodelcomplexity
n5 8900H ce ( 8 with computational cost, obtaining a lightweight model that
positio34 6700it rate (% ated for 46 ltaicrigteyl,yinfhoollmowosgetnheeoturesnpdisezoofrethseistrievailtys,yasntedms;ennosonrlindeyanramelaicss-
Y 12 4500) Estim 2 ys=amxple aoruer mmoosdtelliaknedlyrereasliptoy.nsible for the remaining gap between
0
1 2X p3osi4tion5 6 0 T2rue4 forc6e (N8) 10 We introduced a new deep learning architecture that can
capture the simulation-to-real gap and reconstruct applied
Fig. 10. Results of the single-point test showing (a) localization perfor- contactsfromvoltagemeasurements.Asapreliminarystudy,
manceand(b)forceestimation. wedividedthesensingareaintoa6by6gridandgenerated
Fig.10(a)showstheresultofthelocalizationperformance one- and two-contact datasets using the multiphysics model
of the single-point contact test. The hit rate was calculated to train the DNN model. The results revealed that this
using the reference and estimated contact locations. The method can estimate contact location and force well in the
±
averagehitratewas82 12%.Thelocalizationperformance single-contact case. It also succeeded moderately well at
was slightly higher on the left side of the sensor than the generalizing from one contact to a two contact scenario that
right side. This difference could be caused by a mechanical was not seen in the training dataset. It should be noted that
asymmetry in the test setup, which results in higher contact the grid size used in this study is relatively small compared
forceandlargervoltagechangesontheleftsideforthesame to conventional ERT-based tactile sensors [6]. The inﬂuence
commanded indentation depth. ofthegridsizeneedstobeinvestigatedfurthertogeneralize
Fig. 10 (b) presents the force estimation performance. the calibration method.
Due to the threshold layer in the DNN model, forces lower In the future, ERT-based tactile sensors can be applied
than 1 N are mostly suppressed. The correlation between to whole-body robotic skins for monitoring diverse contact
the estimation and true force is 0.95. In general, ERT-based situations. Extending this calibration framework for more
tactile sensors show poor force estimation performance due complicated contact cases will require both accurate models
to their nonlinear characteristics [6]. The RMSE between andsigniﬁcantrealdata.Moreover,usingsupervisedlearning
±
estimatedandtrueforcewas0.51 0.72N,whichisnearly for calibrating a body-mounted tactile sensor will be chal-
6% of the maximum force. lenging.AlthoughtheDNNmodelwastestedonlywithone-
The two-point contact results appear in Fig. 11. The point and two-point contacts, the proposed method showed
resultsshowthattheDNNmodelsuccessfullylocalizedboth remarkable performance for contact point localization and
contacts with no false positives or negatives in 11 of the 14 force estimation. This framework can be improved if real
tested cases (78.5%). The force estimation error for two- multi-contact data is included in training.
±
point contact was 5.0 2.2 N on average. Although force
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
estimation performance is not as accurate as single-contact
This work was supported by the Max Planck Society,
test, it should be noted that this DNN model was trained
the National Research Foundation of South Korea (NRF-
without any real two-point contact data.
2018R1A6A3A03010897),andtheChinaScholarshipCoun-
V. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSIONS cil. The authors would like to thank Jung Kim and Georg
Martius for their substantial support, Kyungseo Park for the
This paper introduced a calibration method for ERT-
piezoresistive behavior test, and Bernard Javot for technical
based tactile sensors. The proposed method blends a model-
support.
based approach with a data-driven approach. Data-driven
approachesgenerallyrequirealargeamountofdata,whichis
REFERENCES
physically difﬁcult to acquire for large-scale tactile sensors.
[1] R. S. Dahiya, G. Metta, M. Valle, and G. Sandini, “Tactile sensing:
WehypothesizedthatamultiphysicsmodelofanERT-based
fromhumanstohumanoids,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.26,
tactile sensor can resolve this data deﬁciency problem using no.1,pp.1–20,2010.
sim-to-real transfer learning. [2] M.L.Hammock,A.Chortos,B.C.-K.Tee,J.B.-H.Tok,andZ.Bao,
“25thanniversaryarticle:Theevolutionofelectronicskin(e-skin):A
We constructed a simple multiphysics model that maps
brief history, design considerations, and recent progress,” Advanced
contact pressure to voltage measurements. The model was Materials,vol.25,no.42,pp.5997–6038,2013.
1637
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [3] C.Bartolozzi,L.Natale,F.Nori,andG.Metta,“Robotswithasense [16] L.Zou,C.Ge,Z.J.Wang,E.Cretu,andX.Li,“Noveltactilesensor
oftouch,”NatureMaterials,vol.15,no.9,p.921,2016. technology and smart tactile sensing systems: A review,” Sensors,
[4] H. Lee, D. Kwon, H. Cho, I. Park, and J. Kim, “Soft nanocom- vol.17,no.11,2017.
posite based multi-point, multi-directional strain mapping sensor us- [17] H.SunandG.Martius,“Machinelearningforhaptics:inferringmulti-
ing anisotropic electrical impedance tomography,” Scientiﬁc Reports, contact stimulation from sparse sensor conﬁguration,” Frontiers in
vol.7,2017. Neurorobotics,vol.13,p.51,2019.
[5] H. Lee, K. Park, J. Kim, and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Internal array [18] S. Russo, R. Assaf, N. Carbonaro, and A. Tognetti, “Touch position
electrodesimprovethespatialresolutionofsofttactilesensorsbased detection in electrical tomography tactile sensors through quadratic
onelectricalresistancetomography,”inProceedingsoftheIEEEInter- classiﬁer,”IEEESensorsJournal,vol.19,no.2,pp.474–483,2018.
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Montreal, [19] M. E. Taylor and P. Stone, “Transfer learning for reinforcement
Canada,2019,pp.5411–5417. learningdomains:Asurvey,”JournalofMachineLearningResearch,
[6] D.Silvera-Tawil,D.Rye,M.Soleimani,andM.Velonaki,“Electrical vol.10,no.Jul,pp.1633–1685,2009.
impedancetomographyforartiﬁcialsensitiveroboticskin:areview,” [20] J.Tobin,R.Fong,A.Ray,J.Schneider,W.Zaremba,andP.Abbeel,
IEEESensorsJournal,vol.15,no.4,pp.2001–2016,2015. “Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation tothe real world,”in Proceedings ofthe IEEE/RSJ Inter-
[7] D. Silvera-Tawil, D. Rye, and M. Velonaki, “Interpretation of the
nationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),2017,
modalityoftouchonanartiﬁcialarmcoveredwithanEIT-basedsen-
pp.23–30.
sitiveskin,”TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,vol.31,
[21] K.-S.Sohn,J.Chung,M.-Y.Cho,S.Timilsina,W.B.Park,M.Pyo,
no.13,pp.1627–1641,2012.
N. Shin, K. Sohn, and J. S. Kim, “An extremely simple macroscale
[8] F. Visentin, P. Fiorini, and K. Suzuki, “A deformable smart skin
electronicskinrealizedbydeepmachinelearning,”ScientiﬁcReports,
for continuous sensing based on electrical impedance tomography,”
vol.7,no.1,p.11061,2017.
Sensors,vol.16,no.11,p.1928,2016.
[22] G.-R. Liu and S. S. Quek, The ﬁnite element method: a practical
[9] A. Yao, C. L. Yang, J. K. Seo, and M. Soleimani, “EIT-based
course. Butterworth-Heinemann,2013.
fabric pressure sensing,” Computational and Mathematical Methods
[23] G.N.Greaves,A.Greer,R.S.Lakes,andT.Rouxel,“Poisson’sratio
inMedicine,2013.
andmodernmaterials,”NatureMaterials,vol.10,no.11,p.823,2011.
[10] H. Lee, K. Park, Y. Kim, and J. Kim, “Durable and repairable soft
[24] Z. Jinyun, L. Yi, J. Lam, and C. Xuyong, “The Poisson ratio and
tactileskinforphysicalhumanrobotinteraction,”inCompanionPro-
modulusofelasticknittedfabrics,”TextileResearchJournal,vol.80,
ceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonHuman-RobotInteraction
no.18,pp.1965–1969,2010.
(HRI),2017,pp.183–184.
[25] B. Ellis and R. Smith, Polymers: a property database. CRC Press,
[11] D. S. Holder, Electrical Impedance Tomography: Methods, History 2008.
andApplications. CRCPress,2004. [26] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol, “Extract-
[12] V. Chitturi and F. Nagi, “Spatial resolution in electrical impedance ing and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in
tomography: A topical review,” Journal of Electrical Bioimpedance, Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning
vol.8,no.1,pp.66–78,2017. (ICML),2008,pp.1096–1103.
[13] S.MartinandC.T.Choi,“Nonlinearelectricalimpedancetomography [27] E.Alpaydin,IntroductiontoMachineLearning. MITpress,2009.
reconstruction using artiﬁcial neural networks and particle swarm [28] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectiﬁed linear units improve restricted
optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. boltzmannmachines,”inProceedingsoftheinternationalconference
1–4,2015. onmachinelearning(ICML),2010,pp.807–814.
[14] H.Park,H.Lee,K.Park,S.Mo,andJ.Kim,“Deepneuralnetwork [29] D.P.KingmaandJ.Ba,“ADAM:Amethodforstochasticoptimiza-
approachinelectricalimpedancetomography-basedreal-timesofttac- tion,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1412.6980,2014.
tilesensor,”inProceedingsoftheIEEE/RSJInternationalConference [30] D. Masters and C. Luschi, “Revisiting small batch training for deep
onIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),pp.7447–7452,2019. neuralnetworks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1804.07612,2018.
[15] A. Molchanov, O. Kroemer, Z. Su, and G. S. Sukhatme, “Contact
localizationongraspedobjectsusingtactilesensing,”inProceedings
of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems(IROS),Oct2016,pp.216–222.
1638
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 00:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 