2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Grasp Control for Enhancing Dexterity of Parallel Grippers*
Marco Costanzo, Giuseppe De Maria, Gaetano Lettera and Ciro Natale
Abstract—Arobustgraspcontrollerforbothslippingavoid- true slipping motions, due to the dynamics of the Kalman
ance and controlled sliding is proposed based on force/tactile ﬁlter itself. Here a different dynamic model is set up to
feedback only. The model-based algorithm exploits a modiﬁed
explicitlyconsiderthenonlineardynamicsofthecontactand,
LuGre friction model to consider rotational frictional sliding
inturn,todesignanonlinearobservertoestimatetherelative
motions. The modiﬁcation relies on the Limit Surface concept
where a novel computationally efﬁcient method is introduced velocity between the object and the ﬁngers that physically
tocomputeinreal-timetheminimumgraspingforcetobalance describes the slipping motion. The model consists in the
tangential and torsional loads. The two control modalities extension of the LuGre friction model [8] to the case of
are considered by the robot motion planning algorithm that
roto-translationalslidingbasedontheuseoftheLSconcept.
automatically generates robot motions and gripper commands
A new computationally efﬁcient method, based on univer-
to solve complex manipulation tasks in a material handling
application. sal approximators, to numerically compute the LS is also
introduced. The control algorithm is described in detail to
I. INTRODUCTION allowanyreadertoreproduceit,butnomathematicaldetails
are presented, e.g., observability analysis of the nonlinear
Safe handling of objects with a robotic gripper requires
dynamic model, proof of the closed-loop stability of the
to properly grasp the object to avoid slippage in presence
controlsystem,eventhoughtheyareavailable.Thisbecause
of external disturbances and avoid object damage at the
wewanttofocusthisconferencepaperonthepresentationof
same time. Moreover, as a number of manipulation tasks
thepossibilitiesofferedbythein-handmanipulationactions,
can require additional dexterity to the gripper, this can be
allowed by the proposed grasp controller, by making them
achieved by grippers with several degrees of freedom or by
available to the motion planning level. We experimentally
exploiting the so-called extrinsic dexterity [1] while using
demonstrate that a number of complex manipulation tasks,
simpler devices, like parallel jaw grippers. Possessing both
unsolvable with a ﬁxed grasp, are solvable without any
manipulation abilities by the same gripping device requires
re-grasping while using a standard constraint-based motion
special mechanical solutions like [2] or sophisticated grasp
planner with minimal modiﬁcations.
control algorithms [3]. A typical way to improve dexterity
of a pinch grasp is to allow rotation of the grasped object Basically, a virtual rotational joint is added to the kine-
aboutthegraspingaxis,amaneuvercalledpivoting.Pivoting matic chain along the grasping axis of the gripper that is
can be usefully exploited not only in object manipulation by activatedonlywhenasolutionwithaﬁrmgraspisnotfound.
robotic hands [4] but also in whole-body manipulation [5]. If a solution exists with the use of the virtual joint, the
[4] presents a planning algorithm to solve the 3D any-pose- planner sends a request to the low-level grasp controller to
reorienting problem where the pivoting is made possible by activate the controlled sliding modality only in the motion
acustomgripperthatallowsbothaﬁrmgraspandapivoting segments requiring the object or gripper pivoting motions.
motion of the object but using a special mechanism and a
supporting table. II. GRASPCONTROL
Differently,inourpaper[6]wealreadydemonstratedhow
Each force/tactile sensor can provide both the measure-
a parallel gripper equipped with force/tactile sensors can
ment of the full 6D contact wrench (composed by a force
be suitably controlled to achieve both slipping avoidance
and controlled sliding by acting on the grasp force. The vector fsi and a moment vector τsi) hsiT = (fsiT τsiT)
i i i i i
original model-based algorithm for slipping avoidance com- expressed in the sensor frame Σ and the location of
si
puted the grasp force on the basis of the Limit Surface (LS) the center of pressure on the contact area psi, i = 1,2.
i
theory [7]. To improve its robustness against time-varying Therefore, the external wrench h acting on the grasped
(cid:20) (cid:21) E
external disturbances and model uncertainties, a heuristic object can be computed through the grasp matrix W [9],
algorithmexploitedtheresidualofaKalmanﬁltertoincrease i.e.,
the grasp force only when necessary. The method worked hg (cid:44)
hg =W 1 Whg. (1)
well with slowly-varying disturbances only, since rapidly E hg
2
changing tangential loads generated residuals even without (cid:2) (cid:3)
referringthevectorstothegraspframeΣ selectedasshown
g
*This work was supported by the European Commission within the inFig.1and,accordingtothevirtualstickconcept[10],itis
H2020REFILLSprojectIDn.731590. W = I I .Dually,theinternalwrenchh ,i.e.,thatnot
The authors are with Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Universita` degli 6 6 I
causing any motion of the object but necessary to generate
Studi della Campania “L. Vanvitelli”, Via Roma 29, 81031 Aversa, Italy
ciro.natale@unicampania.it enoughfrictionforcesonthecontactareastoholdtheobject,
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 524
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 1
Uniform
Hertzian
0
-1
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6
1
Uniform
Hertzian
0.5
0
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6
Fig. 2. Typical graphs (uniform and Hertzian pressure distributions) of
Fig.1. Gripperusedforin-handmanipulationexperimentsequippedwith f˜tLS andτ˜nLS asfunctionsofc˜.
two force/tactile sensors. Deﬁnition of sensor and grasp frames (colors of
xyz axesfollowtheRGBconventioncommonlyusedin3Ddrawings).
ﬁngers to the object, we introduce the concept of virtual
(cid:2) (cid:3) LimitSurface(LS).Itisdeﬁnedinthewrenchplane(f ,τ )
t n
can be obtained as [9] as the set of points of the maximum net friction wrench
† (cid:44) − (f ,τ )thatcanbalancetheexternalwrench.Assuming
hg =V hg 1/2I 1/2I hg, (2) tLS nLS
I 6 6 that both soft pads have the same physical and geometrical
where V is a matrix spanning the null space of W. Assum- characteristics and the contact surfaces with the object are
ingthatthemanipulatedobjecthasﬂatrigidsurfacesparallel parallel, a unique virtual pressure distribution over a virtual
to each other and normal to the z axis of the grasp frame, contact area can be deﬁned and then use it to compute
then, the internal wrench has only one non null component, the virtual LS. According to the LS theory as recalled
i.e., the z component, that we call grasping force f . By in [12], under the assumption of axisymmetric pressure
n
choosing the grasp frame with the y axis aligned with the distribution, the CoR position is orthogonal to the direction
directionofthetangentialforce,theexternalwrenchhasonly of the tangential force and thus v =0. Therefore, the CoR
x −
two non null components, i.e., the y component of the force position has components [ c 0 0 ]T, with c = vy/ωz.
that we call tangential force f and the z component of the The points of the LS can be numerically computed once the
t
moment that we call torsional moment τ . pressuredistributionandthefrictioncoefﬁcientµareknown
n
A low-level linear force control loop commands the ve- by integrating the pressure distribution over the contact
locity of the gripper ﬁngers to ensure that the grasp force area as detailed in [12]. It is common in the literature to
follows a given reference. This reference is the so-called compute the normalized LS by introducing the normalized
grasp force that is computed by the slipping avoidance or CoR position c˜ with respect to the radius of the contact
controlled sliding algorithms presented in Section II-C and area and the normalized wrench (f˜ ,τ˜ ) with respect
tLS nLS
Section II-D, respectively. to the maximum values f and τ that depend on the
tmax nmax
grasp force as explained in [13]. It can be easily shown
A. Virtual Limit Surface
that the results of those integrals are functions of c˜ and
Under the assumptions stated above, the instantaneous their graphs are those reported in Fig. 2 for two typical
rotational motion about the Center of Rotation (CoR) of the pressuredistributions(Hertziananduniform).Itisrelevantto
manipulated object can be described by a twist vector highlightthatallaxisymmetricpressuredistributionsconsid-
eredin[13]generategraphsinbetweenthefunctionsabove.
t=[ v v ω ]T, (3)
x y z Therefore, the normalized tangential and torsional loads are
where v and v are the components of the linear velocity functions of c˜only, but not of the normal force and are only
x y
and ω is the component of the angular velocity. Hence, as weaklysensitivetothepressuredistribution.Hence,theycan
z
shown in [11], the CoR has position be computed only once and they can be approximated by
− resorting to any universal approximator. Taking into account
pCoR =[ vy/ωz vx/ωz 0 ]T, (4) their typical shapes, it is convenient to use a superposition
that is orthogonal to t. ofsigmoidalfunctionsforf˜tLS(c˜)andofGaussianfunctions
By kinetostatic duality, the external wrench acting on the for τ˜nLS(c˜), which are both radial basis functions and thus
can be used as universal approximators [14], [15].
object can be represented by the three-dimensional wrench
w =[ 0 f τ ]T. (5) B. Relative Velocity Estimation
t n
To characterize the relation between the external wrench With the aim of detecting the slippage of the object, a
and the net friction wrench applied by the soft pad of all dynamic model of the instantaneous motion of the object
525
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. canbeusedtoestimatetheangularvelocityoftheobjectω , (f˜ ,τ˜ ).Thecomputationoff startsfromestimating
that is not directly measurable with tactile sensors, howevezr c˜ taLcScorndLinSg to the algorithm in n[6L]S, then (f˜ ,τ˜ ) is
tLS nLS
it can be observed. The proposed model is a combination of computed via the universal approximators. Recalling that
theLuGrefrictionmodel[8]extendedtothetorsionalfriction f˜ =f /f and that f =µf [13], [12], then it is
t t tmax tmax n
based on the virtual LS and the standard Euler equation of
f
the rigid body motion f = t . (13)
nLS µf˜
− σ | | tLS
ζ˙ = ωz g(0·)ζ ωz (6) NotethatftLS dependsonc˜,whichdependsonbothtorsional
and tangential loads.
1 − −
ω˙ = ( σ ζ σ ω +u), (7) Thedynamiccontribution,aimedatcounteractingslipping
z J 0 1 z
in presence of time varying exter(cid:98)nal disturbances, is here
where ζ is the internal state of the LuGre friction model, computed as
· | | | | | |
g()=g(fn,c)= τnLS + cftLS (8) fnd =αd Cdωz , (14)
is the maximum static friction torque that depends on the where αd > 0 is the dynamic gain and Cd is a linear ﬁlter
normal force f and on the instantaneous CoR position c; necessary to reduce the effect of high frequency noise on
n
σ is the so-called asperity stiffness, while σ is the viscous the grasp force and the absolute value is needed to ensure
0 1
friction coefﬁcient, J is the object inertia moment about the a(cid:98)n always squeezing grasping force. Note that the dynamic
CoR and u is the external torque. Computing g(·) in (8) control action vanishes as soon as no slipping occurs, i.e.,
roebqtuaiinreesdcuosminpgutthateiosntatoifc fmtLoSdealnpdreτsnenLtSedthaabtocvaen, abcecoeradsiinlyg ωstzabl=e f0o.rIat scuafnﬁcbieentslhyowhinghthαadt sthuechcltohsaetdg(l·o)o>p suy,stienmfacist
to the following procedure in this condition the dynamic system (6) and (7) has always
an equilibrium point that can be proved to be stable.
• ComputetheCoRpositionc˜accordingtothealgorithm
presented in [6]. D. Controlled Sliding
• Computef˜tLS andτ˜nLS usingtheuniversalapproxima- This is the second control modality made available to the
tors.
planner and allows a rotational sliding of the object inside
• Denormalize using ftmax and τnmax. the gripper ﬁngers. This can be achieved by bringing the
Itcanbeshownthatthedynamicmodel(6)and(7)withthe graspingforcefromitscurrentvaluetothelowestvaluethat
output equation allowstoholdtheobjectwithoutloosingthegrasp,i.e.,f /µ,
t
y =σ0ζ+σ1ωz. (9) where ft is obviously the weight of the object measured by
the sensorized ﬁngers. This can be obtained by applying a
is locally weakly observable and the following nonlinear
observer (cid:98) (cid:98) (cid:98)(cid:98) ﬁrst order linear ﬁlter in the discrete time k to the desired
value f (k)/µ, i.e.,
(cid:98)ζ˙ = ωz− g(cid:16)σ(0·)ζ|ω(cid:98)z| (cid:98) (cid:17) (10) f t(k+1)=(1−α )f (k)+α f (k)/µ (15)
nCS CS nCS CS t
1+l − −
ω˙z = J σ0ζ σ1ωz(cid:98)+y , (11) wInhetrheisthweayv,aliufetαheCSplasentnserthehatsimtheeconnesetdanttoocfhtahnegeﬁlttehre.
for any positive gain l is such that ω asymptotically gripperorientationwithrespecttotheobjectandnoexternal
z
converges to ω . The formal proof is omitted for brevity torsional moment is applied to the object (e.g., the object
z
and because the paper is more focused on the experimental is kept vertically), then the resulting motion is a gripper
veriﬁcation of the proposed approach. pivotingmaneuverandtheestimatedCoRpositioniscloseto
zero. If a torsional moment is applied to the object, then the
C. Slipping Avoidance
objectstartsrotatinginsidetheﬁngersandanobjectpivoting
Usingthiscontrolmodality,thegraspforceiscomputedto
maneuver is executed, correspondingly, the estimated CoR
avoid any object motion inside the gripper. Similarly to the
position increases from a value close to zero to inﬁnity
slipping control strategy in [6], the reference fn of the low- (a saturation value larger than the maximum radius of the
level grasp force controller is computed as the superposition
contact area in the implementation).
ofastaticcontributionf andadynamiconef .Theﬁrst
oneissufﬁcienttoholdthnes objectonlywhenastnatdicexternal III. MANIPULATIONPLANNING
disturbance is applied to object, namely The objective of the planning procedure described in
Section III-B is to solve pick and place tasks in scenarios
f =α f , (12)
ns s nLS similar to those depicted in Fig. 3. With reference to the
where α is a safety gain slightly larger than 1 to ensure image on top left, suppose that for some reason the robot
s
robustness with respect to the uncertainty affecting the com- had to pick the object with that grasp conﬁguration (e.g.,
putationoff ,whichisthesmallestgraspforcenecessary to avoid collisions or to reach the object location inside its
nLS
tobringthepoint,correspondingtothemeasurednormalized workspace) and it has to place it on the lower shelf layer
external wrench (f˜,τ˜ ), on the normalized LS that is with the same orientation. It is obvious that with a ﬁxed
t n
526
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. vergence algorithm with an efﬁcient Sequential Quadratic
Programming (SQP) constrained nonlinear optimization ap-
proach.
The task execution is divided into the classical six motion
segments of a pick and place task connecting the follow-
ing target pose sequence: pre-grasp, grasp, pre-grasp, pre-
place, place and pre-place. We assume that a grasp planner
computed the grasp pose such that a pivoting maneuver is
alwayspossible.Foreachmotionsegmentaplanningrequest
is issued by specifying the current robot conﬁguration q ,
c
the object target pose p , the position and/or orientation
t
constraints c , the standard kinematic model of the robot
t
r and the augmented kinematic model of the robot r with
s v
the introduction of an additional rotational joint along the
grasping axis between the last end effector link and the
grasped object, that is made available by the pivoting ability
of the grasp controller.
Fig.3. Threesamplescenarios:graspingconﬁgurationsbefore(left)and
after (right) controlled sliding maneuvers necessary to achieve the goal B. Planning with Controlled Sliding
objectposewithoutcollisions.
At every planning request, the motion planner tries to
plan without using the additional joint (using the standard
grasptheplannercannotﬁndanyfeasiblesolutionduetothe kinematic model r ) and only if the request cannot be
s
collision with the top layer. The availability of changing the satisﬁed, e.g., in presence of collisions, it attempts to ﬁnd a
gripperorientationwithoutchangingobjectpose(i.e.,gripper solutionwiththevirtualjoint(usingtheaugmentedkinematic
pivoting) allows the motion planner to ﬁnd the solution model r ), i.e., executing a pivoting maneuver. The latter
v
whoseﬁnalconﬁgurationisdepictedinthetoprightpicture. solution allows the planner to change the angle between
Similarly,withreferencetotheimageonmiddleleft,suppose objectandgripperincomplexscenarios,e.g.,whentheobject
the robot has to pick the bottle placed horizontally on the has to be inserted in narrow spaces and/or when a speciﬁc
table and has to place it vertically on the top layer as shown place angle is required.
in the middle right image. Again, a ﬁxed grasp solution The outputs of each planning request are a vector of
T T T
is unfeasible while an object pivoting maneuver allows the motiontrajectories =( ,..., )andavectorofgripper
1 n
robot to accomplish the task. This is not the only solution. controlmodalitiesm=(m ,...,m ),wherem =0means
1 n i
A way to solve the task is to pivot the object on the support that the slipping avoidance control should be active (ﬁxed
table using the algorithm proposed in [4], which could work grasp) and m = 1 corresponds to the controlled sliding
i
withourgraspcontrolalgorithm,butinourpaperastandard modality. The length n=1,2,3 is automatically selected by
motion planner automatically ﬁnds the solution simply by the planner depending on the scene, as explained hereafter:
using the dexterity offered by the controlled sliding ability. n=1 thestandardplanningwithﬁxedgraspissuccessful
In the last scenario of the bottom pictures, the robot has (m =0);
1
again to pick the bottle horizontally placed on the table to n=2 the target pose p is such that the object should
t
place it in between two bottles already placed on the same be placed vertically and a pivoting maneuver is
shelf layer on two adjacent facings. To avoid collisions with required to achieve it without collisions. The ﬁrst
T
such objects the bottle has to be placed with a given angle trajectory consists in a pivoting (m = 1) with
1 1
with respect to the vertical direction. Thus, the planner has a rotation of the gripper with respect to the object
to ﬁnd a sequence of robot motions to re-orient the object to reach the orientation corresponding to the ﬁnal
with respect to the gripper again exploiting the controlled target pose compatibly with the obstacles; such
sliding feature of the grasp control. pose is denoted with p . To keep ﬁxed the object
p
positionandorientationthemotionisplannedwith
A. Motion Planner T
suitable constraints c . The second trajectory
p 2
This section explains how to handle similar scenarios moves the gripper to the ﬁnal pose with a ﬁxed
by adding an augmented capability to the motion planner grasp (m =0).
2
for solving complex tasks, improving its ﬂexibility. The n=3 the target pose of the object is not vertical but has
frameworkadoptedfortherobotmotionplanningisMoveIt! a certain angle of rotation about the grasping axis.
T
[16],whichusestheOpenMotionPlanningLibrary(OMPL) The ﬁrst trajectory is a pivoting (m = 1) to
1 1
[17], [18] that implements randomized motion planners. allowthegrippertorotatewithrespecttotheobject
The default Kinematics and Dynamics Library (KDL) [19] in an orientation that allows to reach the target
kinematicsolverhasbeenreplacedwithTrac-IK[20],which pose p compatibly with the obstacles. Hence, the
t
merges a simple extension to KDL’s Newton-based con- ﬁnal pose p of this trajectory has the current
s
527
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 10
0.02
[N] 5 0.01
0
0
0 2 4 6 8 10
time [s]
0 0.2
-0.5
0.1
-1
-1.5 0
0 2 4 6 8 10
time [s]
Fig. 5. Preliminary task: quickly lifting an object of unknown weight.
Grasp, tangential, dynamic forces and torsional moment (top); normalized
CoR on the left axis and estimated relative velocity on the right axis
(bottom).
10
0.02
N] 5 0.01
[ 0
0 -0.01
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
time [s]
Fig. 4. Flow chart of the planning algorithm: a C++-like expression is
T 0.2
usedtohandlethedynamiclengthofthevectorofplannedtrajectories . 1
Ifplanningrequestsinthecasesn=2andn=3failthetaskisended. 0 0
-0.2
-1
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
time [s]
position of the gripper and an orientation that is
the composition of the planned gripper orientation Fig.6. Preliminarytaskexecutedat100%robotspeedoverride.
inp andtherelativeorientationbetweenthetarget (cid:98) (cid:98)
t
pose and the vertical pose. The second trajectory
rotates the gripper about the grasping axis with a increaseduntilyin(9)istrackedbyitsestimationσ ζ+σ ω
0 1 z
ﬁxed grasp (m =0) so that the object is brought without an excessive noise ampliﬁcation.
2
toanorientationequaltotheoneinthetargetpose A preliminary object lifting task is executed to demon-
(hence p and p have the same orientation). The strate how the grasp control based on the relative velocity
p t
third trajectory moves the object to the target pose observerallowstherobottosafelygraspobjectsofunknown
with a ﬁxed grasp (m =0). weight (about 380g) even with quick motions, thus in
3
Figure 4 shows a ﬂow chart of the planning algorithm. presence of inertial forces. The object is ﬁrst grasped far
from its CoG with a small force to ensure contact with the
IV. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS sensor and then the slipping avoidance controller is turned
The planning and control methods proposed in the paper on. As soon as the robot starts lifting the object, a relative
have been experimentally tested on a Kuka iiwa robot velocity builds up as it can be recognized in the bottom
equipped with a Weiss Robotics WSG-50 gripper of Fig. 1. subplot of Fig. 5. Correspondingly, the dynamic control
The ﬁngers of the WSG-50 have sensorized with two SUN- action computes a force f that has a peak in the initial
nd
Touch force/tactile sensors [21], [22] with WiFi 802.11n in- phase, then it vanishes as soon as the load gets constant.
terfaceallowing300Hzsamplingrate.Therobotismounted The evidence of no slippage is given by the high value
onatablesuchthatitcanreachaﬁrstshelflayertopickthe of the torsional moment at steady state that means only a
objects (bottom left picture of Fig. 3) to put on a two-layer negligible rotation of the object happened (if the object had
shelf both on the top (bottom right picture of Fig. 3) and pivoted,thenthegravitationalmomentwouldhavevanished).
bottom (top right picture of Fig. 3) layers. The planning and At the end of the lifting phase, the tangential load (red line)
control software is implemented under the ROS framework reaches a value equal to the object weight. The experiment
with services, actions and nodes. The control parameters are isrepeatedwitha100%robotspeedoverrideandtheresults
are similar, again no object slippage occurs as demonstrated
s+5.3
α =1.1, α =13, C = , α =0.004, l=103 by the results in Fig. 6.
s d d s+1.5 CS
Next, three complete pick and place tasks are executed in
−
σ0 =40Nm/rad, σ1 =0.06Nms/rad, J =10 3kgm2 the scenarios described in Section III-A, where a solution
with a ﬁxed grasp does not exist. However, the planning
The gain α is selected such that the static normal force
s algorithm proposed in Section III-B is able to solve the
is 10% higher than that computed with a nominal friction
task using the controlled sliding manipulation ability made
coefﬁcient. The gain α is increased until the peak in
d available by the grasp controller in Section II-D:
the dynamic force is high enough to lift the object. The
parameter α is selected to obtain a time constant of 0.5 • Task1:pickandplaceoftheboxasshownintoppicture
CS
with a sampling frequency of 500Hz. The lag network is of Fig. 3. The weight is approximately 180g and the
tuned to attenuate the measurement noise and the gain l is friction coefﬁcient is about 0.7.
528
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 4 0.02 τ (black line) is very small during the whole task duration
n
N]2 0 since the origin of the grasp frame is very close to the CoG.
[
In the lifting motion segment from 7s to 12s, the planner
0 -0.02
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 ﬁnds a solution with the standard robot model (see the left
time [s]
branch of the ﬂowchart in Fig. 4). The same happens for the
1 0
motion segment when the robot moves the grasped box to
0.5 -0.05 the pre-place pose (see top left picture in Fig. 3). To reach
0 -0.1 the target pose shown in the top right picture of Fig. 3, the
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
time [s] planner ﬁnds a solution by following the right branch of
(a) Task1 the algorithm ﬂowchart with only two trajectories (n = 2)
T T T
and . consists in a rotation of the gripper with a
1 2 1
controlled sliding modality (m = 1) that allows to keep
1T
the orientation ofthe box ﬁxed. is a simplemotion to the
2
placeposewithaﬁxedgrasp(m =0).Notehowduringthe
T 2
execution of trajectory the observer estimates a relative
1
velocity during the gripper pivoting but it is not used since
thecontrolmodalityisnotslippingavoidance.Moreover,the
estimated c˜is high (close to 1) since the measured torsional
moment is very small.
In the execution of Task 2, similar results are shown in
(b) Task2
Fig. 7(b). But, in the trajectory where the planner ﬁnds a
solution with the controlled sliding modality active (m =
1
1) the robot does not move as it can be appreciated in the
accompanying video but the object rotates in-hand to reach
an almost vertical position.
Fig. 7(c) reports the results of the execution of Task 3.
Here the target pose is not vertical and thus the planning
algorithmfollowsthecorrespondingbranchoftheﬂowchart.
Thus,n=3andthemotionsegmentfromthepre-placepose
to the target pose starts with a controlled sliding (m = 1)
1
(c) Task3 during which the object rotates until the vertical position
and the gripper pivots about the grasping axis to reach the
Fig.7. Resultsofthethreemanipulationtasks:grasp,tangential,dynamic
forces on the left axis and torsional moment on the right axis of top orientation of the poTse ps deﬁned in Section III-B. The
subplots; some planned values of mi are reported in different planned successive trajectory 2 rotates the gripper still with a ﬁxed
trajectories identiﬁed by vertical bars; the gray-shaded area highlights the positionbutwithaﬁxedgrasp(m =0)suchthattheobject
motion segment where the planner ﬁnds a solution only using the virtual 2
reaches the orientation of the place pose. The target pose is
joint (pivoting maneuver), with n = 2 fo(cid:98)r tasks 1 and 2 and n = 3 for T
task3.Thebottomsubplotsreporttheestimatednormalizedpositionofthe achieved by executing the last trajectory .
3
CoRc˜andtheestimatedrelativevelocityωz.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The main result consists in the exploitation of a virtual
• Task 2: pick and place of the bottle as shown in middle
additional joint at gripper level made available by a suitable
picture of Fig. 3. The bottle weight is approximately
low-level grasp control. This additional dexterity is then
290g and the friction coefﬁcient is about 0.9. considered at planning level to solve complex manipulation
• Task3:pickandplaceofthebottleasshowninbottom
tasks otherwise unfeasible. Formal proofs of observability
picture of Fig. 3.
of the nonlinear dynamic model and of closed-loop stability
Figure 7(a) shows the results of the execution of Task 1. havebeenomittedtofocusmoreontheexperimentaldemon-
To grasp the object, whose weight is unknown to the robot, stration of the feasibility of complex manipulation tasks
asmallinitialgraspforcef (bluelineinthetopsubplot)of enabled by the combination of the low-level grasp control
n
1.2N is applied by the(cid:98)gripper to ensure a contact with the strategy with a geometric motion planner. Future work will
sensors. At about 7s the robot lifts the object and a peak in be devoted to presentation of formal results on the closed-
the estimated velocity ω rises (magenta line in the bottom loop stability and to the integration of the low-level gripper
z
subplot) that corresponds to a peak in the dynamic force control with task planners that can autonomously reason on
f (magenta line of the top subplot). The motion is quite complex scenes to solve the complete shelf reﬁlling task.
nd
slow due to the joint speed limits imposed to the planner Further investigation will focus on the generalization to the
for the whole motion, and this explains the low value of case of objects with geometry more complex than two ﬂat
the dynamic force. The tangential force f (red line) rises parallel faces, that requires a more complex deﬁnition of the
t
up to the weight of the box, while the torsional moment virtual LS used in the grasp controller.
529
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [10] M.UchiyamaandP.Dauchez,“Symmetrickinematicformulationand
non-master/slave coordinated control of two-arm robots,” Advanced
Robotics,vol.7,no.4,pp.361–383,1992.
[1] N.Daﬂe,A.Rodriguez,R.Paolini,B.Tang,S.Srinivasa,M.Erdmann,
[11] K. Lynch and F. Park, Modern Robotics: Mechanics, Planning, and
M. Mason, I. Lundberg, H. Staab, and T. Fuhlbrigge, “Extrinsic
Control. NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress,2017.
dexterity: In-hand manipulation with external forces,” in 2014 IEEE
[12] R.D.HoweandM.R.Cutkosky,“Practicalforce-motionmodelsfor
Int. Conference on Robotics and Automation, Hong Kong, 2014, pp.
slidingmanipulation,”TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,
1578–1585.
vol.15,no.6,pp.557–572,1996.
[2] B. Carlisle, K. Goldberg, A. Rao, and J. Wiegley, “A pivoting
[13] N. Xydas and I. Kao, “Modelling of contact mechanics and friction
gripperforfeedingindustrialparts,”inProceedingsofthe1994IEEE
limit surfaces for soft ﬁngers in robotics, with experimental results,”
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,May1994,pp.
TheInt.Journ.ofRoboticsResearch,vol.18,pp.941–950,1999.
1650–1655vol.2.
[14] J. Moody and C. Darken, “Learning with localized receptive ﬁelds,”
[3] F.Vin˜a,Y.Karayiannidis,C.Smith,andD.Kragic,“Adaptivecontrol Yale University, Department of Computer Science, Tech. Rep.
for pivoting with visual and tactile feedback,” in 2016 IEEE Int. YALEU/DCS/RR-649,1988.
Conference on Robotics and Automation, Stockholm, SE, 2016, pp. [15] K. Hornik, “Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward
399–406. networks,”NeuralNetworks,vol.4,no.2,pp.251–257,1991.
[4] Y. Hou, Z. Jia, and M. T. Mason, “Fast planning for 3d any-pose- [16] I. A. Sucan and S. Chitta, “Moveit!” http://moveit.ros.org, accessed:
reorienting using pivoting,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference 2019-08-31.
onRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),May2018,pp.1631–1638. [17] I.A.Sucan,M.Moll,andL.E.Kavraki,“TheOpenMotionPlanning
[5] E. Yoshida, M. Poirier, J. Laumond, O. Kanoun, F. Lamiraux, Library,”IEEERobotics&AutomationMagazine,vol.19,no.4,pp.
R.Alami,andK.Yokoi,“Regraspplanningforpivotingmanipulation 72–82,December2012.
by a humanoid robot,” in 2009 IEEE International Conference on [18] Z.Kingston,M.Moll,andL.E.Kavraki,“Decouplingconstraintsfrom
RoboticsandAutomation,May2009,pp.2467–2472. sampling-based planners,” in International Symposium of Robotics
[6] M.Costanzo,G.DeMaria,andC.Natale,“Slippingcontrolalgorithms Research,PuertoVaras,Chile,2017.
for object manipulation with sensorized parallel grippers,” in 2018 [19] R.Nilsson,“Inversekinematics,”Master’sthesis,LuleaUniversityof
IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation. IEEE, Technology,Sweden,2009.
May2018,pp.7455–7461. [20] P. Beeson and B. Ames, “TRAC-IK: An open-source library for
[7] S. Goyal, A. Ruina, and J. Papadopulous, “Planar sliding with dry improved solving of generic inverse kinematics,” in 2015 IEEE-RAS
friction,parti,”Wear,vol.143,pp.307–330,1991. 15th International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids).
[8] C.CanudasdeWit,H.Olsson,K.J.Astro¨m,andP.Lishinsky,“Anew IEEE,nov2015,pp.928–935.
modelforcontrolofsystemswithfriction,”IEEETrans.onAutomatic [21] G.DeMaria,C.Natale,andS.Pirozzi,“Force/tactilesensorforrobotic
Control,vol.40,no.5,pp.419–425,1995. applications,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 175, pp. 60 –
[9] I. D. Walker, R. A. Freeman, and S. I. Marcus, “Analysis of motion 72,2012.
and internal loading of objects grasped by multiple cooperating ma- [22] M. Costanzo, G. De Maria, C. Natale, and S. Pirozzi, “Design
nipulators,”TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,vol.10, and calibration of a force/tactile sensor for dexterous manipulation,”
no.4,pp.396–409,1991. Sensors,vol.19,no.4,2019.
530
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 