2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Reliable Data Association for Feature-Based Vehicle Localization
using Geometric Hashing Methods
Isabell Hofstetter, Michael Sprunk, Florian Ries, Martin Haueis
Abstract—Reliable data association represents a main chal-
lenge of feature-based vehicle localization and is the key to
integrity of localization. Independent of the type of features
used, incorrect associations between detected and mapped
features will provide erroneous position estimates. Only if the
uniquenessofalocalenvironmentisrepresentedbythefeatures
that are stored in the map, the reliability of localization is
enhanced.
In this work, a new approach based on Geometric Hashing
is introduced to the ﬁeld of data association for feature-based
vehicle localization. Without any information on a prior posi-
tion,theproposedmethodallowstoefﬁcientlysearchlargemap
regions for plausible feature associations. Therefore, odometry
and GNSS-based inputs can be neglected, which reduces the
risk of error propagation and enables safe localization.
The approach is demonstrated on approximately 10min
of data recorded in an urban scenario. Cylindrical objects
Fig. 1: The concept of Geometric Hashing for localization: Intro-
without distinctive descriptors, which were extracted from
duction of additional coordinate frames, here depicted as the hash
LiDARdata,serveaslocalizationfeatures.Experimentalresults
frameinred,toefﬁcientlyassociatethefeaturesusingahashtable
both demonstrate the feasibility as well as limitations of the
that was previously computed for a feature-based map.
approach.
I. INTRODUCTION
feasible. This introduces a certain risk for error propagation
Feature-based vehicle localization approaches have been
and, therefore, also safe localization.
studied thoroughly in the past years and their practical
application is known to have great value. These methods This contribution introduces the concept of Geometric
depend on a previously generated map that contains various Hashing to the ﬁeld of data association for feature-based
features, also called landmarks. In order to localize the vehicle localization. Geometric Hashing was initially intro-
vehicle in map coordinates, extracted features from the ducedforobjectrecognitionpurposesandisafastmethodto
vehicle’ssurroundingareassociatedwiththemapdata.These search large data sets for a given sample of features [6], [7].
association constraints pose an optimization problem, which Thisworkfocusesontheadaptionofthemethodforvehicle
is solved to ﬁnd an accurate pose estimation. localizationpurposesandexploresanddemonstratesitsfeasi-
Available localization methods differ mostly in the kind bilityaswellaslimitations.Thepresentedapproachprovides
of features that are used. There are methods that make the means for data association without any assumptions or
use of very dense information such as visual point features knowledge on prior positions. It allows for feature associa-
whichareextractedfromcameraimages[1],orpointclouds tionbasedonlyonthegeometricinformationprovidedbythe
that are obtained from LiDAR or RADAR measurements extracted features while evaluating all possible hypotheses.
[2]. Other approaches that focus on a reduced map size Thiseliminatestheriskoferrorpropagationandenablessafe
and reusability of features, suggest the usage of features localization.Themethodcanbeusedasasafetylocalization
with a semantic meaning such as road markings [3], [4], which complements a state-of-the-art solution and provides
or geometric primitives [5]. the means for the online validation of feature associations.
Thekeychallengewhichallthesemethodsface,iscorrect Inthefollowing,anoverviewofrelatedworkisgivenand
and reliable feature association. In order to provide safe lo- the Geometric Hashing concept as it was proposed by Lam-
calization,aproofoftheprobabilityofincorrectassociations dan et al. in [6] is brieﬂy recapitulated. Then, an association
beingsufﬁcientlylowisdesirable.Mostmethodsdonothave algorithm that utilizes Geometric Hashing is introduced for
amechanismtodosoandrelyonatemporalcomponent,e.g. the online data association for vehicle localization. Finally,
apreviousposeestimate,toarguethatnootherassociationis experimental results verify the potential of the proposed
approach and explore its limitations. We derive and test the
All authors are with the Daimler AG Group Re- methodonadatasetrepresentinganurbanloopof3.8kmin
search & MBC Development, Sindelﬁngen, Germany.
{ Sindelﬁngen, Germany, where cylindrical structures, such as
isabell.hofstetter, michael.sprunk,
}
florian.ries, martin.haueis @daimler.com poles,signs,andtrees,areusedforlocalization.Themethod,
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1322
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ∈ (cid:54)
however,isnotlimitedtothisspeciﬁckindoflandmarksand features(p,q)withp,q S andp=q representsabasisor
i
can easily be adapted to arbitrary localization features. basispair.LetK bethesetofbasispairsofmodelm .The
i | | − i
cardinalityofthisbasissetis K =N (N 1).Eachbasis
II. RELATEDWORK ∈ i i i
k = (p,q) K deﬁnes a local coordinate frame O ,
i (p,q)
Geometric Hashing has been applied in many different called the basis frame or geometric basis. The origin of this
ﬁelds of research to various use cases as for example in frame is deﬁned by the midpoint between the two feature
computer vision for object recognition [8], [9] or structural points p and q. The x-axis is represented by the axis passing
∈
alignment of proteins [10]. throughpandq.Foreachbasisk K ,theremainingfeature
\ i
In the broad ﬁeld of feature-based vehicle localization, points S k are transformed into the corresponding basis
i
however, Geometric Hashing was barely touched. In [11], frame and quantized appropriately. Finally, a hash function
the authors utilize Geometric Hashing for visual localization is applied to each feature point and the hashes are stored in
in large city environments from aerial images. They propose a hash table H.
to use buildings as features that are extracted from satellite
image data. A different hashing based approach was sug- B. Recognition phase
gested in [12], where the authors propose to use scan points
In an online step, a given input sample S can be searched
itself in order to avoid the feature extraction step and apply
for the objects of interest with the help of the hash table.
Geometric Hashing to entire scans of the environment.
Thisphaseiscalledtherecognitionphase.Here,anarbitrary
These works either focus on ﬁnding a very rough global ∈
orderedbasispairk oftworandomfeaturepointsp ,p S
estimate of the vehicle’s position or the use of dense feature 1 2
is generated. This deﬁnes a geometric basis as described
data. The latter is also the case in visual place recognition, \
before.AllremainingpointsofinterestS k aretransformed
which is the solution to the problem of determining if an
into this frame, quantized and hashed in the same fashion
image can be associated to a place that has been seen
as during the training phase. Finally, the hash table is
before [13], [14]. These methods depend on entire images
searched for matching hash values and a vote is cast for
that are searched for correspondences. However, for vehicle
each correspondence between the newly generated basis and
localization this is usually only used for initialization.
each hash table layer. If sufﬁcient feature correspondences
Incontrast,thisworkfocusesontheuseofsparsefeatures
are found, the matching model is returned.
whilestilltryingtoﬁndareasonablyaccuratepositioninthe
map frame. We show the potential of the approach, not as
C. Noise model
a stand-alone method for data association, but as a second
mainstay to validate and conﬁrm data association online. If the given input sample S is affected by noise, the
To the author’s knowledge, this is something that has not positional error of the computed hash locations in the basis
been studied before. Most localization algorithms that try framehastobedescribedbyavalidnoisemodel.Thistopic
to provide safe localization depend on prior positions to wasstudiedin[16].Rigoutsosshowsthatthepositionalnoise
ﬁnd reliable feature associations [5], [15]. However, time on the feature points in the basis frame depends heavily on
dependent information always introduces a certain risk of thechosenbasispair,thepositionofthepointrelativetothe
error propagation, which this contribution tries to eliminate. basis origin as well as the kind of transformation used. In
his work, he derives a noise model for similarity as well as
III. GEOMETRICHASHING afﬁne transformations.
Geometric Hashing was originally introduced by Lamdan In the following, the main results for similarity
et al. in the ﬁeld of computer vision for object recognition transformations will be brieﬂy recapitulated and a noise
purposes [6]. It is a well known technique for matching model for rigid transformations is proposed. For the sensor
geometric features that have undergone a transformation. noise on each single feature point, we will assume a
In an ofﬂine step, features of interest are represented in a Gaussian distribution with standard deviation σ, which is
varietyofcoordinatesystemsthataredeﬁnedbythefeatures centered at the ”true” location of the feature.
themselvesandstoredinaquicklysearchable,tabularformat.
Online, this data base is searched for the best match. 1) Similarity Transformation: If the models of interest
Inthefollowingsections,theconceptofGeometricHash- are allowed to undergo rotation, translation, and scaling, a
ing is brieﬂy revised and the two phases, training phase & similarity transformation can be used for hashing. In this
recognition phase, are discussed separately. For more detail, case, given p and p as a basis pair, every other feature p
1 2
the authors refer to [6], [7] or [16]. can be represented in the basis frame deﬁned by p and p
1 2
by
A. Training phase − · − ⊥·
p=p +(p p ) u +(p p ) v ,
0 2 1 s 2 1 s
Duringanofﬂinephase,calledthepreprocessingortrain-
ingphase,ahashtableisgeneratedfortheobjectsofinterest where p represents the origin and (u ,v ) the coordinates
0 s s
or models. Let M be a list of models for recognition. For of p in the basis frame. For this kind of transformation,
∈
each model m M, i = 1,...,N, all feature points S the resulting noise on the features in the basis frame can
| | i i
with S = N are extracted. Each ordered pair of point be approximated very well by a Gaussian distribution with
i i
1323
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 6 6
4
4 4
2
2 2
0
0 0
− p2
2
p1 −2 −2
−
4
− −
4 4
− − − − − −
4 2 0 2 4 4 2 0 2 4 6 8 4 2 0 2 4 6 8
(a)Randomsamplefeatures,wherefeaturesp1 (b)Simulatednoisymeasurementstransformed (c)Simulatednoisymeasurementstransformed
and p2, depicted in green, were chosen as a by a rigid transformation into the basis frame by a similarity transformation into the basis
basispair. deﬁnedbyp1 andp2. framedeﬁnedbyp1 andp2.
Fig. 2: Noise simulation for rigid and similarity transformations.
standard deviation subsections.Thissuggestedmethodfocusesonhashingusing
|| ||
(4 (u ,v ) 2+3)σ2 rigid transformations since scale relations provide useful in-
Σs = 2|s|p s−p ||2 (1) formationforlocalizationandshouldthereforebepreserved.
2 1
A similar hashing approach for the ofﬂine processing of
as was shown in [16].
feature-based maps was also derived in [17].
2) Rigid Transformation: If the models of interest are
allowed to undergo rotation and translation but no scaling, A. Generation of the Hash Table
rigid transformations are considered for hashing. Again, { }
For a given feature-based map M = f ,f ,...,f ,
givenabasispairconsistingofp andp ,everyotherfeature 1 2 n
1 2 where n is the number of map features, a hash table is
p can be represented in the basis frame by
generated during an ofﬂine process. This hash table is not
− − ⊥
p−p = |(|p2−p1)|| ·u + (|p|2 −p1)|| ·v , created to contain information about certain models, but
0 p p r p p r instead should hold sufﬁcient information about each local
2 1 2 1
where p0 represents the origin and (ur,vr) the coordinates environmentinthemap.Therefore,thebasissetK∈ischosen
of p in the basis frame. as f∈oll{ows: Bas}is p(cid:54)airs k = (fi,fj) with fi,fj M for
In this case, the noise on the feature positions in the basis i,j 1,...,n ,i=j are generated if and only if
frame cannot be described accurately by a Gaussian distri-
|| − ||
bution, which is reﬂected by the simulation results in Fig. d= f f <d
i j basis
2. Here, a random sample of feature points was generated,
which is visualized in Fig. 2a. Noisy measurements were for a given maximum basis pair limit d . This way only
basis
simulated and transformed into the basis frame deﬁned by bases that are representative for a local environment in the
p and p using a rigid transformation (see Fig. 2b) and a map, are generated, which reduces the size of the resulting
1 2
similaritytransform(seeFig.2c),respectively.Dependingon hashtablewhilestillensuringamorethansufﬁcientcoverage
the chosen basis pair and the feature locations with respect of the whole map.
to the basis frame, the noise in the angular component is Once all desired basis pairs are found, for each basis
∈
enhanced compared to the noise in radial direction. k K the origin z(k) of the corresponding basis frame
In the following, an over-bounding of the noise in radial is computed and the features of interest I are determined.
k
direction is suggested in order to obtain a Gaussian distribu- Features of interest are all features in a local surrounding of
tion. This results in a standard deviation of thebasisoriginz(k),whichislimitedbytheinclusionradius
|| ||
Σr = (4 (u2s||,pvs)−2p+||3)σ2, (2) rbianscils.fTrahmene,atrheeccaolcourdlainteadteussoinfgthaerisgeitdotfrafnesaftourrmesatIikoni.nFtihge.
2 1 3 illustrates the main parameters used in this process.
which equals the standard deviation Σ in equation (1)
scaled by the basis pair distance ||p −ps||. Finally,thefeaturesofinterestIk arequantizedandhashed
2 1 according to a given bin size s . In addition to the hash
bin
values, information about the noise distribution for features
IV. LOCALIZATIONUSINGGEOMETRIC in the basis frame is stored in the hash table according to
HASHING equation (2). Each hash table layer now holds information
Forthepurposeofdataassociationforlocalization,amod- aboutalocalmapenvironmentinacoordinateframedeﬁned
iﬁed Geometric Hashing method is derived in the following by two arbitrary map features.
1324
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Algorithm 1 FEATUREASSOCIATION
Input: Hash Table H, Sample of detected features D.
Output: List of feature associations.
∈
1) Randomlychooseabasispair(p ,p )withp ,p D.
1 2 ∈ 1 2
2) Compute the coordinates for each p D in the basis
frame O , quantize, and hash each coordinate.
(p1,p2)
3) Access the appropriate hash table bins in H for each
hash and cast a vote for each geometric basis found
there.
4) Histogram all bases that got one or more votes during
step3anddeterminethosebasesB thatreceivedmore
votes than a predeﬁned threshold: Each of these bases
could contain valid associations.
∈
5) For each basis O B found in step 4, compute
k
the Mahalanobis distance d between features in
Fig. 3: Illustration of the main symbols and variables involved in mal
the hash table generation for a given map section: Basis pair k O(p1,p2) and features in Ok.
(green),basisframe(orange),inclusionradiusr (blue),features 6) Store a weight w based on the Mahalanobis distance
incl
of interest I (gray). d for each candidate association.
k mal
7) Repeat steps 1 - 6 for all possible keys k = (p ,p )
∈ (cid:54) i j
with p ,p D,i=j.
i j
8) Sum all weights per candidate association and choose
B. Feature Association
associations based on summed weights.
Given a sample of detected features D and the previously
generated hash table H, feature associations can now be
determined by searching the hash table. This searching and V. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS
validation process is compactly summarized in Algorithm 1.
∈ A. Dataset
First, two arbitrary detections p ,p D are chosen,
1 2
which deﬁne a geometric basis O just as before. The dataset used for the demonstration and evaluation of
All feature detections D are then t(rpa1n,spf2o)rmed by a rigid theapproachwascollectedwiththevehicleBerthaONE[18].
transformation into this basis frame, quantized, and hashed It was recorded in Sindelﬁngen, Germany, and represents a
accordingly.Foreachcomputedhashvalue,appropriatebins loop of 3.8km in an urban area which results in approx-
in the hash table H are accessed and a vote is given to imately 10min of driving time. The features that serve to
each basis found there. In this step, not only the exact bin demonstrate our approach are cylindrical objects, such as
is accessed but also its direct neighborhood to ensure that signs,trafﬁclights,poles,andtrees,thatwereextractedfrom
also noisy measurements that fell into neighboring bins can LiDAR data as described in [5].
be associated. The map that was used to demonstrate this approach,
contains 738 cylindrical features. All cylinders are repre-
Then, the set of bases B is determined that reached a
sentedbythecoordinatesoftheircenterpointontheground
predeﬁned threshold for the number of votes. These are all
candidate bases that could contain valid associations. As a plane in map coordinates (x,y). As a reference solution for
∈ validationpurposes,weusetheapproachdescribedin[1].A
secondary check, for each basis O B, the Mahalanobis
distance (cid:113) k visualization of the map and the reference trajectory can be
seen in Fig. 4.
− − −
d = (p µ)TΣ 1(p µ) (3) B. Hash Table
mal
A hash table was generated for the previously mentioned
∈
is computed for each sample measurement p O map. The parameters for the hash table generation were
∈ ∼ N (p1,p2)
and f O with f (µ,Σ). The information on chosen as stated in Table I. Those values were chosen in
k
the distribution was previously added to the hash table order to ensure a good coverage of the map and at the same
during the generation process. A weight w based on the time, to limit the number of basis frames. To capture the
Mahalanobis distance is then stored for each candidate true distances between features, a rigid transformation was
association. Finally, the previously described steps can used to transform the features into the basis frames. The
be repeated for each available basis pair k = (p ,p ) resulting hash table contains 37236 geometric basis frames
∈ (cid:54) i j
with p ,p D, i = j for validation purposes. In or hash layers and the serialized data results in a ﬁle size of
i j
a ﬁnal step, the weights are summed for each candidate 305.8MB. This can easily be reduced by carefully selecting
associationandtheﬁnalassociationsarechosenaccordingly. bases to be generated, which was not in the scope of this
work.
1325
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Detections
30 Valid Solution
Invalid Solution
20
10
Fig. 4: Feature map containing 738 cylinderical features (black),
thereferencetrajectoryusedforevaluation(gray),andlocalization 0
poseswhereassociationswerefoundusingtheapproachdescribed 0 100 200 300 400 500 600
in Algorithm 1 (green). Time [s]
Fig.6:Numberoffeaturedetectionsandfoundassociationsversus
TABLE I: Hash Table Properties
time. Color code: Pose estimate classiﬁed as valid (green), other-
wise(red).Forzeroassociations,thepriorposeispropagatedusing
Property Variable Value
odometry measurements.
Binsize s 0.1m
bin
BasisLimit d 60m
basis
InclusionRadius rincl 100m for an optimization problem, which is solved for the ﬁnal
Transformations Rigid localization solution.
Layers 37236 A GNSS receiver and an odometry unit are added to
HashEntries 1603063 the framework in dashed lines as optional components.
Filesize 305.8MB The biggest advantage of the proposed method lies in the
fact that no propagation of prior poses is needed to ﬁnd
valid associations and therefore, we mostly neglect such
C. Localization Framework
information. However, the odometry output can be used to
The localization framework used to demonstrate the ap- provide a continuous solution in cases where the suggested
proach represents a single shot localization system. It is not method is unavailable. A GNSS-based solution helps to
designedtobeutilizedindependentlybutinsteadcanbeused validate associations by determining an extremely rough
asacomplementarysafetylocalizationthatprovidesinputon approximation of the current area of interest, but is also not
how reliable data association is. The framework is depicted necessary in theory.
inFig.5.Thecontributionofthiswork,whichwasdescribed
D. Localization results
in the previous sections, is highlighted in gray.
Thepotentialoftheproposedapproachismainlyassessed
by the availability of the system, the number of associations
Sensors GNSS Odometry given a certain number of detections per time as well as
the processing time. Nevertheless, results on the accuracy
of the resulting position estimates will also be discussed.
FeatureExtractor
Availability plots can be seen in Fig. 4 and 6. Fig. 4 shows
the map, the reference trajectory, and poses are highlighted
Map HashFunction in green where associations were found. Fig. 6 visualizes
the number of detections and associations versus time. We
classify the result in each time step based on the accuracy
HashTable FeatureAssociation oftheresultingpositionestimate.Ifanaccuracyoflessthan
5m in longitudinal and lateral direction and a yaw error of
◦
less than 30 was achieved, we call it a valid solution. All
Optimization
timestepsinFig.6whenavalidsolutionwascomputed,are
Fig. 5: Overview of the suggested localization framework using represented in green, otherwise in red.
Geometric Hashing for data association.
Overall, associations are found in 34.4% of the total time.
This is partially due to the number of detections given at
Asaninputtothefeatureassociation,itisassumedtohave each time step. Only in 62% of the time, ﬁve or more
amapcontainingpointfeaturesaswellasthecorresponding detections were found. In these cases, an overall availability
feature extractor that provides the detected features online. of approximately 51% is achieved.
Theoutputconsistsofalistofassociationsbetweenmapped In total, 92.8% of all localization solutions are valid. This
and detected features. These associations pose constraints includessolutionsthatwerepropagatedduetothefactthatno
1326
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 4
m]
[
on 2
l∆
0
0 100 200 300 400 500
4
m]
[
at 2
l∆
0
0 100 200 300 400 500
d] 0.4
a
[r
Fig.7:Ambiguitiesleadtowrongassociations.Thissnapshotshows w 0.2
a
y
an ambiguous feature pattern that was wrongly associated. It is ∆
highlighted by the use of black lines connecting the cylinders. 0
0 100 200 300 400 500
Time[s]
associationcouldbefound.Inthosecaseswhereassociations Fig. 9: Localization accuracy in longitudinal and lateral direction
werefound,94.2%oftheposeestimateswerevalidand5.8% as well as orientation. Color code: valid solution (blue), invalid
solution (red).
were invalid, respectively. This is due to ambiguous feature
patterns in the map. Fig. 7 shows a scenario where a wrong
associationwaschosenduetoasimilarfeaturepatterninthe
AGeometricHashingbasedmethodisderivedthatenables
map. The chosen associations are connected by white lines,
data association for vehicle localization without any prior
the feature pattern is redrawn by the use of black lines for
position estimate and relies solely on the detected features
better visualization.
per time step.
The suggested approach is demonstrated on a data set
s] 600
m recordedinanurbanareawherecylindricalstructures,which
[
me 400 are represented by their 2D position in the map frame, serve
Ti as localization features. A hash table is generated during an
d 200
se ofﬂine process for a map containing 738 features and used
p
Ela 00 100 200 300 400 500 600 online for data association.
Time[s] Experimental results demonstrate the advantages as well
Fig. 8: Elapsed processing time during feature association. The as the limitations of the approach: A map covering 3.8km
feature association was run on a machine with an Intel Core i7- of roads can be searched for feature associations in 32ms
3770K CPU @ 3.50GHz. on average in order to determine the vehicle’s pose. This
is accomplished without any knowledge on the vehicle’s
Processingtimedependsheavilyonthenumberoffeatures priorpositionwhicheliminatestheriskoferrorpropagation.
N that were extracted in each time step (see Fig. 8). This Additionally,themethodcanbeutilizedtodetectambiguities
f −
is due to the fact that N (N 1) geometric bases are in the map data. However, in the presence of ambiguities,
f f
generatedpertimestep.However,thiscaneasilybereduced the method might choose the wrong association during the
by limiting the number of online generated basis frames. association step.
Also, the method can be very well parallelized which leaves Futureworkwillfocusonanaccuratenoisemodelinpolar
additional room for improvement. coordinates, a thorough validation of associations, and the
Finally, the localization accuracy was evaluated based on useofinformationaboutambiguitiesinmaps.Weplantouse
the position error in longitudinal direction ∆lon and lateral this approach as a safety localization which complements a
direction ∆lat as well as the yaw angle error ∆yaw. The state-of-the-art solution and, therefore, offers the means for
error plots for the evaluation drive are shown in Fig. 9. The the online validation of feature associations.
overall RMS error amounts to 1.3m in longitudinal, 1.03m
◦
in lateral direction and 0.14 in the yaw angle. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
VI. CONCLUSIONSANDFUTUREWORK The map and data set was recorded and kindly provided
This work introduces the concept of Geometric Hashing by the Institute of Measurement and Control System of the
to the ﬁeld of data association for feature-based vehicle Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT). The authors would
localization and explores both the feasibility as well as like to thank their colleagues in Karlsruhe for their support.
limitations of the approach.
1327
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [10] N.Leibowitz,Z.Y.Fligelman,R.Nussinov,andH.J.Wolfson,“Mul-
tiple structural alignment and core detection by geometric hashing.,”
inISMB,pp.169–177,Citeseer,1999.
[1] M.Sons,M.Lauer,C.G.Keller,andC.Stiller,“Mappingandlocal- [11] T. Senlet, T. El-Gaaly, and A. Elgammal, “Hierarchical semantic
izationusingsurroundview,”inIEEEIntelligentVehiclesSymposium hashing: Visual localization from buildings on maps,” in 2014 22nd
(IV),pp.1158–1163,2017. International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 2990–2995,
[2] F.Schuster,C.G.Keller,M.Rapp,M.Haueis,andC.Curio,“Land- IEEE,2014.
mark based radar SLAM using graph optimization,” in 2016 IEEE [12] M.Tomono,“Ascanmatchingmethodusingeuclideaninvariantsig-
19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems natureforgloballocalizationandmapbuilding,”inIEEEInternational
(ITSC),pp.2559–2564,2016. ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,2004.Proceedings.ICRA’04.
[3] M. Schreiber, C. Kno¨ppel, and U. Franke, “Laneloc: Lane marking 2004,vol.1,pp.866–871,IEEE,2004.
based localization using highly accurate maps,” in IEEE Intelligent [13] S.Lowry,N.Su¨nderhauf,P.Newman,J.J.Leonard,D.Cox,P.Corke,
VehiclesSymposium(IV),pp.449–454,2013. andM.J.Milford,“Visualplacerecognition:Asurvey,”IEEETrans-
[4] F.Poggenhans,N.O.Salscheider,andC.Stiller,“PreciseLocalization actionsonRobotics,vol.32,no.1,pp.1–19,2015.
inHigh-DeﬁnitionRoadMapsforUrbanRegions,”in2018IEEE/RSJ [14] I.UlrichandI.Nourbakhsh,“Appearance-basedplacerecognitionfor
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), topologicallocalization,”inProceedings2000ICRA.MillenniumCon-
pp.2167–2174,2018. ference.IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation.
[5] J.Ku¨mmerle,M.Sons,F.Poggenhans,M.Lauer,andC.Stiller,“Ac- SymposiaProceedings(Cat.No.00CH37065),vol.2,pp.1023–1029,
curateandEfﬁcientSelf-LocalizationonRoadsusingBasicGeometric Ieee,2000.
Primitives,”in2019IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsand [15] M.JoergerandB.Pervan,“QuantifyingSafetyofLaser-BasedNav-
Automation(ICRA),2019. igation,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
[6] Y. Lamdan and H. J. Wolfson, “Geometric hashing: A general and 2018.
efﬁcientmodel-basedrecognitionscheme,”1988. [16] I. Rigoutsos, “Massively parallel bayesian object recognition,” tech.
rep., New York University, NY, Department of Computer Sciences,
[7] H. J. Wolfson and I. Rigoutsos, “Geometric hashing: An overview,”
1992.
IEEEComputationalScienceandEngineering,vol.4,no.4,pp.10–
[17] I. Hofstetter, M. Sprunk, F. Schuster, F. Ries, and M. Haueis, “On
21,1997.
AmbiguitiesinFeature-basedVehicleLocalizationandtheirAPriori
[8] Y.Lamdan,J.T.Schwartz,andH.J.Wolfson,“Objectrecognitionby
DetectioninMaps,”in2019IEEEIntelligentVehiclesSymposium(IV),
afﬁne invariant matching,” in Proceedings CVPR’88: The Computer
pp.1192–1198,IEEE,2019.
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, [18] O¨.S¸.Tas¸,N.O.Salscheider,F.Poggenhans,S.Wirges,C.Bandera,
pp.335–344,IEEE,1988.
M.R.Zofka,T.Strauss,J.M.Zo¨llner,andC.Stiller,“Makingbertha
[9] A.C.Roy,K.Hossin,M.P.Uddin,M.A.AlMamun,M.I.Afjal,and
cooperate–teamanniewaysentrytothe2016grandcooperativedriving
A.M.Nitu,“Detectionandclassiﬁcationofgeometricshapeobjects
challenge,”IEEETransactionsonIntelligentTransportationSystems,
for industrial applications,” Advancement in Image Processing and
vol.19,no.4,pp.1262–1276,2017.
PatternRecognition,vol.1,no.2,pp.11–19,2018.
1328
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 