2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Geometric Characterization of Two-Finger Basket Grasps
of 2-D Objects: Contact Space Formulation
† ‡ ∀
Elon D. Rimon and Florian T. Pokorny and Weiwei Wan
Abstract
Thispaperconsidersbasketgrasps,whereatwo-
ﬁnger robot hand forms a basket that can safely lift and
carry rigid objects in a 2-D gravitational environment.
The two-ﬁnger basket grasps form special points in
a high-dimensional conﬁguration space of the object and
two-ﬁnger robot hand. This paper establishes that all two-
ﬁnger basket grasps can be found in a low-dimensional
contact space that parametrizes the two-ﬁnger contacts
along the supported object boundary. Using contact space, B
Fig. 1: A polygonal object supported by point ﬁngers
eachbasketgraspisassociatedwithitsdepththatprovides O O
and in a basket grasp (the full robot hand is not
a security measure while carrying the object, as well as 1 2
shown).Theparameterσdescribestheinter-ﬁngerdistance,
its safety margin away from a critical ﬁnger opening
φ measures the two-ﬁngers’ orientation relative to gravity.
where the object drops-off into its intended destination.
robot hands. Their sampling based technique computes
Geometric techniques that compute the depth and drop-off
a bound on the depth (and hence security) of candidate
ﬁnger opening are described and illustrated with detailed
basket grasps. Among the caging techniques surveyed by
graphical and numerical examples.
Makita and Wan [14] and the Robot Grasping text [18],
I. Introduction
let us shed light on two approaches. The ﬁrst approach
Basket grasps offer a robust approach for picking objects
was pioneered by Vahedi [22], and arrived to full maturity
from a clatter, carrying them in a secure manner to their
in the work of Pipattanasomporn [15, 16]. Under this
destination, then releasing the objects in a controlled man-
approach,thephysicalspacesurroundingthegraspedobject
ner by opening the basket formed by the robot hand.
ispartitionedintoconvexcells.Asearchgraphwhosenodes
Important applications include packing orders at logistic
representtheplacementofthek robotﬁngersinthesecells
centers and picking up parts that arrive in a clutter during
is then used to compute all caging grasps surrounding a
manufacturing operations [5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 21]. This
given object, often as a convex optimization problem per
paper establishes that all two-ﬁnger basket grasps as well
graspnode.Thesetechniquescomputealltwo-ﬁngercaging
as their depth and drop-off ﬁnger opening can be found in
grasps of polygonal objects with n edges in O(n2logn)
a low-dimensional contact space, which parametrizes the
steps, and all three-ﬁnger caging grasps in O(n3logn)
two-ﬁnger contacts along the object boundary.
steps. However, this approach requires a high-dimensional
We study basket grasps of polygonal objects in a 2-D
conﬁguration space for the freely moving ﬁnger bodies.
gravitational environment. The robot hand is modeled as
InhisPhDthesis[1],Allenpioneeredanalternativeapp-
tBwopointordisc-ﬁngersthatfreelymoveinIR2.Theobject, roachthatusesalow-dimensionalcontactspacetocompute
,isinitiallysupportedatanequilibriumstance(Fig.1(a)).
caging grasps. Under the contact space approach, the ﬁn-
The object is to be lifted and carried in a safe manner by
gers maintain contact with the grasped object during the
a basket formed by a two-ﬁnger robot hand, where safety
search for caging grasps, thus reducing the search space
is measured by the depth of the basket formed by the
intoalow-dimensionalcontactspacethatcanbeintuitively
supportingﬁngers.Theﬁngersretaintheirrelativedistance
veriﬁedasmotionoftheﬁngersalongtheobjectboundary.
and orientation while carrying the object (Fig. 1(b)), and
Allen showed that all two-ﬁnger caging grasps can be
the hand should be able to drop the object in a predictable
computed in contact space using O(n2logn) steps [2].
manner upon reaching the intended destination.
Bunis [4] used contact space to compute all three-ﬁnger
Basket grasps form a special class of caging grasps [17,
caging grasps that maintain similar triangular formations
20]. In basket grasps, the bounded mobility of the carried
using O(n3logn) steps. Bunis [3] subsequently used con-
object is based on rigid-body constrains imposed by the
tact space to compute all two-ﬁnger locking grasps of 2-D
supportingﬁngersandenergy-boundimposedontheobject
objects against a wall using the same number of steps.
motions within the basket. Hence, efﬁcient caging grasp
Motivatedbythecontactspaceapproach,thispaperdes-
techniques can be leveraged to the synthesis of basket
cribes how the layout and properties of two-ﬁnger basket
grasps[10,13,23].Mahleretal.[13]weretheﬁrsttooffer
grasps can be computed in the low-dimensional contact
an algorithm that computes basket grasps for two-ﬁnger
space. The basket grasps form special points in a ﬁve-
† ‡ dimensional conﬁguration space (c-space) of the object
Dept.ofME,Technion,Israel. Dept.ofEECS, KTHRoyalInst.of
Technology,Sweden.∀SchoolofEng.Science,OsakaUniversity,Japan. and two-ﬁnger hand. This space consists of the grasped
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1560
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. izationofalltwo-ﬁngercontactsalongtheobjectboundary,
U ×
given by the set =[0,L] [0,L] in the (s ,s ) plane.
1 2
Contactspaceconsistsofrectangles,eachassociatedwitha
particular pair of object edges (including same-edge pairs).
Thelinesboundingeachrectanglerepresentvertex-edgeco-
{ ∈U }
ntacts.Thediagonal,∆= (s ,s ) : s =s ,represents
1 2 1 2
alltwo-ﬁngerpinchingsalongtheobjectboundary.Thedia-
U
gonal forms an obstacle in , since the ﬁngers may not
cross each other while moving along the object boundary.
(a) (b) Example: Consider the inter-ﬁnger distance function
F(bi)g.T2h:e(ao)bTjehcet’ss-pcaornatmacettesrpizaacteioUn offorthetwoobjpecotinbtoﬁunndgaerrys., doefﬁσne(sd i,nsU) ains σU(s1a,res2)d=ep(cid:107)icpt(esd1)F−igpu(rse2)2(cid:107)(.bT).heNcootentothuarst
overlayed with the cont∈ours of the function σ(s1,s2). σ(s1,s21) i2s non-negative and continuous on U, and attains
objectconﬁgurations,q IR3,theﬁnger-openingparameter aglobalminimumofzeroalongthediagonal∆.Alsonote
≥
σ 0, and the angle φ of the two-ﬁnger system relative that σ(s ,s ) forms a positive deﬁnite quadratic function
1 2 ◦
to gravity (Fig. 1(a)). When the object waiting to be in the individual contact space rectangles.
B O
lifted is located at a conﬁguration q , the high-dimensional When a rigid object is supported by ﬁnger bodies
0 O B 1
conﬁguration space contains a 2-D submanifold of all two- and atanequilibriumstance,thenetwrenchon dueto
2
ﬁnger contacts along the object boundary positioned at q . gravity and the supporting contacts must be zero. The next
0
Thissubmanifoldisparametrizedintermsofcontactspace, lemma characterizes the two-ﬁnger equilibrium stances in
U
which is then used to compute the layout of all possible contact space (see [19]).
B
basket grasps of an object waiting to be lifted. Lemma II.1. Let a polygonal object be located at
The paper describes a geometric technique that de- a conﬁguration q in a 2-D gravitational environment. All
0
termines the depth (and hence security) of a candidate two-ﬁnger contacts that form feasible equilibrium stances
U
basket grasp. The main result of the paper, the basket generically form piecewise linear curves in .
B
grasp theorem, states that the depth of a basket grasp is Example:Fig.2(a)showsapolygonalobject ataﬁxed
determined by the relative height of the object’s center of position-and-orientationinIR2.Fig.2(b)showsinsolidbl-
mass at speciﬁc single- and two-ﬁnger equilibrium stances ack all two-ﬁnger placements along the object boundary
U ◦
associated with the basket grasp. These stances can be thatformfeasibleequilibriumstancesincontactspace .
readily found and sorted in contact space as demonstrated To describe the object’s gravitational potential energy,
B B
with detailed examples. The paper ﬁnally addresses the let b denote the position of ’s center of mass in ’s
cm F B
drop-off problem, where the ﬁngers open along a ﬁxed line referenceframe (b =(cid:126)0inFig.1).When islocated
B cm
inIR2 untilacriticaldrop-offeventisreached.Thiscritical at a conﬁguration q=(d,θ), the position of its center of
F
ﬁnger opening is associated with a frictionless two-ﬁnger mass in the ﬁxed world frame, , is given by X (q)=
∈ W cm
equilibrium grasp of the object (without gravity), that can R(θ)b +d, where q=(d,θ) IR3. The gravitational po-
cm B ·
be efﬁciently computed by a simple contact space search. tential energy of is given by U(q)=mg(e X (q)),
B cm
Section II introduces the notion of contact space and where m is ’s mass, g is the gravitational constant, and
characterizes the layout of all possible two-ﬁnger basket e is the vertical upward direction, e=(0,1), in IR2. The
B
grasps at a given object position using contact space. Sec- function U(q) simply measures the height of ’s center of
F B
tion III describes a geometric technique that uses contact massin .Thegravitationalwrenchaffecting isgiven
−∇ W − ×
space to determine the depth of a candidate basket grasp. by U(q)= mg(e,R(θ)b e) (see [19]).
cmF
Section IV demonstrates the technique on several object Consider the free c-space, , whose c-obstacles are
O O
types. Section V studies the drop-off problem, where con- induced by ﬁxed supporting ﬁngers and . Based on
1 2
tact space is used to search for the critical drop-off ﬁnger conservation of energy, the non-degenerate local minima
F
opening of a given basket grasp. The conclusion discusses of U(q) in form locally stable equilibrium stances of
B
open problems as well as extension to 3-D basket grasps. the object . This property is the basis for the following
deﬁnition of basket grasps.
II. CONTACTSPACEOFTWO-FINGERBASKETGRASPS B
Deﬁnition 2. Let a rigid object be supported under
This section characterizes the two-ﬁnger basket grasps of O O
gravitybyﬁngers and atanequilibriumstancecon-
a 2-D object at a given initial position using contact space. 1 2
ﬁguration q . The supporting ﬁngers form a basket grasp
The object’s outer boundary is parametrized by arclength 0 F
∈ if q forms a non-degenerate local minimum of U(q) in .
incounterclockwisedirectionusingtheparameters [0,L], 0 U
The local-minimum test of U(q) in contact space
whereListheobject’sperimeter(Fig.2(a)).Letp(s )and B
1 dependsontheheightof ’scenterofmassasfollows[19].
p(s ) denote the position of the ﬁnger contacts along the
2 LemmaII.2. Atwo-ﬁngerequilibriumstancethatinvolves
objectboundary,suchthatp (0)=p (L)andp (0)=p (L). B
Dﬁnegﬁenristiaotnp(1s. )Aanpdolpy(gson)a.lC1oobnjteacctt1Bspaicseciosntthae2ctpeadrabmy2ettwero- tw−whλoe1re(eρd1gλ(ess1,,λosf2)≥+0froOram1r)es−atλh2leo(ρce2aq(lsu1mil,isibn2r)iimu+murOms2t)ao+nfcUyec(mcqo()sew1fﬁ,hsce2ine)<nts0,
1 2 1 2
1561
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) (b)
(a) (b) Fig. 4: (a) A polygonal object supported at a two-ﬁnger
Fig. 3: The two-ﬁnger equilibrium stances of the object U
showninFigure2areeitherlocal-minima(green)orlocal- basket grasp. (b) The σ0-contour of σ(s1,s2) in .
maxima (red) of U(q) in contact space (see text). ated with the contact-space rectangles, with vertices on
the rectangles’ bounding lines (Figure 4(b)).
ρ1,ρ2 are the signed distances of the contacts from The elliptical contour segments can be parametrized
the inters≥ection point, p, of the ﬁnger contact nBormals, in terms of B’s orientation, θ, in each rectangle R as
rteOr1o,frOm2ass0abthoeBveﬁnpg.eSrtarandcieis,athnadtyicnmvotlhveehaeicgohntcoafve’vsecretenx- feo(cid:18)llaonwds.e(cid:19)LeotftjB.anT(cid:0)dhetkndeeanchotecotnhteouunristetgamnge(cid:1)ennttsistogitvheenejbdkyges
andanedgeof genericallyformlocal minimaofU(q).1 j k
Example:TheequilibriumstancesofFigure2arecolor- s1(θ) =A−1 RT(θ)(x −x )+p0−p0 θ∈[θ−,θ+]
s (θ) 1 2 k j jk jk
coded according to their stability type in Figure 3. Green 2
(1)
fihnoeriUgthh.teTolhfoecBas’lstamcbeiinnlititemyraotyfapnmedaosrfesdcehafocahnrgtshetseanwlocheceandlemtshcaerxiobibmejseachotofmwUov(thqe◦e)s weankhg,elarenesdAθx−=1,[xtajn2−dartθek+]t,hpeo0jc,pcpou0kinrat-rwﬁehnteghneeriopnnoitesiaitoliofvnetsrh.teiTcehtsweooefnﬁedjnpgoaeinnrdst
in contact with two ﬁxed point or disc ﬁngers. touches ajkn endpoijnkt of the respective object edge. When
B
Remark: A two-ﬁnger basket grasp of is a non- the two ﬁngers support the same edge (or parallel edges)
degenerate local minimum of U(q) in the free c-space, F, ofB,theobjectmaintainsﬁxedorientationθ alongalinear
CO CO
wooffhBoUs(eiqsﬁ)annagleoernqcgu-ioltihbbesrtiau1cm-lDesstsaatrrnaecteumth1aSta=nfodbrmdys(2Ca.OlAoc)ba∩alsbmkdeiytn(igCmrOausmp) cso1nE=txocau,mrwsphelegerm:eFecni=gt.utrTjeh·(e4R(saTe)g(smθh)oe(nwxt1s−saaxtips2oﬁ)l+eysgpot0khn−ealpc0joo)nbsjiestrccatoinBntstssau2np+t-.
F S 1 2
itnhat .pTashseesstrtahtruomughctohrerebspaosknedts-gtoratshpepcoonintotuirnoUfσ.(Hs1e,nsc2e), pgorarstepd) obfyUtw(qo).ﬁTngheersﬁnagtearslorecmalaimninﬁixmedumin(IiR.e2. awhbialsekeBt
when the puncture point that determines the depth of the moves along the σ -contour depicted in Figure 4(b). ◦
0
bmaasxkiemtugmrasopfoUc(cqu)rsalaotnagttwhoe-bﬁansgkeert-sgtaranscpe,ciotnftoorumrsinaUlo.ca◦l niqSutearttirnagceasttthheebσas-kceot-ngtorausrpipnoisntta,gve0s=th(ast01,cso02rr)e,stphoentdechto-
0
the contact-space rectangles and their bounding lines. The
III. CONTACTSPACECOMPUTATIONOF
contour is searched sequentially along its two directions.
BASKET-GRASPDEPTH
Thissectiondescribesatechniquethatdeterminesthedepth The θ-parametrization of Eq. (1) can be used to compute
(and hence security) of a candidate basket grasp. The tech- theendpointsoftheinitialcontoursegmentsthatstartatv−0
nique is described for point ﬁngers then extended to disc andreachthecontact-spacerectangleboundinglines,atv1
ﬁngers. In a basket grasp, the object’s conﬁguration point, and v1+. In all subsequent stages, the technique−constructs
qA0s,ltihesealtetvheel-bsoetttoomf aU3(-qD)cianvcirteyaisnestheitsfreheecig-shptaicneFF,[1t9h]e. tahnedceonndtoautrtsheegmpoeinnttss tvhi−a+t1staanrdt avti++th1elopcoaitnetds ovni thanednevxi+t
contact-space rectangles bounding lines. This process ends
appearance of a puncture point, q , marks the depth of the
1 when the ﬁrst two-ﬁnger equilibrium stance is encountered
basket grasp. The basket grasp is speciﬁed as two ﬁnger
∈U along each direction, as next described.
contacts on the object boundary, (s0,s0) , at the object
1 2 Edge-edge equilibrium stance: Consider a stance that
conﬁguration q . The ﬁngers now become ﬁxed supports B
with ﬁxed inter0-ﬁnger distance, σ =(cid:107)p(s0)−p(s0)(cid:107). involves two edges ej and ek of , with inward unit nor-
The technique computes the ba0sket gras1p depth2by trac- mals nj and nk. The force-part of the equilibrium stance
ing the σ -contour of σ(s ,s ) in U, which represents conditi≥on requires that λ1R(θ)nj+λ2R≥(θ)nk=e for some
object mot0ions that maintai1n c2ontact with the supporting λ1,λ2 0.Asdescribedin[19],λ1,λ2 0forminIequality
ﬁngers.Thefollowinglemmacharacterizestheσ -contour. const(cid:20)raintsinθthatdetermineaθ-intervald(cid:21)enoted jk.The
0 U moment-partoftheequilibriumstanceformstheconstraint:
Lemma III.1 ([2]). Each contour of σ(s ,s ) in
consists of elliptical and linear segme1nts2 associ- det R(θ)n×j R(θ)n×k e =0 θ∈I .
p(s (θ)) n p(s (θ)) n 0 jk
1 j 2 k
1Stances that involve disc-ﬁngers located at convex vertices of B Thesolutionsofthisequationinθ givetheedge-edgeeRqui-
typicallydonotformlocal-minimaofU(q)(see[19]). librium stances along the σ0-contour in the rectangle jk.
1562
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Vertex-edgeequilibriumstance:Lettheﬁngerssupport
B B
thej’thvertexof atp(s ),andtheedgee of atp(s ).
1 k 2
The object orientation, θ, is ﬁxed at this particular (s ,s )
1 2
point. To check equilibrium stance feasibility, one models
the ﬁnger at the vertex as a discBof small radius >0. Let h− h+
e and e be the two edges of that meet at the vertex,
j1 j2
with inward unit normals n and n . The disc-ﬁnger can
j1 j2
realize any contact force direction within the generalized
contact normal at the vertex, λ n +λ n such that
≥ 11 j1 12 j2
λ11,λ12 0. The equilibrium stance force-part requires (a) (b)
that λ R(θ)n +λ R(θ)n + λ R(θ)n =e for some Fig. 5: (a) A two ﬁnger vertex-edge saddle point of U(q)
11 ≥j1 12 j2 2 k −
λ ,λ ,λ 0. The solution determines a sector of force withrelativeheighth .(b)Atwoﬁngervertex-edgesaddle
11 12 2 −
directionsattheobjectvertex,λn +(1 λ)n ,suchthatλ point of U(q) with relative height h+.
vari(cid:20)esinanintervalIj containedijn1[0,1].Thej2moment-(cid:21)part the 1-D stratum S at points lower than the local-maxima
of the equilibrium stance forms the constraint: S B
− encounteredalong .Hence,startingatq ,theobject can
1
λn¯ +(1 λ)n¯ R(θ)n e
det ×j1 −j2 ×k =0 move along the rim curve while maintaining contact with
p(s (θ)) (λn¯ +(1 λ)n¯ ) p(s (θ)) n 0 O
1 j1 j2 2 k ∈I the single ﬁnger , until the other ﬁnger is encountered
wheren¯j1=R(θ)nj1andn¯j2=R(θ)nj2. Asolutionλ j at some point of S.iAt this instant the object is located at
iadteEannxtiaﬁemnesdpptlhoee:infTtehoaesfibtσhilei-tcyσo0on-ftcooaunrvteodruetrepxisc-eetgedmdgeeinnetqFiuniigluiRbrrejiku4.m(bs)tacnocne- aliepsooinntt(hse∗1,psie∗2c)eoonftthheeσσ00--ccoonnttoouurritnhaUt.coMnotarienosvtehr,e(bsa∗1s,kse∗2t)-
tains the basket-gra0sp point (green dot no. 1). The neigh- gra−sp−point (s01,s02) and bounded by the higher endpoints
boring local maxima of U(q) along the σ0-contour form◦ (s1W,hse2n)Banmdo(vse+1s,asl+2on).gtherim-curvesegmentthatstartsat
vertex-edge equilibrium stances (red dots no. 2 and 3). O
ThetechniquecomparestheheightsofB’scenterofmass q1,itsBcontactpointwith i movesinacontinuousmanner
along ’s boundary,until theother ﬁngeris encounteredat
atotuthr,etatwkion-gﬁningteoreaqccuoiluibnrtiuthmesrtealnecveasntloscinatgelde-oﬁnngtheerσeq0u-ciloinb-- (s∗1,s∗2). If the contact point−started outside B’s boundary
rium stances as summarized in the following theorem. segment parametrized by [s ,s+], it must have passed
i i −
Theorem 1 (Basket Depth). Let two ﬁnger contacts at through one of the interval’s endpoints, s or s+, before
(s01,s02−) fo−rm a basket grasp of a 2-D object B at q0. rBeamchaiinngtaitnheedpaosinintgsle∗i ctohnattaclitews iitnhsiOde dthueriinigntethrviisalm. oStiinocne,
Let (s ,s ) and (s+,s+) be the two-ﬁnger equilibrium i B
stances1 en2countered1alon2g both directions of the basket- thecontactpointatq1 must−belocatedinside ’sboundary
graspcontourinU.Leth−andh+betheheightofB’scen- segment parametrized by [si ,s+i ]. The heights h1 and h2
thus capture all single-ﬁnger equilibrium stances that can
terBof mass at these stances. Let hi be the minimum height possibly form the puncture point of the basket grasp. (cid:3)
of ’s center of mass over the single-ﬁnger equilibrium
− Extension to disc ﬁngers: The disc ﬁngers can be
stances along the boundary segment [s ,s+] for i=1,2. B
The basket-grasp depth is given by mini{hi−,h+,h ,h }, convertedintopointﬁngersbyexpandingtheboundaryof
B 1 2 outward by the disc-ﬁngers’ radius. The boundary of the
measuredrelativetotheheightof ’scenterofmassatq . CB
0 resulting c-space object, , contains straight line edges
Remark:Oneonlyneedstochecksingle-ﬁngerstancesthat
F as well as circular arcs. Every circular arc can be ap-
form saddle points of U(q) in . These are single-ﬁnger
stances that involve a horizontal edge of B, and certain proximated by a regular k-segment polygonal arc. The
B ◦ basket-grasp depth can now be computed on the polygonal
single-ﬁngerstancesthatinvolveavertexof (see[19]). CB
Proof sketch: The 3-D cavity of a basket grasp at q is approximation of . The output will closely approximate
surroundedbytheﬁngerc-obstaclesCO andCO and0the the exact basket-grasp depth, and will usually identify the
1 2
level-setofU(q)thatpassesthroughthepuncturepoint,q. exactobjectfeaturesthatdeterminethebasketgraspdepth.
1
The puncture point Sq1 can aCpOpear on Sthe indivCidOual c- IV. REPRESENTATIVEEXAMPLES
obstacle boundaries, =bdy( ) and =bdy( ), or Thissectionillustratesthetechniqueoftheprevioussection
1 S 1 CO ∩2 CO 2
on their intersection curve =bdy( ) bdy( ). The on three examples.
S 1 U 2
curve corresponds to the σ -contour in that passes Example 1: Consider the basket grasp of the convex
− 0 B
through (s0,s0). Hence, h and h+ measure the height of object depicted earlier in Figure 4 (green dot no. 1).
B 1 2
’s center of mass at the ﬁrst local-maxima of U(q) enc- The two local maxima of U(q) along the σ -contour of
S F 0
ountered along , which form saddle points of U(q) in . the basket grasp form vertex-edge equilibrium stances (red
S CO
IfthelowestsaddlepointofU(q)lieson =bdy( ), dots no. 2 and 3). These stances are shown in Figure 5
i Si∩ −
considertherimcurvedeﬁnedastheintersectioncurve with their relative heights h and h+. The object also
{ } i
q:U(q)=U(q ) . It forms a closed loop with constant possesses two single-ﬁnger equilibrium stances along the
F 1
height in that passes through q . Since q is the lowest redboundary segments(seeTheorem 1).These stancesare
1 1
saddlepointofU(q)justaboveq ,therimcurveintersects shown in Figure 6 with their relative heights h and h .
0 1 2
1563
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. h1 h2
(a) (b)
Fig. 9: (a) A cup-like object supported at a two-ﬁnger
U
basket grasp. (b) The σ -contour of σ(s ,s ) in , with
0 1 2
(a) (b) the local minimum (no. 1) and two local maxima (no. 2
Fig.6:(a)Asingle-ﬁngersaddlepointofU(q)withrelative
height h . (b) A single-ﬁnger saddle point of U(q) with and 3) of U(q).
1
relative height h .
2
In this example, the minimum height and hence the basket
− ◦
grasp depth is h , depicted in Figure 5(a).
h− h+
(a) (b)
Fig.10:(a)Avertex-edgesaddlepointofU(q)withrelative
−
height h . (b) A vertex-edge saddle point of U(q) with
−
relative height h+. The basket grasp depth is h .
−
with their relative heights h and h+. There are also two
single-ﬁnger equilibrium stances along the red boundary
(a) (b)
Fig. 7: (a) A non-convex object having a shifted center- segments (see Theorem 1), having higher relative heights
of-mass, supported at a two-ﬁnger basket grasp. (b) The h andh .Theminimumheightandhencethebasketgrasp
U 1 2− ◦
σ0-contour of σ(s1,s2) in , with the local minimum (no. depth is h , depicted in Figure 10(a).
1) and two local maxima (no. 2 and 3) of U(q). V. CRITICALDROP-OFFFINGEROPENING
This section characterizes the critical ﬁnger opening of
B
a given basket grasp that allows the release of the object
at its intended destination. To analyze this problem, we
h− h+ assume that the ﬁngers open along a ﬁxed line in IR2,
determined by the inter-ﬁnger segment at the given basket
grasp (Figure 11(a)). The angle between the inter-ﬁnger
(a) (b)
Fig.8:(a)Anedge-edgesaddlepointofU(q)withrelative segmentandthedirectionofgravityisthusﬁxedatφ=φ0.
height h−. (b) An edge-edge saddle point of U(q) with Recall that (q0,σ0) are the object conﬁguration and inter-
relative height h+. The basket grasp depth is h+. B ﬁngerdistanceattheinitialbasketgrasp.Theconﬁguration
Example 2: Figure 7(a) shows a non-convex object space of the drop-off problem consists of the coordinates
∈ ∈ ≥
having a shifted center of mass. The object is supported (q,σ) IR4, where q IR3 and σ σ .
B 0
in a basket grasp via an edge and a concave vertex of . The (q,σ)-space can be thought of as a one-parameter
∈
Figure 7(b) shows the basket-grasp point in contact space family of 3-D spaces, q IR3, parametrized by σ. For each
(greendotno.1).ThetwolocalmaximaofU(q)alongthe σ, the ﬁngers form ﬁxed supports while the object moves
CO | CO |
σ0-contour of the basket grasp are edge-edge equilibrium freely in IR2. Let 1 σ and 2 σ denote the ﬁnger
stances, located inside the contact-space rectangles (red c-obstacles in each σ-slice of IR4. The composite ﬁn-
∪ CO |
dots no. 2 and 3). These st−ances are shown in Figure 8 g∪er c-oCbOstac|les in IR4 are thus σ≥σ0 1 σ and
with their relative heights h and h+. The object has no σ≥σ0 2 σ. When the ﬁngers move apart along a ﬁxed
single-ﬁnger equilibrium stances along the red boundary lineinIR2,theﬁngerc-obstaclesmoveapartasrigidshapes
segments(seeTheorem1).Theminimumheightandhence in the corresponding σ-slices of IR4. At σ=σ , the ﬁnger
◦ 0
the basket grasp depth is h+, depicted in Figure 8(b). c-obstacles overlap in a local neighborhood of q (Fig-
0
Example 3: Figure 9(a) depicts a cup-like object sup- ure 11(b)). As the ﬁngers move apart, a drop-off puncture
ported in a basket grasp via an edge and a concave vertex pointwilleventuallyappearbetweentheﬁngerc-obstacles,
B
of . Figure 9(b) shows the basket-grasp point in contact at a point (q ,σ ) such that σ >σ (Figures 11(c)-(d)).
1 1 1− 0
space (green dot no. 1). The two local maxima of U(q) Theﬁngeropeningdifference,σ σ ,measuresthebasket
1 0
along the σ -contour of the basket grasp are located on grasp’ssafetymarginawayfromthecriticaldrop-offevent.
0
bounding lines of the respective contact-space rectangles The remainder of this section describes a scheme for
U
(reddotsno.2and3).ThesestancesareshowninFigure10 computing the drop-off puncture point in contact space .
1564
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. basket grasp drop−off grasp
(a) (b)
Fig. 12: (a) The search for the critical drop-off event starts
withthebasket-graspcontoursegment.(b)Thesearchends
at the lowest saddle point of σ(s ,s ), located on the left
1 2 R
bounding line of a contact space rectangle .
13
B values, they will eventually reach the lowest saddle point
Fig.11:(a)A2-Dobject supportedatatwo-ﬁngerbasket
of σ(s ,s ) that retracts under decreasing σ to the basket-
grasp ∈with inter-ﬁnger distance σ0. (b) Cross section of grasp p1oin2t (s0,s0). This search takes O(n2logn) steps,
(q,σ) IR4 at the basket grasp point (q0,σ0). (c) The crit- where n is the1nu2mber of edges of the object B [2].
icaldrop-offﬁngeropBening,σ1,isafrictionlesstw∈o-ﬁnger Example: Consider the two-ﬁnger basket grasp of the
equilibrium grasp of . (d) Cross section of (q,σ) IR4 at B
convex object depicted earlier in Figure 4 (green dot
the drop-off puncture point (q ,σ ).
1 1 no. 1). The water ﬁlling analogy starts with the σ -contour
Tvahleueσd-fsulinccetsioonfπ(:qI,Rσ4)-→spIaRce, daerﬁeneledveals-−sπe(tsq,oσCf)O=theσ.sCcaolnar- suergem12en(at))o.fAtshethebawskateetrgrirsaesspwiinththinecrreeacstianngglσe,Rth0e1y3 r(eFaicgh-
sider the free c-space deﬁned as IR4 int( ), where the frictionless two-ﬁnger equilibrium grasp located on the
CriOor.=A∪cσc≥orσd0i(nCgOto1|σSt∪ratCiﬁOe2d|σM)oarnsedtihnet(o·r)yd[e7n],otthese pseutncintutere- left bounding line of R13. It is a saddle point of σ(s1,s2◦)
that marks the critical drop-off ﬁnger opening of σ .
point (q1,σ1) is a critical point of π(q,σ) having the VI. CONCLUSION 1
following properties [17]. All critical points of π(q,σ) in The paper established that the basket grasps can be ana-
thefreec-spaceoccuratfrictionlesstwo-ﬁngerequilibrium lyzed and computed in a low-dimensional contact space.
B
grasps of the object (without gravity). And all puncture First, contact space can be used to compute the layout of
points are saddle points of π(q,σ) in the free c-space. all possible basket grasps of an object waiting to be lifted
B
Thesetofalltwo-ﬁngercontactswiththeobject forms at a given position. Second, the depth (and hence security)
U
a2-DsubmanifoldofIR4,parametrizedbycontactspace . of a candidate basket grasp can be computed along the
Allen[2]establishedthatthebehaviorofπ(q,σ)inthefree basket-grasp contour in contact space. The main result of
− CO
c-space,IR4 int( ),isinone-to-onecorrespondencewith the paper, the basket grasp theorem, states that the depth
thebehavioroftheinter-ﬁngerdistancefunction,σ(s ,s ), of a basket grasp is determined by the relative height of
U 1 2
in . In particular, the saddle points of π(q,σ) (which the object’s center of mass at speciﬁc single and two-
occur at two-ﬁnger frictionless equilibrium grasps) appear ﬁngerequilibriumstancesassociatedwiththebasketgrasp.
U
as saddle points of σ(s ,s ) in . Hence, the computation These stances can be readily found and sorted in contact
1 2
of the critical drop-off ﬁnger opening reduces to a search space as demonstrated with detailed examples. Third, the
U
for the lowest saddle point of σ(s ,s ) in that retracts criticaldrop-offeventthatallowsreleaseoftheobjectatits
1 2
under decreasing σ to the basket-grasp point (s0,s0). intended destination is associated with a frictionless two-
1 2
The saddle points of σ(s ,s ) are of two possible ﬁngerequilibriumgraspoftheobject(withoutgravity),that
1 2
types [2]. Equilibrium grasps where one ﬁnger contacts can be computed as a simple search in contact space.
aconvexvertexwhiletheotherﬁngercontactsanopposing In future research, it is natural to seek quality measures
B
edgeof (Figure11(c));orequilibriumgraspsthatinvolve that will guide the selection of optimal basket grasps. It
B
a convex vertex and an opposing concave vertex of . All seems that the basket-grasp depth (which affects quality)
saddle points are thus located on the bounding lines of increases as the ﬁngers open apart. However, the allowed
the contact-space rectangle (at most one on each bounding ﬁnger opening must satisfy a user-speciﬁed margin of
R
line segment). Let be the contact-space rectangle that security away from the critical drop-off event. Finally, our
jk
containsthebasket-grasppoint(s0,s0).Firstdeterminethe future work will focus on synthesizing basket grasps using
1 2
two endpoints of the σ -contour segment of σ(s ,s ) on 3-D robot hands. It is a natural extension of this paper,
R 0 1 2
bounding linesof . The search can now be thought of with possible follow-up on the role of the hand’s palm
jk
as gradually ﬁlling contour-segments of σ(s ,s ) inside in performing safe transition from basket grasps to fully
R 1 2
withwater,whilesearchingfortwo-ﬁngerequilibrium secure immobilizing grasps of 3-D objects.
jk
graspsontherectangle’sboundinglines.Asthewaterrises Acknowledgement: This work was partially supported by
between successive contour segments according to their σ grant no. 1253/14 of the Israel Science Foundation.
1565
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [16] P. Pipattanasomporn, P. Vongmasa, and A. Sudsang.
Caging rigid polytopes via ﬁnger dispersion control.
[1] T.F.Allen. TwoandThreeFingerCagingofPolygons
IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pages
and Polyhedra. PhD thesis, Dept. of Mechanical
1181–1186, 2008.
Engineering, Caltech, 2016.
[17] E. Rimon and A. Blake. Caging planar bodies by 1-
[2] T. F. Allen, E. Rimon, and J. W. Burdick. Two-
parameter two-ﬁngered gripping systems. Int. J. of
ﬁngercagingofpolygonalobjectsusingcontactspace
Robotics Research, 18(3):299–318, 1999.
search. IEEE Trans. on Robotics, 31(5), 1164-1179,
[18] E. D. Rimon and J. W. Burdick. The Mechanics of
2015.
Robot Grasping. Cambridge University Press, 2019.
[3] H. A. Bunis and E. D. Rimon. Toward grasping
[19] E. D. Rimon, F. T. Pokorny, and W. Wan.
against the environment: Locking polygonal objects
Conﬁguration space characterization of two-
against a wall using two-ﬁnger robot hands. IEEE
ﬁnger basket grasps of 2-D objects. Tech.
Robotics and Automation Letters, 2018.
report, Mechanical Engineering, Technion,
[4] H. A. Bunis, E. D. Rimon, T. F. Allen, and J. W.
https://robots.net.technion.ac.il/publications,
Burdick. Equilateral three-ﬁnger caging of polygonal
Jan. 2020.
objects using contact space search. IEEE Trans.
[20] A. Rodriguez, M. T. Mason, and S. Ferry. From
Autom. Sci. Eng., 15(3):919–931, 2018.
caging to grasping. Int. J. Rob. Res., 31(7), 886-900,
[5] R. Diankov, S. S. Srinivasa, D. Ferguson, and
2012.
J.Kuffner. Manipulationplanningwithcaginggrasps.
[21] J.Su,H.Qiao,Z.Ou,andZ.Liu.Vision-basedcaging
In IEEE Int. Conference on Humanoid Robots, pages
grasps of polyhedron-like workpieces with a binary
285–292, 2008.
industrialgripper. IEEETrans.onAutomationScience
[6] M.DogarandS.S.Srinivasa. Aframeworkforpush-
and Engineering, 12(3):1033–1046, 2015.
grasping in clutter. In Robotics: Science and Systems
[22] M. Vahedi and A. F. van der Stappen. Caging
VII, page Vol. 1, 2011.
polygons with two and three ﬁngers. Int. J. Robotics
[7] M. Goresky and R. MacPherson. Stratiﬁed Morse
Research, 27(11-12):1308–1324, 2008.
Theory. Springer Verlag, New York, 1980.
[23] W. Wan and R. Fukui. Efﬁcient planar caging test
[8] Z. Hu, W. Wan, and K. Harada. Dual-arm assembly
using space mapping. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng.,
planning considering gravitational constraints. In Int.
15(1):278–289, 2018.
Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2019.
[9] D. Kim, Y. Maeda, and S. Komiyama. Caging-based
grasping of deformable objects for geometry-based
robotic manipulation. ROBOMECH Journal,, 6(3),
2019.
[10] T. Kwok, W. Wan, J., C.C.L. Wang, J. Yuan,
K. Harada, and Y. Chen. Rope caging and grasping.
InIEEEInt.Conf.onRoboticsandAutomation,pages
1980–1986, 2016.
[11] M. Laskey, J. Lee, C. Chuck, D. Gealy, W. Hsieh,
F.T.Pokorny,A.D.Dragan,andK.Goldberg. Robot
grasping in clutter: Using a hierarchy of supervi-
sors for learning from demonstrations. In IEEE Int.
Conference on Automation Science and Engineering,
pages 827–834, 2016.
[12] R.R.Ma,W.G.Bircher,andA.M.Dollar. Modeling
andevaluationofrobustwhole-handcagingmanipula-
tion. IEEE Trans. on Robotics, 35(3):549–563, 2019.
[13] J. Mahler, F. T. Pokorny, Z. McCarthy, A. F. van der
Stappen, and K. Goldberg. Energy-bounded caging:
Formal deﬁnition and 2-D energy lower bound algo-
rithmbasedonweightedalphashapes. IEEERobotics
and Automation Letters, 1(1):508–515, 2016.
[14] S. Makita and W. Wan. A survey of robotic caging
and its applications. Advanced Robotics, 31(19-20):
1071–1085, 2017.
[15] P.Pipattanasomporn,T.Makapunyo,andA.Sudsang.
Multiﬁngercagingusingdispersionconstraints. IEEE
Trans. on Robotics, 32(4), 1033-1041, 2016.
1566
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:03:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 