2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Design and Validation of a Soft Robotic Ankle-Foot Orthosis (SR-AFO)
Exosuit for Inversion and Eversion Ankle Support
∗
Carly M. Thalman, Student Member, IEEE, and Hyunglae Lee , Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents a soft robotic ankle-foot
orthosis (SR-AFO) exosuit designed to provide support to
the human ankle in the frontal plane without restricting
natural motion in the sagittal plane. The SR-AFO exosuit
incorporates inﬂatable fabric-based actuators with a hollow
cylinder design which requires less volume than the commonly
usedsolidcylinderdesignforthesamedeﬂection.Theactuators
were modeled and characterized using ﬁnite element analysis
techniques and experimentally validated. The SR-AFO exosuit
wasevaluatedonhealthyparticipantsinbothasittingposition
using a wearable ankle robot and a standing position using
a dual-axis robotic platform to characterize the effect of the
exosuit on the change of 2D ankle stiffness in the sagittal and
frontal planes. For both sitting and standing test protocols,
a trend of increasing ankle stiffness in the frontal plane was
observed up to 50 kPa while stiffness in the sagittal plane
remained relatively constant over pressure levels. During quiet
standing, the exosuit could effectively change eversion stiffness
attheanklejointfromabout20to70Nm/rad atrelativelylow-
pressure levels (< 30 kPa). Eversion stiffness was 84.9 Nm/rad
at 50 kPa, an increase of 387.5% from the original free foot
stiffness.
Fig.1. DesignoftheSR-AFOexosuitincorporatingtheinﬂatablefabric-
Keywords - Soft Robotics, Wearable Robots, Assistive Robots, basedactuatorsforinversionandeversionsupport.(a)Aconceptillustration
Rehabilitation. of the SR-AFO exosuit being worn by a user, (b) A close up view of the
SR-AFOexosuitbeingwornovertheshoe,and(c)Internallayersandsoft
I. INTRODUCTION actuatorplacement.
Chronic ankle instability (CAI) is a long-term disability
angle, which can subsequently lead to complications with
that is often the result of recurrent ankle sprains, where
mobility, increased risk of injuries, or pain due to gait
tendons surrounding the joint are extended past the natural
adaptations attributable to limited ankle function [4], [5],
length and permanent deformation occurs [1], [2]. Ankle
[11], [12]. Wearable robotics designed to assist the ankle
sprains can occur when a sudden instance of inversion or
face several challenges including; weight, computationally
eversion ensues due to unanticipated lateral ankle buckling,
heavyprogrammingalgorithms,jointalignment,andcost[9].
resulting in excessive stress to the tendons [2]. For reported
Soft robotic solutions have demonstrated successful designs
ankle sprains, 85% of injuries can be attributed to lateral
for lightweight, cost-effective assistive devices with ﬂexible
sprains [3]. Many reported cases of CAI continue to impact
materials and forgiving interactions between the robot and
the affected individuals and can cause future risk of falls,
the intricate human ankle joint [13], [14]. The compliant
trips, and injury from the ankle yielding as a result of
materials used in soft robotics use less computing power
loosened or damaged tendons [2], [4], [5]. These types
for joint alignment, avoid heavy components on the foot,
of injuries usually occur in the frontal plane [2]. Current
and provide comfortable actuation methods during ankle
methods of CAI treatment commonly prescribe rigid ankle
rehabilitation [15]–[18] and augmentation [9], [19]. While
braces that serve as splints, using stiff plates placed along
cable-drivensystemshavebeenusedsuccessfullyinprevious
the medial and lateral malleolus of the ankle to prevent
work[17],[19]–[21],therearelimitedstudiesforsoftrobotic
IE motions during walking and weight-bearing actions of
applications that speciﬁcally address issues involved with
the affected individual [4], [6]–[8]. Most ankle-foot orthoses
CAI and lateral ankle sprain prevention that use a fabric-
(AFOs) are made from stiff, lightweight plastics that pas-
based approach or use pneumatic actuators to address the
sively provide stiffness to the ankle joint to help increase
issue of providing variable stiffness.
balance and prevent lateral ankle buckling [4], [9], [10].
Rigid AFOs limit ankle motion and ﬁx the joint at a neutral This paper presents a soft robotic AFO (SR-AFO) exosuit
(Fig. 1) to assist in inversion-eversion (IE) ankle support
∗
CorrespondingAuthor using pneumatic soft fabric actuators to increase IE an-
Carly M. Thalman and Hyunglae Lee are with the Ira A. Ful-
kle stiffness, with minimal impacts on ankle dorsiﬂexion-
ton Schools of Engineering, Arizona State University, AZ, USA.
cmthalma@asu.edu, hyunglae.lee@asu.edu plantarﬂexion (DP) stiffness. The soft actuators are made
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1735
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. from compliant fabric and pneumatically controlled to vary
resulting actuator stiffness. The actively varying change in
stiffnessisusedtopreventanklebucklingintheIEdirection
and provides a comfortable, dynamic solution that behaves
as a garment when inactive and can be worn over the
user’s shoe. This paper also presents a novel approach to
characterizing the resulting stiffness at the ankle for a soft
AFO with variable stiffness focused on lateral support using
pneumatic fabric-based actuators.
II. DESIGNOFTHESR-AFOEXOSUIT
A. Design Criteria and Considerations for SR-AFO Exosuit
The SR-AFO exosuit was made from a custom neoprene
Fig. 2. (a) Frontal view of the SR-AFO exosuit showing the actuator
fabric sleeve that wraps the leg shank and secures under placementalongtheanklejoint.(b)Allofthelayersandmaterialsusedin
the arch of the foot as shown in Fig. 1. The SR-AFO thefabricationoftheSR-AFOexosuitinanexplodedview,indicatinglayer
placement.
exosuitslipsoneasilylikeaboot,andthedon/dofftimewas
minimized by using adjustable Velcro straps that hold the
SR-AFO exosuit with a snug ﬁt around the ankle joint, yet
stillallowsforcomfortableandnaturalmovement.Thestraps
also provide additional anchoring points for the soft fabric
actuators, ensuring minimal slippage once inﬂated. The soft
fabric actuators were placed vertically on either side of the
ankle, starting at the base of the talus and running across
the medial and lateral malleolus of the ankle to mimic the
Fig.3. Freebodydiagramofthesoftfabric-basedactuatorinacantilever
placement of traditional ankle braces for medial and lateral
orientation against the ankle. (a) a simpliﬁed illustration of the actuator
instability, as shown in Fig. 2a. The SR-AFO exosuit was placement and actuator interaction forces with the joint, and (b) the
designed as a one-size-ﬁts-all device and adapts to the foot simulatedorientationandboundaryconditionssetformodeling.
size of most adult subjects. Inextensible nylon anchoring
points were embedded in the lining of the neoprene sleeve applied uniform heat and pressure to the seam to create
brace to hold the actuators in place at the top and base of an air-tight seal. This formed the geometrically programmed
each actuator, as shown in Fig. 2b. This design allows the chambersforfutureinﬂationwiththepneumaticcontrolsys-
user to have freedom and comfort when wearing the device, tem.Theactuatorswerefabricatedusingasinglerectangular
but also tohave controllable support in theIE direction with sealed pouch, which was then folded in half and sewn along
variable stiffness as needed. the outside of the heat seal to form a loop. When inﬂated,
AtargetthresholdforIEstiffnesswassetfor70Nm/rad. this loop formed a hollow cylinder, which expanded inward
This value is signiﬁcantly higher than the IE stiffness that to occupy the negative space inside the loop, similar to that
unimpaired young individuals can achieve with the highest of a blood pressure cuff.
voluntary contraction of ankle muscles. Thus, the proposed
III. CHARACTERIZATIONOFTHESR-AFOEXOSUIT
design should be able to provide sufﬁcient active support to
A. Modeling of Fabric-Based Inﬂatable Actuators
the ankle in the frontal plane to reduce the risk of ankle
sprains or injuries [22], [23]. Previous studies have shown successful applications of
beam-like inﬂatable soft actuators, which consist of a single
B. Fabrication and Control of Actuators
soft chamber inﬂated to form a rigid beam [16], [24], [25].
The SR-AFO exosuit pneumatic source was controlled There have also been applications in which an inﬂatable
usingaportableaircompressor(CaliforniaAirTools,Model actuator has been modeled as a hollow beam with negative
8010A, San Diego, CA), which was connected to a digital space in the center [26], [27]. In the application of the
pressuresensorandpneumaticvalve.Thisvalveusedmanual SR-AFO exosuit, the presented actuator design minimizes
inputs to change and increment pressure as needed for each actuator deﬂection to prevent ankle buckling in the IE
individual, quasi-static test environments as described in direction without increasing internal volume. The design of
future sections. The soft fabric actuators were made from a the soft actuator was modeled using geometric program-
thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) coated nylon fabric (200 ming of soft materials, where preliminary modeling was
DenierRockywoodsFabrics).Thecoatednylonwasoriented based on several initial assumptions that proved reliable in
withtheTPUcoatingfacinginwardandthermallybondedat previous applications [28]. The assumptions used in this
predetermined geometries to allow for the desired actuator model:1)wheninﬂated,thefabricmaterialwasinextensible
behaviorandcharacteristics.Thethermalbondswerecreated and maintained its net shape with minimal deformation to
with a 2 mm heat impulse sealer (AIE-500 2 mm Impulse behave similarly to a rigid object; 2) the inﬂated shape
Sealer, American International Electric INC, CA) which assumed a simpliﬁed geometric shape when pressurized; 3)
1736
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 4. (a) The assumed beam orientation used to model Castigliano’s
Theoremwithacantileverbeam,appliedmoment,uniformworkloadanda Fig.5. FEAmodelofthesoftactuatorsasextruded2Dshells,thedepiction
dummyload,(b)thesolidcrosssectionoftheﬁrstactuatordesign,and(c) of the cross section at the center of each actuator and the model for the
thehollowcrosssectionofsecondactuatordesign. (a)solidand(b)hollowcrosssections,afterpressurizationandloadshave
beenappliedtoachievedeﬂectionangle.
the internal pressure was uniform throughout the internal
area. The payload capability of the actuator depends on moment of inertia, two actuator conﬁgurations were com-
various factors, including radius of the actuator, internal pared, modeled as rigid beams: (1) solid cylinder, and (2)
pressure, and direction of loading. Inspiration for the design thin-walledhollowcylinder.Theareaofthesolidandhollow
of the soft inﬂatable actuators was drawn from Castigliano’s crosssectionswasheldconstant,andthe(cid:113)relationwasdeﬁned
Theorem used in beam theory for determining deﬂection using the following conditions:
of a cantilever beam [29], [30]. The soft actuators were
−
modeled as a cantilever beam, ﬁxed on all sides at one end As=Ah , di<dh, and ds= dh2 di2 (4)
and free to move at the other end - the end of the actuator
wherethecross-sectionalarea(A )ofthesolidbeamwasset
runningparalleltotheanklecalcaneus(Fig.3b).Theactuator s
equal to the cross-sectional area of the hollow cylinder, d
was modeled using a principle of beam theory to determine s
wasthediameterofthesolidcylinder,andd andd werethe
deﬂection of the cantilever beam, y: h i
outerandinnerdiametersofthehollowcylinder,respectively.
1 1 1
y= EI(3FAL3+8wL4) (1) Tahhiisghaellrowreesdistfaonrceathoigbheearmmdoemﬂeecnttioonf fionrertthiae,saanmdethveorleufmoree.
which was formulated using Castigliano’s Theorem ap- Using the parallel axis theorem and the conditions listed in
plied to a cantilever beam with a uniform workload (w) Eq. (4), the second moment of inertia for the solid actuator
acrossthebeamlength(L)forinternalpressure.Atransverse designs was deﬁned as:
load (F ) (Fig. 4a) was applied at the free end of the beam. −
A πd4 π(d2 d2)2
E represents the elastic modulus, and I represents the area Is= 64s = h64 i (5)
moment of inertia for the cross-section of the soft actuator
beam model (Fig. 4b-c). In this instance, w was estimated Thesecondmomentofinertiaforthehollowactuatordesign
using the following work to pressure relation, was deﬁned as: −
π(d4 d4)
PC 1 Ih= h64 i (6)
w= La, whereCa= 2Ldπ (2) Since Ih>Is for the same internal volume of a cylinder, less
wherethepressure(P)oftheactuatoractsacrossthecontact deﬂectionwasexpectedforthehollowcylinderdesignforI .
h
area(C ),resistingbending(tophalfofthecircumferenceof This was validated in the following ﬁnite element analysis
a
the beam) and applied along length L. It was assumed that (FEA) and experimental studies.
thevolumeoftheinternalchambersisequaltothetotalarea
B. Deﬂection vs Load Evaluation
of the beam, as indicated by the shaded regions in Fig. 4b-
In order to evaluate the efﬁcacy of the actuator design, a
c. The workload resists bending and was found using the
FEA study was used to model and simulate the soft fabric
uniforminternalactuatorpressureacrosstheareaofcontact.
actuators using the materials properties found in previous
In this 2D representation, that area was the vertical edge
of the beam over length L. The angle of deﬂection, θ, was work [15]. The FEA simulation was run using Abaqus CAE
(ABAQUS, Dassault Systems, Vlizy-Villacoublay, France)
foundforthebeamusingthefollowingrelationofthevertical
in a dynamic explicit environment. Thin 2D homogeneous
deﬂection,y,andfractionofLatwhichbendingwasallowed
shells were used to create each layer of the fabric actuator,
to occur.
θ =sin−1y (3) and sectioned partitions of the shells were tied to create
L seams. A uniform pressure force was applied across the
Using the theorem in Eq. (1), it was observed that the innermost facing surfaces of the thin shells and increased
deﬂection decreases with a higher moment of inertia. To in increments of 25 kPa from 0 kPa up to 100 kPa. The
minimizethetotalactuatorvolumewhileincreasingactuator solidandhollowactuatorsweresimulatedusingtwoseparate
1737
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. The two actuator designs were evaluated experimentally.
Actuator deﬂection was measured using quasi-static testing
methodology in a cantilever orientation using a 3D printed
housing. Actuator pressure was increased in increments of
25 kPa from 25 kPa to 100 kPa. For each pressure level,
a vertical point load was applied to the end of the actuator
from 1-10 N in increments of 1 N. For each pressure level
and point load combination, the deﬂection of the actuator
was measured using a goniometer for a total of three trials
for each quasi-static condition. The actuators were less
predictable at low pressures, shown by the middle of the
curve in Fig. 6a. The maximum deﬂection angle for a 10 N
± ◦ ± ◦
point load at 25 kPa was 45.77 1.01 and 51.32 0.71
forthehollowandsolidcrosssections,respectively.Thiswas
likelyattributedtothewaythatthefabricbuckles.Duetoits
compliance, it may not have buckled or failed in the same
position with each iterative experiment. The curve became
Fig. 6. Results of FEA analysis and experimentally measured values of more predictable with increasing pressures, and showed a
the both the solid cross section actuator design and hollow cross section
higher resistance to bending at higher pressures. The higher
actuatordesign,andstandarddeviationrepresentedbytheshadedregions.
(a) - (d) depicts the deﬂection angle for each actuator at 25 kPa, 50 kPa, pressure evaluated for the comparison of the two designs
± ◦
75kPa,and100kPa,respectively. shown in Fig. 6d showed a deﬂection of 16.12 0.43 for
± ◦
the solid cross section and 12.82 0.48 for the hollow
cross section for a 10 N load.
IV. EXPERIMENTALVALIDATIONOFSR-AFOEXOSUIT
Stiffness characteristics of soft robots can be difﬁcult to
characterizeontheuserduetoslippageorthecomplianceof
the materials [19]. To address this challenge, a novel robotic
approachwastakenusingtwosetsofvalidationexperiments
to determine the most accurate results of the performance
of the SR-AFO exosuit. Quasi-static experimental protocols
wereimplementedwheretheAFOiswornbytheuserduring
characterizationtoobtainstiffnessvaluesdirectlyattheankle
joint. A total of six healthy participants were recruited for
thisstudy[age:21-28years,weight:47.6-98.5kg,height:
1.62 - 1.81 m], with three male and three female subjects.
Fig.7. (a)theAnklebotsetupwiththeuserwearingtheSR-AFOexosuit This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
overthecustomAnklebotshoe,(b)thedual-axisroboticplatformsetupwith of Arizona State University (STUDY00004351). For both
the user wearing the SR-AFO exosuit for the measurement of IE stiffness
protocols, the following seven conditions were evaluated
inthefrontalplaneandDPstiffnessinthesagittalplane.
for the SR-AFO exosuit: free foot (no SR-AFO exosuit),
models. This was done by using 1) two ﬂat 2D surfaces tied passive SR-AFO exosuit (0 kPa), and pressures of 10, 20,
at the edges to create a single chamber when a pressure 30, 40, and 50 kPa. Pressure was capped at 50 kPa for
load was applied (Fig. 5a), and 2) two overlapped extruded the following trials for comfort reasons during prolonged
cylindrical shells tied at each end to seal a continuous static test environments. To minimize the effect of added
volume chamber in the shape of a ring when the pressure stiffness due to muscle contraction, subjects were asked to
load is applied (Fig. 5b). The beams were constrained by relax their leg and ankle throughout the experimental trials.
an inﬁnitely stiff rigid component to execute a cantilever Muscle activity of 4 major ankle muscles was measured
orientation as shown in Fig. 5. The following steps were using surface electromyography (EMG) sensors: tibialis an-
completed at four pressure levels (25, 50, 75, and 100 kPa) terior (TA), medial gastrocnemius (GM), soleus (SL) and
for ten applied point loads (1-10 N in increments of 1 N): peroneuslongus(PL).Beforetheexperiment,muscleactivity
(1) Pressurization, (2) Stabilization, (3) Point Load. The during fully relaxed and maximum voluntary contraction
deﬂectionoftheactuatorwasmeasuredbyﬁxingonehalfof (MVC) was collected as per standard International Society
the actuator along the y-axis, and applying a perpendicular ofElectrophysiologyandKinesiology(ISEK)protocols[31].
forcetothefreeend.Deﬂectionwasmeasuredasthechange
A. Methods
intheanglefromthestartingpositionoftheinﬂatedactuator
to the ﬁnal position of the free end of the actuator as shown 1) SR-AFO Exosuit Stiffness in Sitting: A quasi-static
in Fig. 5. torque-anglerelationwasevaluatedtodeterminetheresulting
1738
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 8. Results from a representative subject showing ankle stiffness
measuredin12directionsina2Dpolarplot,showinganklestiffnesswith
(50kPa)andwithout(0kPa)theSR-AFOexosuitactive.
stiffness at the ankle joint with and without the SR-AFO
exosuitactiveontherightfootofhealthyparticipants(n=6).
A wearable robot, Anklebot (Interactive Motion Technolo-
gies, Inc.) was used to measure the 2D ankle stiffness in
the sagittal and frontal planes [22], [32]. A specialized shoe
connectedtheAnklebotoneithersideoftheshoebehindthe
heel to interface the ankle with the Anklebot actuators. The
Anklebot rotated the ankle in twelve directions in the 2D
space,withaxesthatconsistedofIEandDPdirections(Fig.
7). This was repeated cyclically for three trials for each of
Fig. 9. Results of six healthy participants, characterizing ankle stiffness
the aforementioned conditions. A quasi-static test protocol
inthesevenconditionsshown,isolatingthedirectionsofthe2Dpolarplot
wasusedtomeasureanklestiffnessinthe2Dspace,andthe toIEandDPaxestoachieveanklestiffnessatthepeakofeachplane.The
effective ankle stiffness for each of 12 movement directions averagevalueforeachtestconditionisalsodisplayed.
wascalculatedfromthecontinuousvectorﬁeldandpresented
oftheplatforminthesagittalplaneFig.7b.Averticaloffset
in a 2D polar plot (Fig. 8). Further details of this estimation
of the axis of rotation of the ankle vs. that of the platform
method were described in previous work [32].
in the frontal plane was accounted for as described in the
2) SR-AFO Exosuit Stiffness in Quiet Standing: Fig. 7b aforementioned studies [34].
depicts the dual-axis robotic platform [23], [33] used to The platform applied a controlled rotational position per-
quantify the ankle stiffness in IE and DP of the right foot of turbation in the direction of ankle eversion and dorsiﬂexion.
healthy participants (n=6). The robotic platform obtained A visual feedback system was provided to ensure that the
kinematicdataoftheplatformandthesubjectsankleanglein subject had an equal weight distribution between each foot,
IEandDPusingadual-axisgoniometer(SG110,Biometrics and that the CoP of the right foot was maintained at the
Ltd, UK). The platform applied position perturbations to the same point as measured during quiet standing before each
◦
ankle and measured the corresponding torques at the ankle perturbationwasapplied.Aperturbationof3 andaduration
using a force plate (9260AA3, Kistler, New York, USA) of 100 ms was applied in the eversion or dorsiﬂexion
attached to the top of the platform, which was then used direction for a total of twelve trials.
to estimate mechanical impedance of the ankle [34].
B. Results
This study focused on the stiffness component of the
ankle mechanical impedance, since ankle stiffness plays 1) SR-AFO Exosuit Stiffness in Sitting: Donning the SR-
a major role in postural balance control during standing AFO exosuit inherently increased ankle stiffness in all di-
and locomotion tasks [34], [35]. The SR-AFO exosuit was rections. It was an anticipated result since the design of
evaluated for additional IE stiffness in the frontal plane for SR-AFO was based upon that of existing ankle wraps. This
increasing pressure levels and monitored for maintaining trend was consistent across all participants (n=6). Group
relatively constant DP stiffness in the sagittal plane. Prior to results for each of 4 directions in the frontal and sagittal
the trial, subjects were asked to wear a pair of athletic shoes planes are displayed in Fig. 9. After being asked to don
andtheirweightwasrecordedalongwiththeirnaturalcenter the SR-AFO exosuit, subjects showed an average increase
ofpressure(CoP)oftherightfootwhilestandinguprighton (i.e., increase from the baseline to the passive condition) of
± ±
the platform. Wireless sEMG sensors were used to monitor 4.45 1.42 Nm/rad of stiffness for inversion, 4.47 1.68
±
the TA, GM, SL, and PL throughout the trials, and MVC Nm/rad for eversion, 5.06 1.88 Nm for dorsiﬂexion, and
±
of the muscle activity was collected prior to the trials. The 5.59 1.69Nm/radforplantarﬂexion.Atrendofincreasing
subject was asked to stand with his/her right foot placed on anklestiffnessintheIEdirectionwasobservedoverpressure
theplatformwiththeankleaxisofrotationalignedwiththat levels up to 50 kPa, while there was an increase in stiffness
1739
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. anchoringpoints,whichservesasacriticalroleintranslating
the forces of the soft actuators paired with the foot [19].
V. DISCUSSION
The SR-AFO exosuit was designed to be worn over the
user‘s shoes and is simple to don/doff. The soft actuators
weremodeledwiththeassumptionthatahollowbeamdesign
would be more effective than a solid beam of the same net
volume in resisting deﬂection when a lateral load is applied.
FEA and experimental results showed reduced deﬂection
angleforthehollowbeamdesign.TheSR-AFOexosuitwas
tested with six healthy subjects using a wearable robot to
measure and characterize ankle stiffness patterns. The An-
Fig.10. Resultinganklestiffnessin(a)eversionand(b)dorsiﬂexionfor
klebot was used to measure 2D ankle stiffness in the IE and
eachofthetestconditionsoftheSR-AFOexosuitforatotalofsixhealthy
participants.Theaveragevalueforeachtestconditionisalsodisplayed. DP directions with the SR-AFO exosuit with the user sitting
and the ankle left free to rotate across different pressure
levels.TheSR-AFOexosuitwasalsoevaluatedusingadual-
axis robotic platform to measure 2D ankle stiffness during
quietstanding.Thereisamajorincreaseinstiffnessbetween
the sitting and standing trials, showing that the SR-AFO
exosuit was not only effective under no loading, but was
vastly more effective while the user was bearing weight on
theanklejoint.Theobservedresultsduringstandingshowed
that the SR-AFO exosuit can effectively change eversion
stiffness at the ankle joint from about 20 to 70 Nm/rad at
relativelylowpressurelevels(30kPa),whileminimizingthe
Fig.11. Averagemuscleactivationforeachtestconditionwithincreasing change in dorsiﬂexion stiffness in the sagittal plane. Ankle
pressureforthe(a)TA,(b)PL,(c)SL,and(d)GMmuscleswhilestanding.
stiffness of 70 Nm/rad in the frontal plane is signiﬁcantly
in the DP direction that plateaus at roughly 30 kPa. This higher than the stiffness that unimpaired young individuals
was the point where the total volume of the actuator is can achieve with the highest voluntary contraction of ankle
ﬁlled and crumpling of the fabric against the human was muscles[22],[23].Thus,theproposeddesignshouldbeable
no longer observed. A stiffness increase of 15.57± 3.41 toprovidesufﬁcientactivesupporttotheankleinthefrontal
Nm/rad and 10.66 ± 2.72 Nm/rad was observed at 50 planewithoutconstrainingnaturalDPanklemovementinthe
kPafromthebaselineforIEandDPdirections,respectively. sagittal plane.
Although the degree of stiffness increase in the IE direction The next stages of this research will focus on the con-
was about 50% greater than that the DP direction, it was trollability and portability of the system. While prelimi-
signiﬁcantly lower than the target IE stiffness (70 Nm/rad). nary results and scope of this work showed a promise
LowerIEstiffnesswaslikelyduetoslippageattheinterface for static environments such as sitting and standing, the
between the foot and SR-AFO exosuit under no loading next iteration of this work will target dynamic tasks and
in seated trials. This result emphasized the importance of include a custom pneumatic control board for the SR-AFO
characterizing the stiffness in standing conditions for which exosuit to investigate the effect of the AFO on kinematic
the exosuit was designed. and dynamic responses of the lower limb during various
dynamic tasks including walking. This could be beneﬁcial
2) SR-AFO Exosuit Stiffness in Quiet Standing: Eversion
forlookingatfutureapplicationswhereasoftAFOcouldbe
stiffness showed a steady increasing trend to a maximum
± used as a standard for dynamic lateral ankle support during
increase of 67.50 16.75 Nm/rad at 50 kPa, an increase
gait rehabilitation to replace the traditional rigid AFOs to
by387.5%fromtheoriginalfreefootstiffness(Fig.10a)for
helpimprovepracticeofphysicaltherapistsforrehabilitative
eversion. In addition, it reached the target IE stiffness of 70
exercises in both quiet standing and walking.
Nm/rad at 30 kPa. The change of dorsiﬂexion stiffness was
less noticeable than eversion stiffness. Dorsiﬂexion stiffness
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
at 50 kPa increased by 22.4 % from the original free foot
stiffness (Fig. 10b. The SR-AFO exosuit in its passive state C. M. Thalman is funded by the National Science Foun-
was designed to resemble a basic ankle wrap, therefore a dation GRFP award #1841051. This work is funded by
minor increase in stiffness was anticipated for passive trials. the Global Sport Institute of the adidas and Arizona State
The stiffness measured in the standing position resulted in a University (ASU) Global Sport Alliance. The authors thank
much higher measured ankle stiffness in eversion than that VarunNalam,TiffanyHertzell,andKayleighGavinfortheir
oftheseatedtrials.Thiscanbeattributedtothedesignofthe contribution.
1740
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [21] M. Cianchetti, C. Laschi, A. Menciassi, and P. Dario. Biomedical
applicationsofsoftrobotics.NatureReviewsMaterials,3(6):143–153,
2018.
[1] J. G. Garrick. The frequency of injury, mechanism of injury, and
[22] H Lee, H Igo Krebs, and N Hogan. Multivariable dynamic ankle
epidemiology of ankle sprains. The American journal of sports
mechanical impedance with active muscles. IEEE Transactions on
medicine,5(6):241–242,1977.
NeuralSystemsandRehabilitationEngineering,22(5):971–981,2014.
[2] K.Venesky,C.LDocherty,J.Dapena,andJ.Schrader. Prophylactic
[23] V.NalamandH.Lee. Environment-dependentmodulationofhuman
ankle braces and knee varus-valgus and internal-external rotation
ankle stiffness and its implication for the design of lower extremity
torque. Journalofathletictraining,41(3):239,2006.
robots. In201815thInternationalConferenceonUbiquitousRobots
[3] D.J.Caine,C.G.Caine,andK.J.Lindner. Epidemiologyofsports
(UR),pages112–118.IEEE,2018.
injuries. TheNursePractitioner,21(9):142,1996.
[24] CWielgoszetal.Bendingandbucklingofinﬂatablebeams:somenew
[4] J F Geboers, M R Drost, F Spaans, H Kuipers, and H A Seelen.
theoreticalresults. Thin-walledstructures,43(8):1166–1187,2005.
Immediate and long-term effects of ankle-foot orthosis on muscle
[25] Y. A. Seong, R. Niiyama, Y. Kawahara, and Y. Kuniyoshi. Low-
activityduringwalking:arandomizedstudyofpatientswithunilateral
pressuresoftinﬂatablejointdrivenbyinnertendon.In20192ndIEEE
footdrop.Archivesofphysicalmedicineandrehabilitation,83(2):240–
International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft), pages 37–42.
245,2002.
IEEE,2019.
[5] J.FLehmann,S.MCondon,B.JdeLateur,andJCSmith.Ankle-foot
[26] F. Putzu, T. Abrar, and K. Althoefer. Plant-inspired soft pneumatic
orthoses:effectongaitabnormalitiesintibialnerveparalysis.Archives
eversion robot. In 2018 7th IEEE International Conference on
ofphysicalmedicineandrehabilitation,66(4):212–218,1985.
BiomedicalRoboticsandBiomechatronics(Biorob),pages1327–1332.
[6] R B Stein, D G Everaert, A K Thompson, S Chong, M Whittaker, IEEE,2018.
JRobertson,andGKuether.Long-termtherapeuticandorthoticeffects [27] J.Luong,P.Glick,A.Ong,M.S.deVries,S.Sandin,E.W.Hawkes,
ofafootdropstimulatoronwalkingperformanceinprogressiveand andM.T.Tolley. Eversionandretractionofasoftrobottowardsthe
nonprogressiveneurologicaldisorders.Neurorehabilitationandneural explorationofcoralreefs.In20192ndIEEEInternationalConference
repair,24(2):152–167,2010. onSoftRobotics(RoboSoft),pages801–807.IEEE,2019.
[7] P.MKluding,K.Dunning,M.WO’dell,S.SWu,J.Ginosian,J.Feld, [28] C.M.Thalman,Q.P.Lam,P.H.Nguyen,S.Sridar,andP.Polygerinos.
andK.McBride.Footdropstimulationversusanklefootorthosisafter A novel soft elbow exosuit to supplement bicep lifting capacity. In
stroke:30-weekoutcomes. Stroke,44(6):1660–1669,2013. 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
[8] J.SJaivin,J.OBishop,WGBraly,andHSTullos. Managementof Systems(IROS),pages6965–6971.IEEE,2018.
acquiredadultdropfoot. Foot&ankle,13(2):98–104,1992. [29] A. P. Boresi, R. J. Schmidt, O. M. Sidebottom, et al. Advanced
[9] P Malcolm, S Lee, S Crea, C Siviy, F Saucedo, I Galiana, F A mechanicsofmaterials,volume6. WileyNewYorketal.,1985.
Panizzolo,KGHolt,andCJWalsh.Varyingnegativeworkassistance [30] EM Odom and CJ Egelhoff. Teaching deﬂection of stepped shafts:
at the ankle with a soft exosuit during loaded walking. Journal of Castigliano’s theorem, dummy loads, heaviside step functions and
neuroengineeringandrehabilitation,14(1):62,2017. numerical integration. In 2011 Frontiers in Education Conference
[10] I.Wiszomirska,M.Błaz˙kiewicz,K.Kaczmarczyk,G.Brzuszkiewicz- (FIE),pagesF3H–1.IEEE,2011.
Kuz´micka, and A Wit. Effect of drop foot on spatiotemporal, [31] R. Merletti and P Di Torino. Standards for reporting emg data. J
kinematic, and kinetic parameters during gait. Applied bionics and ElectromyogrKinesiol,9(1):3–4,1999.
biomechanics,2017,2017. [32] H.Lee,P.Ho,M.ARastgaar,H.IKrebs,andN.Hogan.Multivariable
[11] J.BlayaandH.Herr.Adaptivecontrolofavariable-impedanceankle- static ankle mechanical impedance with relaxed muscles. Journal of
foot orthosis to assist drop-foot gait. IEEE Transactions on neural biomechanics,44(10):1901–1908,2011.
systemsandrehabilitationengineering,12(1):24–31,2004. [33] V. Nalam and H. Lee. Design and validation of a multi-axis robotic
[12] JrMTBalmaseda,SHKoozekanani,MTFatehi,CGordon,PHDrey- platform for the characterization of ankle neuromechanics. In 2017
fuss,andECTanbonliong.Groundreactionforces,centerofpressure, IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),
and duration of stance with and without an ankle-foot orthosis. pages511–516.IEEE,2017.
Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, 69(12):1009–1012, [34] VNalamandHLee. Developmentofatwo-axisroboticplatformfor
1988. thecharacterizationoftwo-dimensionalanklemechanics.IEEE/ASME
[13] M.Yandell,B.Quinlivan,D.Popov,C.Walsh,andK.Zelik. Physical TransactionsonMechatronics,24(2):459–470,2019.
interfacedynamicsalterhowroboticexosuitsaugmenthumanmove- [35] D.AWinter. Humanbalanceandposturecontrolduringstandingand
ment:implicationsforoptimizingwearableassistivedevices. Journal walking. Gait&posture,3(4):193–214,1995.
ofneuroengineeringandrehabilitation,14(1):40,2017.
[14] S. Lee, S. Crea, P. Malcolm, I. Galiana, A. Asbeck, and C. Walsh.
Controllingnegativeandpositivepowerattheanklewithasoftexo-
suit. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA),pages3509–3515.IEEE,2016.
[15] C.M. Thalman, J. Hsu, L. Snyder, and P. Polygerinos. Design of
a soft ankle-foot orthosis exosuit for foot drop assistance. In 2019
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),pages
8436–8442.IEEE,2019.
[16] J.Chung,R.Heimgartner,C.T.O’Neill,N.S.Phipps,andC.J.Walsh.
Exoboot,asoftinﬂatableroboticboottoassistankleduringwalking:
Design,characterizationandpreliminarytests. In20187thIEEEIn-
ternationalConferenceonBiomedicalRoboticsandBiomechatronics
(Biorob),pages509–516.IEEE,2018.
[17] J. Kwon, J. Park, S. Ku, Y. Jeong, N. Paik, and Y.L. Park. A Soft
WearableRoboticAnkle-Foot-OrthosisforPost-StrokePatients.IEEE
RA-L,InternationalConferenceonSoftRobotics(RoboSoft),2019.
[18] C.M.Thalman,THertzell,andHLee.Towardasoftroboticankle-foot
orthosis(sr-afo)exosuitforhumanlocomotion:Preliminaryresultsin
latestanceplantarﬂexionassistance.InIEEEInternationalConference
onSoftRobotics,(RoboSoft).IEEE,2020. [Accepted].
[19] A.T.Asbeck,R.J.Dyer,A.F.Larusson,andC.J.Walsh. Biologically-
inspiredsoftexosuit. In2013IEEE13thInternationalConferenceon
RehabilitationRobotics(ICORR),pages1–8,2013.
[20] G. Bao, H. Fang, L. Chen, Y. Wan, F. Xu, Q. Yang, and L. Zhang.
Softrobotics:Academicinsightsandperspectivesthroughbibliometric
analysis. SoftRobotics,5(3):229–241,2018.
1741
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 