2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Gait patterns generation based on basis functions interpolation for the
TWIN lower-limb exoskeleton*
Christian Vassallo1, Samuele De Giuseppe1, Chiara Piezzo1, Stefano Maludrottu1,
Giulio Cerruti1, Maria Laura D’Angelo1, Emanuele Gruppioni2, Claudia Marchese2,
Simona Castellano2, Eleonora Guanziroli3, Franco Molteni3, Matteo Laffranchi1, Lorenzo De Michieli1
Abstract—Since the uprising of new biomedical orthotic
devices, exoskeletons have been put in the spotlight for their
possibleuseinrehabilitation.Eveniftheseproductsmightshare
some commonalities among them in terms of overall structure,
degreesoffreedomandpossibleactions,theyquiteoftendiffer
in their approach on how to generate a feasible, stable and
comfortablegaittrajectorypattern.Thispaperintroducesthree
proposed trajectories that were generated by using a basis
function interpolation method and by working closely with
two major rehabilitation centers in Italy. The whole procedure
has been focused on the concepts of a conﬁgurable walk for
patients that suffer from spinal cord injuries. We tested the
solutions on a group of healthy volunteers and on a spinal-
cord injury patient with the use of the new TWIN exoskeleton
developedattheRehabTechnologiesLabattheItalianInstitute
of Technology.
I. INTRODUCTION
A signiﬁcant number of individuals in the world are
affectedbylocomotionimpairmentduetotraumaticeventsor
medicalconditions.TheWorldHealthOrganisationstatistics
state that the total international incidence of spinal cord
injury (SCI) is between 250 000 and 500 000 annual cases
[1].Inmostcases,repetitiveandtask-orientedmovementsof
theimpairedlimbscanpreventcomplicationssuchasmuscle
Fig. 1: The TWIN exoskeleton.
atrophyandosteoporosis[2].Forinstance,numerousclinical
studies support the effectiveness of an intense gait training,
particularly in SCI and stroke patients [3]. However, the
The reference approach for controlling lower-limb ex-
cost and the limited availability of assistance often prevent
oskeletonsincaseofsubjectsalmostortotallyunabletovol-
patients from achieving a satisfactory level of medical care
untarily move their legs, like SCI patients, is the predeﬁned
in conventional therapy [4]. Training intensity may also
gait trajectory method [10]. This control strategy consists
be limited by fatigue of the therapist. Therefore, since the
in imposing a predeﬁned gait trajectory, i.e. a sequence of
beginning of the 21st century, researchers have been devel-
desiredjointanglesintime,whichisgenerallyinspiredfrom
oping a vast range of robotic exoskeletons to actively move
a healthy person and replicated by the exoskeleton. This
the users’ impaired lower limbs through a series of motor
control type is used, for instance, by the REWALK [11] and
activities, especially related to gait. Several experiments
ATLAS [12] exoskeletons.
demonstratedthatthesedeviceshavethepotentialtoprovide
A common method to generate a gait pattern is to deter-
neurorehabilitationbymovingthelegsinareproducibleand
mine the joints positions with the help of predeﬁned via-
cyclic way [5] [6]. Traditional designs use two degrees of
points and ﬁt a mathematical curve to them [13]. Neverthe-
freedom in each leg to obtain the ﬂexion-extension of the
less,awell-knowndrawbackofworkinginjointspaceisthe
knee and hip joints, which are generally actuated by electric
difﬁculty in regulating the cartesian parameters of gait, such
motors. This is the case of the HAL [7], the Ekso [8] and
as step length and height [14].
the Indego [9] exoskeletons.
In this work we present our novel approach of generating
1AuthorsarewithRehabTechnologiesLab,IstitutoItalianodiTecnolo- gait trajectories for SCI patients. This is the result of a tight
gia,Genoa,Italy.christian.vassallo@iit.it cooperation with clinicians from two major rehabilitation
2AuthorsarewithCentroProtesiINAIL,VigorsodiBudrio,Italy
clinics in Italy and it was validated by direct experimen-
3AuthorsarewithVillaBerettaRehabilitationCenter,ValduceHospital,
CostaMasnaga,Lecco,Italy tation on a SCI patient. In Section II, an overall structural
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1778
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. description of the lower-limb TWIN exoskeleton (Fig. 1) is III. TRAJECTORIESCOMPUTATION
presented.InSectionIII,ourgenerationmethodisexplained.
The capability to generate acceptable, stable and effective
Results of the experiments where we tested all our trajecto-
gait patterns is one of the critical points in development and
ries are presented in Section IV and discussed in Section V.
clinical use of lower-limb exoskeletons today. Among other
Section VI shows our conclusions and future works.
requirements, these devices have to provide a stable walk
II. TWINLOWERLIMBEXOSKELETON to prevent any discomfort or risk of fall. Given the system
TWIN is a powered lower limb exoskeleton developed at described in Section II, the walking problem translates into
the IIT-INAIL Rehab Technologies Lab. Its overall structure the generation of sequences of setpoints position that, at
consists of four actuated joints (at the hips and at the knees) each iteration (f = 500Hz), the CCU sends to the motor
connectingﬁverigidsections:onepelviscomponentandtwo controllers.
separate, right and left, segments for thighs and shanks.
The actuation units employed to power all four joints A. Computing the reference trajectory
are based on EC90 ﬂat Maxon motors coupled with 100:1 In this paper we present three different walking styles
gearboxes. The device requires the use of forearm crutches basedonthreedifferenttrajectories:T1,T2andT3.Inorder
to maintain balance during standing and ambulation. to generate them, we exploited an interpolation approach
Fig. 2 shows the system architecture of the TWIN ex- which consists in multiplying the length L and the height
oskeleton: a six point star client/server structure with 4 H of the desired step by some basis functions that are
motors, 1 Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and 1 battery normalized both in amplitude and over time. Indeed, it is
interface.TheexoskeletonisoperableviaanAndroiddevice possible to obtain the reference trajectories (x ,z ) and
F F
that employs a custom-made app that communicates via (x ,z ) in Cartesian space as follows:
T T
Bluetooth and has been developed following the IEC 62304
∗
regulation for class A medical devices for safety reasons. x (t)=x0 +L f (t) (1)
The central control unit (CCU), located in the backpack of F F ∗ x
z (t)=z0 +H f (t) (2)
the device, is a custom board based on an ARM Cortex F F ∗ z
x (t)=x0 +L g (t) (3)
A9 processor which is in charge of monitoring the battery T T x
pack and the 6-axes IMU sensor that are connected to
where x0, z0, x0 are the conﬁguration of the swing foot
it via its I2C interfaces. Each motor is locally controlled F F T
and the torso at the beginning of the step, while f , f and
and actuated in position via a proportional-integrative (PI) x z
g are the normalized basis functions. For each trajectory
controller, operating at a frequency of 20 kHz, thanks to a x
style T1, T2 and T3, they are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5.
logic board based on an ARM Cortex-M4 microcontroller
We decided to neglect the torso trajectory z , because it
unit. The communication between the CCU and the motor T
is not needed given the following assumption on the ankle
controllers is performed via CAN bus at a frequency of
passive joint: the ﬂexion angle β (shown in Fig. 3) varies
500Hz.
depending on the step length i.e. the longer the step the
{ ∈ R ≤ ≤
greater the ﬂexion. Assuming that: β ,β β
} { ∈ R ≤ ≤ } min
β and L ,L L L , where β ,
max min flex min
β , L , L are respectively the minimum and the
max min max
maximumvaluesoftheanklejointangleandthesteplength,
we deﬁne β as the maximum ﬂexion of the ankle during
flex
a step. In our trajectory design, the relation between β
flex
and L is considered to be linear and it can be described as
follows:
−
− ∗ L L
β =β +(β β ) −min (4)
flex min max min L L
max min
− ∗
β(t)=β +(β β ) g (t) (5)
min flex min x
Considering that the movement of the leg in support has
to be minimized, the ankle β and the torso reference x
T
are multiplied by the same basis function g . Following
x
this assumption, the resulting trajectory of the knee joint
is around 0°, while the hip joint performs little movements.
Note that L , L are deﬁned values, that depend on
min max
the structure of the exoskeleton: in our case we considered
Fig. 2: Logical structure of the TWIN exoskeleton and main
L =0.05m and L =70% of the leg length.
min max
elements of the control software (in yellow)
Likewise, β and β are structural dependent values,
min max
their tuning is described in the following section.
1779
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. B. Geometric model
The mathematical model of the TWIN exoskeleton is
basedontheDenavit-Hartenbergmethod[15].Foreachjoint,
therotationaxisisorientedsuchthattheangleisconsidered
negative when the leg is moving backwards. An illustration
of the robot parameters is shown in Fig. 3: q and q are
1 2
respectively the knee and hip angles of the leg in support,
while q and q are the hip and the knee angles of the leg
3 4
in swing. The tibia, femur, and hip dimensions are deﬁned
as l ,l and l respectively. The angle θ is the angle of
T F H T
the torso.
Theanklejointsarepassiveandconsistoftwospringsthat
can be tuned to modify β and β . The tuning takes
min max
in consideration the patient characteristics: his/her ankle
ﬂexibility, comfort during movements, and the ability to
walk in a relaxed way. These are some of the key points
that physiotherapists have to analyze in the training process,
in order to correctly tune the stiffness of the ankle joints. Fig. 4: The basis functions of trajectory T1, T2 and T3
The lower the stiffness, the higher the mobility: an inexpert (respectively (a), (c) and (e)), and their time derivatives
patientmightfeelunstableiftheanklesaretooﬂexible,while (respectively (b), (d) and (f)). The basis functions f are
x
skilled ones might feel limited and tied if they are too stiff. represented by continuous lines, while f are represented by
z
The angles θ and θ are respectively the angles of the dotted ones.
T F
torso and the ankle of the swing leg w.r.t. the z-axis. We
constrain the latter equal to zero, at each instant of time, in
order to compute a trajectory such that the support leg is
referenced againts a vertical torso. This approach aims to
mitigate the SCI patient propensity to lean forward while
walking. In our geometric model, the θ angle is negligible
F
since in our approach we do not control the orientation of
the swing foot.
Fig. 5: The basis function g , polynomial of sixth-order,
x
exploited for the generation of the reference trajectory x .
T
C. Inverse Kinematics
In order to obtain the joint trajectories, we divided the
inverse kinematics problem in two parts: the swing leg
follows a reference trajectory (x ,z ) while the support
F F
one obeys to the torso reference trajectory (x ,θ ). Given
T T
the following assumptions: (i) θ = β + q + q with
{ ∈ R ≤ ≤ } T 1∀ ∈2
β ,β β β , (ii) θ (t) = 0, t [0,t ]
mi(cid:18)n flex T (cid:19) s
where t is the step duration, the kinematics equations are:
s
− · ·
− x (l sin(β)+l sin(θ )) −
q =sin 1 T T H T β (6)
1 (cid:18) l (cid:19)
− − F
q =θ q β (7)
2 T 1
− −
− (cid:18)a2 +a2 (cid:19)l2 l2 (cid:18) (cid:19)
q =cos 1 x ·z ·F T (8)
3 2 l l
− F T ·
− z z − − l sin(q )
q =tan 1 F − T tan 1 T · 3
4 x x l +l cos(q )
F T F T 3
Fig. 3: The TWIN parameters description (9)
1780
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. D. Design of the basis functions toe-offphasehasbeenexamined:therollingmovementheel-
toe can increase the stride length compare to ﬂat walking,
We worked closely with physiatrists and physical ther-
allowingfastermovements,reducedloadingofthelegjoints
apists, during the entire design process, to sequentially
and improved stability [23] [24]. Considering the uncon-
develop three different trajectories. At the beginning, a ﬁrst
trollable ankle joint, and the use of crutches to preserve
trajectory - deﬁned as T1 - was generated starting from the
balance,wedesignedtwobasisfunctionsthatemphasizethe
idea that a gait pattern should be ﬁrst and foremost safe
heel-strike movement. A representation of these functions is
in order to minimize the risk of stumble or fall. A second
showninFig.4(e),whilethegeometricfootclearanceofT3
trajectory T2 was successively designed adopting a curve
is shown in Fig. 6(f).
proﬁlethatissimilartothoseexployedincurrentlyavailable
lower limb exoskeletons. Finally, the third trajectory T3 was
createdonthebasisoftheresultsobtainedwithT2andsome IV. ASSESSMENTMETHODS
further adaptation in order to improve its safety by taking
A. Participants
intoaccountpaststudiesonhumanoidrobots.Ouremployed
approach also consisted in quick iterative cycles where we The assessment of the aforementioned gait patterns has
collected feedback from users and clinicians at every step to been performed as a two-stage process: in the ﬁrst phase a
increasingly improve each trajectory and generate the next group of ten healthy volunteers participated in the experi-
one. All the basis functions were optimized in terms of ment. They had no neurological or muscular pathology that
acceleration minimization, i.e. minimum jerk planning [16] wouldaffecttheirlocomotion.Thefocusofthisstagewasto
[17], in order to obtain smooth joint trajectories. acquire user’s feedback throughout the 36 months period of
theTWINdevelopmentphase;inthiswaythesubjectscould
The three obtained trajectories are described more in
test,intime,allthetrajectoriesT1,T2andT3whilegaining
details in the following:
expertise and a better walking capability. The second stage
1) Trajectory T1: it has been designed keeping focus on
oftheexperimentalassessmentinvolvedone31-year-oldSCI
the simplicity of movement. The step is executed in two
patient with a D5 lesion and signiﬁcant previous experience
distinctphases:therisingandthelandingofthefootbothlast
in the usage of lower-limb exoskeletons. The focus of this
exactlyhalfofthetotalswingtime.Thereforethepeakheight
∗ stage was the evaluation of the feasibility of the proposed
is reached at t = 0.5 t . In addition to this, the shape
H S − solutions with an impaired user.
of the step has been designed to be symmetrical: z (t
∀ ∈ F H All the participants gave written and informed consent
) = z (t +)  [0,t ]. The resulting basis functions
F H H before their inclusion in the study. The experiments respect
(Fig. 4 (a)) f and f as polynomials of 6th and 7th order
x z thestandardsoftheDeclarationofHelsinki(rev.2013),with
respectively. A geometric representation of the trajectory T1
formalapprovaloftheethicsevaluationcommitteeComitato
is illustrated in Fig. 6(b). The trajectory T1 was the ﬁrst
Etico Interaziendale Bologna-Imola of the Pharmaceutical
one to be implemented in the TWIN exoskeleton. Its design
Department U.O.C. Farmacia Ospedale Maggiore, Bologna,
allowed us to compare a ”simple” walking style w.r.t. more
Italy (Protocol number: CP-POR1-01 ver.01).
sophisticated ones.
2) Trajectory T2: the basis functions shown f and f B. Protocol
x z
in Fig. 4(c) have been designed in order to induce the
The experiments took place in empty areas at least 15x6
foot to move backwards during the toe-off phase (i.e. when
meters wide under the supervision of qualiﬁed operators
the foot leaves the ground, heel ﬁrst, toe last), to reach
to ensure at all times the safety of the participants. All
the maximum height during the ﬁrst half of the step and
of them were instructed on how to use and behave inside
then to perform a plane-like landing. In recent years, the
the exoskeleton. Preliminary walking activities were also
lower-limb exoskeletons TWIICE [18], Lokomat® [19] and conducted to further acquaint the participants with this kind
C-ALEX [20] have used similar walking trajectories for
ofdevice.WedeﬁnedastartingpointP1andaﬁnalpointP2
rehabilitation therapies and paraplegic assisted walking. A
locatedtenmetersaway.Theparticipantswereaskedtowalk
geometric representation of the trajectory T2, implemented
straightattheirpreferredspeedfromP1toP2morethanonce
in our device, is shown in Fig. 6(d).
in each testing session (Fig. 7). Speed was selected online
3) Trajectory T3: starting from T2, we designed a third by using the Android application while the participant was
trajectory shape in order to accentuate the heel-strike phase, standing still, not during walking, for safety reasons.
i.e. when the foot touches the ground heel ﬁrst. The im-
C. User experience
portance of the heel-strike to toe-off movement has been
widely studied in literature: it is believed that the arches, The assessment phase provided qualitative feedback for
functioning as springs, are compressed in the early stance to the development of the three trajectories. With regard to
storemechanicalenergyandthentoconvertitintopropulsive trajectory T1, all the participants felt it uncomfortable due
power during toe-off. This anatomically passive mechanism to the unnatural ﬂexion of the knee (Fig. 7 (a)). On the
reduces metabolic energy during locomotion and helps with other hand, assessing T2, the problem of stumbling on the
the balance therefore improving its safety [21] [22]. Even in ground with the toe was commonly faced (Fig. 7 (b)). We
the humanoid robotics ﬁeld, the importance of heel-strike to associate this issue to the lack of degrees of freedom in the
1781
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 6: The reference joint trajectories, in position control, during a stride are shown on the ﬁrst row, while the geometric
∼
representation of the swing foot during a step is shown on the second row. In all the cases, the step is 0.40m long with a
∼
peak height of 0.20m. (a) and (b) show trajectory T1, (c) and (d) show trajectory T2, (e) and (f) show trajectory T3.
ankle. In order to avoid the problem, the participants had patient as it did not exploit the singularity which could be
to tilt backwards the torso making the walk uncomfortable offeredbyhisskeletalsystemiffullyextended.Weconclude
and unstable. Lastly, T3 was considered unanimously the that T1 results to be functional, without stumble problems,
smoothest trajectory without presenting any problem related but unnatural and uncomfortable.
to ground collision (Fig. 7 (c)).
ThegeometricrepresentationofT2isshowninFig.6(d),
whiletheresultingkneeandhipjointtrajectoriesaredepicted
V. DISCUSSION in Fig. 6 (c). It resul∼ts that∼the former reaches a maximum
kneeﬂexionangleof 70°( 5°lessthanT1)whilethelatter
The basis function interpolation provides an easy-to-use ∼
hasapeakof 22°duringtheswingphase.Theirmaximum
and reliable tool to generate customized gait patterns for a
excursions are almost synchronized around the 70-80% of
lower-limb exoskeleton. Given the mathematical model of
the stride. The gait style T2 allows to perform walking steps
theroboticdeviceandthegeometricpropertiesofthedesired
with a much smaller excursion variation of the joints angles
gait, the trajectory components on the sagittal plane can
w.r.t. T1. However, although this trajectory minimizes the
be analyzed in order to identify the basis functions able to
patient’s effort and it is much more human-like than T1,
reproduce the desired patterns with minimum jerk planning.
theparticipantsinsomecasesfacedstumblingproblems.An
In this section the outcomes of the experimental process
accurate tuning process of walking parameters was required
are presented, highlighting the positive and negative aspects
in order to minimize the risk of collisions with the ground.
encountered for each gait style T1, T2 and T3.
OnerepresentationofthetrajectoryT1inthesagittalplane The trajectory T3 has been developed in order to obtain
is shown in Fig. 6 (b). The resulting evolution of the knee a pronounced movement of heel-strike that implicates a
and the hip joint angles during stance and swing phases is propulsivepowerduringtoe-offphase.Moreover,wewanted
shown in Fig. 6 (a): it is possible to observe that, during the to identify basis functions able to generate a gait cycle
swingphase,thekneejointperformsasigniﬁcantmovement whichiscomfortableandstableforhealthyandSCIsubjects,
whilethehipjointplaysasecondaryrole.Indeed,theformer without requiring an accurate tuning of walking parameters.
∼
reaches a maximum angle of 75° while the latter has a The resulting trajectory is able to minimize the joint angles
∼
peak of 30°. Their movements are synchronized and they variationandavoidthestumblingproblem.Weidentiﬁedthe
reach the maximum excursion almost at the same time. This basis functions f and f , shown in Fig. 4 (e-f), such that
x z
wide range of motion explains why all the participants felt the toe-off phase is deﬁned by the foot that moves up and
uncomfortable as the excessive knee ﬂexion, combined with forward at the same time, then goes parallel to the ground
amuchlowerhipﬂexion,createdasenseofinstabilitytothe up to 110% of the step length, and ﬁnally ends landing back
1782
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 7: Snapshots of the experiments (a) SCI patient testing the T1 trajectory at the Centro Protesi INAIL premises. (b)
HealthysubjectstumblingonthegroundwhiletestingtheT2trajectoryattheRehabTechnologiesLabpremises.(c)Healthy
subject testing the T3 trajectory at the Rehab Technologies Lab premises.
at 100%. Thanks to this behavior, the heel-strike phase is polationapproachmultiplyingnormalizedbasisfunctionsby
well pronounced, providing momentum to the user for the the geometric properties of the desired gaits. The design of
next step. Fig. 6 (e-f) shows the joints trajectories and the theproposedgaitpatternswasdonethankstothecooperation
shapeofthetrajectoryT3.Wecanobservethattheexcursion of ﬁeld experts and validated in a clinical environment on
between hip and knee joint angles is considerably reduced a SCI patient. The main conclusions that can be draft from
w.r.t. the trajectories T1 and T2: the former has a peak of this work are that an effective gait pattern should be able
∼ ∼
60° and the latter of 42°. The contribution of the hip to (i) minimize the joint angles variation during walking to
joint is higher in T3 than in previous trajectories, reducing maximize the comfort of the user and to (ii) accentuate the
the knee joint angle variation. Such synergy leads to have heel-strike phase thus avoiding the stumbling problem and
a more comfortable and smooth and safe gait pattern w.r.t. increasingthestabilityofthesystem.Therefore,weconclude
T1andT2andthereforerepresentsthetrajectorythatsatisﬁes that the trajectory T3 yields so far the best results in terms
the set requirements the best. ofeffectivenessandacceptabilityanditcouldbeareference
The gait styles T1, T2 and T3 have been also tested with paradigm for future studies on lower limb exoskeletons.
the SCI patient which has been able to walk successfully In the next step of the TWIN project, we plan to fully
with the proposed trajectories. The outcomes of this activity evaluate the acceptability of the proposed gait patterns on
substantially conﬁrmed the feedback obtained in the devel- a statistically signiﬁcant number of impaired patients.
opment phase.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
VI. CONCLUSIONSANDFUTUREWORK We would like to thank all the subjects that have cooper-
Inthispaperwepresentedthreedifferentgaitpatterns:T1, atedwithusduringthesemonthsfortheirhelpandpriceless
T2 and T3. In order to generate them, we exploited an inter- feedbacks.
1783
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [21] R.F.Ker,M.B.Bennett,S.R.Bibby,R.C.Kester,R.McN.Alexander,
”Thespringinthehumanfoot”,Nature,vol.325,pp.147-149,1987.
[1] World Health Organization (2019, August). [Online]. Available: [22] S.M.Stearne,K.A.McDonald,J.A.Alderson,I.North,C.E.Oxnard
https://www.who.int and J. Rubenson, ”The foot’s arch and the energetics of human
[2] N. A. Bayona, J. Bitensky, K. Salter and R. Teasell, ”The role locomotion”,Scientiﬁcreports,vol.6,19403,2016.
of task-speciﬁc training in rehabilitation therapies,” Topics in stroke [23] M-S. Kim, I. Kim, S. Park, J.H. Oh, ”Realization of stretch-legged
rehabilitation,vol.12,pp.58-65,2005. walkingofthehumanoidrobot”,8thIEEE-RASInternationalConfer-
[3] R. Riener, ”Neurorehabilitation Robotics and Neuroprosthetics,” Neu- enceonHumanoidRobots,pp.118-124,2008.
roergonomics: The brain at work, Oxford University Press, Oxford [24] S. Lee, B. Park and J. Park, ”Foot angle determination for efﬁcient
ScholarshipOnline,2009. heel-toewalking”,14thIEEE-URAIInternationalConferenceonUbiq-
[4] V. S. Huang, J. W. Krakauer, ”Robotic neurorehabilitation: a compu- uitousRobotsandAmbientIntelligence,pp.307-308,2017.
tational motor learning perspective,” Journal of neuroengineering and
rehabilitationwalking,vol.6,p.5,2009.
[5] J. L. Patton, F. A. Mussa-Ivaldi, ”Robot-assisted adaptive training:
customforceﬁeldsforteachingmovementpatterns,”IEEETransactions
onBiomedicalEngineering,vol.51,no.4,pp.636-646,2004.
[6] D.Grasmucke,A.Zieriacks,O.Jansen,C.Fisahn,M.Sczesny-Kaiser,
M. Wessling, R.C. Meindl, T. A. Schildhauer, M. Aach, ”Against the
odds: what to expect in rehabilitation of chronic spinal cord injury
withaneurologicallycontrolledHybridAssistiveLimbexoskeleton.A
subgroup analysis of 55 patients according to age and lesion level.”,
Neurosurg.Focus,vol.42,2017.
[7] H. Kawamoto, S. Taal, H. Niniss, T. Hayashi, K. Kamibayashi, K.
Eguchi,Y.Sankai,”VoluntarymotionandsupportcontrolofRobotSuit
HAL triggered by bioelectrical signal for hemiplegia”, 2010 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology,pp.462-466,2010.
[8] S.A. Kolakowsky-Hayner, J. Crew, S. Moran, A. Shan, ”Safety and
feasibility of using the EksoTM bionic exoskeleton to aid ambulation
afterspinalcordinjury”,J.Spine,vol.4,2013.
[9] R.J. Farris, H.A. Quintero, S.A. Murray, K.H. Ha, C. Hartigan, M.
Goldfarb,”Apreliminaryassessmentofleggedmobilityprovidedbya
lowerlimbexoskeletonforpersonswithparaplegia”,IEEETransactions
onNeuralSystemsandRehabilitationEngineering,vol.22,no.3,pp.
482-490,May2014.
[10] T. Yan, M. Cempini, C. M. Oddo, N. Vitiello, ”Review of assistive
strategiesinpoweredlower-limborthosesandexoskeletons,”Robotics
andAutonomousSystems,vol.64,pp.120-136,Feb.2015.
[11] A.Esquenazi,M.Talaty,A.Packel,M.Saulino,”TheReWalkpowered
exoskeletontorestoreambulatoryfunctiontoindividualswiththoracic-
levelmotor-completespinalcordinjury,”AmericanJournalofPhysical
Medicine&Rehabilitation,vol.91,no.11,pp.911-921,Nov.2012.
[12] D. Sanz-Merodio, M. Cestari, J.C. Arevalo, E. Garcia, ”Control
Motion approach of a Lower Limb Orthosis to Reduce Energy Con-
sumption,”InternationalJournalofAdvancedRoboticSystems,vol.9,
no.6,Dec.2012.
[13] R.Huang,H.Cheng,Y.Chen,Q.Chen,X.Lin,J.Qiu,”Optimisation
of Reference Gait Trajectory of a Lower Limb Exoskeleton,” Int. J.
Soc.Robot.,vol.8,no.2,pp.223-235,Apr.2016.
[14] T.Kagawa,H.Ishikawa,T.Kato,C.Sung,andY.Uno,”Optimization-
Based Motion Planning in Joint Space for Walking Assistance With
Wearable Robot,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 415-424,
Apr.2015.
[15] J. Denavit, R. Hartenberg, ”A kinematic notation for lower-pair
mechanismsbasedonmatrices,”ASMEJournalofAppliedMechanics,
vol.22,pp.215-221,1955.
[16] T. Lenzi, J. Sensiger, L.J. Hargrove, ”Speed Adaptation Mechanism
- Robotic Prostheses Can Actively Regulate Joint Torque”, IEEE
Robotics&AutomationMagazine,vol.21,pp.94-107,2014.
[17] R. Grifﬁn, T. Cobb, T. Craig, M. Daniel, ”Stepping Forward with
Exoskeletons: Team IHMC’s Design and Approach in the 2016 Cy-
bathlon”,IEEERobotics&AutomationMagazine,vol.24,no.4,pp.
66-74,2017.
[18] T.Vouga,R.Baud,J.Fasola,M.BouriandH.Bleuler,”TWIICEA
lightweightlower-limbexoskeletonforcompleteparaplegics”,Interna-
tionalConferenceonRehabilitationRobotics(ICORR),pp.1639-1645,
2017.
[19] L. Marchal-Crespo, P. Tsangaridis, D. Obwegeser, S. Maggioni, R.
Riener, ”Haptic Error Modulation Outperforms Visual Error Ampliﬁ-
cation When Learning a Modiﬁed Gait Pattern”, Frontiers in Neuro-
science,vol.13,no.61,2019.
[20] X.Jin,A.PradoandS.K.Agrawal,”RetrainingofHumanGait-Are
LightweightCable-DrivenLegExoskeletonDesignsEffective?”,IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol.
26,no.4,2018.
1784
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 