2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Novel Proximity Sensor for Realizing Tactile Sense in Suction Cups
Sayaka Doi1, Hiroki Koga1, Tomonori Seki1 and Yutaro Okuno1
Abstract—Weproposeanewcapacitiveproximitysensorthat
detects deformations of a suction cup as a tactile sense. We
conﬁrmed that one sensor module provides three applications
forreliablepickingandasimpliﬁedsetup.Theﬁrstapplication
is the picking height decision. The second one is the placing
height decision for detecting whether the grasped object is
placed on the placement surface. These two applications are
achieved by detecting the push-in stroke of the suction cup.
The ﬁnal application is detection of whether the suction cup is
in partial contact or full contact with the object. This function
cancorrectthepickingpostureaswellasdetectwhetherpicking
ispossiblebeforethepull-upmotion.Wealsodemonstratethat
Fig.1. Prototypesensor.(a)Suctioncupwithproximitysensor.(b)Elec-
the partial contact position can be estimated in real time.
trodesofcapacitiveproximitysensor.
I. INTRODUCTION
Industrial robots (e.g., articulated robots, selective com- proximity sensors mounted on the robot’s end-effector are
pliance articulated robot arms (SCARA robots), and parallel useful for manipulation.
robots) are widely used in factores. However, to meet task- While various sensors have been proposed for multi-
yield and cycle-time requirements, skillful engineers need to ﬁngeredend-effectorapplications,therearefewproposalsof
teach robots the correct positions and/or design dedicated sensors for vacuum suction-cup applications. Manipulation
jigs. They often need to verify the teaching positions and systems using suction cups are common, in part because
cycle times repeatedly. These setup methods tend to be it is easy to plan and control suction cups for grasping
expensive and take a long time. Mass production has used [15], [16]. In the 2017 Amazon Robotics Challenge and
automated systems with industrial robots, but small and the 2018 World Robot Challenge, many teams used suction-
medium-sized production have had problems incorporating cup manipulation systems. Since the suction cup has a soft
industrial robots because automation costs may outweigh rubber part, position errors can be absorbed by the rubber
theireffect.Despitethis,thedemandforautomationofsmall stroke. Nevertheless, picking failures, which are presumed
ormedium-sizedproductionisgrowingduetodeclinesinthe to be mainly due to recognition errors by the visual sensor
labor force and rising wages. system, often occurred in these challenges, and the grasped
Numerous techniques using visual systems have been object was released before it touched the placement surface.
proposed for pick-and-place operations [1], [2]. While these In an actual application, this problem would pose a risk
are effective in various situations in factories, visual sensors of dropping or breakage of the object. Moreover, precise
typically have difﬁculty recognizing objects depending on placement is difﬁcult in an actual application. These issues
their material, texture, and color. They also have occlusion lead to poor task yield and poor product quality. Thus,
and lighting disturbance problems. For these reasons, it has suction cups besides other end-effectors are required for
been proposed to use vision sensors in combination with teaching precise positions, and a dedicated jig is needed to
other sensors. eliminate position errors.
Tactileand/orproximitysensorsmountedontheﬁngersof Pressure and ﬂow sensors are often used to detect picking
arobotend-effectorhavebeenproposedforreliablepicking. failures after a pick-up procedure with a suction cup, e.g.
Techniques that use tactile sensors to detect the grasping [17].Aforce-torquesensorattachedtothewristoftherobot
force or contact geometry [3]–[5] have demonstrated stable was used for detecting contact with objects in [17], [18].
grasping. Moreover, proximity sensors have been proposed Althoughtheresultsshowedtheireffectiveness,force-torque
as intermediates between tactile and vision sensors [6]–[10]. sensors are expensive. In addition, there is concern about
Picking can be reliably performed by detecting the distance low sensitivity when the sensor is attached to the base of a
between the ﬁnger and the object. Techniques combining softend-effectorsuchasasuctioncups,becausetheeffector
proximity and tactile sensors have also been proposed [3], works as a damper. An array of ﬂexible piezoresistive
[11]–[14]. A number of studies have shown that tactile or tactile sensors was proposed for vacuum suction cups and
magnetic grippers [19]. This technique has the advantage
1Sayaka Doi, Hiroki Koga, Tomonori Seki and Yutaro Okuno are with that the sensor, which is attached to the gripping surface,
OMRON Corporation, Kizugawadai 9-1. Kizugawa-city, Kyoto, Japan
{ can be applied to magnetic grippers as well as suction cups.
sayaka.doi, hiroki.koga, tomonori.seki,
}
yutaro.okuno @omron.com However, damage may occur to the sensor or object when
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 638
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:57:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.2. Typicalcapacitiveproximitysensor.(a)Schemeofmaincapacitance
formedbysensorelectrode.(b)Relationshipbetweenmeasuredcapacitance
anddistancefromsensorelectrodetoobject.
Fig.4. Applicationsofthesensor.(a)Pickingcontrolbydetectingpush-in.
(b) Placing control by detecting push-in. (c) Posture control by detecting
partialcontact.
of a dielectric object made from, e.g., plastic, the measured
capacitanceisaffectedbyC .C indicatesthegrounding
obj gnd
state of the object. When the object is directly grounded,
C can be ignored (short circuit). When the object is
gnd
not explicitly grounded, the measured capacitance is most
Fig.3. Proposedsensor.(a)Schemeofmaincapacitanceformedbysensor affected by C . The measured capacitance is the total
gnd
electrode.(b)Equivalentcircuitofthesensor. capacitance of C , C , and C in series. When C
prx obj gnd obj
and C can be ignored, the measured capacitance is large
gnd
and the measurement has high sensitivity. When C and
they are in contact. obj
C are small, the measured capacitance is small and the
Under these circumstances, we decided to develop a gnd
measurement has low sensitivity.
sensor for suction cups (Fig. 1). Speciﬁcally, the purpose
of our study was to make setup of automation easy with a B. Sensor Design
reasonable sensor. The purpose of this our study is to make
Photographs of the prototype capacitive proximity sensor
setupofautomationeasywithpracticalsensor.Theproposed
are shown in Fig. 1. Three electrodes are arranged on one
sensor gives a tactile sense to the suction cup, and it is both
side of the sensor board (Fig. 1(b)). These electrodes can
simple and low-cost. The sensor has the potential to make a
determine partial contact without having to use too small an
manipulation system without the need for teaching the robot
electrode. The outer diameters of the electrodes are 35 mm,
the precise positions or for building a dedicated jig.
which is the same as that of the suction cup. In the center
II. SENSORDEVELOPMENT of the sensor, a cutout hole is prepared for the suction
cup. To measure capacitance, we used a self-capacitive
A. Capacitive Proximity Sensing
digital converter FDC1004 made by Texas Instruments. It is
This section describes the principle of operation of the mounted on the other side of the sensor board. The sample
capacitiveproximitysensor.Figure2(a)showstheschematic rate of the FDC1004 is 100 Hz, using a microcontroller
diagram of the capacitance formed by the electrode of a (Arduino Uno). The sensor is attached to the suction cup
typical capacitive proximity sensor. In accordance with the (Fig. 1(a)).
parallel plate capacitance model, the capacitance is propor- Figure 3 shows the scheme of the capacitances of the
tionaltothepermittivityandelectrodesize,anditisinversely sensor and the equivalent circuit. Although there would be
proportional to the distance to object, as shown in Fig. 2(b). a capacitance between the suction cup and the object, it
C isthecapacitancebetweentheelectrodeandtheobject, is omitted here for the sake of simplicity. Compared with
prx
and it depends on the distance between them. C indicates Fig. ﬁg2(a), a route via the suction cup is added. C is
obj prxc
the capacitance of the object itself, which depends on its the capacitance between the electrode and the suction cup,
permittivity and shape. When the object is a conductor such and C is the capacitance between the electrode and the
prxo
as a metal, C can be ignored (short circuit). In the case object. These capacitances correspond to C in Fig. 2(a).
obj prx
639
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:57:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. C and C are the capacitance of the suction cup and
cup obj
that of the object, respectively, while C and C are
gndc gndo
thegroundedstatecapacitanceofthesuctioncupandthatof
theobject,respectively.Themeasuredcapacitanceisthesum
of the series capacitances of the suction cup route (C ,
prxc
C and C ) and that of the object route (C , C
cup gndc prxo obj
and C ).
gndo
C. Applications
Figure4showsthreepossibleapplicationsofthesensorin
pick-and-place operations. In picking operations (Fig. 4(a)),
the sensor detects whether a push-in stroke is sufﬁcient
to grasp an object, and the robot can decide the picking
heightbyitselfwithoutbeingtaught.Thisapplicationisalso
compatiblewithnon-uniformobjects,forwhichitisdifﬁcult
to set the picking height in advance. In placing operations
(Fig. 4(b)), the sensor detects whether the grasped object is
placed on the surface without the robot having been taught
the placing height. Both the height of the surface and the
heightoftheobjectareusuallyneededinadvanceforcareful
placement, but this determination becomes unnecessary in
our system. Figure 4(c) shows a picking operation in the
caseofatiltedobject.Partialcontactbetweenthesuctioncup
and the object leads to a picking failure due to air leaking
Fig. 5. Experimental setup. (a) Common setup for the experiments. (b)
intothesuctioncupafternegativepressurehasbeenapplied. Setupforthepartialcontactexperiments.
The robot can correct the posture of the suction cup from
the information on the partial contact position detected by
the sensor.
III. CAPACITIVETACTILESENSING
Here, we describe the estimation methods of the push-
in stroke l and the partial contact position ψ. l is the
displacementofthelippositionbeforeandafterdeformation.
ψ is the clockwise rotation angle, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Fig.6. Sampleobjectsusedintheexperiments.(a)Groundedcoppersheet.
We used the following linear regression to estimate the (b)Plasticcase.
push-in stroke l:
l=α∆C+β, (1) − ◦
∆C = Acos(ψ 60 )+B, (3)
1
where the coefﬁcient α and β are experimentally obtained ∆C = Acos(ψ+180◦)+B, (4)
2
from 10 measurements. Three times the standard deviation ◦
∆C = Acos(ψ+60 )+B, (5)
(3σ) is 6.3 fF for three measurements, and it is equivalent 3
to a ﬂuctuation in l of about 0.14 mm. On the other hand, where A and B are coefﬁcients, but they do not need to be
3σ is 4.5 fF at 10 measurements, and it is equivalent to a derivedinordertoﬁndψ.Wecangetthefollowingequation
ﬂuctuationinl ofabout0.09mm.Thisissufﬁcienttodetect by solving the system of equations (3), (4), and (5):
√
thepush-instrokeinpractice.∆C isthesumofthemeasured −
capacitive displacements obtained from the three electrodes − 3(∆C ∆C )
ψ =tan 1 1 − 3 . (6)
as follows: ∆C +∆C 2∆C
1 3 2
We judge that the state is in full contact when each elec-
∆C =∆C +∆C +∆C , (2) trode’s ∆C is larger than a certain value.
1 2 3
IV. EXPERIMENTSANDDISCUSSION
where the subscripts are the electrode’s number.
A. Experimental Setup
To estimate the partial contact position ψ, the capacitive
displacementsobtainedfromthethreeelectrodesareapprox- The common setup used for the experiments is shown in
imated as follows: Fig.5(a).Toevaluatepush-instroke,weusedamotorizedZ-
640
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:57:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.7. Capacitivedisplacementdataofpush-instrokeexperimentsusingnon-conductivecup(a)andusingconductivecup(b).Thedataarethemeans
± −
3σ (n=10)fordfrom 2to5mm.
Fig.9. Estimationresultsofpush-instrokewhenthepush-instrokelis0
±
to2mm.Theestimationdataarethemeans 3σ (n=10).
Fig.8. Capacitancebeforecontact(a)andaftercontact(b).(c)Equivalent
circuitof∆C whenthesuctioncupisconductive.
B. Results of Push-in Experiments
The results of the push-in stroke experiments using the
axis stage (OSMS26-300 from Sigmakoki). The suction cup non-conductive and conductive cups are shown in Fig. 7(a)
with the sensor was attached to the Z-axis stage via manual and Fig. 7(b), respectively. The vertical axes express ∆C,
αβ-axisgoniometersandarotationstage(KSP-606M,GOH- and the horizontal axes express the distance d between the
40B15 from Sigmakoki). A stage controller was used to lip of the suction cup and the object. d = 0 mm when the
controlthestageandobserveitsposition.Toevaluatepartial cup just touches the object, d > 0 mm is the state before
contact, we used a manual α-axis goniometer as an object, contact, and d < 0 mm is the state after contact. In Fig.
asshowninFig.5(b).Wesetthetileangleofpartialcontact 7, the capacitive displacement data are the means of 10
◦
to10 byusingtheα-axisgoniometerafteradjustingthetilt measurements, and the error bars indicate 3σ. As shown in
to be in the full contact state by the αβ-axis goniometers at Fig. 7(a), when the suction cup is non-conductive, ∆C is
◦
0 of the α-axis goniometer. inversely proportional to d, and this relationship is like that
We evaluated the push-in stroke using suction cups made ofatypicalcapacitiveproximitysensorasinFig.2(b).While
of two rubber materials: non-conductive silicone and con- thesensitivityofthegroundedcopperishigh,thesensitivity
ductivesilicone(PFG-35-S/PFG-35-SEfromMyotoku).The of the plastic case is very low. On the other hand, when
conductivecupwasgrounded.AsshowninFig.6,wetested the suction cup is conductive, the results for the grounded
twoobjects:agroundedcoppersheetandplasticcase.These copper line and plastic line mostly overlap, and each line
objects have rather different sensitivities, as described in II- has an inﬂection point near d = 0 mm, as shown in Fig.
A, which cover the range of most objects. 7(b). The overlap means that the sensitivity of the plastic
641
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:57:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 10. Measurements gathered in partial contact experiments using
±
conductivesiliconecup.Thedataarethemeans 3σ (n=10).
Fig. 12. Real-time estimation examples of partial contact position when
object is a ﬁnger (a) and plastic case (b). Full-contact estimation example
withplasticcase(c).
Fig.11. Estimatedpartialcontactpositionψ.Theestimateddataarethe
±
means 3σ (n=10).
−
alent to d at d < 0 mm. The coefﬁcients α and β in
(1) were calculated from the measured data of the grounded
caseissimilartothatofgroundedcopper,andadjustmentof
thesensitivityforeachobjectisunnecessary.Comparedwith coppersheet,andtheywereusedtoestimatelwiththeplastic
thenon-conductivecup,thesensitivityoftheconductivecup case as well as the grounded copper sheet. When l was
from 0 to 1 mm, good estimations of push-in stroke were
after contact with the plastic case is high.
achieved for both objects. Although good estimation results
Figure 8 shows images of the capacitance and equivalent
circuit of the capacitance measured when using the con- were obtained for the copper sheet when l was from 1 to 2
mm, the estimated strokes were shifted for the plastic case.
ductive cup. C , C , C and C in Fig, 3 are
omitted.Whenucusipngthgendgcrounodbejdcondugcntidvoecup,C and This is due to the fact that the effect of ∆Cprxo is larger
cup as the distance to the object gets smaller. In pick-and-place
C in Fig. 3(b) are almost ignorable (short circuit) and
gndc applications that use thresholds of the push-in stroke, this
themeasured∆C isapproximatelyequalto∆C because
C is much larger than C (C (cid:29) C prxc). Conse- shift at l >1 mm is not a signiﬁcant issue, as the accuracy
prxc prxo prxc prxo immediately after contact is more important.
quently,while∆C ishardlydetectedbeforecontactbecause
C does not change (Fig. 8(a)), it has a large value after C. Results of Partial Contact Experiments
prxc
contact (Fig. 8(b)). This behavior is like that of a switch
Theresultsofthepartialcontactexperimentsareshownin
circuit(Fig.8(c)).Turningontheswitchmeanscontactwith
Fig. 10. The vertical axis expresses ∆C and the horizontal
the object. An inﬂection point appears due to this switch
axisexpressesthecontactpositionψ.Thedataarethemeans
mechanism. In theory, ∆C becomes large after contact, ±
prxo 3σ(n=10).Thepeakofthethreecapacitivedisplacements
becase the distance to the object is small. The overlapping ◦
(cid:29) changes every 120 . This is consistent with the relationship
results conﬁrmed that the relationship of C C
prxc prxo between ψ and the positions of the electrodes. Figure 11
is strong. The beneﬁts of using the conductive cup can be
shows ψ estimated from the measurement data in Fig. 10.
brieﬂy summarized as follows: ◦ ◦ ◦
At about 0 , 120 , and 240 , the error range is larger than
• Easy to detect contact from the inﬂection point elsewhere. These positions are discontinuous portions of
• Possible to detect any object the electrodes. These errors requires further investigation to
• No need to adjust the sensitivity determine their cause.
Therefore, we decided to use only the conductive cup in the Next, we estimated the partial contact position in real-
subsequent evaluations. time. Images of this demonstration are shown in Fig. 11
Figure 9 shows the estimated push-in stroke l. l is equiv- (see also the attached movie). The pictures on the left show
642
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:57:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. theactualsuctioncupstate,andthechartsontherightshow [12] R. Araki, F. Suga, T. Abe, H. Noma, and M. Sohgawa, “Gripping
the estimated position (red circles). The far side of the cup control of delicate and ﬂexible object by electromotive manipulator
withproximityandtactilecomboMEMSsensor,”Transducers2017,
is displayed at the top of the chart. Figure 11(a) shows the
pp.1140-1143,2017.
contact with a ﬁnger, and Fig. 11(b) shows contact with the [13] A. Yamaguchi, “FingerVision for Tactile Behaviors, Manipulation,
lid of the plastic case. When the cup is in full contact, red and Haptic Feedback Teleoperation, ” in Proceedings of the IEEJ
International Workshop on Sensing, Actuation, Motion Control, and
ﬁllsinthechart(Fig.11(c)).Itcanbeseenthattheestimated
Optimization(SAMCON2018),IS2-4,2018.
contact state matches the actual one. [14] R. Patel, R. Cox, and N. Correll, “Integrated proximity, contact
and force sensing using elastomer-embedded commodity proximity
sensors,”AutonomousRobots,Vol.42,No.7,pp.1443–1458,2018.
V. CONCLUSION
[15] N.Correll,K.Bekris,D.Berenson,O.Brock,A.Causo,K.Hauser,
K. Okada, A. Rodriguez, J. Romano, and P. Wurman, “Analysis and
A new capacitive proximity sensor for suction cups was observationsfromtheﬁrstAmazonPickingChallenge,”IEEETrans.
developed. The two functions that can be achieved with one Automation Science and Engineering, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 172–188,
2018.
sensor module having three electrodes are push-in detec-
[16] H.Nakamoto,M.Ohtake,K.Komoda,A.SugaharaandA.Ogawa,“A
tion and partial contact detection. Since this sensor detects GripperSystemforRobustlyPickingVariousObjectsPlacedDensely
deformation of the cup, in principle, it can be applied to bySuctionandPinching,”inProceedingsofIEEE/RSJInternational
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),pp.6093-6098,
deformable cups such as the bellows type in addition to
2018.
the ﬂat type. We brieﬂy tried a sensor-based control, which [17] C.Eppner,S.Ho¨fer,R.Jonschkowski,R.Mart´ın-Mart´ın,A.Sieverling,
determines the picking and placing heights by detecting the V.Wall,andO.Brock,“LessonsfromtheAmazonPickingChallenge:
Fouraspectsofbuildingroboticsystems,”inProceedingsofRobotics:
push-in stroke (see the attached movie).
ScienceandSystems,2016.
Inthefuture,wewilltrytoextendthesensor’sapplications [18] K.T.YuandA.Rodriguez,“Realtimestateestimationwithtactileand
to controlling the tilt of an object. The sensor has the visual sensing for inserting a suction-held object,” in Proceedings of
IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems
potential to detect not only partial contact but also the
(IROS),pp.1628–1635,2018.
posuture of suction cup when it is carrying an object. [19] V. Mu¨ller, T.-L. Lam and N. Elkmann, “Sensor Design and Model-
basedTactileFeatureRecognition,”2017IEEESensors,pp.1-3,2017.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Hashimoto, Y. Domae, and S. Kaneko, “Review: Current Status
andFutureTrendsonRobotVisionTechnology,”JournalofRobotics
andMechatronics,Vol.29,No.2,pp.275-286,2017.
[2] L.Pe´rez,´I.Rodr´ıguez,N.Rodr´ıguez,R.UsamentiagaandD.Garc´ıa,
“Robot Guidance Using Machine Vision Techniques in Industrial
Environments:AComparativeReview,”SensorsMDPI,Vol.16,No.
335,pp.1-26,2016.
[3] Z. Kappassov, J. A. Corrales and V. Perdereau, “Tactile sensing in
dexterousrobothands—Review,”RoboticsandAutonomousSystems,
Vol.74,pp.195–220,2015.
[4] E. Donlon, S. Dong, M. Liu, J. Li, E. Adelson, and A. Rodriguez,
“Gelslim: A high-resolution, compact, robust, and calibrated tactile-
sensingﬁnger,”inProceedingsofIEEE/RSJInternationalConference
onIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),pp.1927-1934,2018.
[5] A.Cirillo,P.Cirillo,G.D.Maria,C.Natale,andS.Pirozzi,“Controlof
linear and rotational slippage based on six-axis force/tactile sensor,”
In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation(ICRA),pp.1587–1594,2017.
[6] K.Hsiao,P.Nangeroni,M.Huber,A.Saxena,andA.Y.Ng,“Reactive
grasping using optical proximity sensors,” in Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp.
2098–2105,2006.
[7] B.Yang,P.Lancaster,andJ.R.Smith,“Pre-touchsensingforsequen-
tial manipulation,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference
onRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),pp.5088-5095,2017.
[8] K.Koyama,Y.Suzuki,A.Ming,andM.Shimojo,“IntegratedControl
of a Multi-ﬁngered Hand and Arm using Proximity Sensors on the
Fingertips,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),pp.4282-4288,2016.
[9] K. Koyama, M. Shimojo, T. Senoo and M. Ishikawa, “High-Speed
High-Precision Proximity Sensor for Detection of Tilt, Distance and
Contact”, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp.
3224–3231,2018.
[10] N.Yamaguchi,S.Hasegawa,K.OkadaandM.Inaba,“AGripperfor
ObjectSearchandGraspthroughProximitySensing,”inProceedings
of IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems(IROS),pp.6690-6697,2018.
[11] S. E. Navarro, M. Schonert, B. Hein, and H. Wo¨rn, “6d proximity
servoingforpreshapingandhapticexplorationusingcapacitivetactile
proximitysensors,”inProceedingsofIEEE/RSJInternationalConfer-
enceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),pp.7-14,2014.
643
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:57:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 