 
2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
A Continuum Manipulator with Closed-form Inverse Kinematics 
and Independently Tunable Stiffness 
Bin Zhao, Student Member, IEEE, Lingyun Zeng, Baibo Wu and Kai Xu, Member, IEEE 
    Abstract— Continuum manipulators can accomplish various  tendon-driven  manipulators,  high  tension  forces  from  the 
tasks  in  confined  spaces,  benefiting  from  their  compliant  pulling wires compress the vertebrae such that higher friction 
structures and improved dexterity. Confined and unstructured  is generated from the contacting surfaces [8-12]. On the other 
spaces may require both enhanced stiffness of a continuum  hand, jamming can be used to introduce higher friction via 
manipulator for precision and payload, as well as compliance 
pressurization for  tunable  stiffness [13-16].  However,  the 
for  safe  interaction.  Thus,  studies  have  been  consistently 
friction-based stiffness enhancement often leads to actuation 
dedicated to design continuum or articulated manipulators with 
tunable stiffness to adapt to different operating conditions. This  hysteresis. 
paper presents a continuum manipulator with independently 
Actuation unit
tunable stiffness where the stiffness variation does not affect the 
movement of the manipulator’s end-effector. Moreover, the 
proposed continuum manipulator is found to have analytical 
inverse kinematics. The design concept, analytical kinematics,  Continuum 
system  construction  and  experimental  characterizations  are  manipulator 
presented. The results showed that the manipulator’s stiffness 
can  be  increased  up  to  3.61  times  of  the  minimal  value, 
demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed idea.  Distal 
segment 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Proximal 
Continuum manipulators have been of interest due to their  segment Orientation 
segment  
improved dexterity in confined spaces and intrinsic compliant 
interaction  in  unstructured  spaces.  For  example,  slender 
Constrained portion 
continuum manipulators have been applied in surgical robots 
 
[1] and field operations [2, 3]. The continuum manipulator 
Fig. 1.  The constructed continuum manipulator with closed-form inverse 
with tunable stiffness is desired to adapt to different operating 
kinematics and independently tunable stiffness 
conditions. Enhanced stiffness of a continuum manipulator is 
desired for precision and payload, while the compliance is  It  is  possible  to  achieve  tunable  stiffness  via  proper 
preferred for safe interaction, preventing possible damages to  controller design. For example, a modified position controller 
fragile nearby objects or structures.   drove a concentric-tube manipulator into different poses for 
Hence,  recent  researches  have  focused  on  exploring  different stiffness upon understanding its mechanics [17]. A 
possible designs for manipulators with tunable stiffness. For  stiffness controller utilized the manipulator’s intrinsic force 
example, active materials can be used as tunable stiffness  sensing capability that was proposed in [18] to realize variable 
elements,  including  magnetorheological  fluids  [4],  stiffness  [19].  The  controller-based  approaches  can  be 
electrorheological fluids [5] or thermally softened alloy or  challenging in formulating the stiffness model based on the 
plastics [6, 7]. However, the uses of active materials usually  manipulator’s mechanics.  
complicate the robotic system. In addition, the response can be  Furthermore,  stiffness  can  be  enhanced  via  structure 
slow  for  thermally  activated  materials  (on  the  order  of  variations, such as the inclusion of a motion constraining 
seconds).  kinematic  chain  [20].  However,  such  approach  often 
Tunable stiffness can also be achieved by controlling the  complicated the system construction. 
friction  between  the  structural  elements.  For  example,  in  This paper hence proposes a continuum manipulator design 
with independently tunable stiffness. The manipulator with its 
  actuation unit is shown in Fig. 1. As detailed in Section II, the 
*This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science  manipulator’s stiffness can be continuously tuned by moving a 
Foundation of China (Grant No. 51722507, Grant No. 51435010 and Grant  rigid tube inside the manipulator such that the constrained 
No. 91648103), and in part by the National Key R&D Program of China 
portion can be at different positions along the manipulator. It 
(Grant No. 2017YFC0110800). 
Bin  Zhao  is  with  the  RII  Lab  (Lab  of  Robotics  Innovation  and  was  found  that  the  changed  positions  of  the  constrained 
Intervention), UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,  portion will not change the position and orientation of the 
Shanghai, China (emails: zhaobin2014@sjtu.edu.cn) 
orientation segment, even though the manipulator’s shape is 
Lingyun Zeng, Baibo Wu and Kai Xu are with School of Mechanical 
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China (emails:  indeed changed. This is hence referred to as independently 
me_maxqi@sjtu.edu.cn,  wubaibo@sjtu.edu.cn,  and  k.xu@sjtu.edu.cn  ; 
corresponding author: Kai Xu). 
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1847
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 01:22:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
tunable  stiffness  with  respect  to  the  movement  of  the  An AS, which is structurally similar to the DS or PS, is 
manipulator’s end-effector.   integrated to bend the PS. As shown in Fig. 2, the AS is bent 
The stiffness variation approach in the proposed design is  by actuating its actuation backbones. Then the PS and DS are 
similar to the authors’ previous work [21]. However, the  bent, and pure translations of the IDCM are hence generated.  
stiffness  variation  is  associated  with  the  position  and 
Orientation segment 
orientation changes of the end effector in [21]. Namely, the 
DS’s end disk 
stiffness is not independently tunable. On the other hand, the 
proposed idea of changing the position of a rigid structural  Configuration-2
component  is  similar  to  the  insertion  of  the  equilibrium  DS 
modulation backbone in [22]. But the equilibrium modulation  Constrained 
backbone is inserted for generating fine position outputs, other  portion 
than varying stiffness.  Structural 
Moreover,  the  proposed  manipulator  is  found  to  have  backbones
closed-form  inverse  kinematics.  Kinematics  modeling  of  Rigid tube
PS 
continuum robots often relies on a circular shape assumption  AS’s end disk 
of the segments [23]. And the inverse kinematics can be  AS 
solved numerically [24-26] or iteration-based heuristically  PS’s end disk Configuration-1
[27]. Closed-form inverse kinematic solutions for extensible  AS’s actuation backbones (a) (b)
 
bending segments were proposed in [28] and [29]. But the 
aforementioned two methods cannot be applied to continuum  Fig. 2. Design concept: a) the continuum manipulator consists of an IDCM 
with a constrained portion, and an orientation segment, and b) stiffness 
robots with inextensible bending segments. The proposed 
variation is achieved via altering the constrained portion’s position. 
inverse kinematics here is for inextensible bending segments 
under the proposed specific segment arrangement.   The IDCM is inspired from the dual continuum mechanism 
 Contributions of this work hence lie on the proposed design  proposed in [30] where the base disks of the DS and PS are 
with  i)  independently  tunable  stiffness,  and  ii)  analytical  grounded. The IDCM is created by grounding PS’s end disk. 
inverse  kinematics  formulation.  System  construction  and  The  actuation  backbones  in  the  IDCM’s  AS  and  the 
experimental characterizations are presented to demonstrate  orientation segment are actuated by the actuation unit, as 
the effectiveness of the proposed idea.  explained in the Section IV. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II explains the  The proposed stiffness tuning is achieved as a straight rigid 
design  concept.  Section  III  presents  the  closed-form  tube is inserted inside of the IDCM to constrain the bending of 
kinematics.  The  prototype  design  and  construction  are  the PS and the DS, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The position of the 
described in Section IV. The experimental characterizations  constrained portion along the IDCM can be determined by the 
for verifying the independently tunable stiffness are presented  length of the PS, l . As shown in the kinematics model in 
p
in Section V, with the conclusions summarized in Section VI.  Section III, it is found that the tip positions of the IDCM are 
not affected by the position of the constrained portion, as 
II.  DESIGN CONCEPT  shown in Fig. 2(b). A shorter PS may lead to higher stiffness.  
This study proposes a continuum manipulator design with  This is hence referred to as independently tunable stiffness 
independently tunable stiffness. The continuum manipulator  with respect to the IDCM’s tip position, even though the 
consists of an inverted dual continuum mechanism (IDCM)  IDCM’s shape is indeed changed. 
and an orientation segment, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The IDCM  What’s  more,  it  was  further  found  that  the  proposed 
can generate translations of the orientation segment, while the  continuum  manipulator  has  analytical  inverse  kinematics, 
orientation segment orients the continuum manipulator tip.  which is detailed in Section III.C.  
In this design, the IDCM consists of a proximal segment  The IDCM was used in a previous work for designing a 
(PS), a distal segment (DS), a constrained portion and an  surgical manipulator [31]. But it is in this paper that the IDCM 
actuation segment (AS). The PS and the DS are structurally  with  the  constrained  portion  is  proposed  to  achieve 
identical. Each segment consists of a few super-elastic nitinol  independently  tunable  stiffness  and  the  analytical  inverse 
structural backbones, an end disk and several spacer disks.  kinematics is derived. 
The structural backbones are attached to the end disks of the 
III.  KINEMATICS  
DS and the PS, and the spacer disks prevent buckling of the 
structural backbones. Since the total lengths of the structural  The nomenclature and the coordinates are presented in 
backbones remain constant, the identical bending of the PS  Section III.A. The kinematics of a single continuum segment, 
and DS would be generated in the opposite direction. Thus, the  the IDCM, and the continuum manipulator are derived in 
DS’s end disk would be always parallel to that of the PS. The  Section III.B, Section III.C, and Section IV.D, respectively.  
IDCM could seem similar to flexure parallelograms. But the 
A.  Nomenclature and Modeling Assumptions 
IDCM generates 2-DoF (Degree of Freedom) motions, while 
The nomenclature and the coordinates are defined for the 
flexure parallelograms often only generate planar motions. 
proposed continuum manipulator, as in Table I and Fig. 3. For 
1848
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 01:22:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
𝛿
visualization clarity, only three backbones for each segment  B.  Kinematics of a single continuum segment 
 
are shown in the Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. The number of backbones in  The continuum segments, including the DS, the PS and the 
the prototype is different.  orientation segment, are inextensible with two bending DoFs, 
TABLE I  specified by the configuration vector ψ ≡ [θ ]T. The length is 
NOMENCLATURE USED IN THE KINEMATICS MODEL  i i  i
l. The position of {ie} in {ib},ibp , is written as in (1). 
Symbol  Definition  i ie
( ) ( )
Index of the continuum segments. i = p, d and o. The index p  ibp =(l θ)c 1−c s c −1 s T   (1) 
i  means the proximal segment, while d stands for the distal  ie i i  δi θi δi θi θi
segment and o stands for the orientation segment.  Where ibp  = [0 0 l]T, when θ = 0.  
l, l and l refer to the lengths of the PS, DS, and orientation  ie i i
l  p d o The orientation of {ie} in {ib} is written as in (2), referring 
i segment, measured along the virtual central backbone.
to the previous study [26]. 
l  The length of the constrained portion. 
r
l   l = l+l+l+l  c (c )2+(s )2 s c (1−c ) c s 
total total p d r o θ δ δ δ δ θ δ θ
θi   Bending angle of the continuum segment  ibR = si ci (1−c i) c (is )i2+(ci )2 −si si   (2) 
δi  Rotation angle from yˆi1 to xˆib along zˆib.  ie  δi −δci s θi θi δsi s δi cδi θi
ψp  Configuration vectors of the IDCM: ψp = [θp δp]T   δi θi δi θi θi 
ψ  Configuration vector of the orientation segment. ψ  = [θ  δ ]T  The inverse kinematics of a single continuum segment can 
o o o o
ψ  Configuration vector of continuum manipulator. ψ = [ψT ψT ]T  be derived as follows to obtain the configuration vector ψ
p  o i 
c, s  cos(θ), sin(θ)  from a given orientation ibR . 
θ θ ie
 •  Base Disk Coordinate {ib}≡{xˆ ,yˆ ,zˆ } is attached to  θ=acos(ibR )
ib ib ib i ie,33   (3) 
the segment’s base disk with its origin at the disk’s center.  δ=atan2(−ibR ,ibR )
i ie,23 ie,13
xˆ  points from the center to the first backbone.  Where  the  function  atan2  gives  the  angle  between  the 
ib
•  Bending  Plane  Coordinate-1  {i1}≡{xˆ ,yˆ ,zˆ }  shares  positive x-axis and the ray passing the point (-ibR , ibR ) 
i1 i1 i1 ie,23 ie,13
origin with {ib} and has the continuum segment bent in its  ≠ (0,0). It should be noted that the use of the function atan2 
XY plane.  can eliminate the algorithmic singularity introduced by an 
arctan function. 
(a) θ End disk  zˆ xˆ (b)
xˆ =zˆ i Spacer  oe oe zˆob=zˆde C.  Kinematics of the IDCM𝛿 
i2 ie disk  yˆ Translational movements of the IDCM would be generated 
xˆie Virtual  xˆ o=exˆ due to the identical bending of the DS and the PS. Hence, 
zˆ central  ob de
δi i2 backbone  yˆob=yˆde zˆdb cvoecntfoigr uoraf titohne  oPfS t hψep  ID≡ C[θMp  isp ]Ts.p eTchifei eIdD bCyM th’se  schoanpfeig ucraant iobne  
yˆ yˆ zˆ =xˆ described by a path in the bending plane sequentially along: 
i2 ie ib i1 Bending  xˆdb zˆpb •  The virtual central backbone of the PS (a circular arc of 
xˆibδ plane   yˆdb xˆyˆpe xˆ loerniegnthta ltpio ann dpb Rben dcainng b aen cgallec θupla )t,e adn rde ftehrer ipnogs tioti o(1n) p abpnpde  (a2n)d;  
Base diyˆski1 i yˆib zˆi1 yˆppbe pb   •  tThhee { adxbi}s  oisf  lcoocnapsteetrda iinne {dp peo}t iaot np ewpit=h [a0  d0i slta]Tn;c aen odf  lr, hence, 
db r
Fig. 3.  Coordinates attachement and nomenclature of (a) the single  •  The virtual central backbone of the DS (a circular arc of 
continuum segment, and (b) the continuum manipulator. 
length l  and bending angle θ  = θ ), and the tip position 
d d p
•  Bending  Plane  Coordinate-2  {i2}≡{xˆ ,yˆ ,zˆ }  is  dbpde also can be obtained according to (1). 
i2 i2 i2 As the bending plane is represented by δ , the expression of 
obtained from {i1} by a rotation about zˆ  such that xˆ   pbp  is hence derived as in (4).  p
i1 i2 de
becomes the virtual central backbone tangent at the end  pbp = pbp +pbR (pep +dbp )
disk.   de pe( pe db de )
•  End Disk Coordinate {ie}≡{xˆ ,yˆ ,zˆ } is attached to the   c (1−c )(l +l ) θ+l s 
ie ie ie  δp ( θp p d p r θp )  (4) 
end disk. xˆ  points from the center to the first backbone,           =−s (1−c )(l +l ) θ+l s 
ie  δp θp p d p r θp 
and zˆ  is normal to the end disk.    s (l +l ) θ+l c 
ie  θp p d p r θp 
Two modeling assumptions are used. 
Where pbp  = [0 0 l +l +l]T, when θ  = 0. 
•  A virtual central backbone characterizes the length and  de p d r p
Let l  = l +l  is the total length of the PS and DS. The l  is 
shape of the continuum segment. The kinematics assumes  b p d b
constant in the design, regardless of the changes of l . 
a circular shape for the segments, referring to [32].  p
Since the tip movement of the IDCM is purely translational, 
•  The position of the constrained portion along the virtual 
the orientation of {de} w.r.t {pb}, pbR , is an identity matrix. 
central backbone is determined by the length of the PS, l .  de
The lengths of the PS and the DS can be continuouslpy  pbR =I   (5) 
de 3×3
changed via the insertion of the rigid tube.
 
1849
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 01:22:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
It’s worth noting that the location of the rigid tube, l , does  segment. Then, tip position of the IDCM, pbp , is calculated 
p de
not affect the position dbp  and the orientation pbR . Referring  from pbp  and ψ  as in (14). 
de de oe o
to (4), lp alone does not change the value of dbpde. As long as lb  pbp =pbp −obp    (14) 
= l +l  is constant, altering the position of the constrained  de oe oe
p d Finally, the configuration vector ψ  of the IDCM can be 
portion could be used to achieve the stiffness variation without  p
calculated according to (6) and (11) with pbp  obtained from 
affecting the movements of the continuum manipulator.   de
(14). The closed-form inverse kinematics is fully obtained. 
The closed-form inverse kinematics of the IDCM can be 
The parameters of the manipulator are listed in T∈ABLE II.  
derived as follows.  
TABLE II 
The  orientation  of  the  end  effector  of  the  continuum  ∈ PARAME∈TERS OF THE CONTIN∈UUM MANIPULAT∈OR 
manipulator is determined by the orientation segment, since  l   [30mm, 
l = 110 mm  l = 50mm  l = 35mm  p
the IDCM only provides translations. Then, when the desired  b r o 80mm] 
pose of the continuum manipulator is given, the configuration  θ   [0°,90°]  δ   (-180°,180°]  θ   [0°,90°]  δ   (-180°,180°] 
p p o o
of the orientation segment can be obtained from the desired   
𝛿
orientation. Next, tip position of the IDCM can be calculated  IV.  DESIGN DESCRIPTION  
from the determined shape of the orientation segment.  
The  continuum  manipulator  shown  in  Fig.  4  with 
Observing (4), it can be seen that δ , from the configuration 
p closed-form inverse kinematics and independently tunable 
vector ψ  ≡ [θ ]T, can be easily obtained as in (6). 
p p  p stiffness is driven by an actuation unit shown in Fig. 5. The 
δ=atan2(− pbp ,pbp )  (6)  actuation unit alters the position of the constrained portion as 
p de y de x
well. The control infrastructure is also briefly introduced.  
Then, δ  can be eliminated as in (7). 
p
r =+ pbp2 + pbp2 =(1−c )l θ+l s   (7)  A.  Continuum Manipulator 
s de|x de|y θp b p r θp The  schematic  of  the  continuum  manipulator  which  is 
It was found that the θ  term can be further eliminated as in 
p formed by serially connecting the IDCM and the orientation 
(8). Next, the half angle formulas can be used to generate (10).  
segment is shown in Fig. 4(b).  
rs −lrsθp =(1−cθp)θlbp =(1−cθp)  (8)  (a)
pbp −l c s lb s IDCM 
de z r θp θp θp θp
Equation (8) leads to (9). 
( ) ( )
Orientation Spacer  Helical 
r −l s s = pbp −l c (1−c ) segment  disks strip  AS 
s r θp θp de z r θp θp
Stainless steel  Spacer  Helical  Rigid  AS 
r s −l s2 = pbp −l c −c pbp +l c2   (9)  braided tube  disks strip  tube 
s θp r( θp de)z( r θp) θp de z r θp −
r s = pbp +l 1−c
s θp de z r θp
Then, Equation (10) can be obtained by substituting the half 
angle formulas of sinθ  = 2sin(θ /2)cos(θ /2) and cosθ  = 1   
p p p p
2sin2(θ /2). θ  is hence obtained as in (11).  Actuation 
p p ( ) ( )
b Orientation segment IDCM  Linked chain backbones 
tan(θ 2)=r pbp +l   (10) 
p s de z r Linked chain  (c) (d)
θp=2⋅atan2(rs,pbpde z +lr)  (11)  Rigid tube 
D.  Kinematics of the continuum manipulator   
The orientation segment is stacked on top of the IDCM to  Fig. 4.  Design details: (a) the continuum manipulator without the constrained 
form the proposed continuum manipulator. {ob} coincides  portion, (b) the schematic, (c) the linked chain, and (d) the links 
with {de}. Hence, the tip position pbp  of the continuum 
oe In this specific IDCM design, the AS from Section II is 
manipulator can be calculated as follows. 
merged with the PS. The IDCM possesses four structural 
pbp = pbp + pbR obp =pbp + obp   (12) 
nitinol  backbones,  and  its  AS  is  bent  by  actuating  four 
oe de de oe de oe
The orientation pbR  of {oe} in {pb} is obtained as follows.  actuation backbones. These backbones all have diameter of 
oe
pbR = pbR obR = obR   (13)  0.7mm.  The  orientation  segment  has  eight  structural 
oe de oe oe backbones. As shown in Fig. 4(a), a stainless steel helical strip 
The  closed-form  inverse  kinematics  of  the  proposed 
with the wall thickness of 0.1 mm was utilized to separate the 
continuum manipulator is derived as follows.  
spacer disks. A stainless steel braided tube is attached inside 
Firstly, the configuration vector of the orientation segment, 
the spacer disks. It is flexible enough to be bent and it provides 
ψ , is obtained as in (3), since the orientation of the proposed 
o a smooth and continuous surface for inserting the stainless 
continuum  manipulator  only  depend  on  the  orientation 
steel rigid tube to constrain the PS and DS. The rigid tube has 
an outer diameter of 7mm and an inner diameter of 6 mm. 
1850
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 01:22:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
An  important  enabling  mechanism  is  to  allow  the  V.  EXPERIMENTAL CHARACTERIZATIONS 
translation of the rigid tube inside the IDCM without affecting 
In order to verify the proposed design concept, numerical 
bending  the  PS  of  the  IDCM.  Here  a  linked  chain  was 
simulations and experimental validations were carried out. 
designed as shown in Fig. 4(c). The linked chain is composed 
The simulation of the inverse kinematics is presented in 
of articulated links that are cut from a tube, as shown in Fig. 
Section  V.A.  The  verification  of  independently  tunable 
4(d). The linked chain has high axial rigidity for transmitting 
stiffness is presented in Section V.B.  
pushing and pulling, while it has near-zero bending stiffness 
such that bending of the continuum segment is not affected.  A.  Simulation of the Inverse Kinematics 
The linked chain is connected with the stainless steel rigid  The inverse kinematics of the continuum manipulator in 
tube so that the actuation unit translates the linked chain to  different cases is simulated to show its motions.  
push or pull the rigid tube as shown in Fig. 5.   In the first case, the end disk of the continuum manipulator 
is commanded to move on a given plane defined as in (15) and 
B.  Actuation Unit 
(16), as shown in Fig. 6. It’s desired that its end disk of the 
The actuation unit in Fig. 5 is designed to actuate the 
orientation segment coincides with the given plane. 
continuum manipulator as well as alter the position of the 
(pbp −p )×n=0   (15) 
constrained portion to vary the stiffness.   oe 0
An Orientation Proximal Segment (OPS) is integrated to  pbR e =n   (16) 
oe 3
bend the orientation segment. The OPS and the orientation  Where e  = [0 0 1]T and n = [0.577 0.577 0.577]T is a normal 
° 3
segment formed a dual continuum mechanism, as proposed in  vector that is perpendicular to the desired plane, and p  = [50.6 
0
[30]. In the design, the OPS is bent by pushing or pulling four  mm 50.6 mm 50.6 mm] T is a point located in the plane. 
actuation  backbones  simultaneously.  The  backbones  are 
arranged 90  apart and are attached to the end disk of the OPS. 
OPS 
Motor  Z (mm) Probe 
Cannula  Guiding 
Rod 
Rectangular 
Bellow  Motor 
Screw 
Nuts 
Screws  Nut 
 
Gears 
Fig. 6. Simulation of the continuum manipulator configurations 
Gears  corresponding to the manipulator’s movements on the given plane 
Linked 
Since the normal vector n is given, the configuration vector 
chain 
  ψ  of the orientation segment can be obtained according to (3). 
o
Fig. 5.  Schematic of the actuation unit  Then the feasible ψ  values were obtained via iterating θ  and 
p p
solving the corresponding δ  to check whether (15) holds.  
To push and pull the actuation backbones in the OPS and  p
The second case is a motion planning in the configuration 
the AS of the IDCM, four pairs of lead screws were used (two 
space. When the target pose (pbptgt  and pbRtgt ) is given, its 
pairs for driving the IDCM’s AS and two pairs for driving the  oe oe
corresponding  configuration  vector  ψtgt  can  be  calculated 
OPS). Each pair of the lead screws is coupled via a meshing 
according to the closed-form inverse kinematics in Section III.  
pair of spur gears, in order to make the nuts simultaneously 
and equally move in the opposite directions. The actuation  Initial  Target 
pose  pose 
backbones are fixed to the nuts, routed through rectangular 
bellow and a few cannulae. The rectangular bellow can slide 
on Tthhee  griugiiddi ntugb reo diss  paunsdh perde avnedn tp buullcekdl ibnyg  tohfe t hlien kbeadc kcbhoanine st.h  at  Angle (rad)
is actuated by a motorized lead screw, as shown in Fig. 5.  
Five Maxon DCX22L motors were integrated to actuate the 
screws (two for driving OPS, two for driving the IDCM’s AS,  (a) (b)  
and one for changing the position of the constrained portion), 
Fig. 7. Simulation of the motion planning in the configuration space: (a) 
while five Maxon EPOS2 24/2 digital controllers were used to 
intermediate poses, (b) trajectories of the configuration vector ψ 
drive and control the motors. The desired positions of the 
motors are calculated in a desktop computer according to the  The planning algorithm acts on the configuration vector and 
kinematics and transmitted to the digital controllers via a CAN  satisfies the following boundary conditions: 
(Controller Area Network) bus. 
1851
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 01:22:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
ψ(t )=ψcur; ψ(t )=0; ψ(t )=ψtgt; ψ(t )=0   (17)  the  X-direction  of  Config-2  to  3.61  times  in  the 
0 0 f f Y-direction of Config-3 of the minimal values.  
Where t  = 0 s is the start time, while t = 1 s is the end time. 
0 f
Then a third order polynomial is applied to generate the  yˆ xˆ (a.1) (a.2) (a.3)
pb pb
trajectories of the configuration vector according to (18).  
ψ(t)=a t3+a t2+at+a
3 2 1 0   (18)  zˆ
ψ(t)=3a t2+2a t+a pb
3 2 1
Simulation of the continuum manipulator configurations 
Config-1 Config-2  Config-3 
with  intervals  of  0.2  s  is  plotted  in  Fig.  7(a).  And  the 
( )
trajectories of the configuration vector are shown in Fig. 7(b).   b
B.  Verification of the Independently Tunable Stiffness 
Stiffness  of  the  continuum  manipulator  was  quantified 
under  different  configurations  to  demonstrate  the 
effectiveness of the proposed stiffness variation approach.  
Firstly, the continuum manipulator was driven to a desired 
configuration. Then, the position of the constrained portion l  
p
would be changed to alter the stiffness, as shown in Fig. 8(a). 
The orientation segment would be kept straight in the study.  
( ) ( )
The pose with  a b
l = 30mm  XYZ 
p
linear 
stage
Probe 
 
The pose with 
Fig. 9.  Stiffness characterizations: a) poses under three configurations: (a.1) 
l = 80mm 
p Config-1, (a.2) Config-2, and (a.3) Config-3; b) the stiffness results in  
Force sensor    the X, Y and Z directions with respect to different lp lengths (a.k.a, 
positions of the constrained portion) from 30mm to 80mm 
Fig. 8. Verification of tunable stiffness: a) overlaped image of the continuum 
robots with different positions of constrained portion, and b) 
experimental setup of stiffness quantification  VI.  CONCLUSION 
Continuum manipulators have become popular in various 
A 6-axis force sensor (Nano-17, ATI Industrial Automation) 
applications in confined spaces because of their inherently 
with a probe was utilized to measure the exerted force. As 
safe  interactions  and  distal  dexterity.  They  are  at  times 
shown in Fig. 8(b), the probe on the force sensor was driven by 
expected to have tunable stiffness to handle different tasks. 
the XYZ linear stage to touch the continuum manipulator’s tip, 
For example, in surgical applications, high stiffness can be 
and then move its tip in the X, Y and Z directions in the {pb} 
used for accurate tissue dissection and suture penetration, 
respectively.  For  every  0.5  mm  perturbation,  the  exerted 
while low stiffness can be used for tissue separation to prevent 
forces were measured and recorded, and the total perturbation 
damaging the tissue. 
was 3 mm. The slope between the measured forces and the 
The  paper  proposes  a  continuum  manipulator  with 
given movements can be fitted to estimate the stiffness.  
closed-form inverse kinematics and independently tunable 
The  tunable  stiffness  was  verified  under  three 
stiffness. An inverted dual continuum mechanism is proposed 
configurations as shown in Fig. 9(a). The stiffness results with 
with  a  constrained  portion.  The  independently  tunable 
respect to the different positions of the constrained portion are 
stiffness is achieved by altering the position of the constrained 
plotted in Fig. 9(b), ranging from 30 mm to 80 mm with 
portion  without  affecting  the  tip  pose  of  the  continuum 
intervals of 10 mm. A few observations can be made. 
manipulator.  The  design  concept,  system  construction, 
•  As  shown  in  Fig.  8(a),  changing  the  position  of  the  closed-form  kinematics  and  experimental  validations  are 
constrained portion would slightly perturb the orientation  detailed.  Experimental  results  show  that  the  continuum 
segment. The perturbation may results from the friction  manipulator’s tip stiffness could be varied up to 3.61 times of 
between the disks and backbones, and the spacing between  the minimal value, demonstrating the effectiveness of the 
the rigid tube and the stainless steel braided tube.   proposed stiffness variation approach.  
•  It can be seen that the continuum manipulator with a  Future works mainly include two aspects. First, a detailed 
shorter proximal segment possesses higher stiffness.   mechanics modeling would be derived to reflect the stiffness 
•  Changing the position of the constrained portion of the  accurately to achieve stiffness control. Second, the proposed 
IDCM can effectively adjust the tip stiffness of continuum  idea would be applied to a practical design of a continuum 
manipulator. The stiffness is increased from 1.34 times in  surgical manipulator to further verify the concept’s usefulness. 
1852
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 01:22:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
REFERENCES  [19]  A.  Bajo  and  N.  Simaan,  "Hybrid  Motion/Force  Control  of 
Multi-Backbone  Continuum  Robots,"  International  Journal  of 
[1]  J. Burgner-Kahrs, D. C. Rucker, and H. Choset, "Continuum Robots  Robotics Research, vol. OnlineFirst, pp. 1-13, 2015. 
for Medical Applications: A Survey," IEEE Transactions on Robotics,  [20]  K. Xu, M. Fu, and J. Zhao, "An Experimental Kinestatic Comparison 
vol. 31, No.6, pp. 1261-1280, Dec 2015.  between Continuum Manipulators with Structural Variations," in 
[2]  W. McMahan, V. Chitrakaran, M. Csencsits, D. M. Dawson, I. D.  IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 
Walker, B. A. Jones, M. Pritts, D. Dienno, M. Grissom, and C. D.  Hong Kong, China, 2014, pp. 3258-3264. 
Rahn,  "Field  Trials  and  Testing  of  the  OctArm  Continuum  [21]  B. Zhao, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Zhu, and K. Xu, "Continuum 
Manipulator,"  in  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Manipulator with Redundant Backbones and Constrained Bending 
Robotics (ICAR), Orlando, FL, USA, 2006, pp. 2336-2341.  Curvature  for  Continuously  Variable  Stiffness,"  in  IEEE/RSJ 
[3]  S. Liu, Z. Yang, Z. Zhu, L. Han, X. Zhu, and K. Xu, "Development of  International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 
a Dexterous Continuum Manipulator for Exploration and Inspection in  Madrid, Spain, 2018, pp. 7492-7499. 
Confined Spaces," Industrial Robot: An International Journal, vol.  [22]  L. Wang, G. Del Giudice, and N. Simaan, "Simplified Kinematics of 
43, No.3, pp. 284-295, 2016.  Continuum Robot Equilibrium Modulation via Moment Coupling 
[4]  A. Pettersson, S. Davis, J. O. Gray, T. J. Dodd, and T. Ohlsson,  Effects and Model Calibration," ASME Journal of Mechanisms and 
"Design of a Magnetorheological Robot Gripper for Handling of  Robotics, vol. 11, No.5, pp. 051013-051013-12, 2019. 
Delicate Food Products with Varying Shapes," Journal of Food  [23]  R. J. Webster and B. A. Jones, "Design and Kinematic Modeling of 
Engineering, vol. 98, No.3, pp. 332-338, June 2010.  Constant Curvature Continuum Robots: A Review " International 
[5]  A. Sadeghi, L. Beccai, and B. Mazzolai, "Innovative Soft Robots  Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 29, No.13, pp. 1661-1683, Nov 
Based on Electro-Rheological Fluids," in IEEE/RSJ International  2010. 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Vilamoura,  [24]  P. Sears and P. E. Dupont, "Inverse Kinematics of Concentric Tube 
Algarve, Portugal, 2012, pp. 4237-4242.  Steerable Needles," in IEEE International Conference on Robotics 
[6]  M. J. Telleria, M. Hansen, D. Campbell, A. Servi, and M. L.  and Automation (ICRA), Rome, Italy, 2007, pp. 1887-1892. 
Culpepper, "Modeling and Implementation of Solder-activated Joints  [25]  T. Mahl, A. Hildebrandt, and O. Sawodny, "A Variable Curvature 
for Single-Actuator, Centimeter-scale Robotic Mechanisms," in IEEE  Continuum Kinematics for Kinematic Control of the Bionic Handling 
International  Conference  on  Robotics  and  Automation  (ICRA),  Assistant,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Robotics,  vol.  30,  No.4,  pp. 
Anchorage, Alaska, USA, 2010, pp. 1681-1686.  935-949, Aug 2014. 
[7]  W. Shan, T. Lu, and C. Majidi, "Soft-matter Composites with  [26]  S. a. Zhang, Q. Li, H. Yang, J. Zhao, and K. Xu, "Configuration 
Electrically  Tunable  Elastic  Rigidity,"  Smart  Materials  and  Transition Control of a Continuum Surgical Manipulator for Improved 
Structures, vol. 22, No.085005, pp. 1-8, July 2013.  Kinematic Performance," IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 
[8]  V. Saadat, R. C. Ewers, and E. G. Chen, "Shape Lockable Apparatus  4, No.4, pp. 3750-3757, Oct 2019. 
and Method for Advancing an Instrument through Unsupported  [27]  W. Zhang, Z. Yang, T. Dong, and K. Xu, "FABRIKc: An Efficient 
Anatomy,"  US: USGI Medical, Inc., 2004.  Iterative  Inverse  Kinematics  Solver  for  Continuum  Robots,"  in 
[9]  A. Degani, H. Choset, A. Wolf, and M. A. Zenati, "Highly Articulated 
IEEE/ASME  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Intelligent 
Robotic Probe for Minimally Invasive Surgery," in IEEE International  Mechatronics (AIM), Auckland, New Zealand, 2018, pp. 346-352. 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Orlando, Florida,  [28]  S. Neppalli, M. A. Csencsits, B. A. Jones, and I. D. Walker, 
2006, pp. 4167- 4172.  "Closed-Form Inverse Kinematics for Continuum Manipulators," 
[10]  Y.-J.  Kim,  S.  Cheng,  S.  Kim,  and  K.  Iagnemma,  "A  Advanced Robotics, vol. 23, No.15, pp. 2077-2091, 2009. 
Stiffness-Adjustable Hyperredundant Manipulator Using a Variable  [29]  A. Garriga-Casanovas and F. Rodriguez y Baena, "Kinematics of 
Neutral-Line Mechanism for Minimally Invasive Surgery," IEEE  Continuum Robots With Constant Curvature Bending and Extension 
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 30, No.2, pp. 382-395, April 2014.  Capabilities," ASME Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics, vol. 11, 
[11]  P. M. Loschak, S. F. Burke, E. Zumbro, A. R. Forelli, and R. D. Howe,  No.1, p. 011010, Feb 2019. 
"A Robotic System for Actively Stiffening Flexible Manipulators," in  [30]  K. Xu, J. Zhao, and M. Fu, "Development of the SJTU Unfoldable 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems  Robotic System (SURS) for Single Port Laparoscopy," IEEE/ASME 
(IROS), Hamburg, Germany, 2015, pp. 216-221.  Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 20, No.5, pp. 2133-2145, Oct 
[12]  A. Shiva, A. Stilli, Y. Noh, A. Faragasso, I. De Falco, G. Gerboni, M.  2015. 
Cianchetti, A. Menciassi, K. Althoefer, and H. A. Wurdemann,  [31]  Z. Wu, Q. Li, J. Zhao, J. Gao, and K. Xu, "Design of a Modular 
"Tendon-Based  Stiffening  for  a  Pneumatically  Actuated  Soft  Continuum-Articulated Laparoscopic Robotic Tool with Decoupled 
Manipulator," IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 1, No.2,  Kinematics," IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4, No.4, pp. 
pp. 632-637, July 2016.  3545-3552, Oct 2019. 
[13]  A. J. Loeve, O. S. v. d. Ven, J. G. Vogel, P. Breedveld, and J.  [32]  K. Xu and N. Simaan, "Analytic Formulation for the Kinematics, 
Dankelman, "Vacuum Packed Particles as Flexible Endoscope Guides  Statics and Shape Restoration of Multibackbone Continuum Robots 
with Controllable Rigidity," Granular Matter, vol. 12, No.6, pp.  via Elliptic Integrals," Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics, vol. 2, 
543-554, 2010.  No.011006, pp. 1-13, Feb 2010. 
[14]  N. G. Cheng, M. B. Lobovsky, S. J. Keating, A. M. Setapen, K. I. 
Gero, A. E. Hosoi, and K. D. Iagnemma, "Design and Analysis of a 
 
Robust,  Low-cost,  Highly  Articulated  Manipulator  Enabled  by 
Jamming of Granular Media," in IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA, 2012, 
pp. 4328-4333. 
[15]  Y.-J. Kim, S. Cheng, S. Kim, and K. Iagnemma, "A Novel Layer 
Jamming  Mechanism  With  Tunable  Stiffness  Capability  for 
Minimally Invasive Surgery," IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 
29, No.4, pp. 1031-1042, Aug 2013. 
[16]  M. Langer, E. Amanov, and J. Burgner-Kahrs, "Stiffening Sheaths for 
Continuum Robots," Soft Robotics, vol. 5, No.3, pp. 291-303, Jun 
2018. 
[17]  M.  Mahvash and P. E. Dupont,  "Stiffness Control of Surgical 
Continuum Manipulators," IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 27, 
No.2, pp. 334-345, April 2011. 
[18]  K. Xu and N. Simaan, "An Investigation of the Intrinsic Force Sensing 
Capabilities of Continuum Robots," IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 
vol. 24, No.3, pp. 576-587, June 2008. 
1853
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 01:22:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 