2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
SoRX: A Soft Pneumatic Hexapedal Robot to Traverse Rough, Steep, and
Unstable Terrain
Zhichao Liu, Zhouyu Lu, and Konstantinos Karydis
Abstract—Soft robotics technology creates new ways for
legged robots to interact with and adapt to their environment.
In this paper we develop i) a new 2-degree-of-freedom soft
pneumatic actuator, and ii) a novel soft robotic hexapedal
robot called SoRX that leverages the new actuators. Simula-
tion and physical testing conﬁrm that the proposed actuator
can generate cyclic foot trajectories that are appropriate for
legged locomotion. Consistent with other hexapedal robots
(and animals), SoRX employs an alternating tripod gait to
propelitselfforward.ExperimentsrevealthatSoRXcanreach
forward speeds of up to 0.44 body lengths per second, or
equivalently 101 mm/s. With a size of 230 mm length, 140
mm width and 100 mm height, and weight of 650 grams,
SoRXisamongthefastesttetheredsoftpneumatically-actuated
legged robots to date. The motion capabilities of SoRX are Fig. 1: SoRX, the novel soft legged robot developed in this work.
evaluatedthroughﬁveexperiments:running,stepclimbing,and The robot is able to traverse terrains consisting of sand and rocks.
traversing rough terrain, steep terrain, and unstable terrain.
Experimental results show that SoRX is able to operate over
challenging terrains in open-loop control and by following the parts, which limit the contact area along the length of legs,
same alternating tripod gait across all experimental cases. therefore reducing the ability to navigate rough terrain.
Softroboticsisarelativelyyoungﬁeld,withchallengesin
I. INTRODUCTION design, fabrication and control [15]. Soft robots are particu-
Multi-legged robots show promise in application ar- larly appropriate for locomotion in uneven and/or sensitive
eas such as search-and-rescue and intelligence-surveillance- environment,becausetheirsoftstructureallowsthemtobend
reconnaissance (ISR) where operation over rough and un- and squeeze to ﬁt their shape around obstacles, and reduce
structured terrain is expected. However, achieving all-terrain the stress induced by contact over both surroundings and
mobility remains a challenging task, especially as robots the robots surface [16]. In particular, soft robotics have been
scale down in size [1]. investigatedanddevelopedforlocomotionapplications.Prior
Adaptationtoterrainvariationsiskeyfortakingtherobots work includes soft robots powered by soft pneumatic actu-
outsideoftheprotectedlaboratoryenvironment,anddeploy- ators (SPA) to achieve crawling and undulation gaits [17]–
ing them in real-world settings. Studies have indicated that [19]. A starﬁsh-like soft robot was developed to complete
incorporatingcompliantlegs,asanimalsdo,cansigniﬁcantly crawling gaits actuated by shape memory alloys [20]. How-
improve the speed and stability of these robots in varying ever,theactuatorsoftheserobotsonlyhaveonlyonedegree
environmental conditions [2]. Among the ﬁrst efforts to of freedom (DoF). Meanwhile, they are unable to traverse
incorporate passive mechanical compliance within a robot’s over rough terrain as more rigid legged robots do. Notable
legswasthespringyC-leginthehexapedalrobotRHex[3]– exceptions include a robot that combines soft legs with
[5],whichisstillcommonlyusednowadays.Tunabledevices wheels for navigation on uneven terrain [21], and a soft-
were proposed to adjust the stiffness of legs [6]–[8]. Direct- material 3D-printed pneumatic legged robot able to lift its
drive legged robots were also developed to achieve variable legs off the ground and walk over unstructured terrain [22].
compliance (e.g., [9]–[12]). Nevertheless, these robots rely on either rigid wheels or
Therehavebeenotherattemptstoachievetunablestiffness multiplelegconﬁgurationstoachieveall-terrainlocomotion.
using antagonistic pneumatic actuators such as McKibben Moreover, unlike hexapedal robots, they cannot sustain a
actuatorsandpleatedpneumaticartiﬁcialmuscles[13],[14]. large support area, as with an alternating tripod gaits, which
However, these compliant legs come together with rigid can be advantageous when traversing uneven terrain [23].
Thereareotherattemptstoachievesoftleggedlocomotion
The authors are with the Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineer- by leveraging cable-driven actuators. The Soﬁa walking
{
ing, University of California, Riverside. Email: zliu157, zlu044, kary-
} robot [24] and Puppy [25] utilize model-based optimal
dis @ucr.edu.
WegratefullyacknowledgethesupportofNSFundergrant#IIS-1910087 control to achieve walking locomotion. The cable-driven
and of the UCR Ofﬁce of Research and Economic Development under legs have 2 DOFs: bending and extension. Compared to
a Collaborative Seed Grant. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or
pneumatic ones, cable-driven actuators may be more direct
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
donotnecessarilyreﬂecttheviewsofthefundingagencies. tomodelandcontrol.However,cable-drivenactuatorscanbe
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 420
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. challenged when it comes to varying leg stiffness to adapt (a) (b)
to terrain variations. Moreover, the necessary motors may
render cable-driven robots top-heavy and thus unstable [25].
In this paper we present a new soft pneumatic actuator
Bending
with 2 DoFs. We use Finite Element Analysis to predict its Part
performance and expected motion in simulation. Equipped
with a pressurizing/depressurizing air control board, we
evaluate experimentally the bending and extension capacity
Extension
of physical actuator prototypes, identify a pressurization/de- Part
pressurization sequence to generate appropriate cyclic foot
trajectory proﬁles, and conﬁrm that the proposed actuators
Fig. 2: (a) CAD rendering, and (b) a physical actuator prototype.
can be used as legs for a pneumatically-actuated soft robot.
Leveraging the new actuators, we design and manufacture
button layer, which are molded separately. Overall, fabrica-
a tethered soft legged robot prototype, the Soft Robotic
tion of a leg takes place in four steps. 1) Mix the elastomer
heXapod (SoRX) shown in Fig. 1. To the best of our
and process it in vacuum chamber to remove bubbles. 2)
knowledge, SoRX is the fastest soft pneumatic legged robot
Pouritintothemoldsandwait75minutesforittocure,and
to date. More importantly, it is the ﬁrst soft pneumatic
demold the pieces. 3) Use an adhesive (Sil-Poxy, Smooth-
legged robot able to operate over a range of challenging
On) to bond together the two pieces of the bending part.
environments, such as rough, steep, and unstable terrain,
Meanwhile, glue two same silicone bodies made by mold
without any additional control effort and by following the
(c) in Fig. 3 to form the extension part. 4) Insert silicone
same alternating tripod gait across all terrains.
tubes for air connection and bond the two actuator parts.
Succinctly, our contributions are as follows:
• Wedevelopanewsoftpneumaticactuatorwith2DoFs,
and evaluate its performance both in simulation and
physical testing.
• We design and manufacture a tethered soft pneumatic
hexapedal robot and analyze its gait.
(c) Mold for extension part 
• We investigate the robot’s motion capabilities on loco- (a) Mold for bending part (left)                                  (half)
moting over rough, steep and unstable terrain.
x2
II. SOFTLEGDESIGN,FABRICATION,ANDANALYSIS
A. A Soft Pneumatic Actuator Leg Design
(b) Mold for bending part (right)
To design an all-terrain soft legged robot, each leg must
be sufﬁciently compliant to adapt to obstacles, while stiff Fig. 3: Fabrication of the soft pneumatic actuator
enough to support the robot’s weight. One promising way to
balancethistrade-offisbyutilizingsoftpneumaticactuators C. Simulated Actuator Behavior
(SPAs). Prior works on SPAs for legged locomotion have Simulation was conducted to guide the design and to
relied on pneumatic networks (PneuNets) [17] and multiple ensuretheproposeddesigncanworkasintendedinreal-time.
bellowed chambers [22]. However, these actuators can only We used Finite Element Method (FEM) analysis to simulate
bend but not extend, which may constrain the locomotion large non-linear deformations undergone by soft structures,
capabilities of the robot in practice. by following the analysis in [27]. In sum, at each step i of
To mitigate this challenge, we introduce the SPA design the real-time simulation, the internal forces are linearized as
shown in Fig. 2. The actuator consists of two parts: 1)
≈
the bending part, which is adopted by the original PneuNet f(x ) f(x− )+K(x− )dx , (1)
i i 1 i 1
design with one cut remaining, and 2) the extension part,
wheref isthevolumetricinternalstiffnessforceatthenodes,
which employs a Hyper-Elastic Bellows (HEB) actuator
and K(x) represents the tangent stiffness matrix. Assuming
design[26].Whenthetwopartsarepressurized,theactuator
quasi-static motions, the model is in equilibrium in terms of
can both bend and extend; different pressurization/depres-
internal and external forces, that is
surization cycles can then yield a multitude of distinct foot
−
trajectory proﬁles (more on this later in Section III). K(x− )dx=p+f(x− )+JTλ , (2)
i 1 i 1
B. Fabrication
where p stands for the external forces, λ represents the
Each actuator is cast separately out of two-part silicone contributions of the actuators and the contact forces (if
elastomer (Dragon Skin 10 FAST, Smooth-On). Three pairs applicable) and J gathers the directions [27].
of 3D-printed molds (Onyx material on Markforged Mark To solve for node displacements, we ﬁrst ﬁnd a free
Twocarbonﬁber3Dprinter)areusedtoformshapes(Fig.3). conﬁguration xfree by solving (2) with λ = 0. The result
The bending part consists of two pieces: the chamber and also yields δfree which is the violation for constraints. Then,
421
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. a constraint-based so(cid:2)lver comp(cid:3)utes λ given laws of the
constraint between δ and λ, that is
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
−
δ = JK 1JT λ+δfree . (3)
W
Finally,nodedisplacementsarecalculatedusingthevalueof
the constraint response [27]
−
x =xfree+K 1JTλ . (4)
t
Fig. 5: Results and experimental setup for the extension test.
AllstepsareimplementedinSOFA[28]1 withSoftRobot- Negative pressure numbers relate to depressurization (vacuum)
Plugin [29].2 The mesh ﬁle consists of 13,344 tetrahedra mode of the air source.
and 3,352 nodes. To build a precise simulation, elastic
and inertial parameters have to be tuned in simulation. The
Young’smodulusisobtainedfromsilicone’spropertieswhile
the mass of the actuator is measured experimentally [30].
Figure 4 shows simulation results when the actuator is pres-
surizedanddepressurized.Comparisonsbetweentrajectories
insimulationandinphysicaltestingaregiveninSectionIII.
Fig. 6: Results and experimental setup for the bending test.
In the bending test we measured bending angles as input
pressure varies. Results (Fig. 6) show that the actuator
can bend 91deg at 60kPa. However, angles in simulation
Z are smaller than the measured ones. Further, simulations
diverged when the input pressure exceeded 30kPa.
In both tests, we observed some mismatch between the
Y
measured and simulated results. This mismatch may be
X
caused by approximations in material properties such as
Fig. 4: FEM analysis of leg (a) pressurization and (b) depressur-
Young’s modulus and Poisson ratio,3 measurement errors,
ization in the SOFA environment. Each tetrahedron represents the
FEMforceﬁeld.Nodedisplacementsdemonstratechangesinshape. and vibrations caused while the actuator was pressurized.
Moreover,wemeasuredtheforcegeneratedbytheactuator
as a function of the input pressure to illustrate the actuator’s
D. Actuator Performance
stiffness-varying property. In this test, the actuator was
The actuator’s properties regarding extension, bending,
mounted vertically above a load cell with ampliﬁer HX711
and stiffness-varying have a signiﬁcant impact on its utility
andmicrocontrollerArduinoMega(Fig.7).Theactuatorwas
to soft legged robots. To this end, we conducted empirical
incontactwiththeloadcellwhenthepumpwasswitchedoff.
tests to validate simulation results, and to evaluate the
Input pressure values ranged from 0kPa to 20kPa. Results
performance of the physical prototype.
indicate that the actuator can apply 10.67N at 20kPa. As
In the extension and bending tests, the actuator was
such, our hexapedal robot can lift a maximum weight of
mounted horizontally (see Fig. 5). Both extension and bend-
3.26kgwhenitfollowsanalternatingtripodgait.4 Notethat
ingpartsarepressurized/depressurizedat2.5kPaincrements. the bending part was not actuated in this test. However, as
The position of the actuator’s free end was recorded in
pressureincreasesoveracriticalpoint,thelegwillpassively
the extension test. In simulation, the direction of gravity
bend; this effect can lead to the sharp increase observed in
points to the negative direction along Y-axis to match the
Fig. 7 at approximately 13kPa.
experimental setting (see Fig. 4). To represent the additional
rigidity created by the silicone tube in the bending part, III. SORXDESIGNANDGAITANALYSIS
we used a model of stiff springs in the direction of the The new soft actuators are used to create the
tubes [31]. We exported the position of the corresponding pneumatically-actuated soft robotic hexapod SoRX (Fig. 1,
× ×
node via a Python script in SOFA. Extension test results and Fig. 8). SoRX measures 230mm L 140mm W
(Fig. 5) show the experimentally-measured values match the
simulation data. The extension part can elongate by 48mm 1https://www.sofa-framework.org/
at30kPaandbeshortenedby9mmindepressurization.Itis 2https://project.inria.fr/softrobot/
3Materialpropertiesmayvaryduetofabrication,e.g.,itisverydifﬁcult
worthmentioningthatthesimulationdivergedwhenpressure
− toremoveallairbubblesduringcastingdespiteusingadegassingchamber.
values extended beyond the range of [ 2,10]kPa. 4Thatis,threelegsaretouchingthegroundatalltimes.
422
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. may cause non-smooth points in the trajectory. Further, we
noticed that the bending part tended to respond faster to
differential pressure inputs than the extension part. The last
two points are the major differences between simulation
and experiment (i.e. trajectories are smoother, and actuators
Arduino respond equally fast in simulation). These differences may
Load Cell becausedbythevariousapproximationsnotedpreviouslyin
HX711
Section II-D, but also by the fact that the simulation relies
on the assumption of quasi-static motions, which is not met
in rapid actuation cycles needed in practice.
Fig.7:Resultsandexperimentalsetupforthestiffness-varyingtest.
(a) (b)
100mmHandweighs650g.TheframeofSoRXwasman-
ufactured by combining laser-cut wood and acrylic sheets
(Universal Laser Systems VLS 3.60 laser cutter), and six
3D-printed leg holders (Makerbot Replicator+ 3D printer).
Wood Acrylic Polylactic Acid
Fig.9:(a)Empirically-derivedactuationsequenceforonelegstride.
(b) Resulting simulated (in blue) and experimental (in red) foot
trajectories.
Actuators
IV. EXPERIMENTSANDRESULTS
Fig. 8: CAD of SoRX and materials. The motion capabilities of SoRX were evaluated through
ﬁve experiments: running, step climbing, and traversing
A. Gait Analysis rough terrain, steep terrain, and unstable terrain. A modiﬁed
version of an open-source pneumatic control board [34]
Like RHex [32] and DASH [33], among other hexapods,
was used in all experiments. In our board, every air output
SoRX employs an alternating tripod gait for locomotion.
channel is connected to two pairs of valves and pumps
Static stability is guaranteed with alternating tripods by
to allow for both pressurization and depressurization. The
keeping the center of mass within the support area formed
primary experimental testbed is shown in Fig. 10. At this
by the three legs that touch the ground.
stage the robot runs in open loop (i.e. without steering
To achieve effective locomotion we need to determine ap-
control); hence, two acrylic panels were used to ensure the
propriatecycliccontroltrajectoriesfortherobot’sfeet.How-
robot does not fall off from the platform. The length of
ever, determining pressurization/depressurization sequences
forpneumatically-actuatedsoftleggedrobotsisachallenging the platform is 1.2m. A 12-camera VICON motion capture
system was used to collect position and velocity data of the
task.Asshownshortly,availablesimulationtoolsyieldquite
center-of-mass (CoM) of SoRX.
differentresultsfromthoseobservedinpractice.Inthiswork,
we identiﬁed empirically a pressurization/depressurization
sequencethatcanleadtoeffectivelocomotion.Thesequence
is shown in Fig. 9(a). Bending and extension parts are pres-
surized sequentially, and then they are depressurized simul-
taneously. Temporal duration ratios remain ﬁxed; changing
the total cycle time leads to different forward velocities.
To identify the nominal foot trajectory, the actuator was
mounted vertically as in the stiffness-varying test. The ver-
tical axis points to the opposite direction of gravity, thus the
vertical displacements are negative. An entire actuation se-
quencewasappliedtotheactuatorwhilethecamerarecorded Fig. 10: Primary experimental testbed to evaluate performance in
running, step climbing, and traversing rough terrain.
motion.Resultingimageframeswerepost-processedandan-
alyzedwiththevideoanalysissoftwareKinovea.Meanwhile,
A. Running
the same actuation sequence was applied in simulation.
Resulting trajectories are shown in Fig. 9(b). We notice that SoRX was able to reach a top speed of 0.44body lengths
the foot returns to its original starting point after one stride per second (BL/s), or 101mm/s, at maximum actuation
despitetheverycompliantnatureoftheleg.Amaximumfoot pressures of 34kPa for the bending part and 10kPa for
clearance of about 14mm was recorded. Device vibrations the extension part. Figure 11 depicts an instance of the
423
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. robotrunning.Comparedtoothersoftrobots,SoRXcanrun through its actuated values without any damage if forces
signiﬁcantlyfasterbothintermsofbodylengthandabsolute remain below the silicone’s yield point.
distance (Table I). To the best of our knowledge, SoRX is
the fastest to date pneumatically-actuated soft legged robot.
Fig. 11: Snapshots in 0.5sec intervals of SoRX running.
TABLE I: Speeds for soft robots
Robots Speed[BL/s] Speed[mm/s]
SoRX 0.44 101.0
Quadrupedal[22] 0.14 20.0 Fig. 13: SoRX climbing over a 15mm-tall stack of foam board.
Puppy[25] 0.12 15.6
C. Traversing Rough Terrain
Multigait[17] 0.05 6.7
Five-limb[20] 0.003 0.43 Toevaluatetherobot’scapabilitytotraverseroughterrain,
we considered locomotion over sand, rocks, and a mixed
Further,weperformedrunningtestsattwodistinctspeeds
terrain (Fig. 14). The mixed terrain consisted of two ﬂat
set at 0.35BL/s and 0.44BL/s, to capture the evolution of ground parts at the two ends, as well as sand and rocks
the position of SoRX’s CoM in forward motion. Results
parts in the middle. The supplementary video offers a clear
reveal that the robot’s CoM follows a repeatable cyclic
illustration of our experiments.
pattern (Fig. 12). This observation is consistent with the
The speed of SoRX while traversing rough terrain is
CoM evolution of more rigid legged robots, suggesting that
compared to the speed of Quadrupedal [22]. Quadrupedal
relatedtoolstostudystabilityandtodesignmotionplanners
was tested with small pebbles and large rocks. Therefore,
and controllers may be appropriate for soft legged robots as
the speed of SoRX over sand is compared to the one of
well.
Quadrupedal over small pebbles. Results (shown in Fig. 15)
demonstrate that SoRX is able to navigate much faster on
190
all types of terrain. Unlike Quadrupedal, SoRX uses one
leg conﬁguration that is adequate for ﬂat ground and rough
185
terrainalike.ThespeedofSoRXovermixedterrainsuggests
180 that keeping the same gait pattern and control effort may
m] sufﬁce to traverse different types of terrain.
m175
Z [
(a) (b) (c)
170
165 Fast
Slow
160
4 5 6 7 8
Time [sec]
Fig. 14: SoRX was found capable to traverse (a) sand, (b) rocks,
Fig. 12: CoM position evolution in the Z axis at two different and (c) mixed terrain.
forward speeds, 0.44 BL/s (in blue) and 0.35 BL/s (in red),
indicating that the robot’s CoM follows a cyclic pattern.
B. Step Climbing
SoRX was able to overcome obstacles up to 15mm tall
passively and while following the same alternating tripod
gait used for running (Fig. 13). Leg softness appears to
play a dual positive role. First, it can improve locomotion
robustness by enabling SoRX to recover when one leg
gets stuck on the obstacle. Second, it may help overcome
Fig. 15: Terrain traversal speeds for Quadrupedal and SoRX.
obstacles larger than the nominal foot clearance. (Recall the
D. Traversing Steep Terrain
nominal foot clearance was measured at 14mm in static
single-leg tests shown in Fig. 5.) In both cases, a leg may Walkingoverinclinedsurfaceshasbeenachallengingtask
forcibly squeeze or over-extend beyond the range prescribed for all legged robots. A spherical soft robot [35] was able to
424
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. climb a slope with crawling gaits. Puppy [25] can walk up
a hill only in simulation.
Two experiments were implemented to test SoRX’s lo-
comotive performance on steep terrain: 1) walking on an
inclined ﬂat surface, and 2) walking inside an inclined
groove.Therobotwasabletoclimbuptoa10degangledﬂat
surface made of acrylic sheet as shown in Fig. 16(a) while
employingthesamealternatingtripodgaitasinrunningover
ﬂat and rough terrain and climbing over a step. Moreover, (a)
the robot was able to traverse a 15deg inclined groove
500
made of two ﬂat acrylic sheets as shown in Fig. 16(b). The
actuators can bend and squeeze to ﬁt the high-slop surface. 400
Unlike Quadrupedal, SoRX does not require any additional 300
leg conﬁguration to handle steep terrain. The supplementary
s] 200
video shows more clearly how the robot performs in these m/
challenging terrains. m 100
d [
e 0
e
p
S-100
-200
-300
(a) (b) -400
10 10.5 11 11.5 12 12.5 13 13.5 14 14.5 15
Time [sec]
Fig.16:(a)SoRXclimbingupaslopeof10deg.(b)SoRXshown (b)
insideaninclinedgroovewhereactuatorsbendandsqueezetoadapt
to the high-slope surface. Fig. 17: (a) Experimental setup for the unstable terrain testing.
Terrain is oscillating in the X-Y plane at speeds comparable to
E. Traversing Unstable Terrain therobot’sforwardspeed,toppingatapproximately200mm/s.(b)
Superimposed platform (solid curves) and robot (dashed curves)
To further evaluate the robustness of SoRX’s running speedsfortheunstableterraintesting.(x˙ ,y˙ )and(x˙ ,y˙ )denote
p p r r
performance, we commanded SoRX to run on an unstable theplatformandcombinedrobotandplatformspeeds,respectively.
(oscillating) platform. The experimental setup consisted of (Figure best viewed in color.)
fourcasterwheelssupportingawoodensheet;seeFig.17(a).
The platform oscillated in the X-Y plane while SoRX was tripod gait can be utilized for effective locomotion of SoRX
running on top of it. while traversing ﬂat, rough, steep, and unstable (oscillating)
Figure 17(b) superimposes the speed of SoRX and of the terrains. Experiments reveal that SoRX can reach forward
oscillating platform’s as measured through motion capture. speeds of up to 0.44 BL/s, which to the authors’ best of
SoRX was able to run on the platform without tipping over knowledge makes it the fastest soft pneumatically-actuated
despite the platform oscillating at speeds comparable to the legged robot to date. The robot can climb over 15mm tall
robot’s forward velocity. The employed alternating tripod obstacles, walk over terrains that contain rocks, sand, and
gait, paired with soft legs appear to yield a robust running combination of those, climb up to 10deg slope, and walk
performance in spite of the unstable (oscillating) terrain. inside 15deg inclined grooves. SoRX is also capable to run
on an unstable platform oscillating at speeds comparable to
V. CONCLUSIONS therobot’sforwardspeedwithouttippingover.Theseresults
Pneumatically-actuated soft legged robots may serve as a suggestthatcomplianceintroducedthroughapurelysoftleg
newtooltoapplicationswhereoperationoverroughandun- design may create new opportunities for legged robots to
structuredterrainisrequired,e.g.,whenlookingforsurvivors navigate over challenging terrains.
in the aftermath of an earthquake. Operation in such terrains To realize the potential of soft legged robots in appli-
stillchallengesmorerigidleggedrobots;instead,softlegged cations, several challenges remain to be addressed. Among
robotscouldsqueezeandbendtoovercomeobstaclesandﬁt themistoenableuntetheredoperationwhilekeepingthesize
into crevices to explore their environment. and weight of the robot within reasonable limits. Our future
In this paper, we presented SoRX, a novel pneumatically- work will seek to explore more motion capabilities, such as
actuated soft hexapedal robot. SoRX utilizes our new 2- turning and moving backward. We will study the effect of
DoF soft pneumatic actuators that can both bend and extend different elastic modules and stiffness of the ﬂexible legs on
to create foot trajectory proﬁles that are appropriate for the moving performance. Furthermore, we plan to develop
legged locomotion. Consistent with other hexapedal robots control strategies for trajectory tracking and enable SoRX to
(and animals), SoRX employs an alternating tripod gait work autonomously, untethered, and with integrated sensing
to propel itself forward. We showed that the alternating capabilities.
425
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [18] M. T. Tolley, R. F. Shepherd, B. Mosadegh, K. C. Galloway,
M. Wehner, M. Karpelson, R. J. Wood, and G. M. Whitesides, “A
[1] J. Z. Kolter, M. P. Rodgers, and A. Y. Ng, “A control architecture
resilient,untetheredsoftrobot,”Softrobotics,vol.1,no.3,pp.213–
forquadrupedlocomotionoverroughterrain,”inIEEEInternational
223,2014.
ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2008,pp.811–818.
[19] J.M.Florez,B.Shih,Y.Bai,andJ.K.Paik,“Softpneumaticactuators
[2] J. Rummel, Y. Blum, H. M. Maus, C. Rode, and A. Seyfarth,
forleggedlocomotion,”inIEEEInternationalConferenceonRobotics
“Stableandrobustwalkingwithcompliantlegs,”inIEEEInternational
andBiomimetics(ROBIO),2014,pp.27–34.
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2010, pp. 5250–
[20] S. Mao, E. Dong, H. Jin, M. Xu, and K. Low, “Locomotion and
5255.
gait analysis of multi-limb soft robots driven by smart actuators,” in
[3] E. Moore, D. Campbell, F. Grimminger, and M. Buehler, “Reliable
IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems
stair climbing in the simple hexapod ’rhex’,” in IEEE International
(IROS),2016,pp.2438–2443.
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), vol. 3, 2002, pp. [21] A.Sadeghi,A.Mondini,E.DelDottore,A.K.Mishra,andB.Maz-
2222–2227. zolai,“soft-leggedwheel-basedrobotwithterrestriallocomotionabil-
[4] R. Altendorfer, N. Moore, H. Komsuoglu, M. Buehler, H. Brown, ities,”FrontiersinRoboticsandAI,vol.3,p.73,2016.
D. McMordie, U. Saranli, R. Full, and D. E. Koditschek, “Rhex: A [22] D. Drotman, S. Jadhav, M. Karimi, P. Dezonia, and M. T. Tolley,
biologically inspired hexapod runner,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 11, “3d printed soft actuators for a legged robot capable of navigating
no.3,pp.207–213,2001. unstructured terrain,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics
[5] U. Saranli, M. Buehler, and D. E. Koditschek, “Rhex: A simple and andAutomation(ICRA),2017,pp.5532–5538.
highlymobilehexapodrobot,”TheInternationalJournalofRobotics [23] Q. Sun, F. Gao, and X. Chen, “Towards dynamic alternating tripod
Research,vol.20,no.7,pp.616–631,2001. trottingofapony-sizedhexapodrobotfordisasterrescuingbasedon
[6] J. W. Hurst, J. E. Chestnutt, and A. A. Rizzi, “An actuator with multi-modalimpedancecontrol,”Robotica,vol.36,no.7,pp.1048–
physicallyvariablestiffnessforhighlydynamicleggedlocomotion,”in 1076,2018.
IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA), [24] C. Duriez, E. Coevoet, F. Largilliere, T. Morales-Bieze, Z. Zhang,
vol.5,2004,pp.4662–4667. M. Sanz-Lopez, B. Carrez, D. Marchal, O. Goury, and J. Dequidt,
[7] K. C. Galloway, J. E. Clark, and D. E. Koditschek, “Design of a “Framework for online simulation of soft robots with optimization-
tunablestiffnesscompositelegfordynamiclocomotion,”inASMEIn- based inverse model,” in IEEE International Conference on Simula-
ternationalDesignEngineeringTechnicalConferencesandComputers tion,Modeling,andProgrammingforAutonomousRobots(SIMPAR),
and Information in Engineering Conference (IDETC/CIE), 2009, pp. 2016,pp.111–118.
215–222. [25] J.M.Bern,P.Banzet,R.Poranne,andS.Coros,“Trajectoryoptimiza-
[8] A.Enoch,A.Sutas,S.Nakaoka,andS.Vijayakumar,“Blue:Abipedal tionforcable-drivensoftrobotlocomotion,”inRobotics:Scienceand
robotwithvariablestiffnessanddamping,”inIEEE-RASInternational Systems(RSS),2019.
ConferenceonHumanoidRobots(Humanoids),2012,pp.487–494. [26] K. M. Digumarti, A. T. Conn, and J. Rossiter, “Euglenoid-inspired
[9] G.Kenneally,A.De,andD.E.Koditschek,“Designprinciplesfora giantshapechangeforhighlydeformablesoftrobots,”IEEERobotics
familyofdirect-driveleggedrobots,”IEEERoboticsandAutomation andAutomationLetters,vol.2,no.4,pp.2302–2307,2017.
Letters,vol.1,no.2,pp.900–907,2016. [27] C. Duriez, “Control of elastic soft robots based on real-time ﬁnite
[10] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, elementmethod,”inIEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsand
V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills Automation(ICRA),2013,pp.3982–3987.
forleggedrobots,”ScienceRobotics,vol.4,no.26,2019. [28] J. Allard, S. Cotin, F. Faure, P.-J. Bensoussan, F. Poyer, C. Duriez,
[11] T.Apgar,P.Clary,K.Green,A.Fern,andJ.W.Hurst,“Fastonline H. Delingette, and L. Grisoni, “Sofa-an open source framework for
trajectory optimization for the bipedal robot cassie,” in Robotics: medicalsimulation,”inMedicineMeetsVirtualReality(MMVR),vol.
ScienceandSystems(RSS),2018. 125,2007,pp.13–18.
[12] S.Seok,A.Wang,MengYeeChuah,D.Otten,J.Lang,andS.Kim, [29] E. Coevoet, T. Morales-Bieze, F. Largilliere, Z. Zhang, M. Thieffry,
“Designprinciplesforhighlyefﬁcientquadrupedsandimplementation M.Sanz-Lopez,B.Carrez,D.Marchal,O.Goury,J.Dequidt,etal.,
on the mit cheetah robot,” in IEEE International Conference on “Softwaretoolkitformodeling,simulation,andcontrolofsoftrobots,”
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2013,pp.3307–3312. AdvancedRobotics,vol.31,no.22,pp.1208–1224,2017.
[13] B. Verrelst, R. Van Ham, B. Vanderborght, F. Daerden, D. Lefeber, [30] T. M. Bieze, F. Largilliere, A. Kruszewski, Z. Zhang, R. Merzouki,
and J. Vermeulen, “The pneumatic biped lucy actuated with pleated andC.Duriez,“Finiteelementmethod-basedkinematicsandclosed-
pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 18, pp. 201– loop control of soft, continuum manipulators,” Soft robotics, vol. 5,
213,2005. no.3,pp.348–364,2018.
[14] T.Takuma,S.Hayashi,andK.Hosoda,“3dbipedalrobotwithtunable [31] E.Coevoet,A.Escande,andC.Duriez,“Optimization-basedinverse
legcompliancemechanismformulti-modallocomotion,”inIEEE/RSJ model of soft robots with contact handling,” IEEE Robotics and
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), AutomationLetters,vol.2,no.3,pp.1413–1419,2017.
2008,pp.1097–1102. [32] U. Saranli, M. Buehler, and D. E. Koditschek, “Rhex: A simple and
[15] D. Rus and M. T. Tolley, “Design, fabrication and control of soft highlymobilehexapodrobot,”TheInternationalJournalofRobotics
robots,”Nature,vol.521,no.7553,p.467,2015. Research,vol.20,no.7,pp.616–631,2001.
[16] E.Coevoet,A.Escande,andC.Duriez,“Softrobotslocomotionand [33] P.Birkmeyer,K.Peterson,andR.S.Fearing,“Dash:Adynamic16g
manipulation control using fem simulation and quadratic program- hexapedalrobot,”inIEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligent
ming,”inIEEEInternationalConferenceonSoftRobotics(RoboSoft), RobotsandSystems(IROS),2009,pp.2683–2689.
2019,pp.739–745. [34] D.Holland,E.J.Park,P.Polygerinos,G.J.Bennett,andC.J.Walsh,
[17] R.F.Shepherd,F.Ilievski,W.Choi,S.A.Morin,A.A.Stokes,A.D. “Thesoftroboticstoolkit:Sharedresourcesforresearchanddesign,”
Mazzeo, X. Chen, M. Wang, and G. M. Whitesides, “Multigait soft SoftRobotics,vol.1,no.3,pp.224–230,2014.
robot,” Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, vol. 108, [35] Y. Sugiyama, A. Shiotsu, M. Yamanaka, and S. Hirai, “Circular/-
no.51,pp.20400–20403,2011. spherical robots for crawling and jumping,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2005, pp. 3595–
3600.
426
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 