2 020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)  
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Swing-Assist for Enhancing Stair Ambulation in a Primarily-Passive 
Knee Prosthesis 
J.T. Lee and M. Goldfarb, Member, IEEE, 
   Abstract—This paper presents the design and implementation  in the air, the leg system is under-actuated [4], and therefore 
of a controller for stair ascent and descent in a primarily-passive  the hip cannot directly control the knee joint. Thus, swing is 
stance-controlled swing-assist (SCSA) prosthesis. The prosthesis  the only phase of normal gait in which the device-user 
and controller enable users to perform both step-over and step- combination is an underactuated system.  
to stair ascent and descent. The efficacy of the controller and 
 
SCSA  prosthesis  prototype  in  providing  improved  stair 
ambulation was tested on a unilateral transfemoral amputee in 
experiments  that  employed  motion  capture  apparatus  to 
compare joint kinematics with the SCSA prosthesis, relative to 
performing the same activity with a microprocessor-controlled 
daily-use passive prosthesis. Results suggest that the SCSA knee 
significantly  decreases  compensatory  motion  during  stair 
activity when compared to the passive prosthesis. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Many tasks of daily living are often more difficult for persons 
with transfemoral amputation than for their age-matched non-
amputee counterparts [1, 2]. One task frequently performed   
either in the home or in daily life which has been shown to be  Fig. 1. The leg system is fully actuatable in states A and C when the foot is 
exceptionally  difficult  for  persons  with  amputation  is  on the ground, meaning that the user can fully dictate knee motion via hip 
actuation. However, during the swing phase of stair ascent (B) the leg has too 
traversing stairs [3].   
many degrees of freedom and is thus an underactuated system. During this 
  Perhaps the most common type of knee prosthesis which  time, the user may have difficulty achieving adequate flexion 
provides stair ambulation capability is a microprocessor-
controlled knee (MPK). MPKs incorporate stance control via  The swing phase of healthy level ground walking gait has 
modulated dampers that dissipate energy and thus provide  been described as ballistic motion, meaning that healthy knee 
controlled stance-knee yielding during stair descent. Such  trajectory is driven primarily through the hip motion and can 
devices are capable of providing good step-to or step-over  be achieved without powered actuation of the knee joint [5, 
stair descent functionality.  6]. In a passive device such as an MPK, the combination of 
  Although  MPKs  can  provide  adequate  stair  descent  shank inertia, joint resistance, and thigh angular trajectory, 
functionality, they are more limited in their ability to provide  allows the thigh and shank to be inertially coupled – meaning 
stair ascent functionality, due to two essential limitations: lack  that the desired swing-phase knee trajectory can be achieved 
of active knee extension during stance phase, and lack of  via natural swing-phase movement of the hip. However, 
swing control during swing phase. The first assists during the  during  activities  which  involve  slower  movement,  or 
stance phase of stair ascent in which the body center-of-mass  movement in which the relative movement between hip and 
is lifted, while the second guides the swing foot over the  knee is not achieved by the natural dynamics of a double link 
subsequent stair riser and onto the tread during the swing  pendulum, this “ballistic” inertial coupling is not achieved, 
phase. The first of these limitations is less fundamental than  and thus the hip may not provide a desired knee movement. 
the second. Specifically, in stance phase, an amputee can  One such activity is stair ascent. Whether performing a step-
provide stance knee extension via hip extension. In swing  to, or a step-over stair ascent, the natural movement of the hip 
phase, however, an amputee cannot directly provide a desired  joint during stair ascent, when acting through the passive 
knee motion via hip effort.  Specifically,  a  passive  double-pendulum dynamics of the leg, does not result in a 
transfemoral prosthesis (e.g., an MPK) can be thought of as a  knee motion suitable for stair ascent. As such, the user is 
double link pendulum with an actuated revolute joint at the  forced to clear the subsequent stair by employing exaggerated 
hip and unactuated revolute joint at the knee. As shown in  hip  circumduction,  typically  with  a  fully,  or  near  fully 
Fig.1, when in stance phase, the foot of the prosthesis is  extended knee. Doing so also requires a far wider stance, 
grounded, and as such the leg is fully controllable by the hip  relative to non-amputee stair ascent. One potential alternative 
(i.e., the actuated joints are greater than or equal to the degrees  to this approach is that taken by the Ottobock Genium knee, 
of freedom). During the swing phase of gait, when the foot is  in which the user can achieve improved knee flexion during 
 
*Research supported by National Science Foundation.  M. Goldfarb is the H. Fort Flowers Professor of Mechanical Engineering 
J. T. Lee is an NSF fellow researching at Vanderbilt University, Nashville,  at Vanderbilt University. 
TN, 37209 USA. Email: Jantzen.t.lee@vanderbilt.edu 
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 740
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
stair ascent by “whipping” the thigh back, immediately before  that damping resistance to knee extension always remains 
quickly  extending  it  forward.  This  approach  provides  low, even in cases that resistance to knee flexion is high.  The 
sufficient knee movement but requires visibly unnatural hip  main hydraulic cylinder is a single-rod-type, which includes 
movement.   a spring-loaded accumulator to account for rod volume. The 
As an alternative to MPKs, some powered prostheses have  accumulator spring is a wave spring with a spring constant of 
been described which can provide step-to and step-over stair  300 N/cm (166 lb/in), which at full flexion imposes a force of 
ascent without requiring awkward compensatory movement 
160  N  (35  lbs)  on  the  accumulator  piston,  applying 
[7–12]. In addition to providing swing knee flexion, these 
approximately 0.5 Nm of extension bias torque at the knee. 
devices produce knee extension torque during the stance 
The hydraulic cylinder employs a one-inch diameter bore, 
phase of stair ascent. However, they require a large motor and 
which results in an estimated maximum pressure of 11.4 MPa 
transmission ratio to do so. The combination of large motor 
(1660 psi) for an individual weighing 100 kg in stair descent, 
and transmission generates increased audible noise and high 
using healthy data [14] as an approximation of resistive 
output  impedance  relative  to  MPKs.  The  high  output 
torque. In order to minimize friction, the cylinder employs 
impedance, in turn, reduces the user’s ability to initiate gait 
wear rings and cup seals along sliding surfaces, and O-rings 
activities, and also reduces the natural coordination between 
or face seals at static interfaces.  
user and device.  
In order to enable improved stair ascent movement, while  In order to provide swing assist, a 90 W brushless motor 
maintaining the low output impedance and audible noise of  was selected (Maxon EC22 90 W). The motor is rated at a 
an MPK prosthesis, the authors propose here to employ a knee  maximum continuous torque of 50 mNm, and with proper 
prosthesis similar to a stance-controlled MPK, but with a low- heat-sinking, can be reasonably operated at a lower duty cycle 
torque swing-assist feature. Since the swing-assist feature is  to 150 mNm. As shown in Figs. 2 and 3, the motor is coupled 
low torque, the swing-assist motor does not require a high  to the hydraulic rod through a low-ratio and low-torque 
transmission ratio, and therefore is characterized by a low  transmission, which consists of a lead screw located within 
audible noise and output impedance. The resulting prosthesis  the piston rod, driven by the motor through a pair of spur 
is called a stance-controlled swing-assist (SCSA) prosthesis.  gears.  
With this approach, the prosthesis provides stair descent in the 
same manner as a standard MPK, but additionally enables 
both  step-to  and  step-over  stair  ascent  with  improved 
kinematics and less compensatory movement, relative to a 
standard MPK. This paper describes briefly the device design; 
describes a stair controller; and presents experimental results 
indicating improved stair ambulation relative to a standard 
MPK. 
II.  DEVICE DESCRIPTION 
 
The device used during this study, known as an SCSA 
 
prosthesis [13] aims to improv upon the proven benefits of 
Fig. 2. Schematic of hybrid actuator, including: (1) a single rod cylinder with 
MPKs while maintaining their low audible noise and output 
lead screw contained within rod; (2) spring-loaded accumulator biased 
impedance.  It  does  so  by  coupling  a  small  motor  and  toward extension; (3) rotary spool valve; (4) check valve allows for low-
transmission system to the knee joint in parallel with a  resistance extension; (5) lead screw 
modulated damper. The low-torque motor is used during 
 
swing-phase  to  add  controllability  to  this  otherwise 
underactuated phase of motion.  Because the motor system is 
designed for smaller output torques, the system is easily 
backdriven, and the user remains fundamentally in control of 
initiating device movement, as with an MPK. 
The coupled modulated damper and active motor drive are 
shown in schematic in Fig. 2 and shown in solid model 
implementation in Fig. 3. The composite linear actuator is 
employed in the knee prosthesis in a typical slider-crank 
configuration. The modulated damper component is based on 
a hydraulic damper, where the level of damping is modulated 
via a pressure-balanced rotary spool valve, which is actuated 
by a 12 mm diameter brushless gearmotor (Faulhaber 1226 
with 64:1 gearhead). Since the high damping required for  Fig. 3. Solid model of hybrid actuator implementation. Pointers correspond 
stance phase are exclusively used to resist flexion, a check  to items in Fig. 2. The check valve is not visible, since it is out of plane with 
valve is employed in parallel with the rotary spool valve so  the valve and drive systems. 
741
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
The rotary-to-linear transmission ratio is approximately  Prosthesis sensing includes a load cell (see Fig. 4) that 
3050  rad/m,  which,  in  combination  with  the  previously  measures axial load in the shank; an absolute encoder that 
described slider-crank configuration, provides an average  measures knee angle; and a 6-axis inertial measurement unit 
rotational transmission ratio of approximately 75:1 between  (IMU) that measures inertial movement of the shank. The 
the electric motor and knee. Given this transmission, the  actuator  has  two  controlled  outputs:  swing-assist  motor 
motor will provide approximately 9 Nm of knee torque (under  torque, and valve motor torque. Both the swing assist and 
ideal  circumstances).  Alternatively,  assuming  an  85%  valve motors are controlled by PI current control loops which 
transmission ratio efficiency, the motor will provide 7.5 Nm  are nested inside of PD position control algorithms. The 
of active torque and approximately 75 W of active power at  outputs  of  the  high-level  control  adressed  in  this  paper 
the knee. Note that in the same way as the actuator designed  correspond to the combination of trajectory signals sent to the 
in [15], the entire system is submerged in oil, which is  valve and swing assist motors, as well as state-dependent 
intended to reduce friction in the gears and lead screw and  modifications to the gains of the PD control loop. 
therefore minimize backdrive friction (i.e., minimize output 
impedance). As indicated in Figs. 2 and 3, the motor is also  III.  CONTROLLER 
flooded in the same oil.  
  The device was controlled for the experiments detailed in 
As  previously  mentioned,  the  composite  actuator  was  this paper via a stair ascent controller and a stair descent 
incorporated  into  a  knee  housing  within  a  slider-crank  controller. The stair ascent controller was further subdivided 
configuration, as shown in Fig. 4. The housing was designed  into two sub-tasks: one for step-over and the other for step-to 
in two halves with the main components – the hybrid actuator  stair ascent. The stair descent controller can perform both 
and a load cell – located between them. Fig. 4 shows the  step-over  or  step-to  descent  with  the  same  controller 
prosthesis  with  one  housing  side  removed,  showing  the  parameters. These controllers were implemented as finite 
position of the actuator and load cell within the housing. Fig.  state machines via Matlab Simulink Realtime on a laptop 
4 also shows the fully assembled knee housing, including the  computer. The output from each controller is comprised of 
location of an embedded system and battery pack. Contact  three primary commands: 1) a commanded valve angle; 2) a 
between the housing and rotational assembly (i.e., crank)  set of swing-assist control gains; and 3) a desired knee 
provides hard stops in both extension and flexion. The total  trajectory angle, for cases in which the control gains are non-
zero. This information was then transmitted to the device’s 
range of motion of the knee is 130 deg (5 deg hyperextension 
embedded system via a CAN bus. On board the embedded 
to  125  deg  flexion).  Note  that  the  actuator  reaches  a 
system, position control loops of the form 
singularity at 110 deg flexion, such that movement between 
𝜏 =𝐾 (𝜃 −𝜃)+𝐾 (𝜃̇ − 𝜃̇) 
110 deg and 125 deg flexion is non-actuated.  The total mass  𝑟 𝑝 𝑟 𝑑 𝑟
were run around both valve and knee angle, where 𝜃 was the 
of the assembled prosthesis, filled with hydraulic fluid, is 
measured angle in question, 𝜃  was the reference to which that 
2180 g.   𝑟
angle was being controlled, and 𝜏  was the reference torque 
  𝑟
passed along to the nested current control loop. 
 
Stair Ascent 
The stair ascent finite-state machine (FSM) consists of 
three states: stance, swing flexion, and swing extension, as 
shown in Fig. 5. These states are largely similar for both step-
to and step-over gait, with different switching conditions and 
swing extension trajectory.  
During stance phase (State 0), the valve is commanded to a 
closed position, such that the hydraulic fluid locks the knee 
against  flexion  but  remains  in  a  low-resistance  state  in 
extension due to the check valve. The device’s ability to 
produce such conditions is particularly useful during stair 
ascent, as it offers the user support against knee buckling and 
allows for their free extension of the knee, without having to 
change the valve position. During this state, the swing-assist 
motor is left unpowered, as knee motion is driven from the 
hip. Once the leg is unloaded, as measured by the load cell, 
and assuming other switching gate conditions are met, the leg 
then transitions into swing flexion.  
Upon entry to swing flexion phase (State 1), the valve 
 
Fig. 4. Fully assembled and open view of the SCSA knee. Image shows (1)  motor is commanded to open the valve, enabling the leg to be 
hybrid actuator, (2) load cell, (3) covered absolute encoder, (4) covered PCB,  easily flexed. Simultaneously, the angle which the shank 
and (5) enclosed battery pack  makes with the gravity vector is recorded. The reference angle 
to which the knee is controlled is then modulated to drive the 
742
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
shank angle to this initial angle plus a predetermined offset  Because of the nonlinear transmission of the slider crank 
(40 deg). This approach to reference angle generation allowed  mechanism, the damping valve angle is varied throughout 
for  smooth  transitions  between  step-to  and  step-over  knee flexion in order to maintain the subject’s preferred level 
strategies during stair ascent. Finally, at this transition, the  of damping. This allows the user to feel fully supported 
control gains are varied and subsequently filtered in a first  through the entirety of their stair descent trajectory.  
order manner to provide trajectory tracking while avoiding 
discontinuities in torque. If at any point during this phase the 
leg is reloaded (as detected by the load cell), the device 
transitions back to stance, locking the valve and re-zeroing 
swing-assist control gains.  Fig. 6. FSM for stair descent. Switching conditions shown below in Table 2. 
 
Once the knee angle is sufficiently flexed and the leg is 
unloaded, the knee then transitions into the swing phase (State 
1). The valve motor is commanded to open the valve, the 
swing-assist controller gains are increased and passed through 
a first order filter to a moderate proportional and damping 
gains, and a sinusoidal swing trajectory is generated. This 
trajectory initially flexes the knee in order to allow toe 
  clearance over the edge of the step, then extends the knee to 
Fig. 5. FSM for stair ascent. switch conditions detailed below in Table 1.  
enable foot placement on the subsequent stair tread. After the 
knee angle trajectory has cleared its maximum flexion, the 
Once the user’s thigh angle has moved through the desired 
valve is commanded to an angle corresponding to stance 
trajectory associated with stair knee flexion, as measured by 
damping in order to support the user on the next step. At foot 
thigh angle and its first and second derivatives, the device 
strike, the device transitions back into stance phase. 
transitions to the swing knee extension phase (State 2). Upon 
 
entering this state, the valve is commanded back to a locked 
TABLE II.  State transition conditions for stair descent 
position. The extension check valve allows the knee to extend 
freely, while the rotary valve is ready to fully support the user  Transition  Condition 
upon heel strike. The active control gains are then decayed at 
0 → 1  Load ≤ 5 lbs && Knee Angle ≥ 30 deg 
a first order rate to roughly 10% of the values used in State 1, 
1 → 0  Load ≥ 5 lbs || Knee Angle ≤ 5 deg 
as the device is now working with gravity to extend the knee. 
A sinusoidal trajectory is generated to smoothly extend the 
user’s knee so that it can be placed on the subsequent stair  IV.  EXPERIMENTAL ASSESSMENT 
tread. During step-to gait this trajectory extends to a straight    In order to test the efficacy of the device and controller 
knee position, while during step-over gait, it extends to  suite described above for stair ambulation, the system was 
minimize  the  angle  between  the  shank  and  gravity.  All  implemented  on  a  single  subject  and  compared  to  stair 
transition conditions are summarized below in Table 1.  ambulation with his daily-use prosthesis. The experimental 
  protocol  was  approved  by  the  Vanderbilt  University 
TABLE I.  State transition conditions for stair ascent  Institutional Review Board. The test subject was capable of 
Transition  Condition  step-to and step-over stair ascent and descent (with use of a 
hand rail). At the time of the experiment, the subject measured 
0 → 1  Load ≤ 5lbs && Thigh Angle ≤ 2 
1.85 m 98.4 kg (6”1’, 217 lb), and used the Ossur Rheo Knee 
1 → 0  Load ≥ 5 lbs 
as his daily-use MPK. The subject expressed prior preference 
  Thigh Angle has cleared 10 degrees && 
for step-to gait for both stair ascent and descent. The subject 
  Thigh Jerk ≤ 0 deg/s2 && 
mentioned that, due to circumduction of his hip during ascent, 
1 → 2   
If Step-to:     Thigh Velocity < 100 deg/s  he was unable to perform step-over stair ascent in narrow stair 
If Step-over: Thigh Velocity < 60 deg/s  wells. He was brought into the lab setting for two training 
2 → 0  Load ≥ 5 || Leg fully extended for 0.15 s  sessions on the SCSA knee, during which time the down stairs 
  damping settings were tuned to his preference. 
Stair Descent  During the experiment, the subject donned Xsens motion-
The stair descent FSM for this device consists of two states:  capture devices on his pelvis, upper thighs, lower leg, and 
stance and swing, as shown in Fig. 6. The same FSM and  feet. He then ascended two floors of stairs (52 steps total), 
parameters are used for both step-to and step-over gait.  rested for a self-selected amount of time, and then descended 
During the stance phase of gait (State 0), swing-assist  back down the same flights of stairs. This was repeated twice 
control gains are set to zero and the device’s hydraulic  for step-over gait, and twice for step-to gait. This was first 
damping  valve  angle  is  commanded  to  a  position  done on his daily-use prosthesis, and then repeated on the 
corresponding  to  medium-high  damping.  The  specific  SCSA device. Fig. 7 shows the subject ascending the steps 
damping value used was tuned to the subject’s preference, as  with the SCSA prosthesis (left column), and with the daily-
it would be in an MPK, such that the user could descend the  use prosthesis (right column). A video is also included with 
stair  in  a  controlled  fashion  and  at  a  self-selected  rate.  the supplemental material for this paper, showing the subject 
743
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
performing ascent and descent with both devices. Following 
the experiment, the data was parsed on a stride-by-stride 
basis, excluding the first step of each flight of stairs.  
V.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
  Figs. 8 through 10 show data corresponding to stair ascent 
and  descent  with  both  the  daily-use  and  SCSA  knee 
prostheses. Specifically, the figures show for approximately 
50 strides, the mean knee flexion angle, hip flexion angle, and 
hip ab/adduction angle, as a function of stride, for ambulation 
with the daily-use MPK (black line), and for ambulation with 
the SCSA prosthesis (red line). Plus and minus one standard 
deviation  across  the  50  strides  is  also  shown  for  each 
prosthesis via the shaded bands around the means. For the 
step-over stair gaits there is a direct non-amputee analog 
corresponding healthy data [13] shown in the plots with a 
dashed line. 
  As  shown  in  Fig.  7  and  in  the  supplimentary  video, 
differences  in  behavior  was  easily  observable  in  the 
experimemnts. Using the SCSA results in a notable increase 
in knee flexion, as well as a clear difference in the amount the 
user has to elevate his hip in order to clear the stair.  
A.  Step-over Stair Ascent 
  The subject was able to ascend stairs (with use of the 
handrail) in a step-over fashion for both prostheses. As shown 
in Fig. 8, when using his daily-use prosthesis, knee angle 
 
achieved during step-over gait was substantially less than  Fig. 8. Mean step-over stair ascent data for 50 steps of SCSA prosthsis (red) 
when  using  the  SCSA  knee.  When  using  his  daily-use  and daily-use prosthesis (black). Shaded bands are +/- one standard deviation. 
prosthesis, average peak knee angle achieved was 13.5º, as  White dots indicate mean timing of toe-off for each respective device. Dashed 
lines show corresponding data for healthy subject. 
compared to the average peak knee flexion of 87.5º achieved 
by  the  SCSA.  Note  that  healthy  knee  flexion  reaches 
  With  the  lower  knee  flexion  on  his  daily-use  device, 
approximately 90º.  
additional  compensatory  hip  abduction/adduction  was 
 
observed during these tasks. The RMS value of the mean hip 
abduction on his daily-use device was 4.1º, as compared to 
2.4º on the SCSA. Additionally, the hip abduction/adduction 
was observed to be much less uniform during the step over 
task on his daily-use device when compared to the SCSA 
knee.  Finally,  with  knee  flexion  which  more  closely 
resembled healthy knee flexion, the hip flexion also trended 
toward healthy gait. On his daily-use device, the maximum 
and  minimum  hip  flexion  angles  were  29.0º  and  0.2º, 
respectively; as compared to healthy data of 69.7º and 12.7º. 
On the SCSA these mean hip flexion angles were 54.4º and 
8.6º, much more representative of the healthy trajectory.  
B.  Step-to Stair Ascent 
  Fig. 9 shows knee and hip data for step-to stair ascent. As 
seen in the figure, negligible knee flexion was observed when 
using the daily-use MPK. In order to compensate, the subject 
employed  various  compensatory  actions  with  his  body, 
including substantial hip ab/adduction. The SCSA device had 
a mean peak knee flexion of 47.8º during step-to gait, as 
compared to the daily-use device’s 2.5º. The enhanced knee 
flexion substantially decreased the peak abduction values 
  (shown as negative on the plot). Anecdotally, the subject 
Fig. 7. Subject ascending stairs in a step-over fashion. The left column shows  remarked that when climbing stairs using the SCSA in a step-
the subject's gait using the SCSA device, the right showing his daily use 
to fashion, he felt a noticeable decrease in strain of his low-
device. A video corresponding to these experiments is provided in the 
supplementary materials.   back. 
744
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
 
Fig. 10. Mean step-over stair descent data for 50 steps of SCSA prosthsis 
(red) and daily-use prosthesis (black). Shaded bands are +/- one standard 
deviation. White dots indicate mean timing of toe-off for each respective 
device. Dashed lines show corresponding data for healthy subject. 
VI.  CONCLUSION 
This paper describes the design and preliminary testing of 
a stance-controlled swing-assisted knee prosthesis intended to 
  provide enhanced functionality relative to a conventional 
Fig. 9. Mean step-to stair ascent data for 50 steps of SCSA prosthsis (red) and  MPK prosthesis. This paper specifically describes prospective 
daily-use prosthesis (black). Shaded bands are +/- one standard deviation. 
enhancements for purposes of stair ascent and descent, during 
White dots indicate mean timing of toe-off for each respective device.  
which  the  SCSA  prosthesis  is  hypothesized  to  provide 
C.  Stair Descent  improved  swing-phase  kinematics  relative  to  the  MPK, 
  When descending stairs, the subject was able to perform  particularly  during  stair  ascent,  and  therefore  reduce 
both step-to and step-over gaits with both prostheses with the  compensatory  movements  such  as  hip  elevation  and 
aid of a handrail. The data from the step-over trial are  circumduction.  Experimental  testing  with  a  single 
displayed in Fig. 10. No data is shown for the step-to task,  transfemoral  amputee  subject  indicates  corresponding 
since  the  knee  in  both  cases  is  held  straight,  so  little  substantial improvement in swing-phase knee flexion, relative 
information is provided by it. In the step-over stair descent  to an MPK, during both step-to and step-over stair ascent. Due 
data (Fig. 10), the behavior of the two devices is also not  to  this  increased  knee  flexion,  compensatory  hip 
notably  different  from  each  other,  as  it  is  a  primarily 
circumduction was reduced in the subject’s movement, and 
dissipative task, one which is well suited to an MPK. As 
the corresponding stance phase was further normalized, as a 
observed in the figure, the SCSA provided a more consistent 
result of a corresponding narrower stance. Hip and knee 
rate  of  knee  flexion  during  stance-knee  yielding.  This 
motion  during  both  stance  and  swing  when  using  the 
behavior  was  provided  intentionally  in  response  to  the 
prosthesis was shown to better match the motion of a healthy 
subject, who expressed dissatisfaction with the rapid “drop-
individual when climbing stairs, relative to a standard MPK.  
off” experienced on his daily-use device. In addition to the 
Transitions in and out of each task have been explored, but 
more consistent rate of flexion, the trajectory to full extension 
are beyond the scope of this paper, and will be further 
following flexion was notably quicker on the SCSA relative 
discussed  in  later  work.  Additionally,  future  work  will 
to the daily-use device. This is due to the swing-assist feature, 
explore to what extent these controllers need to be manually 
which appeared to enhance the ability of the subject to place 
his foot on the stair tread.   tuned between subjects, though preliminary testing indicates 
The stair descent stance capabilities of this device and  this will be minimal, if at all necessary. 
control regime were shown to maintain and/or improve upon 
those offered by an MPK. At the same time, the aided  REFERENCES 
extension  during  stair  descent  swing  enables  quicker  [1]  I. C. Narang, B. P. Mathur, P. Singh, and V. S. Jape, “Functional 
extension and easy foot placement.   capabilities of lower limb amputees,” Prosthet. Orthot. Int., vol. 8, no. 
1, pp. 43–51, 1984. 
[2]  C. Gauthier-Gagnon, M. C. Grisé, and D. Potvin, “Enabling factors 
related to prosthetic use by people with transtibial and transfemoral 
amputation,” Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, vol. 
745
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
80, no. 6. pp. 706–713, 1999. 
[3]  H. Hobara, Y. Kobayashi, T. Nakamura, N. Yamasaki, and T. Ogata, 
“Foot  clearance  strategy  for  step-over-step  Stair  climbing  in 
transfemoral amputees,” Prosthet. Orthot. Int., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 332–
335, 2014. 
[4]  A. E. Martin and R. D. Gregg, “Stable, Robust Hybrid Zero Dynamics 
Control of Powered Lower-Limb Prostheses,” IEEE Transactions on 
Automatic Control, vol. 62, no. 8. pp. 3930–3942, 2017. 
[5]  S. Mochon and T. A. McMahon, “Ballistic walking,” Journal of 
Biomechanics, vol. 13, no. 1. pp. 49–57, 1980. 
[6]  S. Mochon and T. A. McMahon, “Ballistic walking: an improved 
model,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 52, no. 3–4. pp. 241–260, 
1980. 
[7]  B. E. Lawson, H. A. Varol, A. Huff, E. Erdemir, and M. Goldfarb, 
“Control of stair ascent and descent with a powered transfemoral 
prosthesis,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation 
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 3. pp. 466–473, 2013. 
[8]  C. D. Hoover, G. D. Fulk, and K. B. Fite, “Stair ascent with a powered 
transfemoral prosthesis under direct myoelectric control,” IEEE/ASME 
Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 3. pp. 1191–1200, 2013. 
[9]  E. D. Ledoux and M. Goldfarb, “Control and Evaluation of a Powered 
Transfemoral Prosthesis for Stair Ascent,” IEEE Transactions on 
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 25, no. 7. pp. 917–
924, 2017. 
[10] T.  Lenzi,  M.  Cempini,  L.  Hargrove,  and  T.  Kuiken,  “Design, 
development,  and  testing  of  a  lightweight  hybrid  robotic  knee 
prosthesis,” Int. J. Rob. Res., vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 953–976, 2018. 
[11] A. M. Simon et al., “Configuring a powered knee and ankle prosthesis 
for transfemoral amputees within five specific ambulation modes,” 
PLoS One, vol. 9, no. 6, 2014. 
[12] L. Flynn, J. Geeroms, R. Jimenez-Fabian, B. Vanderborght, N. Vitiello, 
and D. Lefeber, “Ankle-knee prosthesis with active ankle and energy 
transfer:  Development  of  the  CYBERLEGs  Alpha-Prosthesis,” 
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 73. pp. 4–15, 2015. 
[13] J.T.Lee, H.L. Bartlett, M. Goldfarb, "Design of a SemiPowered Stance-
Control  Swing-Assist  Transfemoral  Prosthesis,"  IEEE/ASME 
Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 25, no.1, pp. 175-184, Feb. 2020 
[14] R. R, R. M, and F. C, “Stair ascent and descent at different inclinations,” 
Gait and Posture, vol. 15, no. 1. p. 32, 2002. 
[15] H. L. Bartlett, B. E. Lawson, and M. Goldfarb, “Design of a power-
asymmetric actuator for a transtibial prosthesis,” IEEE Int. Conf. 
Rehabil. Robot., pp. 1531–1536, 2017. 
  
 
746
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:50:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 