2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for Self-ﬂying Delivery Drones
Vikas Sindhwani1, Hakim Sidahmed1, Krzysztof Choromanski1, Brandon Jones2
Abstract—Weproposeanovelanomalydetectionframework
foraﬂeetofhybridaerialvehiclesexecutinghigh-speedpackage
pickupanddeliverymissions.Thedetectionisbasedonmachine
learningmodelsofnormalﬂightproﬁles,trainedonmillionsof
ﬂight log measurements of control inputs and sensor readings.
We develop a new scalable algorithm for robust regression
which can simultaneously ﬁt predictive ﬂight dynamics models
whileidentifyinganddiscardingabnormalﬂightmissionsfrom
thetrainingset.Theresultingunsupervisedestimatorhasavery
high breakdown point and can withstand massive contamina-
tion of training data to uncover what normal ﬂight patterns
look like, without requiring any form of prior knowledge of
aircraftaerodynamicsormanuallabelingofanomaliesupfront.
Across many different anomaly types, spanning simple 3-
sigma statistical thresholds to turbulence and other equipment
anomalies, our models achieve high detection rates across
the board. Our method consistently outperforms alternative
robust detection methods on synthetic benchmark problems.
To the best of our knowledge, dynamics modeling of hybrid
Fig.1. HybridAerialVehicleforHigh-speedPackagePickupandDelivery
deliverydronesforanomalydetectionatthescaleof100million
measurements from 5000 real ﬂight missions in variable ﬂight
conditions is unprecedented.
throughthousandsofﬂightlogscomprisingofdozensoftime
serieslookingforsubtleabnormalitiesstretchesthelimitsof
I. INTRODUCTION
what is manually feasible.
As aerial robots [1], [2] become increasingly capable
As in prior work [3], [4], [5], [6] on fault detection and
of complex navigation, perceptual reasoning and ability to
ﬂeet monitoring of aircrafts [7], [8], [9], our framework
learn from experience, it is expected that a large number of
relies on learning a predictive model of ﬂight dynamics.
deliverymissionswillsoonbeexecutedbysmallair-vehicles
The linear and angular acceleration of an aircraft depends
takingoffautonomously,ﬂyingfarbeyondlineofsightover
on the aerodynamic forces it is subject to, which are a
densely populated areas, hovering inside a residential zone
function of the vehicle state, control commands, dynamic
within touching distance of humans to deliver the package,
pressure and other ﬂight condition variables. As [3] show,
and returning to their “home” upon mission completion.
simple linear or quadratic models trained on historical ﬂight
Ensuring as high degree of operational reliability and safety
logs show impressive predictive power. The norm of the
as passenger airplanes is critical for delivery drones to
predictive residuals at a given time for a given ﬂight, or the
achieve economies of scale.
mean residual over an entire ﬂight can be used as thresholds
While simple statistical thresholds and logical rules can
for anomaly detection. However, in contrast to prior work
be hand-designed to trigger on frequently occurring prob-
that focused on large ﬁxed wing passenger aircrafts and
lematic events (e.g., battery too low, or control surface non-
cruising performance only, we are interested in monitoring
functional), they cannot exhaustively cover all potential fu-
much smaller delivery drones [10] across an entire ﬂight
turefailuremodeswhichareunknownapriori,particularlyas
mission that includes takeoff, package delivery, and landing.
theﬂeetgrowsinmissioncomplexityandvehicletypes.With
Furthermore, to span a full range of conditions from stable
this motivation, we develop an anomaly detection system
hovering to energy efﬁcient cruising, we work with a hybrid
based on a machine-learning model that is continuously
smallair-vehicleschematicallyshownaboveinFigure1.An
trained on thousands of ﬂight logs. When this model reports
arrayof12verticallymountedelectricmotorsprovidesthrust
large predictive errors for a new ﬂight, the vehicle can be
forhoveringﬂight.Twoforward thrustmotors,twoailerons,
ﬂagged for manual inspection and possibly grounded for
and two ruddervators are used primarily for cruise ﬂight.
safety until the issue is resolved. Importantly, the system is
This hybrid conﬁguration makes the task of building
designed to discover normality and does not require upfront
an accurate model of the system more challenging as the
labeling of normal and anomalous missions; indeed, sifting
aerodynamic interactions are more complex than on larger
{ ﬁxed-wing aircraft (e.g. rotor cross-ﬂow, ﬂow around small
1Robotics at Google,} New York Email: sindhwani, structures). As an alternative to pushing the boundary of
hsidahmed, kchoro @google.com
2WingAviationEmail:brnjones@wing.com computational ﬂuid dynamics tools, or performing complex
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 186
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:40:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. and expensive measurement campaigns using wind tunnels, out missions for such abnormalities while ﬁtting a model
learning models from raw ﬂight data turns out to be surpris- to the data that remains. In the absence of such a ﬁltering
ingly effective. mechanism, it is well known that ordinary least squares
Trained on among the largest scale real-world deliv- estimators and associated anomaly detectors may degrade in
ery drone data reported to date, our detectors successfully quality due to the presence of highly abnormal missions in
ﬂag missions with disabled actuators, off-nominal hard- the training set.
ware conditions, turbulence and other anomalous events.
Our approach is based on a combination of non-parametric
III. ROBUSTDYNAMICSLEARNING
dynamics modeling and a novel algorithm for robust and
scalable least trimmed squares estimation, which may be of
A measure of robustness of an estimator is the ﬁnite-
independent interest.
sample breakdown point [11] which in our context is the
fraction of mission trajectories that may be arbitrarily cor-
II. DYNAMICSLEARNINGANDANOMALYDETECTION
rupted so as to cause the parameters of the estimator to
In this section, we introduce notation and formulate the
blowup (i.e., become inﬁnite). For least squares estimators
problemabstractly.Considerarobotinteractingwithitsenvi-
or even least absolute deviations (l ) regressors, the ﬁnite
ronmentaccordingtoanunknowncontinuous-timenonlinear 1
sample breakdown point is 1 making them fragile in the
dynamical system, N
presence of heavy outliers in the training set. A more robust
x˙(t)=f(x(t),u(t)) alternativeistrimmedestimators.Foranyf,denotetheorder
∈R ∈R statistics of the residuals as,
wherestatesx(t) nandcontrolsu(t) m.Assumethat
a ﬂeet of such robots collectively and continuously execute
≤ ≤ ≤
missions generating trajectory logs of the form, r(τ ,f) r(τ ,f) ... r(τ ,f)
[1] [2] [N]
{ }
τi = (xi(t),ui(t),x˙i(t)) Tt=i0 Then we deﬁne the trimmed estimator [12], [11], [13] as
where i indexes the mission. the sum of the smallest k resid(cid:88)uals,
From N mission logs, one may naturally hope to learn
F
f over a suitable family of function approximators by ∗ k
(cid:88) f =argmin r(τ ,f) (2)
solving a least squares problem, ∈F [i]
f
i=1
N
∗ −
f =argmin r(τ ,f) (1) Thebreakdownpointofsuchanestimatoris N k+1 where
∈F i
f i=1 k is the number of missions that should not be trNimmed. In
(cid:88)
where r denotes the predictive residual, practice, k is unknown and is treated as a hyper-parameter.
By making k small enough, the breakdown point can even
r(τ,f)= 1 T (cid:107)x˙(t)−f(x(t),u(t))(cid:107)2 be made larger than 50%.
T 2 The price of strong robustness is computational complex-
t=1
ity of least trimmed squares estimation [14]: for an exact
While this is reminiscent of model-based Reinforcement
solution, the complexity scales as O(Nd+1) for d >= 3
Learning,ourinterestinthispaperisnottolearncontrollers,
∗ dimensional regression problems. The optimization task is
but rather to turn the dynamics estimate f into a detector
both non-smooth and non-convex. Due to its combinatorial
that can ﬂag mission abnormalities. For any trajectory τ
ﬂavor, it is not amenable to standard gradient techniques
generated by a new mission, the per time-step residual norm
(cid:107) − ∗ (cid:107) or least squares solvers even for linear models. Thus, the
x˙(t) f (x(t),u(t)) 2 is a measure of “instantaneous
2 ∗ developmentofpracticalapproximatealgorithms[15],[16]is
unexpectedness”andthemeanresidualacrosstime,r(τ,f ),
ofsigniﬁcantinterest.Wenowdevelopanovelalgorithmfor
deﬁnes an anomaly score for that mission.
robustlearningbasedonsmoothingthetrimmedsquaresloss.
Chu et. al. [3] adopt this approach for predicting linear
ThealgorithmisinspiredbyNesterov’ssmoothingprocedure
and angular acceleration of the aircraft. By using linear
for minimizing non-smooth objective functions [17], and is
and quadratic functions, a single pass over the mission logs
also closely related to Deterministic Annealing [18], [19],
sufﬁces for least squares estimation.
[20] methods for combinatorial optimization.
In practice, such an approach to anomaly detection may
become fragile in the face of the quality of real world
data.Whenthesetoftrainingmissionsiscontaminatedwith A. Smoothing the Trimmed Loss
operationalfailuresorcarrysubtlesignaturesoffuturecatas- ∈ R
trophes (e.g., sensor degradation), the detector may extract Consider the function that maps a vector r N to the
a misleading characterization of normal behavior. Unlike sum of its k sm(cid:88)allest elements,
model-basedRLsettingswhereallcollectedtrajectoriesmay
be useful for learning the unknown dynamics, for anomaly k ≤ ≤ ≤
h (r)= r where r r ... r
detection the learning process has to simultaneously ﬁlter k [i] [1] [2] [N]
i=1
187
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:40:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (cid:88)
This function admits a smoothing [21], [22] deﬁned as Equivalently,
(cid:88)
follows,
N
∗
N f = (cid:88)arg ∈Fmin∈R αir(τi,f)+TH(αi) (6)
hTk(r) = (cid:88)m∈Rin αTr+T H(αi) (3) f ,α N i=1
α N
i=1 N ≤ ≤
N ≤ ≤ s.t.: αi =k, 0 αi 1 (7)
s.t: α =k, 0 α 1 (4)
i i i=1
i=1 − − We now describe a procedure that alternates between a
where H(u)=ulog(u)+(1 u)log(1 u) (5)
ﬁtting phase and a trimming phase up to convergence. Both
Above, T is a smoothing parameter also referred to as these phases are fast, efﬁcient and easily scale to thousands
the “temperature” in the annealing literature. Intuitively, if of missions and millions of measurements. We initialize the
α tends to zero, the corresponding mission is considered optimization with α = k which corresponds to the non-
i N →∞
too anomalous for training and is trimmed away. The α’s robust least squares estimator and the limit of T .
may also be interpreted as probability distributions over 1) Fitting Phase: We consider linear combinations of
binary indicator variables encoding whether or not to trim ﬁxed nonlinear basis functions,
a mission. As such, when T is high, the smoothed objective
f(x,u)=Wφ(x,u)
is dominated by the entropy of the α’s and tend to approach
theuniformdistribution∀i:α = k.AsT →0,theweights where φ : Rn+m (cid:55)→ Rd is a nonlinear feature map and W
i N ×
hardentowardsbinaryvalues.Thisstrategyofstartingwitha is a n d parameter matrix.
highlysmoothedproxytoanon-convexnon-smoothfunction For ﬁxed α’s, optimizing W is a weighted least squares
and gradually increasing the degree of convexity is the cen- problem which admits a fast single pass solution,
tral idea of homotopy [23], continuation [24] and graduated
non-convexity[25],[26]methodsforglobaloptimization.In (cid:88) (cid:88)−
theidealcase,thehighlysmoothedfunctionisclosetobeing W = [A+λId] 1B where, (8)
convexallowingtheglobalminimumtobefoundefﬁciently. N
As smoothing is reduced, one hopes that following the A = (cid:88)αi(cid:88)φ(xi(t),ui(t))φ(xi(t),ui(t))T (9)
continuous path of the minimizer would lead to the global i=1 t
minimum.Figure2showshowspuriouslocalminimacanbe N
B = α φ(x (t),u (t))x˙ (t)T (10)
eliminated due to smoothing, making the optimization task i i i i
much easier. i=1 t
2) TrimmingPhase: ForﬁxedW,wecomputethevector
of N residuals given by r =r(τ ,W). The α optimization
i i
takes the form [17],
1
α = − (11)
i 1+exp(ri ν)
T
(cid:88)
where the scalar ν satisﬁes the nonlinear equation,
N 1 −
ψ(ν)= − k =0 (12)
1+exp(ri ν)
i=1 T
Fig. 2. Left: Normal data follows y = mx where the slope is m = 1. The root of this equation can be easily solved e.g., via the
Right:trimmedlossanditssmoothing(T =0.025)asafunctionofm. −
bisection method noting that ψ(a) < 0 for a = min r
− − i i−
T logN k and ψ(b) > 0 for b = max r T logN k
In particular, the smoothing discussed above has the fol- N i i N
provides an initial bracketing of the root.
lowing properties [21], [22]:
• hT is a concave function. C. Nonlinear Dynamics via Random Fourier Features
k
• hT is continuously differentiable. We experimented(cid:114)with both linear models as well as
k − ≤ ≤
• hTk(r) TR hk(r) hTk(r) holds for some ﬁxed nonlinear random basis functions [27], [28] of the form,
constant R.
2 − −
B. Optimizing the Smoothed Trimmed Loss φ(x,u) = cos(σ 1Gx+σ 1Hu+b) (13)
d
∼N ∼U
With this smoothing of the trimmed loss, for a ﬁxed where G ,H (0,1),b (0,2π)
ij ij
number of k missions to retain, we consider the following and G∈Rd×n,H ∈Rd×m (14)
optimization problem,
Here, the feature map dimensionality d controls the capacity
→∞
∗ ofthedynamicsmodel.Inparticular,asd ,innerprod-
f =argminhT(r(f)), r(f)=[r(τ ,f)...r(τ ,f)]
∈F k 1 N ucts in the random feature space approximate the Gaussian
f
188
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:40:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Kernel [29],
φ(x,u)Tφ(x¯,u¯)≈e−(cid:107)x−x¯(cid:107)222+σ2(cid:107)u−u¯(cid:107)22
Theimplicationofthisapproximationisthateachcomponent
of the learnt dynamics function is a linear combination of
similaritytotrainingmissionmeasurements,inthefollowing
(cid:88)(cid:88)
sense.
Fig.4. ObjectivevsIterations(left)andMissionWeights(α’slearnt)
fj(x,u)=wjTφ(x,u)≈ N βj,i,te−(cid:107)x−xi(t)(cid:107)222+σ2(cid:107)u−ui(t)(cid:107)22
i=1 t models, and several M-estimators proposed in the Robust
Statistics [11] literature. Due to its non-robustness, the least
for some coefﬁcients β and where wT refers to the j-
j,i,t j squares detector is hurt the most due to corruptions in the
th row of W. However, the random feature method scales
training set. By limiting outlier inﬂuence, robust loss func-
linearly in the number of measurements, as opposed to
cubically for β when working with exact kernels. At the tionssuchasl1 andhubershowimprovedperformance.Yet,
they are outperformed by the proposed trimming approach
price of losing this linear training complexity and globally
which gives perfect detection despite massive corruption of
optimal solution, one may also embrace deep networks for
the training data.
this application to parameterize the dynamics model.
D. Comparison on Synthetic Missions
We generate synthetic 8-dimensional input and 3-
dimensional output time series following a linear model
as follows. The output time series for normal missions
carry moderate Gaussian noise, but anomalous missions are
heavily corrupted by non-Gaussian noise sampled uniformly
from the interval [0,10]. 200 training and 200 test missions,
eachwith100timestepsweregeneratedwith50%anomalies
following the procedure below. The anomaly labels were
discarded for training and only used for evaluation.
x(t)∈R8 = c(cid:40)os(g∗t+b), g,b∈R8,g ,b ∼N(0,1)
i i
∈R ∈R ×
y(t) 3 = Wx(t)+(t), W 3 8
∼N
(t)∈R3 := i ∼U (0,1) for normal
 nif(0,10) for anomaly Fig.5. SmoothedTrimmed(proposed)vsRobustestimators.
i
Examples of output proﬁles in normal and anomalous mis-
sions are shown below in Figure 3. IV. ANOMALYDETECTIONFORDELIVERYDRONES
A. Missions
We now report results on data collected from a ﬂeet
of delivery drones ﬂying in multiple environments on real
delivery ﬂight missions. A typical mission consists of a
takeoff, package pickup, a cruise phase to deliver the pack-
age, and subsequent landing. To the best of our knowledge,
machine learning on real delivery drone data at this scale
Fig.3. Normal(left)andAnomalous(right)outputproﬁles. is unprecedented: 5000 historical missions prior to a cutoff
date generating around 80 million measurements are used
Figure 4 shows how alternating optimization of the for training. Trained detectors were tested on 5000 outdoor
smoothed trimmed loss (with temperature T=1.0) leads to missions after the cutoff date. By contrast, recent papers
monotonic descent in the sum of the smallest k = 100 have reported results on 20 to 50 test missions in controlled
residuals, a consequence of our smoothing formulation. The lab environments [30], [31]. Our large-scale ﬂight log data
optimizationconvergestoasetofmissionweights(α’s)that covers multiple vehicle types, package conﬁgurations and
clearly trim away nearly all the anomalies present in the variable temperature and wind conditions. Additionally, the
training set despite heavy 50% corruption and no explicit mission logs are mixed with a variety of research and
anomaly labels provided to the algorithm. development ﬂights that include ﬂight envelope expansion,
Figure 5 shows a comparison of anomaly detectors based prototype hardware and software, and other experiments
ontheproposedtrimmingapproachagainstpureleastsquares designed to stress-test the ﬂight system. Flight missions
189
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:40:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.6. InputSignalsforAnomalyDetection
Fig.7. Detectorpredictions:x-y-zaccelerationsfornormal(top),andanomalous(bottom)ﬂightswitherrorspikes.
generally last approximately 5 minutes including several path, pitch, roll, Root Mean Squared pitch and roll
kilometers of cruise ﬂight. error, pitch and roll torque commands are more than
3standarddeviationsfromthemeancomputedoverthe
B. Signals
entire training set.
Figure 6 shows the input signals used for training models • has-ﬂight-dynamics-issue: The particular ﬂight had an
topredictlinearandangularaccelerationofthevehicle.Each
issue where the ﬂight dynamics were off-nominal due
inputtimeseriesisre-scaledsothatvalueslieintheinterval
to various factors such as an intentionally disabled
−
[ 1.0,1.0]. Training a nonlinear trimmed model with d = actuator or other off-nominal airframe modiﬁcations to
100 random Fourier features on 80 million measurements, test system robustness.
includingdatapreprocessing,iscompletedwithin1.15hours • is-high-wind:Theprevailingwindspeedisgreaterthan
on a single CPU. Predictions on a normal and an anomalous
10m/s, which qualitatively indicates elevated levels of
test mission are shown in Figure 7. The large spike towards
turbulence.
the end of the anomalous test mission causes the mean
Approximately12%ofthetestsetof5000missionshasthese
residual error to be large, ﬂagging the ﬂight as anomalous.
anomalies.
C. Control
E. Detection Performance
The vehicle’s position, velocity, and attitude estimates
from an EKF-based state estimator are compared with com- Figure8showstheperformanceofournonlineartrimmed
mands generated by a high-level mission planning system. detectors (d = 100,T = 1.0,k = 0.75N) on a test set of
Thecontrollergeneratesactuatorcommandstoreduceerrors 5000 missions. On all three anomaly types, the area under
between the state estimate and commands. The controller the True-Positive-Rate vs False-Positive-Rate curve exceeds
incorporatesareal-timeairspeedestimatetoproperlyallocate 0.90. The detector coverage goes beyond simple statistical
control between individual hover motors and aerodynamic anomalymeasuresﬁringreliablyacrossamultitudeoffactors
control surfaces throughout the airspeed envelope. such as disabled actuators, otherwise off-nominal hardware
conditionsandthevehicleexperiencingturbulentconditions.
D. Anomaly Types
We report detection rates for multiple anomaly types: F. Effectiveness of Trimming
• are-basic-stats-exceeded: Basic statistical measures Figure 9 shows the smoothed distribution of mission
suchasvelocitycommanderror,errorfromcommanded weights learned by the proposed trimming algorithm. The
190
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:40:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.10. NominalHoveringvsIntentionallyFailedHoverMotor
Figure 10 shows a comparison between a nominal and the
Fig.8. AnomalyDetectionPerformanceon5000TestMissions
failed hover motor test ﬂight. In this case the prediction
residuals are large compared to the nominal ﬂight.
Fig.9. DistributionofTrainingMissionWeights
Fig.11. LowWindvsHighWindHoveringDynamics
distribution of α’s peaks close to 0 in comparison to the
mean over the entire training set which is close to 1.0. This 2) Impact of Wind Conditions: We compare two oth-
conﬁrms the ability of the proposed method to successfully erwise nominal steady hovering ﬂights differing only in
ﬁlter out anomalies from the training set, in order to ex- their anomaly score. In this case, the algorithm ﬂagged a
tract normal ﬂight patterns, without requiring any form of ﬂight in high turbulent wind conditions as more anomalous
supervision. Without nonlinear modeling and trimming, we than one in light wind conditions. This is reasonable since
observedperformancedegradationinananalysisacrossﬁner wind represents an unmodeled random disturbance and not
anomaly type categories. intendedtobepartofthelearntbareairframeﬂightdynamics
model. Figure 11 shows a comparison of the total thrust
G. Case Studies
command and roll angle for each case. The high wind case
Two example case studies are presented to illustrate the has a lower overall thrust command due to lift from the
utility of the anomaly detection algorithm. wing,butismuchmorevariableasthecontrollerisrejecting
1) Hover Motor Testing: A test ﬂight was performed the random disturbances. Roll angles in the high wind case
with one of the 12 hover motors purposefully disabled. A are up to 25 deg as the vehicle is maneuvering to maintain
disabled hover motor is expected to require additional thrust its hovering position. Flight data in low-wind conditions is
and torque from the remaining hover motors to maintain desirable for system identiﬁcation applications where only
trimmed ﬂight and therefore represents a different ﬂight the bare-airframe dynamics are desired. This algorithm can
dynamics model. The unsupervised anomaly detection algo- beusedasapreprocessingstepinalargedatasettoﬁnddata
rithmsuccessfullyﬂaggedthisparticularﬂightasanomalous. with the least amount of unmodeled disturbances.
191
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:40:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [27] A. Rahimi and B. Recht, “Random features for large-scale kernel
machines,” in Advances in neural information processing systems,
[1] KumarandMichael,“Opportunitiesandchallengeswithautonomous 2008,pp.1177–1184.
micro aerial vehicles,” in International Symposium on Robotics Re- [28] H.Avron,V.Sindhwani,J.Yang,andM.W.Mahoney,“Quasi-monte
search,2011. carlofeaturemapsforshift-invariantkernels,”TheJournalofMachine
[2] D. Floreano and R. J. Wood, “Science, technology and the future of LearningResearch,vol.17,no.1,pp.4096–4133,2016.
smallautonomousdrones,”Nature,vol.521,2015. [29] B.ScholkopfandA.J.Smola,Learningwithkernels:supportvector
machines,regularization,optimization,andbeyond,2001.
[3] E.Chu,D.Gorinevsky,andS.Boyd,“Detectingaircraftperformance
[30] A. Keipour, M. Mousaei, and S. Scherer, “Automatic real-time
anomaliesfromcruiseﬂightdata,”inAIAAInfotech@Aerospace2010,
anomaly detection for autonomous aerial vehicles,” in 2019 Interna-
p.3307.
tionalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2019,
[4] D.G.Dimogianopoulos,J.D.Hios,andS.D.Fassois,“Faultdetection
pp.5679–5685.
andisolationinaircraftsystemsusingstochasticnonlinearmodelling
[31] ——, “Alfa: A dataset for uav fault and anomaly detection,” arXiv
ofﬂightdatadependencies,”in200614thMediterraneanConference
preprintarXiv:1907.06268,2019.
onControlandAutomation. IEEE,2006,pp.1–6.
[5] E.Chu,D.Gorinevsky,andS.Boyd,“Scalablestatisticalmonitoring
ofﬂeetdata,”IFACProceedingsVolumes,vol.44,no.1,pp.13227–
13232,2011.
[6] D.stnevsky,B.Matthews,andR.Martin,“Aircraftanomalydetection
usingperformancemodelstrainedonﬂeetdata,”in2012Conference
onintelligentdataunderstanding. IEEE,2012,pp.17–23.
[7] J.Qi,D.Song,H.Shang,N.Wang,C.Hua,C.Wu,X.Qi,andJ.Han,
“Searchandrescuerotary-winguavanditsapplicationtothelushan
ms 7.0 earthquake,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 33, no. 3, pp.
290–321,2016.
[8] M. Bragg, T. Basar, W. Perkins, M. Selig, P. Voulgaris, J. Melody,
andN.Sarter,“Smarticingsystemsforaircrafticingsafety,”in40th
AIAAAerospaceSciencesMeeting&Exhibit,2002,p.813.
[9] E. Khalastchi and M. Kalech, “On fault detection and diagnosis in
robotic systems,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 51, no. 1,
p.9,2018.
[10] J.Xu,T.Du,M.Foshey,B.Li,B.Zhu,A.Schulz,andW.Matusik,
“Learning to ﬂy: computational controller design for hybrid uavs
withreinforcementlearning,”ACMTransactionsonGraphics(TOG),
vol.38,no.4,p.42,2019.
[11] R. A. Maronna, R. D. Martin, V. J. Yohai, and M. Salibia´n-Barrera,
Robuststatistics:theoryandmethods(withR). JohnWiley&Sons,
2019.
[12] P. J. Rousseeuw and A. M. Leroy, Robust regression and outlier
detection. Johnwiley&sons,2005,vol.589.
[13] P.J.Huber,Robuststatistics. Springer,2011.
[14] D.M.Mount,N.S.Netanyahu,C.D.Piatko,R.Silverman,andA.Y.
Wu,“Ontheleasttrimmedsquaresestimator,”Algorithmica,vol.69,
no.1,pp.148–183,2014.
[15] F.Shen,C.Shen,A.vandenHengel,andZ.Tang,“Approximateleast
trimmed sum of squares ﬁtting and applications in image analysis,”
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1836–
1847,2013.
[16] D.M.Mount,N.S.Netanyahu,C.D.Piatko,A.Y.Wu,andR.Sil-
verman, “A practical approximation algorithm for the lts estimator,”
ComputationalStatistics&DataAnalysis,vol.99,pp.148–170,2016.
[17] Y.Nesterov,“Smoothminimizationofnon-smoothfunctions,”Math-
ematicalprogramming,vol.103,no.1,pp.127–152,2005.
[18] G.L.Bilbro,W.E.Snyder,andR.C.Mann,“Mean-ﬁeldapproxima-
tionminimizesrelativeentropy,”JOSAA,vol.8,no.2,pp.290–294,
1991.
[19] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi, “Optimization by
simulatedannealing,”science,vol.220,no.4598,pp.671–680,1983.
[20] V.Sindhwani,S.S.Keerthi,andO.Chapelle,“Deterministicannealing
for semi-supervised kernel machines,” in Proceedings of the 23rd
internationalconferenceonMachinelearning. ACM,2006,pp.841–
848.
[21] Y. Qi, “Smoothing approximations for two classes of convex eigen-
valueoptimizationproblems,”Ph.D.dissertation,2005.
[22] S. Shengyuan, “Smooth convex approximation and its applications,”
2004.
[23] D.M.DunlavyandD.P.O’Leary,“Homotopyoptimizationmethods
for global optimization.” Sandia National Laboratories, Tech. Rep.,
2005.
[24] E. L. Allgower and K. Georg, Numerical continuation methods: an
introduction. SpringerScience&BusinessMedia,2012,vol.13.
[25] E.Hazan,K.Y.Levy,andS.Shalev-Shwartz,“Ongraduatedoptimiza-
tionforstochasticnon-convexproblems,”inInternationalconference
onmachinelearning,2016,pp.1833–1841.
[26] A.BlakeandA.Zisserman,Visualreconstruction,1987.
192
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:40:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 