2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Neural Network based Inverse Dynamics Identiﬁcation and External Force
Estimation on the da Vinci Research Kit
Nural Yilmaz, Jie Ying Wu, Peter Kazanzides, Ugur Tumerdem
Abstract—Most current surgical robotic systems lack the
ability to sense tool/tissue interaction forces, which motivates
research in methods to estimate these forces from other avail-
able measurements, primarily joint torques. These methods
require the internal joint torques, due to the robot inverse
dynamics, to be subtracted from the measured joint torques.
This paper presents the use of neural networks to estimate the
inverse dynamics of the da Vinci surgical robot, which enables
estimationoftheexternalenvironmentforces.Experimentswith
motionsinfreespacedemonstratethattheneuralnetworkscan
estimatetheinternaljointtorqueswithin10%normalizedroot-
mean-square error (NRMSE), which outperforms model-based
approachesintheliterature.Comparisonwithanexternalforce
sensor shows that the method is able to estimate environment
(a) (b)
forces within about 10% NRMSE.
Fig. 1: The da Vinci Research Kit: (a) Master Tool Manip-
I. INTRODUCTION
ulator (MTM) (b) Patient Side Manipulator (PSM)
Laparoscopic surgery brought the beneﬁts of minimally
sterilization. Installing a force sensor in the non-sterile part
invasive surgery to patients. At the same time, it created
of the robot (i.e., above the instrument) is also challenging
challenges for surgeons who had to operate with long,
because it would require good force estimation algorithms
straight instruments through small incisions while viewing
that account for the highly nonlinear cable-driven design of
images of the internal anatomy captured by a laparoscope
theinstruments.Therearealsopracticaldifﬁcultiesinimple-
inserted through another small incision. Robotic assistance
menting and testing solutions because commercial systems
was introduced to solve both the loss of dexterity and poor
such as the da Vinci do not allow researchers to directly
hand/eye coordination encountered in laparoscopic surgery.
(cid:13) control the robot arms. Fortunately, the widespread adoption
For example, the da VinciR Surgical System (Intuitive
of open research platforms such as the da Vinci Research
Surgical Inc., CA) provides wristed instruments on the Pa-
Kit (dVRK) [2], Fig.1, and the Raven II robot [3] enables
tient Side Manipulators (PSMs) that are teleoperated by the
researchers to implement and test different controllers, and
surgeon via the Master Tool Manipulators (MTMs), while
ultimately to share working solutions with the community.
viewing stereo images from a stereo laparoscopic camera.
These advantages came at a cost, however, which was that This paper presents a neural network (NN) approach to
the surgeon completely lost the sense of touch [1]. This had estimate the inverse dynamics of the da Vinci PSM. The
already been compromised by the shift from open surgery, neural network canbe used to control thePSM, for example
where the surgeon’s hands could directly palpate tissue, to to implement a computed torque controller, but the focus of
laparoscopic surgery, where forces were transmitted to the thispaperistoestimatetheexternaltorques/forcesactingon
surgeon’s hands via the instruments. Experienced robotic the joints by subtracting the internal torques/forces (neural
surgeons learned to estimate forces through other cues, such network outputs) from the measured torques. The method is
as the tautness of suture or the discoloration of tissue being implemented and tested on the dVRK.
stretched, but it is widely believed that surgical performance
would be improved by the addition of haptic feedback. II. RELATEDWORK
There are several challenges to achieving haptic feedback
Thelackofhapticfeedbackintelesurgicalsystemshasled
inatelesurgicalsystem.First,itisdifﬁculttointegrateforce
to a signiﬁcant amount of research. Some of this research
sensors on the instrument tips, especially considering that
has focused on developing miniaturized sensors that can
the instrument must survive several cycles of cleaning and
be mounted on instrument tips. Researchers at DLR have
developed a small 6-axis force sensor placed at the tip of
N. Yilmaz and U. Tumerdem are with the Department of Mechanical
Engineering,MarmaraUniversity,Istanbul,34722,Turkey the MIRO surgical robot [4]. Capacitive sensors that can
(e-mail:nural.yilmaz@marun.edu.tr;ugur.tumerdem@marmara.edu.tr) be placed inside the forceps jaws of the Raven II surgical
J.Y.WuandP.KazanzidesarewiththeDepartmentofComputerScience,
systems have been proposed in [5]. Strain gauges can also
JohnsHopkinsUniversity,Baltimore,MD21218,USA
(e-mail:jieying@jhu.edu;pkaz@jhu.edu) beprintedontopofthedaVincitooltipasdescribedin[6].
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1387
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:01:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. However, these approaches that require modiﬁcations to the neural network has been trained for the robot, and training
instrumentstructurealsoposelimitationsonthefunctionality has been performed with a random persistent excitation
and may not be applicable under all operational settings. trajectory.
In order to obtain force measurements without addi- In the proposed method, identiﬁcation is performed with
tional sensors, force estimation methods can be used. Such the operator in the loop: as the operator controls the slave
approaches have been investigated starting with the ﬁrst in the workspace of the robot, dynamic identiﬁcation is per-
surgical robot prototypes like the Black Falcon [7]. One formedwithoutaneedforanautomatedexcitationtrajectory.
of the issues observed in the early attempts has been the This also helps reduce the discrepancy between the surgical
transmission of robot coupling/internal dynamic forces to workspace and the excitation trajectory. Furthermore, the
the operators in free motion. To solve this issue, in [8], a method is ﬂexible as it can also provide a basis for deep
Coulomb friction compensator was proposed to improve the neural networks that can be trained with data from different
forceestimationresultsonacustomizeddaVincipatientside operations/instruments/surgeons.
manipulator. In [9], a cable tension estimator was developed
Yet another approach is the use of deep learning to
to eliminate the effects of cable elasticity in the Raven
estimate external forces by training a deep neural network
II system. In [10], a sliding mode perturbation observer
using system state measurements from the robot such as
was developed for the estimation of grasping force on a
currentandpositionasthenetworkinputsandexternalsensor
customized da Vinci gripper.
measurements as the training data. Such a setup has been
To overcome problems with cable-tendon driven surgical used in [21] using an external force sensor, to estimate the
manipulators, different actuator/transmission systems and grasping forces on a custom da Vinci gripper. However, the
force estimation schemes have also been developed, such proposed approach is fundamentally different from this ap-
as a pneumatic forceps mechanism and pressure based force proachbecauseitdoesnotrequireaforcesensorfortraining.
estimation method [11], a rigid rod driven mechanism with In [22], interaction forces are estimated using deep neural
strain gauges on the shafts for force estimation [12], and networks and external camera images as the inputs with a
a rigid transmission system with load cell based estimation force sensor used to provide the ground truth. Our approach
[13]. In [14][15], a disturbance observer and neural network makes use of the fact that the fundamental relationship
based inverse dynamics was utilized to estimate external between external forces and joint currents/torques is well
forces on a rigid link driven robotic forceps prototype. known and this can be exploited to obtain accurate external
forceestimatesfromjointtorqueandpositionmeasurements
With the development of the da Vinci Research Kit
without the use of external sensors for ground truth.
(dVRK), many research groups have started developing dy-
namic identiﬁcation and external force estimation methods
III. INVERSEDYNAMICSIDENTIFICATIONAND
for the da Vinci systems. In [16], an explicit physics-based
EXTERNALFORCEESTIMATION
dynamic model of the dVRK PSM was developed and
parameters of this model were identiﬁed together with the The force estimation method proposed in this paper is
free motion torques to estimate external forces under quasi- composed of two parts. First, identiﬁcation of the inverse
static external loading. In [17], an LMI method was utilized dynamic model of a dVRK PSM is performed by training
fordynamicparameterandjointtorqueidentiﬁcationofboth a set of neural networks, as the robot is telemanipulated in
the MTMs and PSMs without external force estimation. In free motion by an operator in the loop. Once the inverse
[18], a linearized model of the PSMs was obtained and the dynamics is obtained, the identiﬁed dynamic torques are
parameters were identiﬁed with least squares optimization. ﬁlteredoutfromthejointtorquemeasurementsandusingthe
External forces/torques were also estimated by ﬁltering out robotJacobian,externalforcesexertedontheendeffectorof
the free motion torques. In [19], an open source convex the robot can be estimated. First, the neural network based
optimizationbasedtoolboxwasproposedfordynamicmodel dynamic identiﬁcation method is explained.
identiﬁcation of the dVRK. All of these approaches assume
an explicit dynamic model for the system and attempt to A. Neural Network-based Dynamic Identiﬁcation of the
identify the parameters of the respective models with the dVRK PSM
robot following an automated optimal excitation trajectory.
The dynamic model of a dVRK PSM can be described by
In this work, we are following a similar approach with a
the joint space equation:
key difference: the inverse joint space dynamics is identiﬁed
by black box models in the form of neural networks for M(q)q¨+C(q,q˙)+G(q)+F(q˙)+τ =τ (1)
int
each joint, whose complexity can be increased and updated
where q, q˙ and q¨ represent the joint position, velocity and
to adapt to various operating conditions. This approach can
accelerationvectors,M,C andGdenotemass/inertiamatrix,
alsohelpreducetheﬁttingerrorsintheexplicitmodel-based
Coriolis and centrifugal force/torque and gravity vectors, F
approaches. A similar neural network based approach has
representsthefrictionforce/torquevector,τ istheinternal
been proposed in [20] for a 3-DOF Planar Twin-Pantograph int
force/torque vector representing the uncertain internal forces
haptic interface. However, unlike our approach, a single
in the robot and τ denotes the actuator force/torque vector,
1388
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:01:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 4: Ofﬂine training of each neural network
Here, each neural network has input measurements from
Fig. 2: Neural network for inverse dynamics identiﬁcation alltherobotjoints,buttheoutputisthetorque/forceestimate
for the respective joint. Thus each joint’s identiﬁcation error
respectively. Since the dVRK utilizes tendon-driven mecha- is used to train the respective neural network, and this
nismsforbothmotionandforcetransmission,itisdifﬁcultto provides better performance than a single neural network
identify the dynamic model accurately due to the uncertain with multiple outputs where different scales of the mea-
system parameters, friction, elongation and elasticity. As a surements becomes an issue. The NN learning process is
result, the dynamic terms in (1) are not exactly known, achieved by back-propagation and Bayesian Regularization.
however a lumped model can be deﬁned to provide the sum Thisapproachhasbeenselectedfortrainingasitcanprovide
of these effects: good generalization for difﬁcult and noisy datasets [23]. In
the multilayer network structure, the tan-sigmoid transfer
τˆ =H(q,q˙) (2)
dyn
function (tansig) and linear transfer function (purelin) have
where q and q˙ are the model inputs, H is the lumped been used for the hidden and output layers, respectively.
internal dynamics model of the robot and τˆ is the inverse Initial weight and bias values were selected randomly and
dyn
dynamics torque estimate. then updated according to adaptive weight minimization
(regularization) with the chosen algorithm.
The crux of the proposal in this paper is to obtain H,
and to identify the lumped robot dynamics, with a set of Fortraining,theposition,velocityandtorquedata,q,q˙and
neural networks. A neural network can be used as a black τ, are recorded as the dVRK is unilaterally teleoperated by
boxmodeltoapproximatethenonlinearrelationshipbetween an operator providing different poses and velocities via the
robot joint states (position, velocity) and the joint torques MTM. The training dataset contains about 415,000 samples.
withouttheneedforanexplicitrobotmodel.Inthispaper,we In Fig. 3, the x and y axes present velocity and position
are trying to approximate this function without acceleration measurements, respectively, and the color scale shows the
measurements, as these measurements can be quite noisy, measured force/torque acting on the actuators. As the robot
however they can also be used if good measurements are moves in free motion, the external force exerted on the
available. Also, in this paper, a separate neural network is robot is known to be zero, which means that the measured
utilized for each joint, with a total of 6 neural networks for joint torques are purely due to inverse dynamics. The error
the combined manipulator (excluding the gripper axis), and variable to be minimized by the networks is the difference
each neural network (see Fig. 2) includes: between the neural network estimate and the measured
torques in free motion so that the neural network can be
• One input layer with 12 neurons for the position and
trained to estimate the joint torque due to inverse dynamics
velocity measurements of each joint
in free motion. The optimal weights to minimize the error
• One hidden layer with 100 neurons
are found through back propagation, as shown in Fig. 4. In
• One output layer with 1 neuron representing the indi-
this paper, training was performed ofﬂine, but it could be
vidual predicted actuator torque
performed online with adaptive neural networks [24].
B. External Force Estimation
When there is an external force/torque applied to the end
effectorofasurgicalrobot,thegeneralizeddynamicequation
in joint space is:
M(q)q¨+C(q,q˙)+G(q)+F(q˙)+τ +τ =τ (3)
int ext
where τ is the external force/torque vector acting on each
ext
joint. The external force/torque can be calculated by sub-
tractingtheinversedynamicstorqueestimatedbythetrained
neural network, τˆ deﬁned in (2), from the measured
dyn
Fig. 3: The relation between joint states (x and y axes) and actuator force/torque τ:
actuator force/torque (color scale) during training operation −
τˆ =τ τˆ (4)
ext dyn
1389
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:01:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ∗
TABLE I: Error values (NRMSE or RelE+) of joint force
(f) or torque (τ) in free-motion for proposed method (PM)
compared to other reported methods
Method τ1 τ2 f3 τ4 τ5 τ6
∗
PM 4.37 3.51 4.99 4.70 6.28 6.80
∗
[18] 5.92 5.78 18.84 10.41 16.84 22.96
∗
SNN 13.88 10.87 14.64 13.57 19.92 20.50
PM+ 18.40 11.19 13.95 12.10 21.23 22.39
[17]+ 22.07 31.55 29.55 11.93 35.10 45.30
Fig. 5: External force estimation with the trained network [19]+ 9.30 17.80 19.10 13.40 23.90 21.30
Utilizing the Jacobian matrix of the robot (J) and the Here,N isthenumberofsamplesinthetimeseriesdatafrom
external joint torques/forces, the external force acting on the the experiments, y is the vector of reference force/torque, yˆ
tool-tip in Cartesian space (see Fig. 5), can be estimated as: is the vector of estimated force/torque of y, and y(n) and
yˆ(n) are the nth samples of y and yˆ, respectively.
−
Fˆ =J Tτˆ (5)
ext ext However,in[17]and[19],theidentiﬁcationperformances
This estimate can then be compared with an external force wereevaluatedbycalculating(cid:118)relativepredictionerrorbythe
(cid:117)(cid:80)
sensor for validation, as described in the next section. following formula: (cid:117)
(cid:116)
(cid:80)
(cid:107) − (cid:107) −
IV. EXPERIMENTSANDRESULTS y yˆ N [yˆ(n) y(n)]2
RelE+ = i(cid:107) (cid:107)i 2 = n=1 i (7)
This section describes the experiments conducted to val- i yi 2 N [y(n)]2
n=1 i
idate the inverse dynamics identiﬁcation and external force
Inthispaper,bothformulashavebeenusedtomakecompar-
estimation. Also, a set of palpation experiments, performed
isons with the results in the mentioned papers. In this paper,
on different phantom surfaces, for stiffness differentiation
errors with superscript + are computed using the relative
are provided as a case study. In the experiments, the da ∗
prediction error (7), and those with the superscript are
Vinci PSM was unilaterally teleoperated by a human op-
calculated using the NRMSE (6).
erator with an MTM and all the identiﬁcation/estimation
results were performed ofﬂine with post-processing. In the
A. Validation of Dynamic Identiﬁcation
experiments, the dVRK communicates with the computer
through FireWire and the data is captured at 1 kHz. Figure
Intheﬁrstexperiment,theneuralnetworkoutputsandthe
6 shows a block diagram of the dVRK controller hardware;
measuredinversedynamicsforces/torquesfromtheactuators
a more detailed description of the system can be found in
infreemotionarecompared.Forthisexperiment,atestdata
[2]. The updated velocity estimation algorithm from [25]
set was collected separately from the training set with the
was used. The torque measurement τ is obtained by the operator unilaterally controlling the robot in free motion for
multiplication of the measured current values with motor
both datasets. It can be seen in Fig. 7 that the measured
torque/force constants. The data is published as ROS topics
force/torque and estimated force/torque by the neural net-
and is recorded as rosbags for ofﬂine processing on Matlab
work are very close and dynamic identiﬁcation is realized
Simulink. To evaluate the performance of the estimation
accurately on each joint with NRMSE of less than 10%, as
method, the normalized root mean square errors (NRMSE)
shown in Table I. Table I also shows the comparison of the
betweentheactualandes(cid:113)timatedforces/torquescanbefound
(cid:80) errors with the proposed method (PM) to results in various
using the formula given in [18]:
papersusingthepreviouslymentionedmetrics.Also,toserve
− asareference,asingleneuralnetwork(SNN),similarto[20],
NRMSE∗ = N1 Nn=1[−yˆ(n) y(n)]2i (6) has been trained using the Levenberg-Marquardt method,
i (y y ) with 12 inputs (joint variables) and 6 outputs (torques) and
max min i
100 hidden neurons. It can be seen that the results obtained
Control PC One channel of Quad Linear Amplifier (QLA) with the proposed method are generally better than the prior
IEEE 1394  (FireWire)
results in the literature, and the use of neural networks for
commanded  +
IEEE 1394 current POopw Aemr p each joint provides an improvement over the SNN.
PHY -
Motor
SPI
buffer DAC B. Validation of External Force Estimation
Power  Sense 
buffer SPI ADC mcueraresnutred  - Op Amp Resistor
Thesecondexperimentwasconductedtovalidatetheforce
FPGA Bessel Filter  Diff. 
(60 Hz) Amplifier estimation in the Cartesian X, Y and Z axes using a force
position quadrature Differential  Enc sensor. A Gamma F/T Sensor (ATI Industrial Automation,
velocity Receiver Apex, NC, USA) was ﬁxed to a platform so as to have the
sameframeorientationasthedVRKbase.Also,a3Dprinted
Fig. 6: dVRK controller hardware for one channel
apparatus with square holes was mounted to the top of the
1390
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:01:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 7: Joint torque identiﬁcation results
C. Stiffness Identiﬁcation
To demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed method for
clinicalpurposes,apalpationcasestudywasalsoperformed.
The goal was to differentiate the relative stiffness values of
three different phantoms by touching 7 random points on
each phantom, as shown in Fig. 10. The phantom in Fig.
10(a) has the lowest stiffness and the phantom in Fig. 10(c)
has the highest stiffness. During the experiments, force and
position data were recorded, external forces were estimated
with the proposed algorithm and these were plotted with
Fig. 8: Test setup used in validation experiments. Contact in
respect to changes in tool position, as shown in Fig. 11.
(a) X-axis, (b) Y-axis, (c) Z-axis
Stiffnesscanbedeterminedfromtheslopeoftheseplots.As
theexactstiffnessvaluesofthephantomswerenotavailable,
sensor for the purpose of touching in each axis separately, the same calculation was performed with the measurements
as illustrated in Fig. 8. Figure 9 shows the comparison of from the force sensor placed under the phantoms. Table III
measured forces and estimated forces when the end effector shows consistent estimates of the average stiffness for each
is in contact with the sensor, with results summarized in phantom by the proposed method (PM) and force sensor
Table II. When there is contact with the sensor, it can be (FT). This result shows that the proposed method can be
observedthatestimationresultsofeachaxisareinagreement useful in applications such as tissue differentiation which
with the force sensor outputs with less than 10% error in could be of practical use to surgeons.
each axis. However, the fact that the robot was not always
D. Discussion
indirectcontactwiththesensor,butratherwithanapparatus
that was mounted on top of the sensor, and had contact at
Whencomparedwithexistingidentiﬁcationandestimation
locations other than the tip, may account for some of the
results in the literature on the dVRK, the method in its
errors observed. Table II also compares the force estimation
current form has comparable or better error rates. However,
errors obtained in this experiment with the results provided
the main advantage of the proposal is the learning nature
in [18], which is the only cited paper that uses a similar
of the identiﬁcation method and it can be improved with
dVRKsetupandhasperformeddynamiccontactwithaforce
moredatasetsandtraining.Itisalsoversatilewhencompared
sensor for validation of force estimates. While the exact
with other identiﬁcation/estimation methods. In the current
experiment setup cannot be replicated, it can be seen that
implementation, training, identiﬁcation and estimation have
the performance of the proposed approach is comparable.
beenperformedoff-line,butthisispurelyanimplementation
issue. Even if the neural network is trained ofﬂine, it can be
TABLE II: Normalized RMS error values (NRMSE) of
used in a real-time application. Also, it should be possible
Cartesian force (F) in contact and free-motion to implement an adaptive neural network to enable real-time
Method Fx Fy Fz training.Thiswouldmeanthattrainingcanbeperformedby
PM∗ 6.80 9.86 4.45 the surgeon/operator as the method does not require an op-
∗
[18] 8.26 5.96 6.10 timal excitation trajectory, given that sufﬁcient excitation is
1391
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:01:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) Cartesian X-axis Force (b) Y-axis Force (c) Z-axis Force
Fig. 9: Validation of external force estimation
TABLE III: Estimated stiffness values for each phantom
using proposed method (PM) and force/torque sensor (FT)
Phantom#1 Phantom#2 Phantom#3
PM FT PM FT PM FT
Method
(N/m) (N/m) (N/m) (N/m) (N/m) (N/m)
(a) (b) (c) P1 237.74 238.84 499.23 388.64 738.11 799.08
P2 255.22 225.13 556.89 530.37 690.36 818.21
Fig.10:Experimentsetupsutilizedinstiffnessdetermination:
P3 281.45 249.96 525.62 517.47 857.74 806.83
(a) Phantom #1, (b) Phantom #2, (c) Phantom #3 P4 216.06 260.33 456.74 489.32 714.23 856.99
P5 243.78 252.18 479.41 533.21 759.9 806.04
P6 268.47 219.14 499.17 501.38 697.89 856.78
P7 224.03 245.26 465.45 522.67 761.48 807.65
Avg(K) 246.68 241.55 497.50 497.58 745.67 821.65
the surgical operation for identiﬁcation and elimination of
trocar interaction forces. Another limitation of the current
implementation is that the training workspace did not cover
the whole robot workspace, but this can be corrected by
combiningdatafrommultipletrainingsets.Furthermore,the
method can be augmented by the use of deep learning as
extensive amounts of data are being gathered from different
dVRK and da Vinci setups around the world. Finally, we
have provided force estimates from the tip on three axes,
but this was due to limitations in the experiment setup. A
mounting apparatus for the force/torque sensor and a grip
force sensor is required, but the proposed method is capable
of handling estimation in these axes as well.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed a neural network based inverse dynamics
identiﬁcation method for the da Vinci patient side manip-
Fig. 11: Stiffness differentiation results of: (a) Phantom #1, ulators and, using this identiﬁcation method, we obtain a
(b) Phantom #2, (c) Phantom #3 simple and robust way to ﬁlter out the dynamic components
from the joint torque measurements for the estimation of
provided by the human operator. The presented experiments the external forces. The method does not require a ground
wereperformedonasinglePSMwithasingleinstrument,so truth sensor and is easy to implement. With experiments,
it is possible that real-time training updates may be required we have demonstrated that both the identiﬁcation and ex-
when applying the neural network to different PSMs and ternal force estimation methods have results comparable to,
instruments. Also, during a surgical operation, robot dynam- or better than, similar methods used on the dVRK. The
ics is subject to changes as the robot is coupled with the method can be improved with more training and real-time
environment at various contact points, including the trocar. implementation. Different neural network architectures can
Therefore, a lumped black box approach that can achieve also be implemented for better performance.
real-timeidentiﬁcationwouldbemorerobustcomparedwith
explicit model based approaches which could suffer from ACKNOWLEDGMENT
model uncertainties due to interaction with the environment.
One possible application of the proposed method would be Anton Deguet assisted with the experimental setup. The
to enable surgeons to perform identiﬁcation before/during da Vinci Research Kit is supported by NSF NRI 1637789.
1392
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:01:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES theestimationofinteractionwrench,”inInternationalSymposiumon
MedicalRobotics(ISMR). IEEE,Apr,pp.1–7.
[19] Y.Wang,R.Gondokaryono,A.Munawar,andG.S.Fischer,“Aconvex
[1] A.M.Okamura,“Methodsforhapticfeedbackinteleoperatedrobot-
optimization-based dynamic model identiﬁcation package for the da
assisted surgery.” The Industrial Robot, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 499–508,
VinciResearchKit,”RoboticsandAutomationLetters,pp.3657–3664,
Dec2004.
2019.
[2] P.Kazanzides,Z.Chen,A.Deguet,G.S.Fischer,R.H.Taylor,and
[20] A. C. Smith, F. Mobasser, and K. Hashtrudi-Zaad, “Neural-network-
S.P.DiMaio,“Anopen-sourceresearchkitforthedaVincisurgical
basedcontactforceobserversforhapticapplications,”IEEETransac-
system,” in Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Auto. Hong Kong, China:
tionsonRobotics,vol.22,no.6,pp.1163–1175,2006.
IEEE,2014,pp.6434–6439.
[21] J.J.O’Neill,T.K.Stephens,andT.M.Kowalewski,“Evaluationof
[3] B. Hannaford, J. Rosen, D. Friedman, H. King, P. Roan, L. Cheng,
torquemeasurementsurrogatesasappliedtogriptorqueandjawangle
D.Glozman,J.Ma,S.N.Kosari,andL.White,“Raven-II:Anopen
estimationofroboticsurgicaltools,”RoboticsandAutomationLetters,
platform for surgical robotics research,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical
vol.3,no.4,p.3027,2018.
Engin.,vol.60,no.4,pp.954–959,Apr2013.
[22] A. Marban, V. Srinivasan, W. Samek, J. Fernandez, and A. Casals,
[4] U.Hagn,R.Konietschke,A.Tobergte,M.Nickl,S.Jo¨rg,B.Ku¨bler, “Estimation of interaction forces in robotic surgery using a semi-
G. Passig, M. Gro¨ger, F. Fro¨hlich, U. Seibold, L. Le-Tien, A. Albu- supervised deep neural network model,” in Intl. Conf. on Intelligent
Scha¨ffer,A.Nothhelfer,F.Hacker,M.Grebenstein,andG.Hirzinger, RobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,Oct2018,pp.761–768.
“DLR MiroSurge: a versatile system for research in endoscopic [23] D.J.C.MacKay,“BayesianInterpolation,”NeuralComputation,1992.
telesurgery,” International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology [24] B. Widrow and M. A. Lehr, “Adaptive neural networks and their
andSurgery,vol.5,no.2,pp.183–193,Mar2010. applications,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems, vol. 8,
[5] U.Kim,D.-H.Lee,W.J.Yoon,B.Hannaford,andH.R.Choi,“Force no.4,pp.453–507,1993.
sensor integrated surgical forceps for minimally invasive robotic [25] J. Y. Wu, Z. Chen, A. Deguet, and P. Kazanzides, “FPGA-based
surgery,” Transactions on Robotics, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1214–1224, velocityestimationforcontrolofrobotswithlow-resolutionencoders,”
Oct2015. inIntl.Conf.onIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,Oct
[6] R. Pena, M. J. Smith, N. P. Ontiveros, F. L. Hammond, and R. J. 2018,pp.6384–6389.
Wood,“PrintingstraingaugesonIntuitiveSurgicaldaVincirobotend
effectors,” in Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE,
Oct2018,pp.806–812.
[7] A. Madhani, G. Niemeyer, and J. Salisbury, “The Black Falcon: a
teleoperated surgical instrument for minimally invasive surgery,” in
Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol. 2. IEEE, 1998,
pp.936–944.
[8] M. Mahvash, J. Gwilliam, R. Agarwal, B. Vagvolgyi, L.-M. Su,
D.D.Yuh,andA.M.Okamura,“Force-feedbacksurgicalteleoperator:
Controllerdesignandpalpationexperiments,”inSymposiumonHaptic
InterfacesforVirtualEnvironmentandTeleoperatorSystems. IEEE,
Mar2008,pp.465–471.
[9] M.Haghighipanah,M.Miyasaka,andB.Hannaford,“Utilizingelastic-
ityofcable-drivensurgicalrobottoestimatecabletensionandexternal
force,”RoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.2,no.3,pp.1593–1600,
Jul2017.
[10] M.C.Lee,C.Y.Kim,B.Yao,W.J.Peine,andY.E.Song,“Reaction
force estimation of surgical robot instrument using perturbation ob-
serverwithSMCSPOalgorithm,”inIntl.Conf.onAdvancedIntelligent
Mechatronics. IEEE,Jul2010,pp.181–186.
[11] K.TadanoandK.Kawashima,“Developmentof4-DOFsforcepswith
forcesensingusingpneumaticservosystem,”inIntl.Conf.onRobotics
andAuto. IEEE,2014,pp.2250–2255.
[12] H.Takahashi,S.Warisawa,M.Mitsuishi,J.Arata,andM.Hashizume,
“DevelopmentofHighDexterityMinimallyInvasiveSurgicalSystem
withAugmentedForceFeedbackCapability,”inIntl.Conf.onBiomed-
icalRoboticsandBiomechatronics. IEEE,2006,pp.284–289.
[13] C. A. Seneci, K. Leibrandt, P. Wisanuvej, J. Shang, A. Darzi, and
G.-Z. Yang, “Design of a smart 3D-printed wristed robotic surgical
instrumentwithembeddedforcesensingandmodularity,”inIntl.Conf.
onIntelligentRobotsandSystems. IEEE,Oct2016,pp.3677–3683.
[14] N. Yilmaz, M. Bazman, and U. Tumerdem, “External force/torque
estimation on a dexterous parallel robotic surgical instrument wrist,”
in Intl. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE, Oct 2018, pp.
4396–4403.
[15] N. Yilmaz, M. Bazman, A. Alassi, B. Gur, and U. Tumerdem, “6-
axis hybrid sensing and estimation of tip forces/torques on a hyper-
redundant robotic surgical instrument,” in IEEE/RSJ International
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2019,
pp.2990–2997.
[16] H.Sang,J.Yun,R.Monfaredi,E.Wilson,H.Fooladi,andK.Cleary,
“Externalforceestimationandimplementationinroboticallyassisted
minimally invasive surgery,” The International Journal of Medical
Robotics and Computer Assisted Surgery, vol. 13, no. 2, p. e1824,
Jun2017.
[17] G.A.Fontanelli,F.Ficuciello,L.Villani,andB.Siciliano,“Modelling
and identiﬁcation of the da Vinci Research Kit robotic arms,” Intl.
Conf.onIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),pp.1464–1469,2017.
[18] F.Pique,M.N.Boushaki,M.Brancadoro,E.DeMomi,andA.Men-
ciassi, “Dynamic modeling of the da Vinci Research Kit arm for
1393
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:01:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 