2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Energy-based Safety in Series Elastic Actuation
† †
Wesley Roozing1, , Stefan S. Groothuis , and Stefano Stramigioli1
e
Abstract—This work presents the concept of energy-based Σ Σ
safety for series-elastic actuation. Generic actuation passivity 1 f 2
and safety is treated, deﬁning several energy storage and
power ﬂow properties related to passivity. Safe behaviour is
Fig.1:TwosystemsΣ andΣ connectedbyanenergytransferringpower
not guaranteed by passivity, but can be guaranteed by energy portwithassociateddu1alpowe2rvariablesefforteandﬂowf.
and power limits that adapt the nominal behaviour of an
impedance controller. A discussion on power ﬂows in series-
elastic actuation is presented and an appropriate controller is One way to enforce passivity of an actuated system is the
developed.Experimentalresultsvalidatetheeffectivenessofthe Embedded Energy-Aware Actuation method as presented in
energy-based safety in elastic actuation. the previous work [4], [5]. In this framework, passivity is
enforced at the interface between continuous time dynamics
I. INTRODUCTION
and discrete time control systems: at the actuation, where
With the increased interest in collaborative robots, the
it is exactly determined how much energy is injected into
area of truly safe and stable interaction between humans
a system. This is contrary to other techniques that strive to
and robots has seen signiﬁcant development in the past
dissipate excess energy above the passive energy level, such
years. Many developments have taken place to increase
as the Passivity Observer/Controller (POPC) approach [6],
the level of safety, using various control techniques [1]
[7], energy tank based approaches [8], or methods that
and novel mechanical implementations [2]. All of these
passivate a system using a passive setpoint modulation [9].
show a paradigm shift from rigid high-bandwidth, highly
However, safe behaviour is not guaranteed by passivity.
accurate position controlled systems to compliant and softer
Passivity puts no limit on the total energy content as long as
interaction controlled systems. Series-elastic actuation uses
it was injected at some point, or on the rate of energy ﬂow
a physical elastic element to decouple the motor side from
(power). In general, safety criteria are directly or indirectly
the link side of the actuator or joint. This actuation is able
dependent on energy transfers. In this work, total energy
to store and release energy, having merits in energy efﬁcient
content, passivity, and rate of energy ﬂow (that is, power)
actuation.However,whenenergyisputintheelasticelement
at the interaction port are explicitly controlled.
and no locking mechanism exists to keep the energy stored,
Torque and impedance control of series-elastic actuators
it is immediately released and, thereby, possibly causing
has been discussed thoroughly in literature [10]–[13]. While
undesired behaviour in the intended application.
many algorithms are either passive or passivity-based, most
Inphysicalsystems,thepropertyofpassivityisanenergy-
do not consider safety issues that may arise in spite of pas-
basedmeasureofstability.Itisaspecialcaseofdissipativity,
sivity. The main contribution of this paper is to combine the
as introduced in [3], that arises naturally in physical dynam-
concept of energy-based safety with series elastic actuation,
icalsystems.Intuitivelystated,andconsideringtheenergetic
to ensure passive or strictly dissipative and safe behaviour
connectionoftwosystemΣ andΣ bypowerport(e,f)as
1 2 through modulated impedance control.
showninFig.1,systemΣ issaidtobepassivewithrespect
2 Theremainderofthepaperisstructuredasfollows.Sec.II
to the port (e,f) if the stored energy of Σ is never more
2 elaborates on the properties of passivity and requirements
than what has been added through (e,f) plus the energy
for safety. Sec. III presents the contribution of energy-
initially present in Σ . System Σ can be thought of as an
2 1 awarenessinserieselasticactuators,andexperimentalresults
actuator that delivers power to a mechanism Σ . In general,
2 are presented in Sec. IV. The results and limitations are
existing literature does not explicitly deal with discrete time
discussed in Sec. V and the paper concludes with Sec. VI.
control implementations and their performance implications,
even though it cannot be guaranteed that a stable continuous
time control system remains stable when it is implemented II. GENERICACTUATIONPASSIVITYANDSAFETY
inadiscretetimecomputer.Apassivesystem,however,does General passivity can be mathematically described by
remain stable. considering a system with a (cid:90)storage function V(s(t)):S →
R
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon , in which the state s∈S, such that:
2020researchandinnovationprogrammeundergrantagreementNo.688857
(SoftPro). The content of this publication is the sole responsibility of t1
the authors. The European Commission or its services cannot be held V(s(t1)) ≤ V(s(t0))+ P(σ)dσ ∀t1 ≥t0, (1)
responsibleforanyusethatmaybemadeoftheinformationitcontains. t0
1Robotics and Mechatronics group, University of Twente, The Nether-
lands.Email:{w.roozing,s.stramigioli}@utwente.nl. where P(σ) is a supply function to the system with stored
†Theseauthorshavecontributedequallytothiswork. energy V(s(t)). This is visualized in the generic model of
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 914
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (cid:90)
∂H(s) storing behaviours are mathematically deﬁned by:
eint
∂s
C D (cid:90) t1
H.(.s) s˙ fint Passive: V(s(t1))≤V(s(t0))+ P(σ)dσ
t0
(cid:90) t1
Conservative: V(s(t ))=V(s(t ))+ P(σ)dσ
1 0
econ fcon t0
(cid:16) (cid:17) t1
Dissipative: V(s(t ))<V(s(t ))+ P(σ)dσ
1 0
Fig. 2: Visualization of a generic port-Hamiltonian model, with storage
t0
port ∂H(s),s˙ , control port (econ,fcon) and interaction port (eint,fint). Strictly (cid:90)
∂s R
Nirroetveertshiabtleaedniesrsgipyatdiiosnsippaotriton. with (edis,fdis) can be included to model Dissipative: P(t)≤0 ∀t
t1
Active: V(s(t ))>V(s(t ))+ P(σ)dσ, (2)
1 0
a physical dynamical system in Fig. 2 (in which the time-
t0
dependence notation is dropped), with storage C and associ- for all t >t . Note that the deﬁnition of strictly dissipative
atedHamiltonianstoragefunctionH(s)≡V(s),controlport systems1only0places a constraint on the power ﬂow at a
(econ,fcon)andassociatedsupplyfunctionthatcanbedeﬁned consideredport,anddoesnotdeﬁneaconstraintonthestored
asthedualityproductofefforteconandﬂowfconaccordingto energy.
Pcon := (cid:104)econ,fcon(cid:105). Moreover, an interaction port (eint,fint)
is shown, with corresponding power ﬂow Pint := (cid:104)eint,fint(cid:105). B. Passivity and safety
A natural choice for the storage function V(s(t)) in (1) Although passivity guarantees the stability of a system,
is the total energy in the system. The supply function is
it implies nothing about the safety of the system with
the supplied power through the control port of the system,
respect to itself or the environment. Safe behaviour of a
for example the duality product of mechanical force F and system is often loosely stated as behaviour that causes no
velocity v, i.e., P = (cid:104)F,v(cid:105). Systems that contain only damage to the system itself or to the environment with
passivephysicalelements,e.g.masses,springs,anddampers,
which energy is exchanged, i.e., interaction. A more formal
cannot contain more energy than what was initially present.
rating can be obtained with the deﬁnition of various safety
Consequently, the energy is bounded and thus a system that
criteria, like the Head Injury Criterion, Maximum Power
is overall passive is always stable [14], [15].
Index, and Maximum Mean Strain Injury Criterion. To meet
these criteria, the amount of energy, power, force, and/or
A. Energy storage properties acceleration that is transferred to the environment needs to
be limited [16]. In general, all safety criteria are directly or
Eq. (1) states the condition for a passive system. If indirectlydependentonenergytransfers,makingenergyand
a system can be described such that strictly the equality powerareasonablefocusforsafetyconsiderations[17],[18].
holds, the system is conservative, i.e., non-dissipative. This Safe behaviour of a robot has been treated in [19], where
means that exactly all supplied energy is stored, and none itwasproposedthatwhenunwantedenergyinanimpedance
is dissipated. A dissipative system always stores less energy controlled system is identiﬁed, the controller drains energy
than was supplied, i.e., only the inequality holds in (1). If a by being more compliant and when unsafe power output is
system is designed to only extract energy from an attached detected, the controller increases the damping on its output.
system through a power port at any time instance, i.e., the Theformerpreventspossiblesuffocatingforcestobeapplied
powerﬂowthroughthatportisnegativeorzero,itisdeﬁned byaroboticsystemtotheenvironment,e.g.,aperson,while
here to be strictly dissipative. Hence, strictly dissipative thelatterpreventsahigh-energy,largemomentummovement
systems cannot supply any energy. These properties deﬁne having the risk of causing a potentially harmful collision.
special cases of passive systems. Safety can also be established at the actuation level of
On the other hand, if (1) does not hold at all, the system a system using an actuation energy budget, as shown in
is deﬁned as being active. Formally, physical systems are previous work [4], [5]. This budget is the amount of energy
always passive, and energy cannot be created or destroyed thatcanbeinjectedbytheactuatorinasystem.Byallocating
according to the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics. An active energy needed for task execution to the budget, safety is
system may arise when certain physical energetic connec- achieved because the amount of energy in the system can be
tions are not present in the mathematical description of the chosentoneverbeoutsideofsafelimits,whilestillallowing
system. In that way, the systems seem to be able to increase enough for task execution.
their stored energy without having exchanged or received This paper proposes to ensure safety by imposing con-
that energy through a considered power port, which can be ditions on the actuation energy storage and output power,
considered the generation of energy. For example, a naive varying it between strictly dissipative and passive depending
controllerimplementationonasystemthatdoesnotconsider on the set safety limits. In the former, energy in a connected
and limit supplied actuation power may render a system systemisonlyeverextracted,meaningthatnoenergycanbe
active and unstable [4]. Similar to (1), the various energy releasedintotherobotandtheenvironmentcausingpotential
915
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. and where elastic element deﬂection ∆=(θ−q). The rate
of change of stored energy is the sum of the power ﬂowing
throughtheports,whichisrepresentedbythedualityproduct
of the collocated output and input port variables y and u:
V˙(s)=(cid:104)y,u(cid:105)=yTu
=τmθ˙−τq˙
Fig.3:Lineardynamicsmodelofseries-elasticactuation.
=Pcon−Pact.
harm. In the latter, energy may be stored up to a safe limit Hence, the change in actuation energy storage is the energy
and only released at a safe rate. supplied via the control port minus the energy released via
the actuation output port.
III. ENERGY-BASEDSAFEELASTICACTUATION 1) Shaping energy exchange: As was shown, the energy
One of the main differences between stiff actuation and ﬂow out of the actuation into the robot is deﬁned by the
elastic actuation is indirect coupling of the control input actuation port (τ,q˙) and its corresponding power Pact =
to the control variable. In stiff actuation the mechanical (cid:104)τ,q˙(cid:105). Thus, shaping the relationship between τ and q˙ im-
forces following control inputs are directly applied to the plies shaping the energy exchange between the two systems.
robot.Hence,thechoiceofcontroleffortdirectlydetermines Consider the following ﬁrst-order impedance relationship:
power ﬂow into the system. Conversely, in elastic actuation
only motor-side states can be directly inﬂuenced, which are τ =τimp :=−Kq−Dq˙, (7)
indirectly coupled to the robot-side states. The consequence with corresponding storage function given by Vimp = 1Kq2.
2
is that the choice of control effort at the motor-side does Taking the derivative and computing Pact = τq˙ using (7)
not directly inﬂuence power ﬂow out of the elastic element yields1:
into the robotdynamics. At a particular pointin time, stored
elastic energy may be injected into the robot, even though V˙imp =Kqq˙ ≤ −Pact =Kqq˙+Dq˙2,
the control power may be negative. forK,D ≥0,whichisasufﬁcientconditionforpassivitycf.
As an example, to provide damping (i.e. negative power) (2). In fact, the actuation port is dissipative for any D >0.
at the output (actuation port), some deﬂection in the elastic However, it is only strictly dissipative ∀ q,q˙ if K = 0 and
element is required, to generate the desired torque. This D ≥ 0, in which case Pact = −Dq˙2 ≤ 0 (cf. (2)), i.e.
may momentarily require positive power at the control port the actuator can only absorb power from the robot. Hence,
to create the required deﬂection, even though power at the realising the torque dynamics τ = τimp above, the system
actuation port is nonpositive. Interestingly, for any nonzero canbemadeeitherpassive,dissipative,orstrictlydissipative
power to be generated at the actuation port, nonzero energy w.r.t. the actuation port by choosing K and D.
must be present in the system in the form of elastic energy. While the desired impedance (7) can theoretically be
realised by control (as will be shown in the next section),
A. Modelling and energy ﬂows
notallrequiredhigher-ordersignalscanbeobtainedexactly,
Consider the linear model of an elastic actuator with load as in practice they need to be approximated by numerical
in Fig. 3, with motor and load inertiae B and M, with methods or estimators. Secondly, aspects such as discrete-
positionsθ andq,respectively,coupledbyanelasticelement time digital control and delays of any realisable system
with stiffness k. The input torque as generated by the motor will reduce performance. Thus, in practice, even control
isdenotedbyτm,andexternalinteractiontorquesaredenoted algorithms that are theoretically passive in continuous time
as τext. Its dynamics are given by: cannot be fully guaranteed to be passive in practice. Hence,
actively monitoring the energy ﬂow out of an actuator into
Bθ¨=τm−k(θ−q), (3) the actuated system is necessary, to take appropriate action
Mq¨=τext+k(θ−q). (4) so that safety can be guaranteed at all times.
The output torque that is applied to the robot is deﬁned as B. Control
τ :=k(θ−q). The dashed vertical lines in Fig. 3 depict the
As discussed above, the goal is to realise the following
control port (econ,fcon):=(τm,θ˙) and actuation output port behaviour:
(eact,fact):=(τ,q˙).Focusingontheactuationsubsystem,its
∗ ∗ ∗
total storage function is given by: τ →τ =K(q −q)+D(q˙ −q˙)+τid, (8)
V(s)= 1Bθ˙2+ 1k∆2, (5) where ∗ denotes reference conﬁgurations and velocities, K
2 (cid:20) (cid:21) 2 and D denote impedance stiffness and damping, and τid
with the state s deﬁned as: denotes a link-side inverse dynamics based term to achieve
s= θ˙ , (6) 1The minus sign stems from the positive direction of Pact to b−e energy
∆ ﬂowoutoftheactuator,henceenergysuppliedtotheactuatoris Pact.
916
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 2) Rendering intrinsic stiffness: Consider a truly elastic
actuator, that is, one with a physical stiffness close to what
should be rendered at the output. In such a case it is useful
torendertheactuator’sintrinsicstiffnessexactly,i.e.K =k.
The motor-side coordinate θ then simpliﬁes to
∗ − ∗
θ =q +k 1(De˙ +Mq¨ ), (13)
q
−
which is equal to θ = −k 1Dq˙ in the regulation case
∗ ∗ ∗
q¨ ≡ q˙ ≡ q ≡ 0. The motor position is only adjusted to
produce the desired link-side damping, as the desired link-
(cid:16) (cid:17)
side stiffness is already produced by the physical stiffness.
The feed-forward terms reduce to
− ∗
τff =k(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)1(cid:125)B (cid:124)De(q3)+(cid:123)M(cid:122) q(4) (cid:125)+
∗ ∗
Bq¨ +ke +De˙ +Mq¨ , (14)
q q
θ¨=q¨∗ τ∗
which for the regul(cid:124)ation c(cid:123)a(cid:122)se is e(cid:125)q(cid:124)ual t(cid:123)o(cid:122) (cid:125)
Fig.4:Cascadedimpedanceandforcecontrolwithfeed-forwardterms.
−
∗ τff =−k 1BDq(3)−Dq˙−kq. (15)
exact link-side tracking, given by τid =Mq¨ in the consid- ∗
ered case. Notice that (8) is equal to (7) for the regulation Bθ¨ τ
∗ ∗ ∗ where the ﬁrst term can be recognised as motor acceleration
case q ≡ q˙ ≡ q¨ ≡ 0, fulﬁlling the earlier conditions for
feed-forward given the desired motor-side coordinate above,
passivity and (strict) dissipativity at the port (τ,q˙).
and the second term compensates for spring force. Hence,
1) Torque feedback and feed-forward terms: Suppose a
torque control law of the form: choosing K = k simpliﬁes required motor dynamics as
well as control terms. This choice also demonstrates how
∗ ∗
τm =Kp(τ −τ)+Kd(τ˙ −τ˙)+τff, (9) the central design idea in [12] is effectively a special case
where τff denotes feed-forward terms. The resulting control of the conventional cascaded impedance control scheme4
structure is shown in Fig. 4, constituting a well-known cas- with K = k. Notice that compared to (11), (14) does not
caded control scheme augmented with feed-forward terms. depend on q¨. The earlier mentioned work [12] neglected the
Toobtainthefeed-forwardterms,werecallk(θ−q)=:τ, remaining q(3) term, seemingly without signiﬁcant loss in
set τ =τ∗, and solve for(cid:124)the motor(cid:123)-(cid:122)side coord(cid:125)inate θ: performance.
− ∗
θ =q+k 1(Ke +De˙ +Mq¨ ), (10) C. Energy-based impedance modulation for safety
q q
The strategy for ensuring safety, as discussed in Sec. III-
∗
τ
where e = q∗ − q(cid:16)denotes the link-side tra(cid:17)cking error. A, relies on modulation of rendered impedance parameters
Substitutqing into (3) and solving for τm, we obtain K and D that allow to vary the system between passive
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) and strictly dissipative. The technique proposed in [19] is
− ∗
τff =k 1B Ke¨q+De(q3)+Mq(4) + employed, with some minor modiﬁcations.
1) Limiting energy storage: The energy stored in the
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) ∗ (cid:125)
τ¨ ∗ controlledactuationsystemisdeﬁnedbythevirtualpotential
Bq¨+Keq+De˙q+Mq¨ . (11) energy in the impedance stiffness:
∗
Lastly, substituθt¨i=nq¨g (8), (9), anτd (11) into (4) leads to the Ep = 12Kq2. (16)
∗
followinglink-sidedynamics,expressedinthetrackingerror whereq ≡0wasassumedwithoutlossofgenerality.Hence,
dynamics: modulation of K ca(cid:40)n be utilised to limit the stored virtual
Me¨q+De˙q+Keq =τext, (12) energybelowamaximumEp ≤Epmax.SettingK asfollows:
which for M,D,K >0 and τext =0 has the unique equilib- 2Epmax 1kq2 >Emax
rium e¨ =e˙ =e =0, thus creating an actuator impedance K = q2 2 p (17)
q q q k Otherwise,
as speciﬁed by (7), with the addition of a reference position
∗
input q (t) ∈ C4 and its derivatives2,3, as shown in Fig. reducestheimpedancestiffnessdownfromk asitisbrought
4. However, notice that the feed-forward terms (11) require furtheroutofequilibrium–effectivelyabsorbinganyenergy
measurements of q˙,q¨,q(3). To partially reduce this burden a injected through the actuation port above the threshold of
speciﬁc choice for K can be made. Epmax via the control port.
C
2 k denotesthesetofk timescontinuouslydifferentiablefunctions. 4Including the feed-forward terms (14), however with the exception of
∈C
3Notethatassumingﬁnitecontrolinputs,τext hastobeatleast 1 to thekeq term,leadingtotherenderedstiffnessbeingaseriesconnectionof
ensureﬁniteq(3). thephysicalstiffnessandmotorproportionalgainintheircase.
917
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 2) Limiting output power: Contrary to stored energy, Current Belt
Embedded board ampliﬁer B drive
output power is a function of both impedance parameters K
andD.First,recallPact =−Kq(cid:112)q˙−Dq˙2,withK nowgiven k
by (17). Secondly, deﬁne the nominal impedance damping
D¯ as
D¯ =2Mζ K/M (18) M
where ζ deﬁnes the damping ratio of the load. Notice D¯
Ethernet 48V Motor
decreases(cid:40)with decreasing K given by (17), to maintain the
desired damping ratio. Now, setting D as follows:
Fig. 5: The compliant actuation experimental setup used for testing the
−Kqq˙+Pamctax −Kqq˙−D¯q˙2 >Pmax controllerperformance.
D = q˙2 act , (19)
D¯ Otherwise 4
2
increases D >D¯ if necessary, to ensure Pact ≤Pamctax. 0
3) Choosing safety parameters: From the physical inter-
pretation of a spring-damper for the rendered impedance, -2
it becomes clear that not every combination of Emax and -4
p
Pmax is desirable. Consider TableI, which shows that either 0 2 4 6 8 10
act
both parameters need to be zero for strict dissipativity, or
0.6
both must be positive for passive operation (with limited
0.3
energy storage and output power for ﬁnite values). Other
0
combinationsresultinconﬂictingenergystorageandrelease
requirements. With regards to passive operation, the two -0.3
parameters are not independent: a system with large energy -0.6
storage will generally tend towards high power output, and 0 2 4 6 8 10
forcing small power output requires large and rapid changes
in damping5. Fig.6:Experiment,safetyoff:Positionandtorques.
IV. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS the software implementation the sample rate was set to
A. Experimental setup 200Hz; together with ﬁltering of the encoder signals, this
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, necessitated lowering the nominal stiffness to K = 1k
2
to ensure satisfactory performance. Higher order derivatives
experiments were performed with a compliant actuation
were neglected as the relatively low encoder resolution
setupasshowninFig.5.ItconsistsofaDCmotorconnected
makes numerical approximation infeasible.
toaﬂywheelthroughabeltdrivemechanism,withcombined
ResultswithoutimpedancemodulationareshowninFig.6
inertia B, which drives a load inertia M through a ﬂexible
and 7. In Fig. 6 it can be observed that upon release at
shaft with stiffness k. Because the ﬂexible shaft is consider-
4.5s and 9.7s, the motor inertia ﬁrst moves in the opposite
ably more compliant than the belt drive, parasitic belt drive
direction to generate desired damping torques, after which
compliance is neglected. Optical incremental encoders on
the motor and load allow angular position measurements. both inertiae converge asymptotically (ζ = 1.0) to the
equilibrium position. Up to approx. 0.7J of energy is stored
The motor is driven by a current controlled power ampliﬁer,
due to the large deﬂection, corresponding to a torque of
and control and data acquisition run on an embedded FPGA
approx. 0.66Nm. Upon release of the load this energy is
board. Physical and control parameters are listed in Table II.
released, resulting in a peak actuation power of over 3.3W,
B. Results as shown in Fig. 7. Most of this energy is then re-absorbed
Two experiments were performed, with impedance mod- and dissipated by the actuation to dampen the load in its
ulation switched off and on, respectively. In both cases, equilibrium position.
the load was brought out of its equilibrium position by Next experiments were performed with impedance modu-
approx. ±2rad, and then released. Due to limitations in lation enabled. The safety parameters were set to Epmax =
0.25J and Pmax = 0.25W, respectively, i.e. passive be-
act
5AusefulguidelineappearstobechoosingEpmax andPamctax relativelyas
functionofthetimeconstantofthephysicalspringandloadcombination. TABLEII:Physicalandcontrolparametersoftheexperimentalsetup.
Component Value Unit
TABLEI:Choosingsafetyparameters.
Flexibleshaftstiffnessk 0.551 Nm/rad
Epmax=0 Epmax>0 LoadﬂywheelinertiaM 1.37··10−−3 kgm2
Pamctax=0 Strictlydissipative Undesirable (Energy may Motor+ﬂywheelinertiaB 1.02 10 3 kgm2
bestoredbutnotreleased) Beltdrivespeedreductionratio 60 –
Pamctax>0 Undesirable (No energy is Passive Encoderresolution 201600 counts/rev
stored,butmaybereleased) Controlsamplerate 200 Hz
918
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0.6 0.6
0.4 0.4
0.2 0.2
0 0
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 5 10 15 20
3 3
1.5 1.5
0 0
-1.5 -1.5
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 5 10 15 20
Fig.7:Experiment,safetyoff:Energyandpower. Fig.9:Experiment,safetyon:Energyandpower.
4 0.3
2
0.2
0
-2 0.1
-4
0 5 10 15 20
0
0 5 10 15 20
0.6
0.3 Fig.10:Experiment,safetyon:Impedanceparameters.
0
sample rate and encoder resolution, which are straightfor-
-0.3
ward avenues to increase performance further.
-0.6
The current safety implementation imposes ﬁxed limits
0 5 10 15 20
on energy storage and actuation power. The choice of these
limits at the moment is heuristic and would beneﬁt from
Fig.8:Experiment,safetyon:Positionandtorques.
further future investigation. Furthermore, execution of tasks
may (momentarily) require larger energy content or output
haviour with limits on energy content and actuation power
power. For such situations temporarily increasing the safety
output. The results are shown in Fig. 8–10. In the ﬁrst part,
limitsorimplementingactuationbudgetingmayproveuseful
the load is again brought to approx. ±2rad and released.
further developments to this strategy.
However, the stored energy is limited to 0.25J (Fig. 9),
due to the modulation of impedance stiffness as shown in VI. CONCLUSIONS
Fig. 10. Even when brought to almost ±4rad (from 15s), This paper presented the implementation of energy-based
theenergyis limitedappropriately.Thisis reﬂected inlower
safety in series-elastic actuation. Generic actuation passivity
torques shown in Fig. 8. The actuation power shown in
and safety were treated, deﬁning several energy storage
Fig. 9 shows that the system does not manage to stay within
properties. It was concluded that passivity is not a sufﬁcient
the imposed limit just after release, but converges quickly.
condition for safety, and that limitations on energy content
Thisisattributedtoinsufﬁcientlyaccuratetorquetrackingas
and output power, or even strict dissipativity, are necessary.
the reference changes rapidly. However, the peak of almost
The developed controller for an elastic actuation system
0.6W is a signiﬁcant reduction over the earlier >3.3W showsimpedanceregulatingbehaviourtorealisesafetylimits
without impedance modulation.
basedonenergyandpower.Theexperimentalresultsvalidate
the theoretical foundations of the proposed approach.
V. DISCUSSION
REFERENCES
Although some issues were observed in the experimental
[1] N. Hogan, “Impedance control: An approach to manipula-
results, they validate the effectiveness of the energy-based tion: Part i, part ii, part iii,” ASME Journal of Dynamic
safety concept. While Sec. III-B.1 showed that rendering Systems, Measurement and Control, 1985.
the desired (modulated) impedance in principle requires [2] G.A.PrattandM.Williamson,“Serieselasticactuators,”in
Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
higher order derivatives of system states, the results indicate
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 1995.
that satisfactory performance can be achieved without them.
[3] J. C. Willems, “Dissipative dynamical systems part i: Gen-
Indeed, the system was able to enforce the safety limits to eral theory,” Archive for rational mechanics and analysis,
a large extent. Control performance was mainly limited by vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 321–351, 1972.
919
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [4] G. A. Folkertsma, S. S. Groothuis, and S. Stramigioli,
“Safety and guaranteed stability through embedded energy-
aware actuators,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2018.
[5] S. Groothuis, G. Folkertsma, and S. Stramigioli, “A gen-
eral approach to achieving stability and safe behavior in
distributed robotic architectures,” Frontiers in Robotics and
AI, 2018.
[6] B. Hannaford, “Time-domain passivity control of haptic
interfaces,” IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS AND
AUTOMATION, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 10, 2002.
[7] J.-H. Ryu, C. Preusche, B. Hannaford, and G. Hirzinger,
“Time domain passivity control with reference energy fol-
lowing,”IEEETransactionsonControlSystemsTechnology,
vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 737–742, 2005.
[8] C. Secchi, S. Stramigioli, and C. Fantuzzi, “Position drift
compensation in port-hamiltonian based telemanipulation,”
in 2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, Beijing, China: IEEE, Oct. 2006,
pp. 4211–4216.
[9] D. Lee and K. Huang, “Passive-set-position-modulation
framework for interactive robotic systems,” Robotics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 354–369, 2010.
[10] A. Albu-Schaffer, C. Ott, and G. Hirzinger, “A uniﬁed
passivity-based control framework for position, torque and
impedancecontrolofﬂexiblejointrobots,”TheInternational
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 23–39,
Jan. 1, 2007.
[11] W. Roozing, J. Malzahn, N. Kashiri, D. G. Caldwell, and
N. G. Tsagarakis, “On the stiffness selection for torque-
controlled series-elastic actuators,” IEEE Robotics and Au-
tomation Letters, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 2255–2262, 2017.
[12] M.Keppler, D.Lakatos, C.Ott, A.Albu-Scha¨ffer,and oth-
ers,“Apassivity-basedapproachfortrajectorytrackingand
link-side damping of compliantly actuated robots,” in 2016
IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation
(ICRA), IEEE, 2016, pp. 1079–1086.
[13] A. Calanca, R. Muradore, and P. Fiorini, “A review of al-
gorithmsforcompliantcontrolofstiffandﬁxed-compliance
robots,”IEEE/ASMETransactionsonMechatronics,vol.21,
no. 2, pp. 613–624, 2015.
[14] A. v. d. Schaft, L2-gain and passivity in nonlinear control.
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 1999.
[15] R. Ortega, A. v. d. Schaft, F. Castan˜os, and A. Astolﬁ,
“Control by Interconnection and Standard Passivity-Based
Control of Port-Hamiltonian Systems,” IEEE Trans. Au-
tomat. Contr., vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 2527–2542, 2008.
[16] R. Alami et al., “Safe and dependable physical human-
robot interaction in anthropic domains: State of the art
and challenges,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2006
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, 2006, pp. 1–16.
[17] M.Laffranchi,N.Tsagarakis,andD.Caldwell,“Safehuman
robotinteractionviaenergyregulationcontrol,”inIntelligent
Robots and Systems, 2009. IROS 2009. IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on, 2009, pp. 35–41.
[18] T. Tadele, T. de Vries, and S. Stramigioli, “The safety of
domestic robotics: A survey of various safety-related pub-
lications,” Robotics Automation Magazine, IEEE, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 134–142, 2014.
[19] T.S.Tadele,T.J.deVries,andS.Stramigioli,“Combining
energy and power based safety metrics in controller design
for domestic robots,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2014.
920
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 