 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)  
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Real-time Simulation of Non-Deformable Continuous Tracks  
with Explicit Consideration of Friction and Grouser Geometry 
Yoshito Okada, Shotaro Kojima, Kazunori Ohno, and Satoshi Tadokoro 
  Abstract—In this study, we developed a real-time simulation 
method for non-deformable continuous tracks having grousers 
for rough terrain by explicitly considering the collision and 
friction between the tracks and the ground. In the proposed 
simulation  method,  an  arbitrary  trajectory  of  a  track  is 
represented with multiple linear and circular segments, each of 
which is a link connected to a robot body. The proposed method 
sets velocity constraints between each segment link and the 
robot body, to simulate the track rotation around the body. To 
maintain the shape of a track, it also restores the positions of the 
segment links when required. Experimental comparisons with 
other existing real-time simulation methods demonstrated that 
while the proposed method considered the grousers and the 
 
friction with the ground, it was comparable to them in terms of 
 
the  computational  speed.  Experimental  comparison  of  the 
 
simulations based on the proposed method and a physical robot 
exhibited that the former was comparable to the precise motion  Figure 1.  Design of the proposed method. 
of the robot on rough or uneven terrain. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
the deformation of the tracks, which may be caused by (1) and 
Tracked vehicles have widespread usage and are expected  (2). For non-deformable tracks that are constrained to follow a 
to  be  employed  in  search-and-rescue  operations,  plant  fixed trajectory with respect to the robot body, (1) and (2) are 
inspections,  construction  activities,  and  military  missions,  key to realizing realistic simulations, instead of (3). 
which require high mobility on rough terrain [1]. 
In this study, we developed a real-time simulation method 
Developing  a  tracked  vehicle  involves  training  its  for non-deformable tracks with grousers on rough terrain 
operators or populating the motion data for machine learning  based on the collision and friction between the tracks and the 
and conducting extensive trails on rough terrain. However, it  ground. A track for which the proposed method is developed is 
is nearly unfeasible to establish physical experimental test  illustrated in Fig. 1. In the method, an arbitrary trajectory of a 
environments that cover all the possible scenarios a robot will  track is represented with multiple linear and circular segments, 
encounter in practical missions. In addition, a robot developer  where each trajectory segment is a link consisting of a flat belt 
or trainee has to risk accidental breaking of the robot in its  and arbitrary-shaped grousers. The proposed method was so 
physical tests.  designed for the real-time simulation because it required a few 
links and joints. In the method, velocity constraints were set 
Thus,  performing  simulation  experiments  is  important 
between the track and the robot body to represent the track 
because it allows for assessing a robot prior to conducting 
rotation  around  the robot body. However,  the constraints 
physical tests or complements the physical tests that can 
between the track and the ground were not modified in the 
potentially damage the robot. Hence, the motion of a tracked 
proposed method. Instead, these were deferred to the physics 
vehicle on rough terrain must be simulated with a high degree 
engine in the simulator such that the collisions and the friction 
of accuracy. In addition, the simulation should be conducted in 
between them were explicitly considered by an appropriate 
real time if it is used to train the operators. 
model in the physics engine. 
Realistic simulation of the movement of a tracked vehicle 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec. II 
on rough terrain is based on the interaction between the 
introduces the related work on the real-time simulation of 
continuous  tracks  (including  the  grousers)  and  the 
tracked vehicles. Sec. III provides a detailed description of the 
surface/ground.  This  interaction  is  characterized  by  (1) 
proposed method, including its qualitative comparison to other 
collision detection based on the precise geometries of the 
related  methods.  Sec.  IV  presents  the  evaluation  of  the 
tracks  and  ground  to  generate  the  contact  points,  (2) 
proposed method by  its  quantitative  comparison  to  other 
constraints, including the friction at the contact points, and (3) 
related methods and to the real-life motion of a physical robot. 
  Sec.  V  summarizes  the  conclusions  and  suggests  some 
All the authors are with Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8579, Miyagi,  applications of the method. 
Japan (phone: +81-22-795-7025; e-mail: {okada, kojima, ohno, tadokoro}@ 
rm.is.tohoku.ac.jp). 
Y. Okada and K. Ohno are also with the RIKEN Center for Advanced 
Intelligence Project, Chuo-Ku 103-0027, Tokyo, Japan (e-mail: okada@ 
rm.is.tohoku.ac.jp) 
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 948
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:03:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Constraint-to-ground simulation 
 
links are also known [3–5]. Such methods precisely model 
tracks with grousers and consider the effect of the friction and 
collision with the ground as well as the deformation of the 
tracks. 
  However, realizing the accurate behavior of a track using 
  this method in real time is challenging, as reported in [6], 
Figure 2.  Multiple-wheel simulation  because of the high computational cost required to handle the 
  numerous plate links and hinge joints in the simulated track. 
Moreover, the parameter tuning is also complex, including 
II.  RELATED WORK  that of the inertial parameter of the links, dynamic parameters 
A.  Multiple-Wheel Simulations  (e.g., rotational friction and damping coefficient) of the hinge 
joints, and horizontal tension that acts on the simulated track, 
Simulation methods in which multiple wheels are aligned 
as reported in [4–6]. 
along a track trajectory, as depicted in the upper part of Fig. 2, 
are widely used because they only require cylindrical links and  C. Simulation with Velocity Constraints Applied to the 
revolute joints, which all robot simulators support by default  Ground 
[2]. Because a track is assumed to be comparable to a set of 
This  simulation  method  is  for  non-deformable  tracks 
wheels, the simulation of the collision and friction between a 
without  grousers  involving  modification  of  the  velocity 
track and the ground in physics engines is similar to that of 
constraints applied to the ground [6]. Simulations can be 
general wheels. 
conducted over a shorter time than those of other methods, 
The drawback of a multiple-wheel method is that real-time  because this method represents an entire track as a single link. 
simulations have to be conducted using fewer wheels (e.g.,  The effect of track rotation around the robot body is achieved 
links and joints) than required to ensure a low computational  by changing the velocity constraints on the contact points 
cost. This impacts the accuracy, because the trajectory of the  between the track and the ground according to the desired 
simulated track is altered along straight segments and may  rotational velocity of the track. This is performed instead of 
yield erroneous results for rough terrain. For example, when  rotating the track with respect to the robot body. 
both the adjacent wheels contact a bump on the ground, the 
The above-mentioned method is an innovative approach 
traction forces from these wheels act on the bump in the upper 
for real-time simulation; however, it does not consider the 
and lower directions, respectively, as displayed in the lower 
friction  with  the  ground  because  the  original  velocity 
part  of  Fig.  2.  This  generates  a  low  driving  net  force, 
constraints set using the friction model of the physics engine 
propelling the robot forward, so that it cannot climb over the 
are modified. This may also result in the model presenting 
bump, which is not the case with real tracks. 
scenarios that are impossible in reality, such as those shown in 
Another  drawback  is  consideration  of  grousers.  An  Fig. 3. The above method presents a scenario where a track 
inaccurate trajectory of a track can also result in an incorrect  can start climbing a vertical wall even if the track contacts the 
geometry of the grousers. Using relatively larger number of  wall with low drag and the ground with low friction. Further, it 
wheels  improves  these  drawbacks  and  increases  the  does not consider the effect of a grouser because a track link 
simulation  accuracy  but  also  makes  the  simulation  more  does not move with respect to the robot body. 
expensive. 
III.  PROPOSED METHOD 
B.  Multiple-Plate Simulations 
A.  Representation of a Trajectory 
Simulation methods involving a closed loop consisting of 
In the proposed method, an arbitrary trajectory of a track 
thin short plate links and hinge joints connecting adjacent 
with respect to the robot body is a closed loop of multiple 
949
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:03:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
 
 
Figure 4.   Examples of the tracks represented by the proposed method. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.   Representation of a rotating track. 
 
grouser  is  acceptable,  provided  it  is  supported  by  the 
employed robotic simulator. 
The grousers are distributed along the trajectory such that 
 
the distance between the footprints of the adjacent grousers is 
 
equal to L/N, as presented in Fig. 5, where L and N are the 
Figure 5.   Distribution of the grousers between the segment links. 
total length of the trajectory and the total number of grousers, 
 
respectively. The pose of the n-th grouser with respect to the 
segments  that  are  either  a  linear  or  circular-shaped,  as  footprint of the 0-th grouser can be expressed by the following 
presented in Fig. 4. It can represent oval tracks, which are used  equation: 
for numerous tracked vehicles [7–9] (Fig. 4(a)); tracks with 
(cid:3041)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)
different  radii  of  the  front  and  rear  pulleys,  which  are 
frequently employed in sub-tracks [7, 8] (Fig. 4(b)); triangular  (cid:3041)𝑅 =(cid:3437)(cid:3533)(cid:3036)(cid:2878)(cid:2869)𝑅 (cid:3441)𝑅 , 
(cid:2868) (cid:3036) (cid:3007)(cid:3017) (cid:3008)
tracks,  which  can  enhance  mobility  [9]  (Fig.  4(c));  and  (cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2868)
trapezoidal tracks, which are used for tanks (Fig. 4(d)). 
where (cid:3037)𝑅, (cid:3037)𝑅 , and 𝑅  are the transforms from the footprint 
(cid:3036) (cid:3036) (cid:3007)(cid:3017) (cid:3008)
Each linear segment is parameterized by the start position  of the i-th grouser to the center of the j-th grouser, from the 
and the direction of the end position with respect to the robot  footprint of the i-th grouser to that of the j-th grouser, and from 
body as well as the length of the segment. The base shape of  the footprint to the center of a grouser, respectively. 
this segment without grousers can be implemented in a robotic 
In  a  robotic  simulator,  this  can  be  implemented  by 
simulator as a cuboid link, whose pose and dimension are 
embedding the shapes of the distributed grousers in the link 
based  on  the  above  parameters.  Each  segment  link  is 
representing the trajectory segment of the grouser. 
constrained with respect to the body by a slider joint. Sec. 
III-B explains the manner in which to represent the grousers  C.  Representation of a Rotating Track Along a Trajectory 
on a segment link. 
To represent the motion of a track, each link moves along 
The  circular  segments  are  parameterized  by  the  start  the corresponding trajectory segment. Specifically, the links 
position and the rotational axis with respect to the robot body  that are cuboidal (with the shapes of the grousers) move along 
as well as the angle of rotation. The base shape of such a  the  linear  trajectory  segments,  whereas  those  that  are 
segment without grousers can be implemented in a robotic  cylindrical move along the circular trajectory segments. This 
simulator as a cylindrical link whose pose and dimension are  can be realized in a robotic simulator by setting the position 
based  on  the  above  parameters.  Each  segment  link  is  and velocity constraints on the slider or revolute joints, which 
constrained with respect to the robot body using a revolute  connect each segment link and the robot body, based on the 
joint.  angular position and velocity of the sprocket driving the track. 
B.  Representation of the Grousers  Continuous movement of the segment links alters the 
shape of the entire track. This problem is overcome in the 
Grousers can be parameterized by their pose (with respect 
proposed method because the segment links roll back to their 
to the trajectory), shape, and total number. Any shape of a 
previous positions when the position of the (n-1)-th grouser in 
the link reaches the original position of the n-th grouser, as 
950
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:03:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
TABLE I.   QUALITATIVE COMPARISON OF THE DESIGN OF THE PROPOSED METHOD AND THE EXISTING METHODS 
  Proposed  Multiple-wheel  Multiple-plate  Constraint to ground 
       
               
 
Real-time  +  +  -  ++ 
 
 
Grousers  +  -  +  - 
 
 
Friction  +  +  +  - 
 
 
Deformation  -  -  +  - 
 
 
Rough terrain  ++  -  ++  + 
 
+: good / supported,  -: inferior / not supported / out of scope 
 
TABLE II.   COMPARISON BASED ON THE REAL-TIME FACTOR (GREATER THAN 1.0 INDICATES THE METHOD WORKS FASTER THAN REAL TIME) 
Proposed  Constraint 
Proposed  4 wheels  13 wheels 
(no grousers)  to ground* 
2.79 ± 0.03  3.96 ± 0.02  4.86 ± 0.05  1.79 ± 0.00  5.93 ± 0.21 
* Estimated based on the comparison with the multiple-wheel method (4 wheels) results in [6] 
depicted in Fig. 6. The segment link position is restored  based on the computational costs and the collision and friction 
between simulation steps, i.e., when the time is paused in the  between a track (including the grousers) and the ground, as 
simulation. The change in the grouser position equals the  summarized in Table 1. 
separation between the adjacent grousers, i.e., L/N, to match 
The computational cost is highly dependent on the number 
the positions of the (n-1)-th and n-th grousers before and after 
of links and joints in the simulation. In the proposed method, 
the restoration, respectively. This allows the shape of the 
the number of links and joints required to simulate a track 
entire track to remain consistent before and after the positions 
were  equal  to  that  of  the  segments  that  represented  the 
of the segment links are restored. By these procedures, the 
trajectory. In the case of an oval trajectory, which is the most 
proposed method mimics continuous track movement along a 
common  (and  consists  of  two  linear  and  two  circular 
trajectory. This is implemented in a robotic simulator by 
segments), four pairs of links and joints are required, as 
changing the position of each joint between each segment link 
depicted in Fig. 4(a). The upper linear link and joint can be 
and the robot body. 
omitted, and three pairs of links and joints are adequate if the 
If there are no grousers on the track, the segment links can  upper linear link does not come into contact with the ground 
be restored to their original positions with respect to the robot  during operation. The number of links and joints required in 
body before each simulation step.  the  proposed  method  is  thus  comparable  to  that  in  the 
multiple-wheel method and less than that in the multiple-plate 
D.  Representation of the Collision and Friction between a 
method; hence, the proposed method is expected to be more 
Track and the Ground 
effective than these methods in terms of the computational 
Using  the  aforementioned  procedures,  a  track  with  cost. 
grousers moving along the trajectory with respect to the robot 
The effect of the grousers, i.e., the collision between the 
body  was  represented  using  only  links,  joints,  and  the 
grousers and the ground, is considered in the proposed method 
constraints  supported  by  a  general  robotic  simulator  (by 
because  a  track  rotates  around  the  robot  body  along  an 
default). In the proposed method, because a track actually 
accurate trajectory, similar to in the multiple-plate method. In 
rotates around the robot body, the simulation of the interaction 
terms of the grouser consideration, the proposed method is 
between the moving track and the ground surface is deferred 
expected to be better than the multiple-wheel method (owing 
to  the  built-in  physics  engine  of  the  robotic  simulator. 
to  the  trajectory  accuracy)  and  the  constraint-to-ground 
Specifically, the detection of the contact points between the 
method, which does not move a track against the robot body. 
track and the ground and the calculation of the driving forces 
acting on the contact points are realized using the default  In the proposed method, the friction between a track and 
collision  detection  and  friction  model  (e.g.,  [10])  of  the  the ground is considered utilizing the default friction model of 
physics engine, without any modifications.  the simulator, because the proposed method does not modify 
the constraints on the points that contact the ground. This 
E.  Qualitative Comparison with Existing Methods 
could be an advantage over the constraint-to-ground method, 
The proposed method and the existing methods described 
in Sec. II were qualitatively compared. The comparison was 
951
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:03:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
TABLE III.   SPECIFICATIONS OF THE TRACKED VEHICLE, QUINCE 
TABLE TYPE STYLES 
Total weight  33 [kg] 
Size of main body  L685 × H150  
(w/o sub-tracks)  × W370 [mm] 
Shape of tracks  Oval 
Number of tracks  2 
L685 × H150  
Size (w/o grousers) 
× W170 [mm] 
Number of grousers  40 
Main tracks 
Trapezoidal 
(Upper base 5 
Shape of grouser 
× Lower base 18 
× H 16 [mm]) 
Number of tracks  4 
L345 × H150  
Size (w/o grousers) 
× W25 [mm] 
Sub-tracks 
Number of grousers  22 
Same 
Shape of grouser 
as main tracks 
 
 
TABLE IV.   STEP CLIMBING TEST RESULTS TABLE TYPE STYLES 
Front sub-track  Step height  Reality  Simulation 
angle 
0 [°]  40 [mm]  S  S 
120 [mm]  S  S 
190 [mm]  F  F 
45 [°]  120 [mm]  S  S 
240 [mm]  S  S 
380 [mm]  F  F 
S: Succeeded, F: Failed 
which modifies the original constraints established by the 
 
friction model. 
 
The proposed method is expected to simulate the motion of  Figure 7.   Snapshots of the step climbing test and the simulation by the 
proposed method. 
a track on rough terrain precisely because it considers grousers 
 
and friction. 
Both  the  proposed  and  existing  methods  were 
IV.  EVALUATION  implemented on Gazebo simulator 7.16 [11] on Ubuntu 16.04 
A.  Quantitative Comparison with Existing Methods  LTS 64 bit. The Open Dynamics Engine [12] was used as the 
physics engine. The simulation step was set as 1 ms, i.e., the 
The computational speeds of the proposed method and the 
simulation world advanced 1 ms each step. All the test cases 
considered  exiting  methods  were  compared.  The  tracked 
were implemented on a laptop with an Intel Core i7-6500U 
vehicle modeled for this evaluation was PackBot 510 [7], the 
processor (2.50 GHz × 4) with 8 GB RAM. 
most distributed mobile robot with non-deformable tracks 
worldwide (more than 2000 copies), to the best of the authors’  The test case involved a forward drive at 0.3 m/s on a flat 
knowledge. The trajectories of its left and right main tracks are  ground. The metric was the real-time factor, a ratio of the time 
oval in shape. The dimensions of a single main track are L690  advanced in the simulation world to the time that would have 
× W75 × H180 mm, including grousers. In the proposed  passed  in  the  real  world,  averaged for  10  s  based  on  a 
method,  each  grouser  was  modeled  as  a  cuboid  with  real-world clock. A real-time factor equal to or greater than 1.0 
dimensions of L5 × H8 mm. Forty grousers were distributed  implies that the simulation can run in real time. 
on each main track. The sub-tracks were not modeled. 
The  test  results  are  summarized  in  Table  2.  They 
The  multiple-wheel  methods  used  for  comparative  demonstrate that the proposed method runs beyond the real 
purposes had four wheels, which was the minimum number of  time at a comparative speed, similar to the multiple-wheel 
wheels that can be aligned lengthwise without any spacing  methods. Table 2 also provides the real-time factor of the 
between  adjacent  wheels,  and  13  wheels,  which  were  constraint-to-ground method estimated from the CPU time 
comparable to the grousers on the linear segments.  required for a 110-s drive in the simulation reported in [6]. The 
evaluation  in  [6] was based  on  increased  test  cases  and 
implemented in the V-REP simulator [13]. The processing of 
952
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:03:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
the constraint-to-ground approach is expected to require the 
shortest time among all the methods; however, it does not 
support grousers. 
B.  Comparison with an Actual Robot on Rough Terrain 
The  accuracy  of  the  proposed  method  to  simulate 
movement on rough terrain was evaluated by a comparative 
analysis using an actual robot. The six-degree-of-freedom 
(6-DoF) tracked vehicle, Quince [8], with two main tracks and   
four sub-tracks, was used for the evaluation. The detailed   
specifications of Quince are summarized in Table 3. 
The test case scenario was of a track having to climb over 
steps at 0.1 m/s. The steps were 40, 120, and 190 mm in height 
with 0° sub-track angles so that the lower linear segments of 
the sub-tracks contacted the ground, and they were 120, 240, 
and 380 mm in height of the steps with 45° sub-track angles. 
The frictional coefficients of the ground and steps were set as 
0.6 each in the simulation, based on a preliminary experiment 
using the real robot and the ground surface.   
 
The  results  of  all  the  test  cases  obtained  from  the  Figure 8.   Alternative applications of the proposed method; 
simulation and using Quince were comparable, as can be seen  lugged wheel (left), conveyer (right), and air traffic (bottom). 
from Table 4. In all the successful tests, the grousers collided   
with the edge of the steps, and this allowed both the robot in 
instance, by setting a circular trajectory and replacing the 
the simulation and Quince in the practical case to climb over 
grousers by thin plates, lugged wheels can be simulated. Using 
the step. This effect was more pronounced for the 120-mm 
a three-dimensional trajectory and a geometry model of an 
step  with  0°  sub-tracks  and  the  240-mm  step  with  45° 
aerial vehicle, for developing an aerial robot, the air traffic can 
sub-tracks. In these cases, the grousers were key for the robot 
be  simulated.  Examples  of  possible  applications  of  the 
to climb over the step because the step was slightly higher than 
proposed method are displayed in Fig. 8. 
the center of the front pulley of the sub-track, i.e., the robot 
might not have been able to climb over the step without  Future  studies  can  be  conducted  on  supporting  the 
grousers. Snapshots of the test with the 240-mm step with 45° 
deformation of a track; however, a large-scale deformation of 
sub-tracks are presented in Fig. 7. 
the track belt may be challenging using the proposed method. 
In all the failed tests, the sub-tracks and main tracks of the  Hence, a small-scale deformation of the grousers could be 
simulation and Quince slipped on the vertical surface of the  considered by modeling them as soft objects. With the Open 
step and horizontal surface of the floor, respectively. The  Dynamics Engine, which was used in this research, constraint 
proposed method successfully simulated this behavior, owing 
force mixing (CFM), which is based on a similar concept, can 
to the explicit consideration of the friction between the tracks 
be utilized for this purpose. Future research can also include 
and the environment. 
the evaluation of analytic models  of tracked vehicles in 
comparatively more complex scenarios (e.g., [14]) using the 
V.  CONCLUSION 
proposed method. 
In this study, we developed a real-time simulation method 
for non-deformable continuous tracks with grousers on rough 
REFERENCES 
terrain with explicit consideration of the collision and friction 
with the environment. It represented an arbitrary trajectory of  [1]  R. R. Murphy, Disaster Robotics, MIT Press, 2014. 
a track with multiple linear and circular segments, each of  [2]  K. Kurose, S. Saga, S. Okamoto, K. Ohno, and S. Tadokoro, 
"Designing of online simulation environment for development control 
which was a link connected to the robot body, in the employed 
algorithms for robots operating in rough terrains," 2008 IEEE/RSJ 
robotic simulator. The method applied velocity constraints 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 
between each segment link and the robot body to represent a  2008. 
track rotating around the body. It could restore the positions of  [3]  M. Sokolov, I. Afanasyev, R. Lavrenov, A. Sagitov, L. Sabirova, and E. 
the segment links when needed to maintain the shape of a track  Magid, “Modelling a crawler-type UGV for urban search and rescue in 
consistently.  Experimental  comparison  of  the  proposed  Gazebo environment,” International Conference on Artificial Life and 
Robotics (ICAROB), 2017. 
method  to other simulation methods demonstrated  that  it 
[4]  M. Wallin, A. K. Aboubakr, P. Jayakumar, M. D. Letherwood, D. J. 
worked faster than real time with a real-time factor of 2.79. 
Gorsich, A. Hamed, and A. A. Shabana, “A comparative study of joint 
Experimental comparison of the simulations and a physical  formulations: Application to multibody system tracked vehicles,” 
robot showed that the former was comparable to the precise  Nonlinear Dynamics, vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 783–800, 2013. 
motion of a real robot over multiple test terrains.  [5]  S. Nakaoka, AGX Vehicle Continuous Track (AGX crawler). [Online]. 
Available: 
Our developed method can simulate continuous tracks and  https://choreonoid.org/en/manuals/latest/agxdynamics/agx-continuous
also arbitrary objects moving on an arbitrary trajectory. For  -track.html. [Accessed: Sep-2019]. 
953
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:03:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
[6]  M. Pecka, K. Zimmermann, and T. Svoboda, “Fast simulation of 
vehicles with non-deformable tracks,” 2017 IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017. 
[7]  B. M. Yamauchi, “PackBot: a versatile platform for military robotics,” 
Unmanned ground vehicle technology VI, 2004. 
[8]  E. Rohmer, T. Yoshida, K. Ohno, K. Nagatani, S. Tadokoro and E. 
Koyanagi, “Quince: A Collaborative Mobile Robotic Platform for 
Rescue Robots Research and Development”, The 5th International 
Conference on the Advanced Mechatronics (ICAM), 2010. 
[9]  W. Lee, S. Kang, M. Kim and M. Park, "ROBHAZ-DT3: teleoperated 
mobile platform with passively adaptive double-track for hazardous 
environment applications," 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference 
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2004. 
[10] J. Trinkle and J. S. Pang, “On Dynamic Multi-Rigid-Body Contact 
Problems with Coulomb Friction,” ZAMM - Journal of Applied 
Mathematics and Mechanics, vol. 77, pp. 267–279, 1997. 
[11] N. Koenig and A. Howard, "Design and use paradigms for Gazebo, an 
open-source  multi-robot  simulator,"  2004  IEEE/RSJ  International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2004. 
[12] R.  Smith,  Open  Dynamics  Engine.  [Online].  Available: 
https://www.ode.org/. [Accessed: Sep-2019].  
[13] E. Rohmer, S. P. N. Singh and M. Freese, "V-REP: A versatile and 
scalable robot simulation framework," 2013 IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2013. 
[14] R. Yajima, and K. Nagatani, "Investigation of the tip-over condition 
and motion strategy for a tracked vehicle with sub-tracks climbing over 
an obstacle on a slope", 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Safety, 
Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), 2018. 
[15] S. Nakaoka, "Choreonoid: Extensible Virtual Robot Environment Built 
on an Integrated GUI Framework", 2012 IEEE/SICE International 
Symposium on System Integration (SII)", 2012. 
 
954
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:03:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 