2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Underactuated Waypoint Trajectory Optimization
for Light Painting Photography
Christian Eilers*, Jonas Eschmann*, Robin Menzenbach*,
Boris Belousov, Fabio Muratore, and Jan Peters
Abstract—Despite their abundance in robotics and nature,
underactuatedsystemsremainachallengeforcontrolengineer-
ing. Trajectory optimization provides a generally applicable
solution, however its efﬁciency strongly depends on the skill of
theengineertoframetheprobleminanoptimizer-friendlyway.
Thispaperproposesaprocedurethatautomatessuchproblem
reformulationforaclassoftasksinwhichthedesiredtrajectory
is speciﬁed by asequence ofwaypoints. Theapproach isbased
on introducing auxiliary optimization variables that represent
waypointactivations.Tovalidatetheproposedmethod,aletter
drawing task is set up where shapes traced by the tip of a
rotary inverted pendulum are visualized using long exposure
photography.
I. INTRODUCTION
Controlling underactuated systems is of special interest (a) Quanser Qube. (b) Coordinate systems.
in robotics and engineering because many common systems Fig. 1: Evaluation platform: Furuta pendulum.
such as automobiles, hovercrafts, aircrafts, ships, legged and
wheeled robots, as well as underwater vehicles are under-
The main contribution of this paper is the design of
actuated [1]. Nevertheless, designing efﬁcient controllers for
the objective function for trajectory optimization described
suchsystemsrequiressigniﬁcantlymoreeffortthanforfully
in Section III. This objective function explicitly takes into
actuated ones [2]. In particular, even if a feasible trajectory
account the waypoints and thus enables the generation of
isobtainedinsimulation,trajectorytrackingonarealsystem
recognizable letter contours in long exposure photography.
is non-trivial because not all deviations from the desired
However,open-loopexecutionoftheoptimaltrajectoryisnot
trajectorycanbecompensatedduetotheunderactuation[3].
sufﬁcient on its own because even small deviations from the
Although techniques such as partial feedback lineariza-
planned trajectory yield unrecognizable letters. Section IV
tion [4], which aim to cancel the system dynamics, can be
details the implementation of the stabilizing feedback con-
effective at reducing the plant to a partially linear form,
troller that enables efﬁcient trajectory tracking. Finally, the
they do not exploit the passive system dynamics [3]. For
resulting trajectories and letters are presented in Section V.
classicalcontrolsystems,suchasthecart-pole,convey-crane,
pendubot, etc., a number of controllers have been hand- II. LIGHTPAINTINGSETUP
designed [5] that do exploit the system dynamics. The task The hardware platform used for experiments is the
in those examples is typically to drive the system to an Quanser Qube shown in Fig. 1a. It implements the rotary
equilibrium state. In this paper, on the other hand, we are inverted pendulum system introduced by Furuta et al. [8],
interested in generating and tracking a dynamic trajectory which consists of a freely rotating pendulum attached to a
rather than reaching a static target state. motor-driven arm. A schematic is shown in Fig. 1b. While
Trajectory generation for both actuated and underactuated thearmcanberotatedinthehorizontalplane,thependulum
systems is commonly performed using numerical optimiza- swings in the vertical plane orthogonal to the arm. The state
tion [3]. For fully actuated systems, waypoints are relatively of the nonlinear system(cid:2)is described (cid:3)by the two angles and
straightforward to incorporate into the trajectory generation the corresponding angular velocities
process because kinematic path planners can be used [6].
For underactuated systems, however, a kinematic plan may x= θ α θ˙ α˙ T .
be dynamically infeasible [7]. Therefore, a dynamics-based
The Furuta pendulum is a classical platform for evaluating
trajectoryoptimizationmethodisneededthatcanhandletra-
control algorithms, appreciated for its rich passive dynamics
jectoryspeciﬁcationintheformofasequenceofwaypoints.
and underactuation. Its equations of motion are provided
*Authorscontributedequallyname.surname@stud.tu-darmstadt.de in the Appendix, with derivations starting from the Euler-
All authors are with the Computer Science Department, Technische Lagrange equations available in [8] and [9].
Universita¨tDarmstadt,Germanyname.surname@tu-darmstadt.de The light painting task is set up as follows. A piece of
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
2020researchandinnovationprogrammeundergrantagreementNo640554. reﬂective tape is attached to the tip of the Furuta pendulum.
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1505
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:06:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Letter Conﬁg
Projection
+parameters
KinematicModel RBF
Objective
Fig. 2: Reachable space Fig. 3: Projection of a letter
Collocation DynamicModel
visualized as a point cloud. onto the reachable space.
NLP Linearize
While the pendulum is moving, a long exposure photograph
is taken. The goal is to draw recognizable letters with the
Activation LQR
Solver
tip of the pendulum. Since the reachable space of the Furuta Controller
pendulum covers a part of a sphere, as shown in Fig. 2, all
letters ﬁrst need to be projected onto the reachable space
before drawing, as depicted in Fig. 3.
Ideally, we would like to have a controller that receives LED-Device Camera Qube
a letter as input and is able to trace its contour with the
tip of the pendulum. If the system was fully actuated,
trajectory tracking would be straightforward. However, due
to underactuation, not every trajectory can be executed but A Image
onlydynamicallyfeasibleones.Therefore,thecrucialtaskis
to ﬁnd a trajectory which most closely follows the shape of Fig. 4: Full pipeline from planning to tracking for drawing
the desired letter. As a proxy for this task, we discretize the lettersvialightpaintingphotographyusingFurutapendulum.
letter into a sequence of waypoints and subsequently search
for a trajectory that passes through these waypoints. A. Direct Collocation
The diagram in Fig. 4 shows the full pipeline of our
Trajectory optimization is concerned with ﬁnding a fea-
approach to underactuated light painting. On a high level,
sible trajectory that minimizes a given objective function.
it can be split into three parts, from top to bottom: waypoint
Numerical optimization methods such as multiple shooting
generation(ﬁrstrow),trajectoryoptimiztion(rows 2–3),and
and direct collocation work by transforming a continuous-
execution (bottom 3 rows). Waypoint generation comprises
time optimal control problem into a big Nonlinear Program
letter discretization and projection discussed above. Trajec-
(NLP) [10]. Methods differ in how exactly the discretiza-
tory optimization takes the generated waypoints as input
tion is done and what variables are treated as optimization
and ﬁnds a sequence of control commands that drives the
variables. We use direct collocation with cubic splines [11],
system through these waypoints using the knowledge of the
widely spread in robotics [3], and implement our optimiza-
system kinematics and dynamics. Finally, an LQR feedback
tion problem in CasADi [12].
controllerisaddedfortrackingoftheoptimizedtrajectoryat
Direct(cid:2)collocation tre(cid:3)ats both state(cid:2)s x and control(cid:3)com-
theexecutionstage.Additionally,asynchronizedsetofLEDs t
mands u as optimization variables,
isactivatedwhenthependulumpassesthroughthetrajectory t
segments belonging to the letter to increase illumination. X= x ... x , U= u ... u − ,
0 N 0 N 1
whereas the system dynamics are imposed as constraints.
III. TRAJECTORYOPTIMIZATION The objective function typically has the form of a sum over
(cid:88) (cid:88)
the time steps
Given a set of waypoints obtained via letter discretization
−
N N 1
and subsequent projection onto the reachable space, we aim (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
J(X,U)= α d(xˆ,x )+β u2 (1)
to devise an objective function that will yield a trajectory t t t
t=0 t=0
passing through the waypoints upon optimization. To this
end, we ﬁrst describe the trajectory optimization method Jα(X) Jβ(U)
which we employ in Section III-A. After that, we present where d(xˆ,x ) is a distance-based metric that encodes the
t ∈
the main idea of our approach of introducing ‘attention’ state-dependent part of the running cost. Weights α [0,1]
t
into the optimization objective and explain it on the task of determine the importance of each time step and are usually
reaching a single desired waypoint in Section III-B. Finally, settoα =1.Parameterβ ischosensuchthatthecostofthe
t
inSectionIII-C,wedemonstratehowtheideaofintroducing squared control commands is orders of magnitude smaller
‘attention’ can be extended to multiple waypoints and how than the other cost terms. Moreover, we introduce xˆ as a
to enforce a desired ordering among them. parameter, which will later play the role of a waypoint.
1506
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:06:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0.05 Running cost waypoint: 0 1.0 of pre-specifying the activations αt, we treat them as op-
Running cost0000....00001234 R''AAuttntteennninttiigoo nnc''o  ccsoot sswtt  awwyaapyyoppinootii:nn 1tt::  01 0000....2468me Activated Loss(Normalized) tciomeifzﬁactiieonntsvαartiabbyleRαsa.td=MiaolerxBepasc(cid:18)ios−nFc(urtˆent−σcetl2iyto),n2ws(cid:19)(eRpBaFras)moeftetrhiezefot(rh3me)
0.00 0.0Ti
0.0 0.2 0.4Time [s] 0.6 0.8 1.0 wheretˆisthecenteroftheRBFandσ isthebandwidth.The
center tˆdetermines the activation time and is introduced as
Fig.5:Effectof‘attention’onthelossfunction.Components
a new optimization variable in the NLP. Thus, the optimizer
of the loss function are drawn over time for a task with two
is able to shift its ‘attention’ and can account for the time
waypoints. Note that the loss is minimal and close to zero
needed to accumulate sufﬁcient energy to reach a desired
when ‘attention’ is one.
state. Inserting Eq. (3) into E(cid:18)q. (1), we o(cid:19)btain the objective
(cid:88)
function that incorporates ‘attention’ for a single waypoint.
speOcuiﬁrckweyayidtheaatidsratwosptahream‘aettteerniztieont’heofwtheeighotpstimαtizeirntoa N −(tˆ−t)2
J (X,tˆ)= exp d(xˆ,x ). (4)
the important moments in time when the waypoints need to α σ t
t=0
be reached. Crucially, which moments exactly are important
Toexcludetrivialsolutionsachievedbyshiftingtheattention
is determined by the optimizer itself. In the following, we
out of the scope of the ﬁnite trajectory, tˆ needs to be
detail how this is done, ﬁrst on a single-waypoint example
constrained to the interval [0,N].
and then on the full sequential problem.
This formulation also allows one to minimize the time
B. Attention Mechanism for Reaching a Single Waypoint of arrival at the waypoint by simply adding a punishment
term γtˆ to the objective function in Eq. (4) with some
If there is only one po(cid:40)int xˆ that needs to be reached, the
positiveweightγ.Themainadvantageofthisapproachisits
coefﬁcients α in Eq. (1) can be set as
t independence on pre-speciﬁed activation times, which also
makes it scalable to multiple waypoints.
1, t=N,
α = (2)
t 0, otherwise, C. Attention for Reaching Multiple Waypoints in Sequence
which puts all the weight on the last time step and yields a Extending Eq. (4) with an activation time tˆ for each
i
trajectory that ends up at the target state. At ﬁrst sight, one waypoint xˆ and summing o(cid:18)ver the wayp(cid:19)oints, we obtain
i (cid:88) (cid:88)
could imagine solving a set of such one-waypoint problems the objective function for multiple waypoints
andthenchainingthesolutionstogethertoobtainacomplete − −
M 1 N −(tˆ t)2
trajectory. However, this approach will not work, because J (X,T)= exp i d(xˆ ,x ) (5)
α σ i t
it does not account for the fact that the ﬁnal state of one
i=0 t=0
segment becomes the initial condition for the subsequent where M is the number of waypoints and T is the set of
one. Since the dynamics are nonlinear and the system is their associated activation times tˆ.
i
underactuated, the optimizer may decide to e.g. do an addi- Theorderinwhichthewaypointsaretraversedmatters:if
tional swing between going from one waypoint to another, the waypoints are traversed in an arbitrary order, the drawn
despite the points being next to each other, just because letters are hardly recognizable. However, the ordering is not
the velocity with which the ﬁrst waypoint was reached enforced by the objective function in Eq. (5). To impose
was not sufﬁciently high. Moreover, switching controllers order,weaugmenttheoptimizationproblemwithconstraints
≤ −
betweensegmentsisnon-trivialandleadstojerkytransitions. of the form tˆ tˆ , i = 0,...,M 2. Furthermore,
i i+1
Therefore, we aim for developing a method that allows to it is beneﬁcial to split up the set of the waypoints into
pass through multiple waypoints smoothly instead. segments. All segments are then treated within one NLP,
AnapproachbasedonEq.(2),wheretheactivationtimeis but the ordering constraints are only enforced within each
triviallysettothelasttimestep,ishardlyscalabletomultiple segment.Tofurtherimprovethesmoothnessofthetrajectory,
(cid:88)(cid:0) (cid:1)
waypoints, as the activation time for each point would have we add a punishment term
to be known in advance. Setting the activation times for −
S 1 −
multiple waypoints by hand is prohibitive and in general J (T)=µ tˆ tˆ (6)
leads to suboptimal solutions. This can be attributed to the µ lj fj
j=0
underactuatedandoscillatingnatureoftheFurutapendulum, −
to the objective function that favors short segments tˆ tˆ .
which makes it hard to anticipate how much swinging is lj fj
Here,f andl denotetheﬁrstandlastwaypointsinsegment
needed to accumulate sufﬁcient energy for reaching certain j j
j, respectively. Each letter is split into S segments and µ
states.
determines the strength of the segment duration punishment.
Forlongexposurephotography,itdoesnotmatteratwhat
The resulting objective function for multiple segments is
exact time the system passes through each waypoint. This
given by
rendershard-codedactivationssuchasinEq.(2)unnecessary
and motivates a more ﬂexible approach. Namely, instead J(X,U,T)=J (X,T)+J (U)+J (T). (7)
α β µ
1507
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:06:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 6: Open-loop control on the Quanser Qube: (top) motor Fig. 7: Closed-loop LQR tracking controller successfully
input voltage, (middle) horizontal joint angle θ, (bottom) tracks the same desired trajectory as in Fig. 6, and it is
pendulumjointangleα,plottedovertime.Trajectoryinblue able to correct the deviations from the planned trajectory
(Sim)wasoptimizedinsimulationtotraceletter‘S’asshown despite underactuation. Undesirable overshoots in the input
in Fig. 8. Trajectory in orange (Qube) was obtained on the voltage,owingtoexploitsofthelinearizedsystemdynamics,
real system, and it rather quickly diverges from simulation. are clipped to prevent excessively large control signals.
The NLP is then solved by minimizing the objective Eq. (7) the system on the desired trajectory, we employ an LQR
subjecttothecollocationconstraintsonthesystemdynamics, tracking controller described in the following.
path and boundary constraints, and the proposed activations The ﬁrst step is to linearize the system dynamics along
ordering constraints. a desired trajectory. If x˙ = f(x,u), then the linearization
Fig. 5 illustrates the effect of ‘attention’ on the loss func- around a given point (xd,ud) can be written as
tion. The results were obtained by optimizing the objective
≈ ∂f(xd,ud) − ∂f(xd,ud) −
given in Eq. (5) with two waypoints. The curves correspond x˙ x˙d+ (x xd)+ (u ud). (8)
∂x ∂u
to the individual terms d(xˆ ,x ) and αi for each of the two
i t t Performing such linearization at every time step, we can
waypoints i = 0 and i = 1. Thus, the value of the full loss
obtain a linearization around the desired trajectory. It is
is given by the sum of the terms αid(xˆ ,x ) over t and i.
t i t convenient to introduce auxiliary variables representing the
Notably, when ‘attention’ rises to one, the corresponding
deviations from the desired trajectory
distance-basedlossgoestozero,signallingthatthewaypoint
is reached. Summing the losses up without time activations − −
x˜ =x xd, u˜ =u ud. (9)
would yield a high value for the total cost, despite both t t t t t t
waypointsbeingreached(indicatedbythelossgoingtozero Inserting Eq. (9) into Eq. (8), we obtain
once for each waypoint). Therefore, a formulation with a
∂f(xd,ud) ∂f(xd,ud)
ﬂat weighting αt = 1 for all time steps, as it is used in x˜˙t = ∂tx t x˜t+ ∂tu t u˜t. (10)
most of the literature, would yield a high loss value despite
Discretizing the continuous-time linear dynamical system
the desired states being reached. In contrast, the RBF-based
given in Eq. (10) using the Euler integration scheme
objective function in Eq. (5), which only accumulates the
distance-based losses close to the waypoints, results in a x˜ =x˜ +∆tx˜˙ , (11)
much lower loss value. (cid:18) t+1 t (cid:19) t
we arrive at the discrete-time time-varying dynamics
IV. LINEAR-QUADRATICOPTIMALTRACKING
∂f(xd,ud) ∂f(xd,ud)
Executinganopen-loopsequenceofcontrolcommandson x˜t+1 = I+∆t ∂tx t x˜t+∆t ∂tu t u˜t
therealsystemresultsinatrajectoryratherquicklydiverging
=A x˜ +B u˜ . (12)
from the desired path due to disturbances, modeling errors, t t t t
and uncertainties in the initial conditions. An example is These dynamics provide the basis for designing a time-
shown in Fig. 6. To prevent such divergence and to keep varying tracking feedback controller.
1508
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:06:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. GiventhelinearizedmodelalongthetrajectoryinEq.(12),
we can formulate the trajectory stabilization problem as the
minimization of the(cid:88)cost(cid:0) (cid:1)
−
N 1
J = x˜TQx˜ +u˜TRu˜ . (13)
t t t t
t=0
The system is quadratically penalized for being away from
thedesiredtrajectoryusingweightingmatricesQandR.The
optimal feedback controller that minimizes the cost given
in Eq. (13) subject to the dynamics provided in Eq. (12) is
an afﬁne control law of the form
−
u =ud K x˜ (14)
t t t t
where the feedback gain matrix K is found by solving the
t
discrete-time Riccati equation backwards in time [13].
The result of applying the stabilizing LQR controller
derived in Eq. (14) to the same trajectory on which the
open-loop execution failed is shown in Fig. 7. As it can be
seen from the plots, the system is able to follow the desired
trajectory, canceling all disturbances and deviations, in spite
of being underactuated.
Notwithstanding its impressive performance, the LQR as
a tracking controller for the Furuta pendulum has some
limitations.First,thecontrollercanonlystabilizethesystem
when it is sufﬁciently close to the desired trajectory. Due
(a) Trajectory trace. (b) Light painted shape.
to underactuation, the envelope of correctable deviations
is quite small. Second, due to high nonlinearity of the Fig.8:Pendulumtrajectoriesandcorrespondinglightpainted
dynamics, linearizations can be rather bad in some states, letter shapes. Each highlighted segment on the right consists
leading to overshooting and instability. As the LQR has no of a set of waypoints traversed in quick succession. Note
natural way of incorporating control constraints, the applied that the complete trajectories may be quite long, as seen in
control voltages were clipped. the traces on the left, and it is virtually impossible to design
Another general problem of the LQR is the choice of such trajectories by hand or using kinematic path planning.
the weighting matrices Q and R, which are typically found
usingpriorknowledgeortrial-and-error.Wewereabletoﬁnd are added to our direct collocation formulation of the trajec-
goodparametersforthepresentedexamples,butasgenerated tory optimization problem described in Section III.
trajectories for different letters show signiﬁcant variability, a For all of our experiments, the initial state x is assumed
0
tailoredsetofparametersisrequiredforeachletter.Asimilar to be zero, which corresponds to the system being still, with
problem is stated in [14]. Finding a good set of parameters the pole centered in the front and hanging down.
without many trials is still an open research area and could Following the pipeline from Fig. 4, the trajectories shown
bethesubjectforfuturework,potentiallysolvedbylearning in Fig. 8 were obtained in simulation. The traces on the left
or optimization algorithms such as [15]. showthatasigniﬁcantamountoftimeisspentinpreparation
of each maneuver, while the pendulum is accumulating
V. RESULTS the required energy and momentum to pass through the
waypointsinthespeciﬁedorderandinquicksuccession.The
In the previous sections, individual blocks from the
visualizations on the right show the expected results from
pipeline in Fig. 4 have been introduced. In this section, the
thelightpaintingphotography,wherethelettersegmentsare
completeapproachisevaluatedandtheresultinglightpainted
trajectories are presented. highlightedbasedontheactivationtimestˆi obtainedthrough
the ‘attention’-augmented trajectory optimization described
The Quanser Qube implementation of the Furuta pendu-
in Section III-C.Notethatwhileletter‘I’consistsofasingle
lum imposes a hard limit on the range of values that the
segment, letters ‘A’ and ‘S’ are comprised of three segments
horizontal rotary angle θ can take, reﬂected in the reachable
each. The letter ‘S’ is specially challenging because of the
space shown in Fig. 2. In addition, a software limit is
kinodynamic structure of the Furuta pendulum.
imposed on the input voltage signal u to avoid damaging
Long exposure photographs of the light painted letters
the motor. To account for the joint and control limits, the
are presented in Fig. 9. The pictures have been taken in
following inequality constraints
a dark room with an LED device synchronized with the
− ≤ ≤ − ≤ ≤
umax ut umax, θmax θt θmax trajectory execution and activated based on the optimized
1509
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:06:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (cid:18) APPENDIX (cid:19)
Equations of motion of the Quanser Qube are given by
(cid:18) 1 −(cid:19)1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
m L2+ m L2 m L2cos2α+J θ¨
p r 4 p p 4 p p r
(cid:18)1 (cid:19) 1
+ m L L cosα α¨+ m L2sinαcosα θ˙α˙
2 p p r 2 p p
Fig. 9: Images of letters ‘I’, ‘A’, and ‘S’ created by light −
(cid:18)− 1 (cid:19) (cid:18) k ((cid:19)u k θ˙)
painting photography following the pipeline from Fig. 4. m L L sinα α˙2+D θ˙ = m m ,
2 p p r r R
m
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 1
segment beginning/end times tˆi described in Section III-C. 2mpLpLrcosα θ¨+ Jp+ 4mpL2p α¨+Dpα˙
Comparing the real images in Fig. 9 with the simulated
− 1 1
renderings in Fig. 8, we observe a sufﬁciently good match m L2cosαsinα θ˙2+ m L gsinα=0.
allowing the letters to be well recognizable. However, the 4 p p 2 p p
trajectoriesslightlydeviatetowardstheend,asitcanbeseen Thecontrolcommandu(seeupperEq.)isthemotorvoltage.
onthemiddlestrokesintheletters‘A’and‘S’thataredrawn The dynamics parameters can be found in [16].
last. These segments are slightly tilted compared to their
desired location. For a better view, see the accompanying REFERENCES
video, where real and simulated trajectories are drawn side [1] M.W.Spong,“Underactuatedmechanicalsystems,”inControlprob-
by side. lemsinroboticsandautomation. Springer,1998,pp.135–150.
[2] H. M. Choset, S. Hutchinson, K. M. Lynch, G. Kantor, W. Burgard,
L. E. Kavraki, and S. Thrun, Principles of robot motion: theory,
algorithms,andimplementation. MITpress,2005.
VI. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSION [3] R.Tedrake.Underactuatedrobotics:Algorithmsforwalking,running,
swimming, ﬂying, and manipulation (course notes for MIT 6.832).
[Online].Available:http://underactuated.mit.edu/
A method for objective function design in the context
[4] M.W.Spong,“Partialfeedbacklinearizationofunderactuatedmechan-
of trajectory optimization with waypoints has been pre- ical systems,” in Proceedings of IEEE/RSJ International Conference
sented (see Section III). The proposed objective function onIntelligentRobotsandSystems,vol.1. IEEE,1994,pp.314–321.
[5] I. Fantoni and R. Lozano, Non-linear control for underactuated
(seeEq.(5))featuresanRBF-smoothed‘attention’overtime
mechanicalsystems. SpringerScience&BusinessMedia,2001.
thatactivatesthedistance-basedlosswhenthecorresponding [6] J. Lin, N. Somani, B. Hu, M. Rickert, and A. Knoll, “An efﬁcient
waypointisnear.Crucially,theRBF-activationsarenothand- andtime-optimaltrajectorygenerationapproachforwaypointsunder
kinematicconstraintsanderrorbounds,”inInternationalConference
designed but jointly optimized together with the states and
onIntelligentRobotsandSystems. IEEE,2018,pp.5869–5876.
control commands. For the tasks in which the order of the [7] J. Schultz and T. Murphey, “Trajectory generation for underactuated
waypoints matters, the objective function has been extended controlofasuspendedmass,”in2012IEEEInternationalConference
onRoboticsandAutomation. IEEE,2012,pp.123–129.
to enforce the desired ordering (see Eq. (7)).
[8] K. Furuta, M. Yamakita, and S. Kobayashi, “Swing-up control of
The proposed method has been evaluated on a task of inverted pendulum using pseudo-state feedback,” Proceedings of the
drawing letters with the Furuta pendulum, a highly dynamic Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part I: Journal of Systems and
ControlEngineering,vol.206,no.4,pp.263–269,1992.
underactuated system (see Section V). The letters were
[9] B. S. Cazzolato and Z. Prime, “On the dynamics of the furuta
discretized into a set of waypoints, and a trajectory passing pendulum,” Journal of Control Science and Engineering, vol. 2011,
through them was optimized using the proposed objective p.3,2011.
[10] J.T.Betts,“Surveyofnumericalmethodsfortrajectoryoptimization,”
function. This procedure yielded activation times at which
Journalofguidance,control,anddynamics,vol.21,no.2,pp.193–
the waypoints were reached as a byproduct (see Fig. 5). 207,1998.
An LQR-based tracking controller has been applied to exe- [11] C. R. Hargraves and S. W. Paris, “Direct trajectory optimization
usingnonlinearprogrammingandcollocation,”JournalofGuidance,
cute the planned trajectories (see Section IV). To visualize
Control,andDynamics,vol.10,no.4,pp.338–342,1987.
the trajectory traces, long exposure photography has been [12] J.A.E.Andersson,J.Gillis,G.Horn,J.B.Rawlings,andM.Diehl,
employed, with an LED ring illuminating the scene at the “CasADi – A software framework for nonlinear optimization and
optimalcontrol,”MathematicalProgrammingComputation,2019.
activation times obtained through optimization (see Fig. 9).
[13] F. L. Lewis, D. Vrabie, and V. L. Syrmos, Optimal control. John
Althoughthedesiredperformancehasbeenachieved,sev- Wiley&Sons,2012.
[14] A.W.DivelbissandJ.T.Wen,“Trajectorytrackingcontrolofacar-
eralimprovementsarepossible.First,thelettersegmentation
trailer system,” IEEE Transactions on Control systems technology,
and discretization process should be automated. Second, the vol.5,no.3,pp.269–278,1997.
complexity of waypoint optimization needs to be evaluated [15] A.Marco,P.Hennig,J.Bohg,S.Schaal,andS.Trimpe,“Automatic
lqr tuning based on gaussian process global optimization,” in 2016
in more depth; we used between 5 and 15 waypoints, but
IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
larger numbers may be required in other tasks. Finally, IEEE,2016,pp.270–277.
parameters such as time horizon, waypoints order, segment [16] QuanserInc.,“Qube-servo2workbook-studentversion,”2013.
duration penalty, as well as the tracking LQR cost matrices
are currently set by hand for each letter. Automating this
procedure would be of great practical interest even beyond
the light painting task.
1510
Authorized licensed use limited to: La Trobe University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:06:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 