2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Predicting and Optimizing Ergonomics in
Physical Human-Robot Cooperation Tasks
Linda van der Spaa1,2, Michael Gienger2, Tamas Bates1,2, Jens Kober1
Abstract—This paper presents a method to incorporate
BB
ergonomics into the optimization of action sequences for bi-
manual human-robot cooperation tasks with continuous physi-
cal interaction. Our ﬁrst contribution is a novel computational
model of the human that allows prediction of an ergonomics AA  
assessment corresponding to each step in a task. The model is
learnedfromhumanmotioncapturedatainordertopredictthe
humanposeasrealisticallyaspossible.Thesecondcontribution
is a combination of this prediction model with an informed
graph search algorithm, which allows computation of human-
robot cooperative plans with improved ergonomics according
to the incorporated method for ergonomic assessment. The
conceptshavebeenevaluatedinsimulationandinasmalluser
study in which the subjects manipulate a large object with a
32DoFbimanualmobilerobotaspartner.Forallsubjects,the
ergonomic-enhanced planner shows their reduced ergonomic Fig.1. Robottestsetupofthehuman-robotcooperativeplanner.A:The
cost compared to a baseline planner. human partner wears a full-body motion capture suit (for validation). B:
Thescreendisplaysthecooperativeplanforbothpartners.
I. INTRODUCTION
on workers even when the task and physical environment
Industrial robots have begun to leave their cages, but are
may be highly dynamic or unknown in advance.
not yet anywhere near the point where they can cooperate
Inthispaper,ergonomicoptimizationisappliedtothetask
with humans at an equal level. Through physical assistance
of manipulating a large object, which requires continuous
andcooperation,robotshavealargepotentialtomakehuman
interaction between the robot and the human partner. The
lives easier and prevent muskuloskeletal disorders (MSDs).
presented ergonomic planner extends the sequential planner
However, physical Human-Robot Interaction (pHRI) is still
of [5] to select a sequence of states which is ergonomically
largelyrestrictedtohandling,lifting,andpositioningscenar-
optimal for the human partner. The new planner is applied
ios in which robots do not have the autonomy to plan their
to the task of rotating large objects (Fig. 1).
provided assistance themselves [1].
The contribution of this paper is twofold: 1) We de-
For example, consider the case of moving a large object
velop a model that predicts the ergonomics of a human
that is too heavy or bulky to be safely and comfortably
within a human-robot collaborative task (Sec. IV). 2) This
manipulated by one person. In such cases a cooperative
ergonomicspredictorisintegratedinsequentialtaskplanning
robot providing physical assistance could take most of the
(Sec. V), resulting in a joint plan for the human and robot
weight, or at least support the object in a way that allows
movements optimized for human ergonomics. Subsequently,
the human to remain in a comfortable, ergonomic posture.
Sec. VI explains how this method is applied to our test
Non-ergonomic poses are very high on the list of causes of
case. The presented ergonomic planner is compared to a
work-related MSDs [2], closely followed by heavy physical
baseline planner which optimizes solely for a minimum
work and lifting. Product lifecycle management software,
timesolution,withoutadditionallyoptimizingforthepartner
like Siemens Jack [3], is used in industry to optimize the
ergonomics.Thesimulationresultsanduserstudyevaluation
ergonomicsofproductsorprocesses,includingcollaborative
are presented in Sec. VII. Our ﬁndings are concluded and
robot arms [4], in the design phase. However, such tools are
discussedinSec.VIII.Butﬁrst,relatedworkisdiscussedin
typically useful for static environments or processes which
Sec. II and a system overview given in Sec. III.
do not involve any on-the-ﬂy customization or adaptation
to speciﬁc users. Incorporating human ergonomics measure- II. RELATEDWORK
ments in the decision-making process of cooperative robots Literature shows various research on physical human-
atrun-timehasthepotentialtoimprovethelong-termimpact robot cooperation (pHRC), improving ergonomic working
conditions, and some steps towards integrating the two.
1Delft Uni{versity of Technology, Mekelweg}2, 2628CD The
Netherlands l.f.vanderspaa, j.kober @tudelft.nl, A. Physical Human-Robot Cooperation
tamas.bates@tum.de
An important area of pHRC research focuses on a human
2Honda Research Institute Europe, Offenbach, Germany
michael.gienger@honda-ri.de and robot jointly manipulating a single tool [6]–[8]. These
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1799
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:12:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. problems require a form of impedance control, which al-
lows stiffnesses to be varied to achieve improved trajectory
tracking while decreasing the human task effort. This form
of co-manipulation has been extended to cooperative car-
rying of objects, still using impedance control to manage
the interaction forces between the robot and human [9],
[10]. Instead of using the position of the manipulator or
manipulatedobjectforimpedancecontrol,EMGsignalshave
been successfully used as an input “intention estimate” for
controlling cooperative object manipulation [11], [12]. Fig.2. Systemoverview:Thetaskmodelprovidesagoal.Inordertoreach
this goal, the planner proposes sequences of hand poses. An ergonomics
A different form of cooperative physical interaction is
estimatorisdevelopedtoevaluatetheergonomiccostofthesehandposes,
observedinobjecthandovers.Muchresearchinthisareahas suchthatminimizingthiscostresultsinanergonomictasksolution.
focused on predicting where the human will move his/her
ergonomics estimator
hand [13] or, incorporating knowledge of a task model,
classifying the intended (next) action [14], [15].
More complex, sequential, tasks that require regrasping pose IK
during co-manipulation of objects have been addressed in predictor corrector full
body
[16], in which a planner was developed for dyadic collabo- hand  pose estimator pose
rative manipulation, which includes a model of the human poses
 
as an active agent who shares the task objective. load load on ergonomic ergonomic
B. Optimizing Ergonomics in pHRC estimator hands assessment cost
Ergonomic optimization has made a recent appearance in
the ﬁeld of pHRC. So far two trends have been observed. Fig.3. Predictingtheergonomiccostfromhandposes.
The ﬁrst trend is the task of holding a workpiece in the
optimal position in space while a human works on it. For
example, in tasks like drilling in which a human applies a III. SYSTEMOVERVIEW
tool to an object, the position of the object held by a robot The focus of this paper is the design of a method for
has been ergonomically optimized to minimize joint torques ergonomicplanningoftasksinwhichbothhumanandrobot
[17],[18],musculareffort[19]ortheRULAscore[20],[21]. needtocoordinatetheirmovementstosatisfytheconstraints
The second trend, in the domain of sequential tasks, is in of the task (e.g. do not drop the object). To this end, we
optimizing the ergonomics for short moments of interaction developedamethodtoestimatetheergonomiccostbasedon
duringthehandoverofobjects[22].Inthesecasesthehuman a prediction model of the human’s pose and loads (Sec. IV).
pose only depends on the robot in the brief instants of the This predicted ergonomic cost is then incorporated in a
handover, and each handover pose is independent of the sequential planner (Sec. V). A schematic overview of the
previous ones. two components and their interaction is given in Fig. 2.
C. Ergonomic Measures IV. ERGONOMICSPREDICTOR
Extensive bio-mechanical models exist (e.g. [23]) which In order to estimate the ergonomics (Sec. IV-A) of the
canbeusedtosimulatehumanbodiestoextractinformation hand poses, we need to predict the postures the human will
that cannot be directly obtained from sensors. However, the use to obtain these hand poses, as well as the load that will
complexityoffullmuskuloskeletalmodelsmakesthemcom- actonthehumaninthesepostures(Fig.3).Forpredictingthe
putationally expensive to use. In [19] a full muskuloskeletal posture, we employ a learned pose predictor combined with
model is used to train a low dimensional latent variable an inverse kinematics correction to estimate the full-body
model, which is then used for minimizing muscle activation pose of the human based on his/her hand poses (Sec. IV-B).
in a bimanual drilling task. In [17], [18], a weighted sum The load is estimated based on the hand poses of the human
of joint torques has been used as an ergonomic measure, in and the robot, combined with the physical properties of the
which the joint torques were obtained from the full-body manipulated object (Sec. IV-C).
pose combined with the estimated respectively measured
A. Ergonomic Assessment
center of pressure.
Many methods in practical use are based on tables and In this paper, we chose REBA [25] as the ergonomics
checklists[24]designedformanualevaluationoftasksbyan assessment method. By using a standardized ergonomics
ergonomicsexpert.Agenerallyacceptedandpopularmethod metric, we expect that our results will be compatible with
for full-body evaluation, veriﬁed by ergonomic experts and existing ergonomics practices. Even so, the metric is easily
easy to automate, is the Rapid Entire Body Assessment replaceable by any other measure derivable from pose and
(REBA) [25] (which is the full-body extension of RULA load information.
[21]).REBArequiresmeasurementofthefull-bodyposeand REBA applies a set of tables to evaluate the human
estimation of the external forces acting on the body. posture from joint angles augmented with some additional
1800
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:12:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. C. Hand Load Estimator
The load on each human hand is estimated based on the
handposesofthehumanandrobotaswellasphysicalprop-
erties (such as the mass, geometry, and friction parameters)
of the manipulated object. To do so, we solve the following
optimization problem: each of the hands is allowed to exert
a normal force F and a tangential force F (as depicted in
N T
Fig 4). Static balance is assumed at all times. Two reasons
supportthisassumption:all(allowedrobot)motionsareslow,
and the planner only considers conﬁgurations in which it
should be possible to halt the plan, for example, to wait for
a conﬁrmation to continue.
Fig.4. Anobjectsupportedatfourpoints,by:c :robotright,c :robotleft,
1 2
c :humanright,andc :humanlefthand.Ateachcontactpoint,thetotal The optimization criterion is the square of the resultant
3 4
forceF isthevectorsumofthenormalforceFN,actingindirectionθ,and forces summed over all hands in contact, which expresses
a tangential force FT, which can be decomposed into vectors pointing in the desire to hold the object as lightly as possible. Given
y andz direction.Thexdirectionisdeﬁnedfromthehumantotherobot.
whichhandsareincont(cid:88)actwith(cid:0)theobject,Eq(cid:1).(1)describes
the optimization problem:
information, e.g., external loads (Sec. IV-C) or whether the
min F2 +F2 (1)
human is standing on one leg. The resulting score ranges N,i T,i
from 1 (negligible risk) to a maximum of 12 (high risk: 8- (cid:113) i=handsincontact (cid:113)
subject to the following bounds for each of the hands:
10, very high risk: 11+).
The original REBA assessment considers only one active − − ≤ ≤ −
F2 F2 F F2 F2
arm.Forthebimanualtasksweareconsidering,weevaluate maxPull,i maxT,i N,i maxPush,i maxT,i
(1a)
the arm that is the least ergonomic in order to compute
− ≤ ≤
the worst-case REBA score. The full-body pose score is (cid:80) Fm(cid:80)axT,i FT,i F(cid:80)maxT,i (1b)
integrated over time to evaluate and compare plans.
and the static balance constraints,
(cid:80) (cid:80) (cid:80)
F =0, F =0, F =mg, (1c)
B. Full-Body Pose Estimator i x,i i y,i i z,i
M =0, M =0, M =0, (1d)
For the ergonomic assessment, we need to infer a full- i x,i i y,i i z,i
body pose given the hand poses. Mapping hand poses to a where FmaxPull,i, FmaxPush,i, and FmaxT,i are the maximum
pulling, pushing, and tangential forces for each of the (robot
full-body pose is a redundant problem, which we chose to
solve in the following two steps: and human) hands in contact. Gravity g is acting on the
1) Learned Pose Predictor From Data: maps the two object’s mass m in the negative z-direction (Fig. 4). The
solution of this optimization problem is the set of minimum
human hand poses to the human’s full-body pose by means
hand forces required to hold the object in static balance.
of supervised learning. Given that the training data does not
always cover the whole input space, there might be small V. ERGONOMICPLANNER
errors in these predictions.
For planning, the general planning architecture of [5] has
Since the mapping from hand poses to full-body poses is
been extended to include the ergonomic cost of the human
not unique, we record humans to get full-body poses that
partner. Given some goal state provided by the task model
are typically employed. The datasets contain full-body joint
(Fig. 2), the state space is searched for a sequence of states
angles(59degreesoffreedom)andacorrespondingforward
to reach the goal with minimum cost. This plan can be
kinematicmodel.Welearnanearestneighbor(NN)mapand
convertedtosmoothmotiontrajectoriesfortherobot’shands,
an LWPR model [26]. The models are trained on the hand
and through full-body IK, motor commands for the robot
poses obtained by the forward kinematics model from the
hardware can be computed. For further details, the reader is
recorded poses. Evaluation and selection of the models is
referred to [5].
discussed in Sec. VI.
Given an object of known size and weight, the tasks we
In any case, the hand positions and orientations of the consider are formulated in terms of the desired position and
estimated full-body pose will not exactly match the target. orientation (pose) of the object. In order to plan how best
This is corrected in the next step: to cooperatively manipulate the object to achieve this goal,
2) Inverse Kinematic (IK) Pose Correction: makes the the underlying state description comprises the object pose
hands of the full-body pose match the hand poses. as well as the contact locations for robot and human hands.
The IK pose correction step will correct the pose to Fig.5depictsthediscretestatedescriptionfortheboxobject
comply with the human hand poses. Additional constraints usedinourstudy.However,thefaceoftheobjectcanhavean
are applied to align the feet with the ground plane, and to arbitraryshape.Possiblecontactlocationsaredeﬁnedevenly
keeptheoverallcenterofmassbalanced.See[27]fordetails. distributed around the graspable surface of the object, with
1801
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:12:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLEI
±
MODELESTIMATIONERRORS,MEAN STD,FORTHENNANDLWPR
PREDICTORSWITHDIFFERENTANGLEWEIGHTFACTORS.
Angleweightfactor 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
| | ± ± ± ± ± ±
NN (cid:126)x incm 13 8.2 13 8.2 13 7.5 14 7.6 15 8.3 15 8.7
(cid:54) indeg 30±34 21±18 17±10 15±9.6 14±8.9 14±8.5
| | ± ± ± ± ± ±
LWPR (cid:126)x incm 15 10 14 9.1 16 10 15 9.3 17 8.7 14 8.3
(cid:54) indeg 39±35 36±31 30±37 22±26 26±34 16±22
∈{ ◦ ◦− } ◦
Fig.5. Statedescription.Thenumbersinthecirclesenumeratethecontact Φhob∈ject{0.5,00.,5∆+Φ∆,.h.,..,.3.6,02.0}∆,∆Φh ,=∆Φ0.=1 i3n0maentdersh.eiTghhtiss
locationsononesideoftheobject.Discretizedheighth(fromground)and
section presents the relevant implementation details to the
angleΦobject deﬁnethepositionandorientationoftheobject.
simulation tests and user study discussed in Sec. VII.
A. Pose Estimation
the hand normal vector always perpendicular to the object
surface.Inthisway,theindexofthecontactlocationsufﬁces Each participant was equipped with a motion capture
to describe the position and orientation of each hand. suit for data collection, and was asked to move and rotate
∗
An A graph search is applied to ﬁnd a state sequence the box with a human partner. A corresponding dataset of
which is optimal with respect to some cost criterion. Costs about 1.5min with a sampling time of 4ms was recorded.
accumulateastheplannerexplorespossiblenextstatesinthe Participants were guided to move the box through a large
sequenceandeachtransitionfromonestatetothenexthasan range of positions in the overall task space. The obtained
associated cost. In [5], this transition cost was proportional dataset was used to train a subject-speciﬁc pose predictor
to the time the robot needed for the transition. which, after IK correction, provides a pose estimate that
In the ergonomic planner, the transition cost is extended reﬂects the respective participant’s personal pose behavior.
by the predicted ergonomic cost of the human partner. With The smaller the IK correction can be kept, the more human-
the method presented in Sec. IV, the REBA score can be like the predicted poses will be, and the more personal
computed for each of the states proposed by the planner. It behavior is captured.
is assumed that subsequent states are close enough, and the The pose predictor is trained to estimate the full-body
change between them slow enough, that the properties (such pose from hand positions and orientations. A weight factor
asposeandload)duringthetransitionbetweenthestatescan scales the importance of the orientations with respect to the
be estimated sufﬁciently by linear interpolation between the positions. One set of training data (18k samples) was used
enclosingstates.Currently,weassumeeachstatetransitionto to train the NN and LWPR predictors with different angle
have a ﬁxed duration. Therefore, we assume the ergonomics weight factors. The models were evaluated with a different
of the transitions can be compared by taking the average dataset (25k samples) containing similar poses of the same
REBA score of the enclosing states. person. The results are shown in Table I.
Thehumanergonomiccosttermisscaledtodominatethe Ingeneral,theNNpredictionresultsinalowermeanerror
previously described robot cost by one order of magnitude. and smaller standard deviation compared to the LWPR. The
When different possible successor states have the same cost, differences are small for the position precision, but the NN
the planner is biased towards selecting the next state which predictor performs much better when it comes to predicting
requires the least movement. While not exploited in the the correct angles of the hands. An angle weight factor of
experiments,itshouldbestatedthatourplanningarchitecture 0.3 was chosen for the subsequent experiments, trading off
allows for specifying an upper bound on the permissible position and orientation.
ergonomic cost. This can easily be incorporated into the The body pose estimation, especially the IK correction
employedplannerbyrejectingstateswithanergonomiccost step, is too computationally expensive for the planner to run
larger than a given limit. on every state evaluation. As the set of states considered
during planning is discrete and ﬁnite, we generate a table
VI. EVALUATIONSCENARIO which contains the full-body pose stored for every set of
Inthispaper,themethodisappliedtoacooperativeobject unique human hand states and object heights. Then, during
rotation task in which the object is held on one side by search,onlythistableneedstobeevaluatedinordertoobtain
the robot and on the other side by a human. A proof-of- the pose for ergonomic evaluation.
concept user study with four subjects was conducted with a
× × B. Load Estimation
rectangularboxofdimensions0.63 0.36 1.0m,weighing
10kg (Fig. 1). The box is rotated in the 2D plane around Currently, we disallow grasping (and hence pulling). For
the axis pointing from the human to the robot. Translation therobotthiswillalwaysbethecase,asitisnotabletograsp
is only allowed in the vertical direction, as speciﬁed by the objects. The people in the study were instructed not to
h. The state space is deﬁned as in Fig. 5, with angles grasp,onlysupport,theobject.Thus,allforcesinxdirection,
1802
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:12:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLEII TABLEIII
PARAMETERSANDCONSTRAINTVALUESFORTHELOADESTIMATION PREDICTEDANDMEASUREDREBASCORESOFTHEERGONOMICAND
◦
BASELINEPLANNERFORROTATINGA10kgOBJECTBY180 ,
maximumhumanpullingforce Fh,maxPull 0.0 N MEAN±STDFORFOURDIFFERENTPEOPLEANDTWOROTATIONTASKS
mmaaxxiimmuummrhoubmoatnpuplulisnhginfgorfcoerce FFrh,,mmaaxxPPuulslh 908..01 NN EACH(CLOCKWISEANDCOUNTERCLOCKWISEROTATION).
maximumrobotpushingforce Fr,maxPush 137.3 N
frictioncoefﬁcienthuman µh 1.1 Average Maximum %oftim≥ewith
frictioncoefﬁcientrobot µr 1.1 REBA REBA REBA 8
object(box)mass m 10.0 kg ± ± ±
Planned ergonomicplanner 4.6 0.2 6.5 1.1 0.9 1.5
± ± ±
baselineplanner 6.0 0.7 7.8 0.4 25.2 24.2
± ± ±
Measured ergonomicplanner 5.1 1.2 7.9 0.9 5.9 6.3
perpendicular to the object face (Fig. 4), are assumed to baselineplanner 5.5±1.6 8.0±1.3 17.7±18.0
be zero. Therefore, the maximum allowed tangential forces
depend on the normal forces and the friction coefﬁcients,
| |
i.e., FmaxT,i =µi FN,i , with the friction coefﬁcients µi. ergonomic for the human. This can be observed in states C
Theparametervaluesusedinthepresentedcasesarelisted
and D in Fig. 6. The baseline planner requires the human to
in Table II. Since REBA considers a maximum load of
stayinaveryunergonomicposeuntiltherobothasregrasped
10kg, this was set as the maximum allowed human pushing
twice, while the ergonomic planner allows the human to
load. The robot arms have a maximum load speciﬁcation of
regrasp to a more ergonomic pose as quickly as possible
14kg. The friction coefﬁcients are an estimate based on the
and to stay in the more ergonomic pose as long as possible.
friction coefﬁcients of combinations of materials the human
Figures 7 and 8 show the predicted, respectively the
and robot hands and the box are made of.
measured, REBA scores from the ergonomic and baseline
Asforthefull-bodyposes,theloadsareprecomputedand
planners. The dashed lines indicate the seven states corre-
stored in a table for fast retrieval during planning.
spondingtothesnapshotsinFig.6.Duetosafetyreasons,the
VII. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS robottakes6.0sforregraspingorrotatingtheobject.Height
adjustmentscanbeperformedmuchfasterandwhenitisthe
The ergonomic planner is tested in a small user study of
four people (1 female, 3 male), ranging in height between human’sturntoregrasp,a3.0stransitiontimeismuchmore
comfortableforthehuman.Withalongertransitiontime,the
1.70 and 1.95m, on the task of collaboratively rotating the
◦ humans would need to take active care not to be too fast.
box 180 , clockwise and counterclockwise. The subjects
This results in some state changes in the ergonomic planner
were speciﬁcally chosen for their differences in size and
occurring at a different time than in the baseline planner.
build in order to prove the concept. The ergonomic perfor-
mance of the planner is compared to that of the planner Fig. 7 shows lower REBA scores for the ergonomic
without the ergonomic cost term. In order to evaluate the plannerwheneveramoreergonomicalternativecanbefound.
quality of the ergonomic planner, the participants need to The results in Fig. 8 also generally show a REBA score
follow the robot’s collaborative plan for them. The plan is below the score associated with the baseline planner. Up to
displayed on a large screen next to the robot. about 35s, the predicted REBA scores are reﬂected in the
The planner is evaluated in simulation and in an experi- measurements, except for the ergonomic plan not actually
mental setup with the robot depicted in Fig. 1. During the getting the REBA score as low as 3. Around 30s and in
experiments, the participants wear an Xsens motion capture the last 7s, the baseline plan was executed surprisingly
suit [28] to measure their poses. The REBA scores are ergonomically, resulting locally in a lower REBA score for
computed from the predicted, respectively measured, poses the baseline planner.
combined with the estimated loads. Measurements of the The ergonomic plan differs from person to person, which
robot hand forces show an average force estimation error indicates the planner accounts for subject-speciﬁc differ-
of 0.4N, with a standard deviation of 9.8N. Compared the ences. Table III lists the combined results of the planners
average predicted force of 25.9N, this is accurate enough for all participants of the user study, each of whom rotates
for our purposes. the box clockwise and counterclockwise, once in simulation
Fig. 6 shows seven states out of a sequence proposed by and once together with the physical robot. Averaged over all
the ergonomic (top row) and baseline (bottom row) planners generatedplans,thepredictedaverageREBAscoreisclearly
◦
for the goal of rotating the box 180 . The original planner lower for the ergonomic planner compared to the baseline
justtriestominimizethetimetotaskcompletion.Asaresult, planner, and the standard deviation is smaller. In a single
the height of the object is held constant and, by default, the case, the predicted maximum REBA score was as high for
robotalwaysregraspsﬁrst.Forafaircomparisonbetweenthe the ergonomic planner as for the baseline planner. This is
twoplanners,theheightoftheobjectintheinitialstateisthe the case when no more ergonomic alternative is known by
ergonomically optimal height of the starting pose according the pose estimator. Except for one single case (state B in
to the human pose model. Fig. 6 and Fig. 7), the ergonomic planner could avoid plans
≥
The ergonomic planner adjusts the height to optimize includingposesinthe“HighRisk”category,i.e.,REBA 8.
ergonomics.Whoregraspsﬁrstalsodependsonwhatismost The REBA scores observed during the experiments show
1803
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:12:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. A B 3 C 3 D 3 E REBA:  5 F REBA:  3 G
5 REBA:  8 REBA:  8
◦
Fig.6. Ergonomicplanner(top)versusbaselineplanner(bottom)showingsevenstatesoftheplannedsequenceforrotatingthebox+180 .Atthebottom
ofeachsubﬁguretheREBAscoreisprinted.ThestatescorrespondtothedashedlinesinFig.7.
human model which allows for prediction of an ergonomic
8
assessmentcorresponding toa statewithin atask. It consists
of a learned pose model and a computational load model.
6
The pose model is trained with human motion capture data
4 F G inordertopredictthehumanposeasrealisticallyaspossible.
The load model assumes some prior knowledge of the task,
A B C C D D E such as the mass and geometry of the manipulated object.
2
Given a state within the task, the pose and load models pro-
0 10 20 30 40 50
videthehumanposeandcorrespondinginteractionforcesfor
calculatingacorrespondingergonomicsscore.Ourprediction
Fig. 7. Predicted ergonomic scores for the ergonomic and the baseline
planner for rotating the box +180◦. The dashed lines correspond to the model gives a subject-speciﬁc estimate of the ergonomics of
states depicted in Fig. 6 is reached. In case of states C and D the two the states within a task.
planners differ in when the state is reached (see lines in corresponding
The second contribution is the integration of this pre-
colors).
diction model with a planning algorithm. The presented
planner incorporates states and actions for both robot and
8 human. This allows the computation of sequential plans op-
timizedforhumanergonomics.Itisalsopossibletocompute
6 F G plans with a guaranteed upper bound on the permissible
ergonomics score. We have shown in simulation and robot
4 experimentsofacollaborativehuman-robotbox-rotatingtask
that the proposed concepts lead to improved human er-
A B C C D D E
2 gonomics. Evaluation of the proposed ergonomics-enhanced
0 10 20 30 40 50 planner in more complex collaborative tasks remains for
future work.
Fig. 8. Measured ergonomic scores for the ergonomic and the baseline In this paper, we selected the REBA score for ergonomic
◦
plannerforrotatingthebox+180 .AsinFig.7,thedashedlinescorrespond
assessment. However, the system is ﬂexible enough to allow
tothestatesdepictedinFig.6.
forincorporatingotherergonomicsindicators.Forfutureuse
of the proposed method, exploration into the effects of in-
smaller differences between the two planners. Though large corporatingalternateergonomicsindicatorsisrecommended,
differences were observed between participants, in general as the discrete nature of REBA sometimes causes a large
the ergonomic planner still yields a lower ergonomic cost, differenceinergonomiccostforverysmallposturechanges.
and the amount of time spent in poses with a ‘high’ This paper demonstrates our approach to be capable of
ergonomic risk is reduced considerably. In all cases the ﬁndingaplanwhichaffordsimprovedergonomicsforpeople
standard deviation is lower for the ergonomic planner. working with a robot. Future work will focus on concepts
to encourage the human to follow the ergonomic plan, and
VIII. CONCLUSIONANDDISCUSSION
reacting appropriately when the human does not.
Thispaperpresentsanovelconceptforcomputingoptimal
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
ergonomics-enhanced plans in cooperative physical human-
robot interaction tasks. The ﬁrst contribution is a novel The authors thank Dirk Ruiken for his kind support.
1804
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:12:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES inhuman–robotcollaboration,”Int.J.RoboticsResearch,vol.36,no.
13-14,pp.1579–1594,2017.
[1] V.Villani,F.Pini,F.Leali,and C. Secchi,“Surveyonhuman–robot [15] K.P.Hawkins,S.Bansal,N.N.Vo,andA.F.Bobick,“Anticipating
collaboration in industrial settings: Safety, intuitive interfaces and human actions for collaboration in the presence of task and sensor
applications,”Mechatronics,vol.55,pp.248–266,2018. uncertainty,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
[2] B. R. da Costa and E. R. Vieira, “Risk factors for work-related 2014.
musculoskeletaldisorders:asystematicreviewofrecentlongitudinal [16] T. Stouraitis, I. Chatzinikolaidis, M. Gienger, and S. Vijayakumar,
studies,”AmericanJ.IndustrialMedicine,vol.53,no.3,pp.285–323, “Dyadic collaborative manipulation through hybrid trajectory opti-
2010. mization,”in2ndConf.RobotLearning,2018.
[3] Siemens PLM Software. (2019) Jack. [Online]. Available: [17] W. Kim, J. Lee, L. Peternel, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Ajoudani,
https://www.plm.automation.siemens.com/store/en-us/jack/ “Anticipatory robot assistance for the prevention of human static
[4] P. Maurice, V. Padois, Y. Measson, and P. Bidaud, “Human-oriented joint overloading in human–robot collaboration,” IEEE Robotics and
designofcollaborativerobots,”Int.J.IndustrialErgonomics,vol.57, AutomationLett.,vol.3,no.1,pp.68–75,2018.
pp.88–102,2017. [18] L.Peternel,W.Kim,J.Babicˇ,andA.Ajoudani,“Towardsergonomic
[5] M.Gienger,D.Ruiken,T.Bates,M.Regaieg,M.Meißner,J.Kober, controlofhuman-robotco-manipulationandhandover,”inIEEE-RAS
P. Seiwald, and A.-C. Hildebrandt, “Human-robot cooperative object 17thInt.Conf.HumanoidRobotics(Humanoids),2017.
manipulationwithcontactchanges,”inIEEE/RSJInt.Conf.Intelligent [19] A. G. Marin, M. S. Shourijeh, P. E. Galibarov, M. Damsgaard,
RobotsandSystems(IROS),2018. L.Fritzsche,andF.Stulp,“Optimizingcontextualergonomicsmodels
[6] B. Nemec, N. Likar, A. Gams, and A. Ude, “Human robot coopera- inhuman-robotinteraction,”inIEEE/RSJInt.Conf.IntelligentRobots
tion with compliance adaptation along the motion trajectory,” Auton. andSystems(IROS),2018.
Robots,vol.42,no.5,pp.1023–1035,2018. [20] A. Shafti, A. Ataka, B. U. Lazpita, A. Shiva, H. A. Wurdemann,
[7] F.Ficuciello,L.Villani,andB.Siciliano,“Variableimpedancecontrol andK.Althoefer,“Real-timerobot-assistedergonomics,”inIEEEInt.
ofredundantmanipulatorsforintuitivehuman–robotphysicalinterac- Conf.RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2019.
tion,”IEEETrans.Robotics,vol.31,no.4,pp.850–863,2015. [21] L. McAtamney and E. N. Corlett, “RULA: A survey method for
the investigation of work-related upper limb disorders,” Applied Er-
[8] L. Roveda, S. Haghshenas, M. Caimmi, N. Pedrocchi, and L. Moli-
gonomics,vol.24,no.2,pp.91–99,1993.
nati Tosatti, “Assisting operators in heavy industrial tasks: on the
[22] B. Busch, M. Toussaint, and M. Lopes, “Planning ergonomic se-
design of an optimized cooperative impedance fuzzy-controller with
quences of actions in human-robot interaction,” in IEEE Int. Conf.
embeddedsafetyrules,”FrontiersRoboticsandAI,vol.6,p.75,2019.
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2018.
[9] D. J. Agravante, A. Cherubini, A. Sherikov, P.-B. Wieber, and
[23] AnyBody Technology A/S. [Online]. Available:
A. Kheddar, “Human-humanoidcollaborative carrying,” IEEE Trans.
www.anybodytech.com
Robotics,vol.35,no.4,pp.833–846,2019.
[24] G.David,“Ergonomicmethodsforassessingexposuretoriskfactors
[10] E. Gribovskaya, A. Kheddar, and A. Billard, “Motion learning and
for work-related musculoskeletal disorders,” Occupational Medicine,
adaptiveimpedanceforrobotcontrolduringphysicalinteractionwith
vol.55,no.3,pp.190–199,2005.
humans,”inIEEEInt.Conf.RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2011.
[25] S. Hignett and L. McAtamney, “Rapid entire body assessment
[11] J.DelPretoandD.Rus,“Sharingtheload:Human-robotteamlifting
(REBA),”AppliedErgonomics,vol.31,no.201,p.205,2000.
using muscle activity,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation
[26] S. Vijayakumar and S. Schaal, “Locally weighted projection regres-
(ICRA),2019.
sion: An O(n) algorithm for incremental real time learning in high
[12] L. Peternel, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Ajoudani, “Towards multi-modal
dimensional space,” in 17th Int. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML),
intention interfaces for human-robot co-manipulation,” in IEEE/RSJ
2000.
Int.Conf.IntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),2016.
[27] M.Gienger,H.Janssen,andC.Goerick,“Task-orientedwholebody
[13] J. Bu¨tepage, H. Kjellstro¨m, and D. Kragic, “Anticipating many fu-
motionforhumanoidrobots,”in5thIEEE-RASInt.Conf.Humanoid
tures:Onlinehumanmotionpredictionandsynthesisforhuman-robot
Robots,2005.
collaboration,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
[28] D.Roetenberg,H.Luinge,andP.Slycke,“XsensMVN:full6dofhu-
2018.
manmotiontrackingusingminiatureinertialsensors,”XsensMotion
[14] G. Maeda, M. Ewerton, G. Neumann, R. Lioutikov, and J. Peters,
TechnologiesBV,Tech.Rep.,2009.
“Phaseestimationforfastactionrecognitionandtrajectorygeneration
1805
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:12:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 