2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
A Synchronization Approach for Achieving Cooperative Adaptive
Cruise Control Based Non-Stop Intersection Passing
Zhe Liu, Huanshu Wei, Hanjiang Hu, Chuanzhe Suo, Hesheng Wang, Haoang Li, and Yun-Hui Liu
Abstract—Cooperative adaptive cruise control (CACC) of waves propagated in trafﬁc ﬂows and result in trafﬁc jams
intelligent vehicles contributes to improving cruise control [2]. With trafﬁc management and vehicle scheduling, CACC
performance, reducing trafﬁc congestion, saving energy and
technique can be utilized to realize non-stop intersection
increasing trafﬁc ﬂow capacity. In this paper, we resolve the
passing,whichwillgreatlyincreasethetrafﬁcefﬁciencyand
CACC problem from the viewpoint of synchronization control,
our main idea is to introduce the spatial-temporal synchro- save energies consumed during decelerations and accelera-
nization mechanism into vehicle platoon control to achieve the tions in stop-and-go patterns.
robust CACC and to further realize the non-stop intersection In this paper, we introduce the CACC approach into
control. Firstly, by introducing the cross-coupling based space
resolving the non-stop intersection passing control problem
synchronization mechanism, a distributed control algorithm is
of autonomous vehicles. Our main idea is to transform the
presented to achieve the single-lane CACC in the presence
of vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications, which enables non-stop intersection passing control problem into a CACC
autonomous vehicles to track the desired platoon trajectory problem with virtual platoons, then introduce the spatial-
while synchronizing their longitudinal velocities to keeping temporalsynchronizationmechanismtoachieverobustCAC-
the expected inter-vehicle distance. Secondly, by designing the
C and thus realizing the non-stop intersection passing. More
enter-time scheduling mechanism (temporal synchronization),
speciﬁcally, we ﬁrstly introduce a space synchronization
a high-level intersection control strategy is proposed to com-
mand vehicles to form a virtual platoon to pass through the mechanism to build the CACC system. The information
intersectionwithoutstopping.Thirdly,aLyapunov-basedtime- of the preceding and succeeding vehicles is considered to
domainstabilityanalysisapproachispresented.Comparedwith imitate human driving behaviors and achieve robust pla-
the traditional string stability based approach, the proposed
toon control. Secondly, we design an enter-time scheduling
approach guarantees the global asymptotical convergence of
mechanism to achieve the temporal synchronization of all
the proposed CACC system. Experiments in the small-scale
simulatedsystemdemonstratetheeffectivenessoftheproposed the vehicles near the intersection, i.e., assembling them into
approach. a virtual platoon. Then the previously established CACC
approach can be directly utilized to coordinate the motion
I. INTRODUCTION
of each vehicle in the virtual platoon and the non-stop
Platoon control of autonomous vehicles has been investi- intersection passing control can be achieved.
gated extensively since the 1990s [1], [2] and several practi-
cal testing systems have been developed in recent years [3]– A. Related Work
[5]. Forming a platoon contributes to increasing trafﬁc ﬂow 1) Intersection Planning and Control:
capacities and saving energies. Based on Adaptive Cruise Intersection handling is one of the most challenging
Control (ACC) approach and vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) / issues in current self-driving systems and most previous
vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication technology, accidents occurred at intersections [7]–[9]. Traditional re-
CooperativeAdaptiveCruiseControl(CACC)isexpectedto searchesmainlyfocusonpredictingtheintentionandmotion
achievemorerobustandreliableplatooncontrolperformance trajectoryoftherelatedvehiclesandoptimizingthedecision
[3], [4]. making system to avoid collisions [7], [8], [13]. However,
Intersectionhandlingisoneofthemostchallengingprob- these algorithms have not taken advantages of the V2V /
lems for intelligent vehicles [7]–[9] and inevitable stop-and- V2I technologies and system-level autonomy of the vehicle
go patterns during intersection passings may cause shock platoon, and stop-and-go behaviors during intersection pass-
ings will increase the energy consumptions and may cause
ThisworkissupportedinpartbytheNaturalScienceFoundationofChina
trafﬁc jams [2].
under Grant U1613218, in part by Beijing Advanced Innovation Center
forIntelligentRobotsandSystemsunderGrant2019IRS01.Corresponding Managingthetrafﬁcﬂowandschedulingthevehicleenter-
authors:H.WangandH.Li. time can be achieved by developing the trafﬁc management
Z.Liu,H.Wei,C.Suo,H.LiandY.-H.LiuarewiththeDepartmentof
centerwhichreceivesvehicleinformationandsendsschedul-
MechanicalandAutomationEngineering,TheChineseUniversityofHong
Kong,HongKong. ing decisions through communication networks. Based on
H. Hu is with the Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong which, the intersection passing time of each vehicle can be
University,China.
coordinatedandnon-stopintersectionpassingcanberealized
H. Wang is with Department of Automation, Key Laboratory of Sys-
tem Control and Information Processing of Ministry of Education, Key [9]. However, these researches mainly focus on the route
Laboratory of Marine Intelligent Equipment and System of Ministry of planningandintersectionschedulingproblem,andarebased
Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. H.
ontheassumptionsofprefectindividualvehiclemotioncon-
WangisalsowithBeijingAdvancedInnovationCenterforIntelligentRobots
andSystems,BeijingInstituteofTechnology,China. trol performance. External disturbances and motion control
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 236
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. un-accuraciesmayresultinanunstablecoordinationsystem, intransportationsystemstoachieveadaptivecontrolwithout
and lead to vehicle collisions. linearizingoperations[14],however,theeffectivenessofthis
2) Vehicle Cruise Control: type of approaches in CACC systems has not been validated
In the past decades, researchers have developed numerous yet.
car-following models (CRFs) in order to model human
drivingbehaviors,areviewofthepast50yearscanbefound B. Main Contribution
in [1]. Among these, Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) [1]
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized
and its extensions have been widely used to model human
as follows:
behaviors and to achieve autonomous cruise control [2].
However, testing results presented in [6] showed that IDM Firstly, a novel CACC approach is presented in this paper
controller has signiﬁcant shortcomings in the presence of byintroducingthesynchronizationframework.Theproposed
preceding vehicle speed changes. approach ensures that the position error of each vehicle
In recent years, in order to achieve a safe and comfort- converges to zero in a synchronous manner, i.e., the desired
able driving experience, ACC has been investigated actively inter-vehicle distance can be maintained and the robustness
and commercial systems have been developed [6]. ACC to external disturbances can be improved.
overcomes the large response delay and distance error of Secondly, we transform the non-stop intersection passing
IDM controllers, however, it may amplify preceding vehicle control problem of autonomous vehicles into a CACC prob-
velocity changes and lead to upstream shock-waves. More lembyintroducingthevirtualplatoonconcept.Theproposed
recently, thanks to the rapid development of V2V / V2I spatial-temporalsynchronizationmechanismregulatesthein-
communication technologies, CACC has been extensively tersectionenter-timeofthevehiclesinthevirtualplatoonand
studied, which has been proved to have the advantages of simultaneously coordinate their motions to avoid collisions.
decreasingfuelconsumptionsandmaintainingstabilityunder Then based on the proposed CACC approach, the reliability
short inter-vehicle distances [3]. However, in most existing and robustness of the intersection coordination system can
work [3]–[5], only the information of preceding and leading be guaranteed.
vehicles is considered, disturbances in succeeding vehicles Thirdly, a time-domain stability analysis approach is pre-
cannotberespondedbythewholeplatooninasynchronous sented based on the Lyapunov method. Compared with the
manner, thus reducing the efﬁciency and robustness of the string stability approach, the proposed approach guarantees
CACC system. Another problem is that, in existing work the global convergence of the CACC system even under
[3]–[5], the current acceleration of the preceding vehicle is substantial initial errors, thus ensuring the applicability of
required to achieve the CACC functionality. Compared with the proposed approach in practical implementations.
the velocity and position information, vehicle acceleration The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
usually changes rapidly and can not be measured accurately describes the overall system structure, Section III presents
or obtained in real-time. This requirement will impact the the detailed methods of the proposed CACC based non-
implementation feasibility of the existing controllers. stop intersection passing control system. Simulations and
3) System-Level Autonomy and Stability Analysis: real experiments are proposed in Section IV and Section
Sudden velocity changes of the preceding vehicle may V respectively. Finally, the conclusion and future work are
cause upstream shock-waves and form trafﬁc jams [2]. This described in Section VI.
property can be analyzed by the string stability approach
[11]. A vehicle platoon is string stable if changes of the II. SYSTEMSTRUCTURE
velocity of preceding vehicles will be attenuated in the
response of the following vehicles [3]. Similar to most existing work [2]–[6], we consider the
Both the vehicle-level and system-level string stability single-lane CACC task. The longitudinal control and lateral
conditions are presented in [2] and based on which, an controlcanbedecoupled[2]–[6]andwerestrictthisworkto
optimalcontrollerisfurtherproposedwhichenablesasingle thelongitudinalcontrolproblem,i.e.,wefocusondesigning
autonomous vehicle to stabilize a string of human driving the acceleration control lawof each vehicle. We assume that
vehicles. However, in most existing work [2]–[4], frequency relative velocities of the preceding and succeeding vehicles
domain analysis of the error transfer function is utilized as well as the inter-vehicle distances can be measured or
to construct the string stability approach. This approach obtained in real-time, and there exists a trafﬁc management
can only guarantee the local stability of the CACC system centerwhichcollectsthestateofeachvehicleandformulates
through model linearization near the work point. In order the virtual platoon which deﬁnes the intersection passing
to utilize these approaches, the uniform ﬂow equilibrium of order (enter-time). Figure 1 shows the overall structure of
the CACC system should be global stable. Or an additional the proposed system.
controller is required to bring the system to the neigh- Based on the proposed CACC controller, the onboard
borhood of the equilibrium [2] before the existing CACC motion control system enables each vehicle to keep syn-
approaches can be implemented. These will greatly limit chronous velocity and desired inter-vehicle distance with its
the practical applications of the existing CACC approaches. neighbors in the virtual platoon, thus achieving the non-stop
Recently, neural network based methods have been utilized intersection passing task.
237
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Traffic Management Center Thenacouplederrorsi canbedeﬁnedasthecombination
(Intersection Coordination Control) of x˜, x˙˜, and κ of each vehicle i, where
i i i
−
V2V / V2I Communication Network si=x˙˜i+kpx˜i+κi=x˙˜i+kpx˜i+kh(h˜i+1 h˜i). (4)
Finally, we design the following CACC acceleration con-
trol law
Perception Perception Perception − − −
ai=v˙di kpx˙˜i κ˙i ksisi, (5)
Motion Control Motion Control Motion Control
(CACC Controller) (CACC Controller) (CACC Controller) where k , k and k are positive control gains, κ is deﬁned
p h si − i
in (3), and κ1=khh˜2, κN = khh˜N.
Hardware Actuation Hardware Actuation Hardware Actuation The proposed controller (5) leads to the close-loop dy-
Vehicle i+1 Vehicle i Vehicle i-1
namics s˙i+ksisi=0, which im→plies that si and s˙i converge
to zero exponentially. Since s 0, we have
Fig.1. Overallsystemstructure. i
− − −
x˙˜i=−kpx˜i−kh(h˜i+−1 h˜i) − − (6)
III. CACCBASEDNON-STOPINTERSECTIONPASSING = kpx˜i kh[(x˜i x˜i+1) (x˜i−1 x˜i)]
{ }
CONTROL By{de}ﬁning x˜=[x˜1,x˜2,...,x˜N]T, Kp=diag kp N×N, Kh=
diag k × , and the cross-coupling topology matrix as
A. Synchronization Approach for CACC h N N
follows
 
Consider N autonomous vehicles driving in a platoon, as − 
 1 1 0 ... 0 
showninFigure2,wherex andv representthelongitudinal  − 
i i  1 2 1 
position and velocity of each vehicle i, h is the inter-  
vehicle distance between vehicle i−1 and viehicle i. xd is φN×N = ... ,
i −
the desired position of vehicle i, which can be calculated 1 2 1
−
from the desired platoon trajectory, or from the preceding 0 ... 0 1 1
vehicle position x− and the desired inter-vehicle distance
i 1 we have the following error dynamics
hd. Please note that hd can be either a constant [2], [10] or
i i −
a time-varying fo∗rm [3], [4]. If hdi is an identical constant, x˙˜= Kpx˜+Khφx˜. (7)
i.e., hd =hd =h , we have x˙d =x˙d =vd and x¨d =x¨d =v˙d,
i j i j i j B. CACC Formulation of Non-Stop Intersection Passing
where vd and v˙d represent the desired platoon velocity and
Weintroducethevirtualplatoonconcept[9]tocoordinate
acceleration.Otherwise,wedenotex˙d=vd andx¨d=v˙d.vd is
i i i i i the enter-time of each vehicle near the intersection. In order
assumed to be uniformly continuous. We ignore the vehicle
to solve the intersection coordination problem, the CACC
length for simplicity, which can be considered in h or hd in
i i system formulated in Section III should be re-deﬁned as
implementations.
follows:
Vehicle i+1 Vehicle i Vehicle i-1
Fig.2. CACCcontrolstructureofavehicleplatoon.
−By deﬁning the position error of each vehicle i−as x˜i =
xi xid and position synchronization error εi=x˜i−1 x˜i, we Intersection Point
have Virtual Platoon
− − − −
εi=(xi−1 xi) (xid−1 xid)=hi hdi =h˜i, (1)
Vehicle i+1 Vehicle i Vehicle i-1
− − −
ε˙i=h˙i h˙d =vi−1 vi h˙di. (2) Fig.3. VirtualplatoonbasedCACCproblemforintersectioncoordination.
Obviously, the CACC problem has been transformed into Consideranintersectionwithtwosingle-laneroadsandN
a motion synchronization control problem, the control ob- vehicles (here we utilize the batch control concept and only
jective is to converge x˜i, εi and ε˙i of each vehicle i to zero considerthevehicleofwhichthedistancetotheintersection
simultaneously. is smaller than a threshold, i.e., di<D). As shown in Figure
In order to achieve motion synchronization, we introduce 3, in order to schedule the enter-time of each vehicle, all the
the cross-coupling approach [15] to deﬁne the coordination vehicles are assembled in a virtual platoon and the order of
error each vehicle is determined by its distance to the intersection
− −
κi=kh(εi+1 εi)=kh(h˜i+1 h˜i). (3) center. The leader vehicle (vehicle 1) is the one which has
238
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. thenearestdistancetotheintersectioncenter,andweassume K¯h, and M, we have MKp=K¯pM and MKh=K¯hM. Then
that it has a desired velocity vd and is controlled to track −
ixt1ds−de∑siijr=e2dhtdjrarjeepcrteosreynitntdhievivdiurtaulaly1l.pTohsietnioxnia=ndDd−esdiireadndvixrtidu=a∗l V˙ ==−22xx˜˜TTMMTTK(¯K¯ppM−x˜K+¯h2Hx˜)TMMx˜T<K¯h0H.Mx˜
pxsaidomsB=ietaisxoae1dnsd−oSofe(nicv−tteihoh1eni)cahlIebI∗I.o.ivTienhedtehdﬁeenﬁvitniiriottunioasnl, ptohlfaetoontoohnne.-rsItvfoahprdiiain=btleehrsdsjei=sctithohne, t0fhr.oeSAmBinca(ccr6oeb)ra,xd˙˜liwainsteg’sbhotLoauevnmLedemex˙˜mdia,+mVw˙akiepi1xsh˜,iau=εvniei0→fVo,˙irwm→0,hlyih0˜ci,hc=woinmhhtiipicn−hluieoihsmudstp,h→latihet0sex˙˜n.MiT→fxr˜ho→em0n,
passing control problem has been transform into the CACC x˜i→0, and h˙˜i=x˙˜i−1−x˙˜i→0.
control problem with the virtual vehicle platoon deﬁned
The proof is completed.
above. Then the proposed CACC approach in Section III
can be used to solve this problem. D. Implementations and Discussions
It is obvious that if the virtual position error x˜ and
i From (1)-(4), the proposed controller (5) can be re-wrote
synchronization error ε of each vehicle converge to zero
i as:
− −
simultaneously, the enter-time can be coordinated and the ai=v˙di (kp+ksi)x˙˜i kpksix˜i
non-stop intersection passing can be achieved. −kh(h˙˜i+1−h˙˜i)−khksi(h˜i+1−h˜i). (8)
C. Stability Analysis Since h˜i+1−h˜i=(hi+1−hi)−(hdi+1−hdi), we have
We ﬁrst introduce two lemmas which will be used in the − − −
proposed stability analysis. ai=v˙di (kp+ksi)x˙˜i kpksix˜i+kh(h˙di+1 h˙di)
− − − − −
Lemma 1: Each vehicle in the platoon keeps the des→ired +khksi(hdi+1 hdi) kh(h˙i+1 h˙i) khksi(hi+1 hi).
int→er-vehicledis→tancewiththeprecedingvehicle,i.e.,εi 0, We can ﬁnd that, in addition to the desired information
h h , if Mx˜ 0, where
i d and its own states, each vehicle only needs to measure the
 
 −  relative velocities and the inter-vehicle distances to its two
1 1 
 −  neighbors. This guarantees the feasibility of implementing
1 1
M(N−1)×N = ... . theRpermoaprokse1d:aIpnprtohaechprionproesaeldapapplpicroaaticohn,s.both information
−
1 1 of the preceding and succeeding vehicles is considered in
Proof: Combining the deﬁnition of εi, M and x˜, this controllerdesign,thenbasedonthecross-couplingtopology,
lemma can be proved directly. thedisturbanceinonevehiclewillberespondsimultaneously
if L∑eNjm=1mψaij2=: (0s,eei=[161],)..F.,oNra, ttohpenoloMgyψm=atHrixMψ,Nw,Nhe=re{ψHij=}, bthyataltlhevephoiscilteisoninerthroerpolfateoaocnh.vwehhaict’lsemcoonrve,erMgex˜s→to0zeirmopilnieas
MψL,   synchronous manner, i.e., the desired inter-vehicle distance
 
1 1 1 ... 1 can be maintained. So introducing the synchronization ap-
 
0 1 1 ... 1 proach contributes to improve the robustness of the CACC
 
L= ... 1 , sysRteemm.ark 2: The proposed approach guarantees the global
... 1 1
convergence of the CACC system, thus we relax the as-
0 0 ... 0 1
sumption in string-stability approaches and do not need an
0 0 0 ... 0 × −
N (N 1) additionalcontrollertobringthesystemtotheneighborhood
and M is deﬁned in Lemma 1. of the work point.
Remark 3: Since information of virtual neighbors in the
Then we present a sufﬁcient condition which ensures the
virtualplatooncannotbedirectlymeasuredbyvehicleiand
global convergence of the proposed system as follows:
Theorem 1: The proposed CACC system is globally can only be obtained through V2V / V2I communications,
the communication delays between the trafﬁc management
asymptotically stable, i.e., the position error x˜, inter-vehicle
i
distance error h˜ and the relative velocity error h˙˜ converge center and vehicles may affect the reliability of the in-
tdoiazge{rokpa}s(yNm−1p)t×o(itNic−a1l)l,y,K¯ifhs=ymd(ia−gK{¯pkh+}(KN¯h−H1))×<(N−0,1)w,ihseyrme(KA¯)p== tdgeeirevssee,lcottipyompniecnacltolyoorfdthitnehaetciooVmn2mVsuyns/tiecVma2t.iIonHcoodmwelemavyuenr,aicnwadtiitothhnetthereecshpnroaonploside-
A+AT, and H is deﬁned in Lemma 2.
delay of the hardware vehicle platform are totally different
Proof: Deﬁning the Lyapunov functionV =x˜TMTMx˜,
in size, so most of researches ignore the communication
where M is deﬁned in Lemma 1, we have
delay [9]. In this paper, we present simulations to validate
−
V˙ = 2x˜TMTMKpx˜+2x˜TMTMKhφx˜. the effectiveness of the proposed CACC approach in the
presence of communication delays. Simulation results in
According to the deﬁnition of φ and Lemma 2, we have Section IV show that the introduction of communication
Mφ =HM, and according to the deﬁnition of Kp, Kh, K¯p, delaysonlycausessomeresponsedelaysanddoesnotaffect
239
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. the ﬁnal convergence of the CACC system. If the inter- vehicles also slow down (from t = 55s to 80s) to wait
vehicle distance is set to be large enough, this effect can for the disturbed vehicle to maintain the platoon. Thanks
be ignored. In the future, we will evaluate the effect of to the synchronization mechanism, the disturbed vehicle
communication delays on the platoon control performance can catch up and recover in a short time. Note that the
in practical applications, and consider the communication response delay in Figure. 4 results from the communication
delay in system design explicitly. delays considered in the simulation. The results validate
the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed approach
IV. SIMULATIONS in the presence of acceleration saturation limits, external
We ﬁrst present simulations to validate the robustness and disturbances, substantial initial errors and communication
scalabilityoftheproposedCACCapproach.Insimulation1, delays.
15vehiclesarecommandedtoformaplatoonwithadesired In simulation 2, we change the desired inter-vehicle dis-
time-varying velocity vdi = vr = 5+1∗.5cos(0.075t) and a tance into a non-uniﬁed and time-varying form hdi =hmin+
constant inter-vehicle distance hd =h =17.5m. Then the t v. where the leader vehicle has a time-varying velocity
i d,i i
proposedCACCcontrollercanbesimpliﬁedasthefollowing v1 = 5+1.5cos(0.075t), and following vehicles keep the
form: desiredinter-vehicledistancetotheirprecedingvehicles.We
ai=v˙r−0.3x˙˜i−0.2x˜i−0.3(h˙i+1−h˙i)−0.2(hi+1−hi). s0e,tohtmheinr=pa5rmam, tedt,eir=s 2ar.5es,thxe1 =sam5te+a2s0ssiinm(0u.l0at7i5otn),1h˜.i(T0h)e=n
In order to validate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed CACC controller can be transformed into the
theprooposedCACCapproachinsolvingthevirtualplatoon following form:
ci.oen.,trol problem, we add a communication delay τ =0.2s, ai=ai−1−0.08x˙˜i−0.5x˜i−0.08(h˙˜i+1−h˙˜i)−0.5(h˜i+1−h˜i).
− − −
εi=x˜i−1(t τ) x˜i(t τ).
In addition, we set the acceleration saturation limit to
| | Vehicle 15 Vehicle 15
ai <0.2G=1.96m/s2,whichisusuallyusedinthepractical
ACC system to ensure the ride comfort. What’s more, we
−
add an ac−celeration disturbance 1.3a8 to vehicle 8 (i.e.,
a8|input = 0.7a8) from t =55s to 60s to demonstrate the
robustness of the proposed approach.
Attenuation of 
Vehicle 2
headway time changes Vehicle 1 Attenuation of velocity changes
Response delay
Fig.5. Resultsofthesimulation2.
Disturbance (t=55s) Results in Figure 5 show that velocity changes of the
leadervehicleandheadwaytimeerrorsofprecedingvehicles
are attenuated in the response of following vehicles, these
validate the stability of the proposed approach. Note that
in simulation 2, the information of xd is absent for the
i
following vehicles and hd is non-uniﬁed and time-varying,
i
so the control system will not converge to an equilibrium
Desired platoon velocity unless the velocity of the leader vehicle keeps constant.
V. REALEXPERIMENTSINSMALL-SCALESIMULATED
SYSTEMS
Saturation limit
Wefurtherconductlaboratorialexperimentsinsmall-scale
simulated systems with several TurtleBot-3 Burger robots
to demonstrate the practical applicability of the proposed
Fig.4. Resultsofthesimulation1. approach.
An indoor vision positioning system is constructed to lo-
− ∗ −
We −set x1d−(0) =∗0, xid(0) = xid−1(0) h , xi(0) = xid calizeeachvehicleinrealtimeandawirelesscommunication
0.02(i 8)(i 1)h and vi(0)=0, i.e., we add substantial network is established to achieve communications. Due to
initialerrors.ResultsinFigure4showthatthepositionerror the hardware limitations, the acceleration control inputs are
x˜, inter-vehicle distance error h˜ and velocity error x˙˜ of integrated into desired velocity inputs, where the velocity
i i i | |
each vehicle converge to zero simultaneously. Furthermore, saturation limit is set to vi <0.25m/s. What’s more, the
external disturbances on vehicle 8 are responded by all steering controller presented in [10] is used for orientation
the 15 vehicles in a synchronous manner, the preceding control.
240
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Vehicle 1
x-axis
y-axis O
t=1s t=6s t=8s t=0s t=5s t=15s
t=11s t=14s t=17s
t=25s t=35s t=45s
Fig.6. Realscenariosinthenon-stopintersectionpassingexperiment. Fig.8. RealscenariosintheCACCexperiment.
In experiment 1, ﬁve vehicles are commanded to form a
Experiment results in Figure 8 and Figure 9 show that the
virtualplatoontopasstheintersectionwithoutstoppings.The
inver-vehicle distance between each two neighboring vehi-
desired inter-vehicle distance between two virtual neighbors
∗ cles converges to the desired value successfully, i.e., initial
is set to hd = h = 0.36m. The desired velocity of each
i distanceerrorsconvergetozerosimultaneously.Finally,each
vehicle is set to vdi = vr = 0.15m/s, thus v˙r = 0. Then vehicle follows its preceding vehicle to track the desired
the proposed CACC controller can be transformed into the
circle trajectories and, in the meantime, keeps the desired
following form:
inter-vehicle distances with the preceding and succeeding
− − ∗ −
ai=5(vr vi)+10(hi h )+(vi−1 vi) neighbors, thus the CACC task is accomplished.
− − ∗ − −
10(hi+1 h ) (vi vi+1).
Once the vehicle has passed the intersection, the control m)0.8 vehicle 1 - vehicle 2
strategy of the vehicle will be switched into keeping the ce (0.7 vehicle 2 - vehicle 3
desired velocity (and following the entity preceding vehicle, stan0.6 vehicle 3 - vehicle 4
if exist). e di0.5
hicl0.4
e
m) 123 IntReresaelc ttriaojnectories section (m) 123 Intial inter-vehicle Idnitsetrasneccetion inter-v00..230 25 time (s) 50 75
y-axis ( 0 vviirrttuuaall  vveehhiiccllee  12   e to inter 0 Fig.9. ResultsoftheCACCexperiment.
-1 vvviiirrrtttuuuaaalll   vvveeehhhiiicccllleee   534   distanc-1 Intpear-svseinhgic tlhee d iinsttaenrsceec dtiuorning  VI. CONCLUSION
-2 -2
-2 -1 0 1 2 0 4 8 12 16
x-axis (m) time (s)
In this paper, a novel distributed CACC approach is ﬁrst
Fig.7. Resultsofthenon-stopintersectionpassingexperiment. presentedbyutilizingthemotionsynchronizationframework
and based on which, a high-level intersection coordination
Experiment results in Figure 6 and Figure 7 show that systemisfurtherpresentedbyintroducethespatial-temporal
eachvehiclecancoordinateitsmotionwithvirtualneighbors synchronization mechanism to achieve the robust CACC
and the inter-vehicle distance between each two neighboring controlbasednon-stopintersectionpassing.Lyapunov-based
vehicles converges to the desired value successfully, and stability analysis is proposed to ensure the global conver-
the non-stop intersection passing purpose without vehicle gence of the proposed control system. Simulation results
collisions is achieved. validate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed
In experiment 2, the CACC task with four autonomous approach in the presence of substantial initial errors, ac-
vehicles is considered, where the leader vehicle is com- celeration saturation limits, external disturbances and com-
manded by a constant desired velocity v1 = 0.15m/s and munication delays. Finally, Real experiments in small-scale
w∗1=0.2rad/s, and a constant desired inter-vehicle distance roboticsystemsdemonstratethepracticalapplicabilityofthe
h =0.35mbetweeneachtwoneighboringvehiclesisconsid- proposed approach.
ered. The initial position of each following vehicle is placed Infuturework,wewilltakethepracticalvehicledynamics
randomly with large initial position errors and inter-vehicle into consideration, and test the proposed approach on real
distance errors. vehicle platforms.
241
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] M. Treiber, A. Hennecke, and D. Helbing, “Congested trafﬁc states
inempiricalobservationsandmicroscopicsimulations,”Phys.Rev.E,
vol.62,no.2,pp.1805–1824,2000.
[2] C. Wu, A. M. Bayen, and A. Mehta, “Stabilizing trafﬁc with au-
tonomousvehicles,”inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.Robot.Autom.,Brisbane,
Australia,2018,pp.6012–6018.
[3] G. J. Naus, R. P. A. Vugts, J. Ploeg, M. J. G. van de Molengraft,
and M. Steinbuch, “String-stable CACC design and experimental
validation: A frequency-domain approach,” IEEE Trans. Vehicular
Technol.,vol.59,no.9,pp.4268–4279,2010.
[4] V.Milane´s,S.E.Shladover,J.Spring,C.Nowakowski,H.Kawazoe,
andM.Nakamura,“Cooperativeadaptivecruisecontrolinrealtrafﬁc
situations,”IEEETrans.Intell.Transp.Syst.,vol.15,no.1,pp.296–
305,2014.
[5] M. Omae, R. Fukuda, T. Ogitsu, and W.-P. Chiang, “Control pro-
cedures and exchanged information for cooperative adaptive cruise
control of heavy-duty vehicles using broadcast inter-vehicle commu-
nication,”Int.J.Intell.Transp.Syst.Res.,vol.12,pp.84–97,2014.
[6] V. Milane´s and S. E. Shladover, “Modeling cooperative and au-
tonomousadaptivecruisecontroldynamicresponsesusingexperimen-
tal data,” Transp. Res. C: Emerging Technol., vol. 48, pp. 285–300,
2014.
[7] M.Bouton,A.Nakhaei,K.Fujimura,andM.J.Kochenderfer,“Scal-
abledecisionmakingwithsensorocclusionsforautonomousdriving,”
inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.Robot.Autom.,Brisbane,Australia,2018,pp.
2076–2081.
[8] D Isele, R. Rahimi, A. Cosgun, K. Subramanian, and K. Fujimura,
“Navigating occluded intersections with autonomous vehicles using
deepreinforcementlearning,”inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.Robot.Autom.,
Brisbane,Australia,2018,pp.2034–2039.
[9] M. Omae, T. Ogitsu, N. Honma, and K. Usami, “Automatic driving
controlforpassingthroughintersectionwithoutstopping,”Int.J.Intell.
Transp.Syst.Res.,vol.8,pp.201–210,2010.
[10] M. Omae, N. Honma, and K. Usami, “Flexible and energy-saving
platooningcontrolusingatwo-layercontroller,”Int.J.Intell.Transp.
Syst.Res.,vol.10,pp.115–126,2012.
[11] D. Swaroop and J. K. Hedrick, “String stability of interconnected
systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Contr., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 349–357,
1996.
[12] X. Liu, A. Goldsmith, S. S. Mahal, and J. K. Hedrick, “Effects of
communicationdelayonstringstabilityinvehicleplatoons,”inProc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst., Oakland, USA, 2001, pp. 625–
630.
[13] U. Baumann, C. Gla¨ser, M. Herman, and J. M. Zo¨llner, “Predicting
ego-vehiclepathsfromenvironmentalobservationswithadeepneural
network,”inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.Robot.Autom.,Brisbane,Australia,
2018,pp.4709–4716.
[14] T.Yang,N.Sun,H.ChenandY.Fang,“Neuralnetwork-basedadaptive
antiswing control of an underactuated ship-mounted crane with roll
motionsandinputdeadzones,”IEEETrans.NeuralNetw.Learn.Syst.,
2019.
[15] Z. Liu, W. Chen, J. Lu, H. Wang and J. Wang, “Formation control
of mobile robots using distributed controller with sampled-data and
communication delays,” IEEE Trans. Contr. Syst. Technol., vol. 24,
no.6,pp.2125–2132,2016.
[16] W.Yu,J.Cao,andJ.Lu¨,“Globalsynchronizationoflinearlyhybrid
coupled networks with time-varying delay ,” SIAM J. Appl. Dyn.,
vol.7,no.1,pp.108–133,2008.
[17] V. B. Kolmanovskii, and A. D. Myshkis, Introduction to the theory
andapplicationsoffunctionaldifferentialequations,Norwell,MA:K-
luwer,1999.
242
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 15:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 