2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Variable Stiffness Springs for Energy Storage Applications
Sung Y. Kim, Tiange Zhang, and David J. Braun
Abstract—Theory suggests an inverse relation between the works, there is an inverse relation between the stiffness
stiffness and the energy storage capacity for linear helical and the energy storage capacity of the actuator. Such an
springs: reducing the active length of the spring by 50%
inverse relation entails that increasing stiffness reduces the
increases its stiffness by 100%, but reduces its energy storage
energy storage capacity of the actuator. A notable exception
capacity by 50%. State-of-the-art variable stiffness actuators
used to drive robots are characterized by a similar inverse is a previously designed variable moment arm actuator [16],
relation,implyingreducedenergystoragecapacityforincreased wherechangingthemechanicaladvantageisusedtoincrease
spring stiffness. This relation limits the potential of the vari- stiffness,withoutreducingtheenergystoragecapacityofthe
able stiffness actuation technology when it comes to human
actuator.However,modifyingthemechanicaladvantageofa
performance augmentation in natural tasks, e.g., jumping,
kinematic mechanism attached to the spring cannot increase
weight-bearing and running, which may necessitate a spring
exoskeleton with large stiffness range and high energy storage the energy storage capacity of the spring; increasing the
capacity. In this paper, we theoretically show that the trade- energy storage capacity of a spring can only be done by
off between stiffness range and energy storage capacity is not changing the geometric or material property of the spring.
fundamental; it is possible to develop variable stiffness springs
The range of stiffness and the energy storage capacity
with simultaneously increasing stiffness and energy storage
of a spring may be simultaneously increased by increasing
capacity. Consistent with the theory, we experimentally show
that a controllable volume air spring, has a direct relation the mass of the spring. For example, in coil springs and
between its stiffness range and energy storage capacity. The leaf springs, adding mass could be done by increasing the
mathematicalconditionspresentedinthispapermaybeusedto thickness of the spring. However, increasing the thickness
develop actuators that could bypass the limited energy storage
of a coil or leaf spring is nontrivial in a practical design.
capacity of current variable stiffness spring technology.
While increasing stiffness may be theoretically done with
zeronetmechanicalwork[7],[8],[17],[18],thefundamental
I. INTRODUCTION
questionthatremainsishowtosimultaneouslyincreaseboth
Variable stiffness actuators [1] used in robotics [2], pros- the stiffness and the energy storage capacity of a variable
theses [3], and human augmentation [4], provide stiffness stiffness spring that, at least theoretically, does not require
modulation for stable robot-environment interaction [5] and mechanical work. Developing such an actuator remains elu-
safe human-robot interfacing [6]. Variable stiffness spring siveinboththeoreticalstudiesandpracticalapplication[19].
actuators [7], [8] may also be used to accumulate elastic In this paper, we present a mathematical characterization
energy while increasing stiffness under limited spring defor- of variable stiffness spring actuators that can simultaneously
mation. This method of energy storage could be useful for increasestiffnessandenergystoragecapacitywithnegligible
human performance augmentation [9]. For example, given a (theoreticallyzero)energycost.Wederiveasetofanalytical
high enough spring stiffness, a large amount of gravitational conditions that deﬁne the class of these actuators. Using
potentialenergymaybestoredwithinalimitedspringdefor- these conditions, we identify a variable volume air spring
mation, which could be subsequently useful to jump higher, as one of the simplest actuators that satisﬁes our analytical
walk with a heavy backpack, or run faster beyond what is conditions. Using a variable volume air spring, we experi-
possible using a more conventional series elastic actuator. mentally demonstrate simultaneous increase of stiffness and
However, energy storage within a limited deformation range energy capacity by increasing the volume of the air spring
of an actuator requires high stiffness, which reduces the at atmospheric pressure. In practice, increasing the volume
energy storage capacity of most variable stiffness actuators. of the air spring at atmospheric pressure requires negligible
Stiffnessmodulationmaybeachievedbyextendingtheac- amount of mechanical work compared to the work done to
tivelengthofthespringinantagonisticandspring-pretension deform the spring.
based variable stiffness actuators [10], [11], reducing the High energy capacity variable stiffness springs may be
active length of a helical spring [12] and leaf spring based used to develop actuators for robots, that could reduce the
actuators[8],[13],orchangingthetransmissionratioinvari- weightandsize ofmoreconventionalactuators andbatteries
able moment arm actuators [14], [15]. In all aforementioned [20],[21].Variablestiffnessspringswithhighenergycapac-
itymayalsobeusefulforhumanperformanceaugmentation,
where, beyond providing stiffness modulation, they could
SungY.Kim,TiangeZhang,andDavidJ.BraunarewiththeDepartment
of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee store large amounts of energy to enable augmented humans
37235,USA. bypass the limitations of their biological limb [9], [22].
Email:sung.kim@vanderbilt.edu
Email:tiange.zhang@vanderbilt.edu
Email:david.braun@vanderbilt.edu
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 928
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. II. VARIABLESTIFFNESSSPRINGS increased stiffness. We will use these conditions to ﬁnd the
∈N×Z
Variablestiffnessactuatorsusetwomotors;onetocontrol exponents (m,n) in (2) that could be used to model
anidealvariablestiffnessspringdesignedforenergystorage.
thedeformation,andanothertosetthestiffnessofthespring
The ﬁrst condition describes the behavior of a typical
[1], [2], [17]. In this work, we consider variable stiffness
spring; it asserts zero force at zero deformation (Section III-
spring actuators [18], sometimes referred to as stiffness
A). The second and third conditions assert simultaneously
modulators [7], [8], which only provide stiffness modulation
increasing stiffness range and energy storage capacity (Sec-
without changing the equilibrium position of the actuator.
tions III-B and III-C). Finally, the fourth condition ensures
The conceptual model of a variable stiffness spring actuator
that no force is required to change the stiffness of the spring
is shown in Fig. 1.
when the spring does not store energy (Section III-D). The
last condition enables the stiffness and the energy storage
z
Fz capacityofthespringtobeincreasedwiththeoreticallyzero
mechanical work when the spring does not store energy.
Load A. Zero output force with zero deformation
When the spring is not deformed, i.e. when z=z0, the
k force provided by the spring should be zero regardless of
m
the stiffness:
∀ −∂V
z0:Fz(z0,z0)= ∂z(z0,z0)=0. (3)
Fig.1. Modelofavariablestiffnessspring.Inthismodel,zdenotesthe Condition (3) yields the following set of basis functions:
lengthofthespring,F denotestheforcebythespring,whilekdenotesthe
z
stiffnessofthespringchangedbythe“motor”m. B1={(z−z0)mzn0}, where(m,n)∈{N×Z:m(cid:54)=1}. (4)
A. Variable stiffness helical springs This condition indicates that the exponent of the defor-
−
Thepotentialenergyfunctionofahelicalextensionspring, mation (z z0)m must be either zero or strictly greater than
one. This condition is consistent with the potential energy
with changeable active length and active length dependent
function of standard helical springs, torsional springs, and
stiffness, is given by:
leaf springs, as well as, the potential energy function of
1 − spring pretension based and variable moment arm based
V(z,z0)= 2k(z0)(z z0)2, (1) variable stiffness actuators [17]. We note that (4) does
−
where z z deﬁnes the deformation of the spring, while not impose a symmetric force-deformation relation, because
0
k(z0)isthestiffnessofthespring.Thelatterrelationmaybe such relation does not constitute a necessary condition for
justiﬁed by noting that the stiffness of a helical spring is the the practical realization of a spring. For example, helical
functionofthenumberofactivecoilswhich,inturn,deﬁnes extension springs do not have symmetric force-deformation
the active length z of the spring [12]. relations, as they cannot be compressed. The following two
0
conditions deﬁne springs for which the stiffness range and
B. Variable stiffness springs the energy storage capacity simultaneously increase, as the
The mathematical model of a variable stiffness spring geometry of the spring changes.
which has changeable active length, and active length de-
pendent stiffness, may be deﬁned by its potential energy B. Controllable increase in stiffness range
function:
The following condition ensures that the range of achiev-
V(z,z0)= +∑∞ +∑−∞ Cm,n(z−z0)mzn0, (2) aobfltehestisfpfnriensgscvhaalunegsesof(atshez0spirsiningcirnecarseeads)e:s as the geometry
m=0n= ∞
where the exponents (m,n) ∈ N×Z deﬁne the kinematic ∂|kmax−kmin| >0, (5)
design of the spring, while C encapsulates the geometric ∂z
m,n 0
and physical parameters. This Laurent series representation
where k and k are deﬁned by:
ofthepotentialenergyfunctionissimilartotheoneproposed max min
in [23]. ∂2V ∂2V
III. DESIGNCONDITIONSFORTHEIDEALVARIABLE kmax=z∈[zmmina,xzmax] ∂z2 (z,z0), kmin=z∈[zmmini,nzmax] ∂z2 (z,z0).
STIFFNESSSPRING In order to present a reasonably simple representation of
In this section, we introduce four analytical design con- (5), we assume that the minimum stiffness is attained at
−
ditions to deﬁne the model of a variable stiffness spring zero deﬂection z z0 =0 while the m∈a{ximum sti}ffness is
characterized by increased energy storage capacity with attained at the largest deﬂection z=zk zmin,zmax . Under
929
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. this assumption, the aforementioned inequality relation (5) An example of a simplest potential energy function – the
leads to the following set of basis functions: one with the least number of basis functions and the lowest
order of basis functions that belong to B is given by:
B2={(z−z0)mzn0}, where(m,n)∈{N×Z:m≥2,∃m>2 − VSS
sgn[Cm,n]sgn[(zk−z0)m−3][(zk−z0)n−(m−2)z0]>0} V(z,z0)=C3,−2(z z2z0)3, 12z0≤z≤z0, C3,−2<0. (12)
(6) 0
In the next section, we will present one practical design
This condition is sufﬁcient but not necessary to achieve (5).
where the p(cid:26)otential energy function is constructed usi(cid:27)ng a
linear combination of similar basis functions given by:
C. Controllable increase in energy storage capacity
− − − −
stoWraegeacimapatcoitydeassigitns satifsfnperisnsgintchraetasheas.sSiinnccreeathseedpreenveiorguys BV∗SS= (z zz0)2,(z z2z0)3,(z z3z0)4,(z z4z0)5,... .
0 0 0 0
condition ensures that the stiffness increases with z0, the (13)
spring should store more elastic potential energy as z
0
increases. This assertion leads to the following condition: V. VARIABLEVOLUMEAIRSPRING
An air spring with controllable volume, i.e., controllable
∂V ∂
∂mz0ax = ∂z0z∈[zmmina,xzmax]V(z,z0)>0. (7) anierssmaansds,thiseamdaexvimicuemthpaottceanntiaslimenuelrtganyesotuosrelydibnycrtehaessepsrtiinfgf-.
Increasing the air mass can be done in two different ways.
Assuming that the maximum potential energy is attained at
∈{ } First, the air ﬂow control valve can be opened to let air
z=zV zmin,zmax , the inequality can be reduced to the into the chamber by increasing the height of the piston
following set of basis functions:
(cid:18) (cid:19) whenthechamberisatatmosphericpressure.Second,anair
B3={(z−z0)mzn0}, where(m,n)∈{N×Z: (8) pump can be used to add air to the chamber. The important
difference between these two methods is that the former
sgn[Cm,n]sgn[zV−z0]m−1 m+n−zzVn <0}. can theoretically be done with zero net mechanical work,
0 while the latter requires mechanical work in proportion to
Similar to the condition derived in the previous section, (8) the air mass pumped into the cylinder and the pressure
is sufﬁcient but not necessary to achieve (7). in the cylinder. Our work will focus on the former, since
that method may be practically implemented using a small
D. Zero input force with zero deformation motor and a small battery because opening and closing the
valveandmovingthepistonatatmosphericpressurerequires
For variable stiffness springs that do not require energy
limited amount of external energy.
to hold stiffness, the stiffness modulating actuator, e.g., the
motorinFig.1,shouldexperiencezeroforcewhenthespring
A. Model of the Air Spring
isnotdeformed,i.e.,whenitdoesnotstoreenergy[17].This
imposes the following condition: Giventheassumptionthattheairspringiscompressedata
sufﬁciently low frequency, the compression of the air spring
∀ −∂V may be considered an isothermal process. Consequently, the
z0:Fz0(z0,z0)= ∂z0(z0,z0)=0. (9) potential energ(cid:16)y function of(cid:16)the(cid:17)v(cid:17)ariable volume air spring
is given by:
This equality relation implies the following set of basis
−
fBun4c=tio{n(sz:−z0)mzn0}, where(m,n)∈{N×Z:m≥2}∪(0,0). V(z,z0)=Fatm z−z0−z0ln zz0 =p∑∞=2(−1)pFpat!m(zz0p−z01)p
(10) (14)
According to (10), the exponent of the deformation should where F is the atmospheric pressure, while the length of
atm
be greater than one or both exponents must be zero. the cylinder and the stroke length are given by:
∈ ∈
IV. DESIGNOFASPRINGUSINGANALYTICAL z0 [zmin,zmax] and z [zmin,z0]. (15)
CONDITIONS
One can conﬁrm that (14) satisﬁes the analytical design
Potential energy functions that describe the class of vari- conditions given in (11).
able stiffness springs, ideal for energy storage applications, Based on (14), the force-deformation characteristic of the
(cid:16) (cid:17)
can be obtained by a linear combination of basis functions spring is deﬁned by:
that satisfy the following conditions (3), (5), (7), and (9).
The basis functions that satisfy these conditions are given F(z,z0)=−∂V(∂zz,z0) =Fatm zz0−1 , ∀z∈[zmin,z0] (16)
by:
where the initial atmospheric pressure inside the uncom-
∩ ∩ ∩
BVSS=B1 B2 B3 B4. (11) pressed air cylinder ensures F(z0,z0)=0.
930
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) (b) (c) (d)
g 
ell ginme
c nu
d  aol
a hv
o C
L
g
n
ri
p
s
er e 
d h
ylin ng t
r c ssi
Ai e
r
p
e m
v o
al C
v
r 
Ai
Storing energy Changing stiffness
(compressing the spring) (increasing the volume)
High pressure Atm pressure
z
02
z olume 1 z01 z01 z olume 1 z01 z volume 2 z01
v zmin z zmin v zmin zmin
closed valve open valve
Fig. 2. Experimental set up of the controllable-volume air spring within one compression-expansion cycle. (a-b) Atmospheric air is being compressed
fromequilibriumheightz totheminimumheightz whiletheairﬂowcontrolvalveisclosed.(c)Thepistonisthenreturnedtotheequilibriumheight
01 min
z (Volume 1) with the valve closed. (d) Once the piston reaches the equilibrium position, it is raised up to z (Volume 2) at atmospheric pressure to
01 02
introducemoreairmassintothesystemthroughtheopenedvalveforthenextcompression-expansioncycle.
Similarly, the stiffness of the air spring is given by: Finally,wedeﬁnethemax(cid:16)imumelasticp(cid:16)otenti(cid:17)al(cid:17)energythat
can be stored by the air spring:
k(z,z0)= ∂∂2zV2 (z,z0)= Faztm2z0, ∀z∈[zmin,z0]. (17) Vmax(z0)=Fatm zmin−z0−ln zmzin . (20)
0
The stiffness of the spring depends on the length of the air
In the next section, we will experimentally conﬁrm the
cylinder z , and therefore, the air mass inside the cylinder.
0 behavior of the air spring as predicted by (16), (17) and
Increasing z leads to smaller minimum stiffness and larger
0 (20).
maximum stiffness:
B. Experimental Setup and Procedure
F F z
kmin=k(z0,z0)= zatm, kmax=k(zmin,z0)= za2tm 0. (18) Figure2showstheairspringusedinourexperiment.The
0 min device is composed of a double-acting air piston, where air
Also, the range of achi(cid:32)evable stiffn(cid:33)ess values increase as the canenterfrombothsidesofthepiston,withaborediameter
active length of the air cylinder increases: of 3 inches and a total stroke length of 12 inches. The air
inlet on the compressed side is actuated by a valve, which
−
∂(kma∂xz kmin) =Fatm z21 −z12 ≥0, ∀z0∈[zmin,zmax]. lientsaiirnmaiarsastiantmthoespshperirnicgpisrefsascuirleitawtehdenbyopoepneendi.nTghtehechvaanlgvee
0 min 0
(19) when the air spring is at equilibrium, in order to minimize
931
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. the work needed to move the piston. The minimum height Experimental data: energy capacity and stiffness ranges
of the compressed air chamber is 4.31 inches. 90 80
The spring was placed in an Instron 5944 testing machine
80 70
to ensure consistent and precise force and displacement
70
measurements throughout the course of the experiment. The 60
tmesutmingvainlusetr,uim.e.enzt=wzamsinp,roregmraaminmededcotonsetannsutrtehrtohuagththoeutmeiancih- acity (J) 6500 50 Stiffnes
experimentaltrial. Aftereach trial,the airﬂowcontrol valve p s
ca 40  (1
owfastheexcthenamdebderatwaastmoopsepnheedr,icanpdretshseurseh.afTthoisf tphreocaeirssspdroinegs Energy  4300 30 0N/m)3 
not require any additional work in theory, but in practice,
20
work needs to be done to compensate for the gravitational 20
forceactingonthepiston,energydissipationduetofriction, 10 10
and transient thermodynamic effects. Once the piston was
0 0
raiseduptothenexttestingheight,thevalvewasclosed,and
1.5 3.5 5.5 7.3
the next trial of compression was performed. This process, Stroke length (in)
shown in Fig. 2, was repeated at constant deformation rate
until the compression length reached its maximum. The
Fig.4. Experimentalresultsoftherangeofstiffnessandtheenergystorage
stroke lengths were between 1.5, 3.5, 5.5, and 7.3 inches, capacityoftheaircylinder,fordifferentequilibriumheight,z ,andstroke
0
and the frequency of the deformation was consistent across length.Themaximumenergystoragecapacityandthestiffnessmodulation
trials to mitigate unaccounted thermodynamic effects. rangebothincreasedasmoreairwasaddedintothecylinder.
C. Results
The experimental force-displacement curves starting from larger force was needed to deform the piston to the same
the equilibrium position z , and ending at the minimal minimumheight.Additionally,asthecylinderincludesmore
0
height zmin, are shown in Fig. 3. These experimental force- airforeachtrial,theresultantforce-deformationcurveshows
deformation curves were ﬁt with the normalized force func- increasedstiffness(seetheslopeofeachcurve)andincreased
tion, found in (16). We obtained R2>99% for all ﬁts. The potential energy (see the area underneath each curve). Mini-
resultsconﬁrmthepreviouslydiscussedtheoreticalairspring mal effort was needed to raise the piston to each new height
model.Pleaseseethecorrespondencebetweenthemeasured since the pressure inside the cylinder was the atmospheric
(solid) lines and the ﬁtted (dashed) lines in Fig. 3. pressurewhilethevalvewasopen.Thiswayofchangingthe
stiffness is consistent with our theory of requiring negligible
Experimental data: Force-displacenent curves amount of work to change the stiffness of the spring. These
2500 observations are consistent with the theoretical predictions,
(16) and (17).
Active length of the air spring
Figure 4 more directly shows that the stiffness range and
2000 1.5 in
3.5 in the energy storage capacity of the spring simultaneously
Fit 
5.5 in increase, as the active length of the cylinder increases.
7.3 in
N) 1500 This experimental result validates our theoretical conditions,
 (F predictions (18), (19), (20), and shows the adequacy of the
ce   simple air-spring model for the experimental investigation
or
F 1000 conducted in this paper.
VI. CONCLUSION
500
This paper deﬁnes analytical conditions to characterize
variable stiffness springs that can simultaneously increase
0 stiffness and energy storage capacity. These conditions led
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 to the design of a controllable-volume air spring that exper-
Normalized displacement  s (-) imentally validated our theoretical ﬁndings.
In some applications, air springs may be limited by
the weight of the air cylinder, transient effects, and air
Fig.3. Experimentalresultofthespringforce(N)versusthenormalized
deformationofthesprings=(z−zmin)/(z0−zmin).Fourcompressiontrials leakage due to inadequate sealing and pressurization issues.
wereperformedwithcylinderstrokelengthsof1.5,3.55.5,and7.3inches Maintaining atmospheric pressure when changing stiffness
measuredfromthesamelowestcompressionheightz .Thedeformation
− min requires the size of the cylinder to be scaled by the load.
wasnormalizedwiththecorrespondingz z valueforeachtrial.
0 min
Pressurizingthecylindertodownsizeforhigherpoweroutput
Thedataillustratesthatastheactivelengthofthecylinder applicationsrequiresworktobedonetochangestiffnessand
was increased to include more air mass into the cylinder, increasesstart-upforce.Finally,transientthermodynamicef-
932
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. fectsmayaddascalingfactorontheforcefunctionthatisnot [11] J. W. Hurst, J. E. Chestnutt, and A. A. Rizzi, “The actuator with
captured by our isothermal assumption and a time constant mechanically adjustable series compliance,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics,vol.26,no.4,pp.597–606,2010.
for achieving ambient pressure equilibrium. Additionally, in
[12] K.W.Hollander,T.G.Sugar,andD.E.Herring,“Adjustablerobotic
this paper, a conceptual process was tested in a controlled tendonusingaJackSpringTM,”inIEEEInternationalConferenceon
laboratory setting, but a customized mechanical design may Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), (Chicago, IL, USA), pp. 113–118,
June-July2005.
be required for successful practical implementation.
[13] T. Morita and S. Sugano, “Design and development of a new robot
We note that despite the aforementioned limitations, vari- joint using a mechanical impedance adjuster,” in IEEE International
ablevolumeairspringscouldbeusedtominimizethetrade- Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), vol. 3, (Nagoya,
Japan),pp.2469–2475,May1995.
off between increased stiffness and reduced deformation
[14] L.C.Visser,R.Carloni,andS.Stramigioli,“Variablestiffnessactua-
limit, which is the pitfall of low energy capacity. For ex- tors:Aport-basedanalysisandacomparisonofenergyefﬁciency,”in
ample,inpassiveprostheticdevices,airspringsmayprovide IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),
(Anchorage,Alaska),pp.3279–3284,May2010.
a larger range of joint stiffness without compromising the
[15] A. Jafari, N. G. Tsagarakis, and D. G. Caldwell, “A novel intrin-
amount of energy that can be stored by the spring. In sically energy efﬁcient actuator with adjustable stiffness (AwAS),”
human jumping, weight-bearing and running augmentation, IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 355–
365,2013.
airspringsmayserveasaquasi-passiveenergyreservoirthat
[16] E. Barrett, M. Fumagalli, and R. Carloni, “Elastic energy storage
could allow a large amount of energy to be ﬁrst stored and in leaf springs for a lever-arm based variable stiffness actuator,” in
then used to bypass the natural limitation of the biological IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems
(IROS),(Daejeon,Korea),pp.537–542,Oct2016.
limb[9],[18].Furthermore,whenusedaspartofanactuator,
[17] V. Chalvet and D. J. Braun, “Criterion for the design of low-
the variable stiffness spring may be able to recycle energy powervariablestiffnessmechanisms,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,
and reduce motor power. In this way, variable stiffness vol.33,no.4,pp.1002–1010,2017.
[18] D. J. Braun, V. Chalvet, C. T.-H., S. Apte, and N. Hogan, “Variable
springs could reduce the size and weight of conventional
stiffness spring actuators for low energy cost stiffness modulation,”
high-output power actuators [21]. IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.35,no.6,pp.1435–1449,2019.
[19] J. Zhang, J. Sheng, C. T. ONeill, C. J. Walsh, R. J. Wood, J.-H.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Ryu,J.P.Desai,andM.C.Yip,“Roboticartiﬁcialmuscles:Current
progress and future perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
We thank Chase W. Mathews for his input during the
vol.35,no.3,pp.761–781,2019.
initial discussion phase of this work, Jantzen Lee for his [20] D.F.B.Haeuﬂe,M.D.Taylor,S.Schmitt,andH.Geyer,“Aclutched
help with the experimental setup, and Brian O’Grady for his parallel elastic actuator concept: Towards energy efﬁcient powered
legs in prosthetics and robotics,” in IEEE RAS EMBS International
help with the experiment.
Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob),
(Rome,Italy),pp.1614–1619,June2012.
REFERENCES [21] S.Wolf,G.Grioli,O.Eiberger,W.Friedl,M.Grebenstein,H.Hppner,
E. Burdet, D. G. Caldwell, R. Carloni, M. G. Catalano, D. Lefeber,
[1] R. Van, T. Sugar, B. Vanderborght, K. Hollander, and D. Lefeber,
S.Stramigioli,N.Tsagarakis,M.VanDamme,R.VanHam,B.Van-
“Compliant actuator designs. review of actuators with passive ad-
derborght, L. C. Visser, A. Bicchi, and A. Albu-Scha¨ffer, “Variable
justable compliance/controllable stiffness for robotic applications,”
stiffness actuators: Review on design and components,” IEEE/ASME
IEEERoboticsAutomationMagazine,vol.16,no.3,pp.81–94,2009.
TransactionsonMechatronics,vol.21,no.5,pp.2418–2430,2016.
[2] D.J.Braun,F.Petit,F.Huber,S.Haddadin,P.vanderSmagt,A.Albu-
[22] G.S.Sawicki,O.N.Beck,I.Kang,andA.J.Young,“Theexoskeleton
Scha¨ffer,andS.Vijayakumar,“Robotsdrivenbycompliantactuators:
expansion:improvingwalkingandrunningeconomy,”IEEETransac-
Optimal control under actuation constraints,” IEEE Transactions on
tionsonRobotics,vol.17,no.25,pp.1–9,2020.
Robotics,vol.29,no.5,pp.1085–1101,2013.
[23] T. H. Chong, V. Chalvet, and D. J. Braun, “Analytical conditions
[3] E.M.GlanzerandP.G.Adamczyk,“Designandvalidationofasemi-
for the design of variable stiffness mechanisms,” in IEEE Interna-
activevariablestiffnessfootprosthesis,”IEEETransactionsonNeural
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), (Singapore),
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2351–
pp.1241–1247,May2017.
2359,2018.
[4] S.H.Collins,M.B.Wiggin,andG.S.Sawicki,“Reducingtheenergy
cost of human walking using an unpowered exoskeleton,” Nature,
vol.522,no.7555,pp.212–215,2015.
[5] B.KimandJ.Song,“Designandcontrolofavariablestiffnessactuator
based on adjustable moment arm,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol.28,no.5,pp.1145–1151,2012.
[6] G. Tonietti, R. Schiavi, and A. Bicchi, “Design and control of a
variablestiffnessactuatorforsafeandfastphysicalhuman/robotinter-
action,”inIEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation
(ICRA),(Barcelona,Spain),pp.526–531,April2005.
[7] D. J. Braun, S. Apte, O. Adiyatov, A. Dahiya, and N. Hogan,
“Compliant actuation for energy efﬁcient impedance modulation,” in
IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),
pp.636–641,May2016.
[8] H. F. Lau, A. Sutrisno, T. H. Chong, and D. J. Braun, “Stiffness
modulator: A novel actuator for human augmentation,” (Brisbane,
Australia),pp.7742–7748,May2018.
[9] A.SutrisnoandD.J.Braun,“Enhancingmobilitywithquasi-passive
variablestiffnessexoskeletons,”IEEETransactionsonNeuralSystems
andRehabilitationEngineering,vol.27,no.3,pp.487–496,2019.
[10] S.WolfandG.Hirzinger,“Anewvariablestiffnessdesign:Matching
requirements of the next robot generation,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), (Pasadena, CA,
USA),pp.1741–1746,May2008.
933
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:02:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 