2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Semi-Empirical Simulation of Learned Force Response Models for
Heterogeneous Elastic Objects
Yifan Zhu1, Kai Lu2, and Kris Hauser1
Abstract—This paper presents a semi-empirical method for
simulating contact with elastically deformable objects whose
force response is learned using entirely data-driven models.
A point-based surface representation and an inhomogeneous,
nonlinearforceresponsemodelarelearnedfromaroboticarm
acquiring force-displacement curves from a small number of
pokinginteractions.Thesimulatorthenestimatesdisplacement
and force response when the deformable object is in contact
with an arbitrary rigid object. It does so by estimating dis-
placements by solving a Hertzian contact model, and sums the
expected forces at individual surface points through querying
thelearnedpointstiffnessmodelsasafunctionoftheirexpected
displacements.Experiments ona varietyof challengingobjects
show that our approach learns force response with sufﬁcient
accuracy to generate plausible contact response for novel rigid
objects.
I. INTRODUCTION
Roboticmanipulationofdeformableobjectshasanumber
ofapplications,suchasin-homeenvironments,cablerouting,
textile handling, handling packaging in automated ware-
houses, and soft tissue modeling in biomedical settings, but
it remains a topic of active research. Common deformation
Fig. 1. Flow of our method. A point interaction model of a deformable
simulationmethods,suchasﬁniteelementmethod(FEM)or object is ﬁrst learned through data acquired with the system shown here
mass-spring modeling (MSM), require an object’s geometry afterasmallnumberofpokes.Themodelisthenusedinasemi-empircal
simulator that solves for the deformation and contact wrench with an
and its material properties to be represented by a volumetric
arbitrary rigid object. The color of the deformed object represents the
mesh model. Mesh models are challenging to build from amountofsurfacedeformation.
noisy sensor data, and calibrating appropriate material con-
stitutive parameters is a tedious, time-consuming, and error-
proneprocessthatdependsonanappropriatemeshtopology data can enhance physics modeling when the physics of
andconstitutiveequations.Data-drivenapproacheshavebeen certain phenomenon are not well understood [1]–[3], when
studied in robotic palpation of biological tissue, where a the parameters for the governing physics equations are hard
robotic probe gathers a dense ﬁeld of data to estimate tissue to identify [4], [5], or when applying the physics equation
stiffness and identify anomalies. is computationally prohibitive [6], [7]. In our approach,
We envision that robots could use naturalistic data ac- the simulator 1) accepts a point-based model of the object
quisition to model deformable objects, in which behavior surface’s force response under displacements, which are
is observed from a small number of interactions and the learned from data, and then 2) calculates a resultant contact
model is improved continuously during interaction. Humans wrenchfor a novelrigid objectusinganalytical calculations.
can very quickly generalize from the data gathered during Our model is quite general, as its deformation response can
manipulation to predict plausible outcomes in vastly dif- be heterogeneous and nonlinear. Moreover, the visuo-tactile
ferent scenarios. This paper takes preliminary steps toward model constructed by our method can overcome camera
providing robots with similar capabilities. We take a semi- calibration error, sensor noise, and “fuzzy” objects with ill-
empirical approach that integrates machine learning with deﬁned boundaries. It is important to note that we do not
physics.Thisgeneralideaisappealingbecauselearningfrom expect a robot to need to touch an object hundreds of times
during naturalistic interaction. Our experiments examine
*This work was supported in part by NSF grants NRI-#1527826 and performance under a tiny fraction of pokes as training data.
NRI-#1830366.
Even with only a few touches, reasonably predictive models
1: Y. Zhu and K. Hauser are with the Departments of C{omputer Sci-
ence,UniversityofIllinoisatUrbana-Champaign,IL,USA. yifan16, canbelearned,whichsuggeststhatourpipelineispromising
}
kkhauser @illinois.edu for on-line use in naturalistic interaction.
2: K. Lu is with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing,China.lu-k16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn We evaluate this approach using an experimental testbed
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1646
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:57:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (Fig. 1) consisting of a robot arm equipped with a RGB- et al. adopt a similar approach but select the next poking lo-
D camera, a tapered probe attached at the end-effector, cationusingBayesianoptimization[15].Goldmanetal.ﬁrst
and a force-torque (F/T) sensor. Experiments show that our design a hybrid motion-force controller to follow cycloidal
approach can learn a point deformation model that predicts paths on a tissue surface to estimate the shape, then palpate
force response 0.49N of root mean squared error (RMSE) atdiscretizedsurfacelocationswithmultiplegridresolutions
over 5 test objects with 10 interactions each. When making to measure the impedance matrices across the surface [16].
contact with novel rigid probes, which are a line-shaped Liu et al. map the stiffness by moving a mechanical roller
paddle and a cylinder, our simulator’s force prediction has across the tissue with a robot arm [17]. While these works
1.5NRMSE.Thisaccuracyiscomparabletolearnedmodels are able to map the stiffness of heterogeneous tissues, force
obtainedwiththesamenumberofinteractions.Wealsoshow response is assumed to be linear.
an application of our method to planning for packing a rigid
object on top of a deformable object into a box. III. POINTDEFORMATIONMODELLEARNING
II. RELATEDWORK Fig.1showstheﬂowofouroverallsystem.Theﬁrststage
of our system learns a visuo-tactile model of the deformable
Deformable object modeling has long been studied in
object using data. We shall discuss the learning stage in the
various ﬁelds including computer graphics, continuum me-
currentsection,leavingthediscussionofsimulationforSec-
chanics, and biomechanics. An overview of the existing
tion IV. We assume that the object is elastic, quasistatic, and
methods on deformable object modeling can be found in
that interaction forces are dominated by normal deformation
Ref. [8]. It still remains a challenge to build models that
rather than friction and shear deformation. We hope to relax
match real-world objects accurately both in deformation and
these assumptions in future work.
force response.
The point deformation model consists of an equilibrium
Several researchers have studied the problem of building
surface model, and a force response model. The equilibrium
elastic models of real-world object using experimental data. ∈ R
surface model is a set S of points x 9, with each
Frank et al. attempt to build homogeneous FEM models by
point x = [p ,p ,p ,r,g,b,n ,n ,n ], representing posi-
ﬁrst collecting force probing data using a mobile robot arm, x y z x y z
tion, color, and (outward) normal, respectively. The position
a thin probe, an F/T sensor and a RGBD camera [9]. An
and normal are represented in the world frame. The force
error minimization approach is used to estimate the FEM ∈ R
response model is denoted as f = y(x,d), where f is
model parameters such that the simulations match recorded
forcemagnitudeinthenormaldirection,xisapointinS,and
data. Boonvisut and Cavusoglu follow a similar scheme to d∈Risdisplacement.Lettingn=[n ,n ,n ]∈R3 denote
build FEM models for elastic objects under stretching [10]. the normal in x and p=[p ,p ,p ]∈x R3y thez position, this
Both methods require tens of minutes to perform the error x y z
mapgivestheforceapointprobewouldfeelinthedirection
minimization, making it less likely to be used online. Bickle − ·
of n when the point is moved to position p d n.
et al apply error minimization to inhomogeneous, nonlinear
FEM models [11]. Radial basis functions (RBF) are used
A. Data Collection
to interpolate the strain-stress relationship in each ﬁnite
element, and error minimization optimizes the weights used Although our methods are applicable to naturalistic inter-
forRBFinterpolationtomatchobservations.Althoughbeing actions,forthecomparisonpurposesinthispaperweemploy
able to handle more complex materials, the error minimiza- a separate data acquisition stage similar to Frank et al [9] to
tion step is prone to being stuck in local minima and the build a ground truth dataset. The deformable object is laid
data acquisition process requires complex apparatus setup, on a ﬂat surface, and it is assumed to return to its original
including multiple cameras, carefully positioned and tuned position when pressed in the normal direction. If it is found
light sources, and drawing markers on the testing objects. to move while pushed, then a central point on the bottom of
Empirical data have also been used to tune MSM and the object is afﬁxed to the table using Velcro tape. In future
meshless methods. Deussen et al use simulated annealing work it may be possible to simply track the movement of
to estimate the elastic properties of an MSM object model, the object during acquisition. We include 5 different testing
given data from simulation experiments [12]. Burion et al objects in our experiments, Sloth, Vest, Lamb, Shoe, and
solve a similar problem using a particle ﬁlter [13]. Pauwels Bird, shown in Fig. 2a. Sloth and Bird are stuffed animals,
et al. build meshless models of homogeneous 2D foams Vest and Shoe are clothing items, and Lamb is a piece of
whose shape upon contact with a rigid object depends on lamb leg consisting of muscle, fat, and bone. Each object
a deformability constant. This constant is estimated by error has varying stiffness across the object surface. The regions
minimization of real-world data. Because the method only of interest of the objects are the surfaces facing up when
simulatesdeformableshape,itisunabletopredicteforcesat the objects are laid ﬂat on a table, with the exception that
contacts. we use only the face region of the sloth due to poor visual
Ahighlyrelatedtopicisroboticpalpation.Yamamotoetal perception on the furry torso.
use a robot equipped with an F/T sensor to poke at discrete To build a 3D point cloud of the equilibrium surface, a
locations on ﬂat phantom tissue to estimate the stiffness wrist mounted RGB-D camera is used. Some objects need a
across the object surface and ﬁnd anomalies [14]. Salman fewscansfromdifferentanglestogenerateacompletepoint
1647
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:57:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLEI
STATISTICSOFCOLLECTEDDATAONTHETESTINGOBJECTS
PointCloud PointProbe LineProbe CylinderProbe
Sloth 67,923 121 363 121
Vest 62,318 116 348 116
Lamb 18,059 94 276 94
Shoe 32,408 96 192 96
Bird 41,515 116 315 116
B. Force Response Model Learning
(a) Sloth, Vest, Lamb, Shoe, and (b)GroundtruthdataonLamb,with The next step in our pipeline learns to predict force
Bird objects, along with rigid color showing force felt at d = 0.5 responsesatdifferentlocationsontheobjectsurface.Recent
probesusedintesting. mm.
advancements in automated machine learning (AutoML)
Fig.2. Theobjectsandprobesusedintheexperiments.Dataisgathered
have greatly reduced the amount of manual effort needed
usingthepointprobe,andthesimulatorgeneralizesforcepredictionstothe
lineandcylinderprobes. to select a regression model and tune hyperparameters. In
this paper we use the AutoML [19] package from scikit-
learn [20] to perform the regression tasks.
We compare performance of different types of regressors.
cloud. Open3D [18] is applied to perform outlier removal TheAutoMLpackagesearchesamongensemblesofdifferent
and normal estimation. types of regressors and preprocessors and runs until a user-
Tocapturegroundtruthforceresponsedata,werandomly speciﬁed time limit is reached. We can also specify the type
select a set of locations on the object to be poked with a of regressors during AutoML training to reduce the number
pointprobe,showninFig.1.Duringexperiments,wecollect ofhyperparametersthatneedtobeoptimized,thusimproving
data on a uniform grid, and randomly select among these training speed. Another option is to select an appropriate
locations to be training data, and the rest to be testing data. regressor directly, without relying on AutoML to select the
To complete one probing action at a point x, we align the hyperparamters.Inparticular,wetestthefollowingmethods:
pointprobe’saxiswiththepoint’ssurfacenormal.Startingat (1) AutoML (Auto-M) trained for 360s (2) AutoML with
a user-speciﬁed distance from the surface, the probe pushes Extra Trees as the regressor type (Auto-ET) trained for 30s;
inthenegativenormaldirectionataconstantspeedof2mm/s (3)Adaboost(AB),GradientBoosting(GB),RandomForest
until reaching a force threshold, which is set to 3-5 N in (RF), and Extra Trees (ET), all trained using scikit-learn
our experiments depending on the overall stiffness of the with default parameters. Fig. 3b show the results on the
testingobjects.Theamountofdisplacementandforceinthe Lambmodel.Althoughsingleregressorscantrainamodelin
normaldirection,measuredbythewristmountedF/Tsensor, less 1s, Auto-ET generally achieves the best results in 30s.
is recorded at 250 Hz. As a result, our force measurements If Auto-M were to be given more training time, it could
are quite sparse in the spatial features, while being quite potentially learn a better model, but doing so would require
dense in force / displacement. One example of the collected hours or even days of training. We settle on Auto-ET for
data on the Lamb is shown in Fig. 2b. the rest of the paper given its balance between speed and
accuracy on our dataset. The resulting force predictions that
If both the visual and tactile data have no error, then we
evolve after 2, 5, 10 locations are used as training data for
would expect the force felt by the point probe tip away
a 0.5mm displacement on Lamb are shown in Fig. 4.
from the object surface to be zero and positive otherwise.
Results with Auto-ET on all 5 testing objects are shown
However, this is often not the case. As shown in Fig. 4a,
in Fig. 3a. The Shoe and the Vest are the hardest to learn
we often observe nonzero forces beginning anywhere from
becausetheyarenotcompletelyelasticandaremadeofcom-
-5 to 5mm of displacement. This is largely due to error in
posite materials, resulting in signiﬁcantly varying stiffness
the calibration and bias in the camera’s depth estimates, and
across their surface.
further motivates the use of learning to correlate visual and
Prediction speed per point varies with the query size,
tactile data.
because of query overhead. With 1 point in each query, it
≈
Forvalidationpurposes,wecollectsecondandthirdsetsof takes 17ms per point, while with 10,000 points per query,
≈
pokingdatawithalineprobeandacylindricalprobe(capped it takes 0.015ms per point. Also, prediction speed is not
at3-14N,dependingontheobjects),showninFig.2a.These directly related to the number of training points.
arenotusedfortraining,butonlyforevaluationofhowwell
our simulation model can generalize from point probe data. IV. SEMI-EMPIRICALSIMULATOR
Weprobeonceateachlocationusingthecylinderprobe,and Thesecondphaseofourpipelineestimatesreactionforces
three times with the line probe at each location with random betweenthedeformableobjectandacontactingrigidobject.
orientation changes (about the local probe x-axis). We also The rigid object is represented as a 3D surface mesh M
recordthetorqueabouttheEEframecenter.Theparameters deﬁned in the global frame. The contact detector determines
of all three datasets are summarized in Table 1. if it is in contact with the deformable object’s equilibrium
1648
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:57:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) A point indentation moves (b)Displacedpointscalculatedby
nearbypointsonthedeformable the collision detector (red) vs ac-
(a) Testing error on each object us- (b)Comparingtestingerrorbetween object. tualdisplacements(blue).
ing Auto-ET, with varying training regressors,overallobjects. Fig.5. Deﬁnitionsusedinthesurfacedeformationmodel.
setsize.
Fig.3. Breakdownoflearningcurvesforlearningforceresponsemodels.
Regressorsaretrainedover10sampledsubsetsofthegroundtruthdataset, Let d denote the nominal displacement of asurface point
andplotsshowRMSEmeanandvarianceacrosssamples. i
at a contact patch, we assume that it consists of both dis-
placementcausedbyneighboringpointdisplacementandthat
actually contributes to the total force, which we call actual
displacement and denote as d˜. We solve for non-negative
i
actual displacements that are no greater than the nominal
displacements. A smaller nominal displacement would indi-
catepenetration,whileanegativeactualdisplacementwould
cause the deformable to apply a negative (pulling) force on
the rigid object at that point (Fig. 5b).
1) NominalDisplacementCalculation: Tocalculatenom-
inal displacements of the deformable object’s surface points
we use collision detection and estimate penetration depths.
(a) Collected force vs d at one (b)2locations To do so, we ﬁrst discretize the surface of the rigid object
pointonLamb.
by placing equally spaced points on edges and 2D grids on
facets based on a user-selected discretization. Via experi-
mentation, we found that simulation results are relatively
insensitive to the selection of this discretization, and we use
a 3mm resolution for all experiments.
Next, we ﬁnd the pairs of rigid surface points and the
deformable surface points that will be touching after de-
formation and the nominal displacement of the deformable
surface points. Point correspondence is calculated by pro-
jecting all the points to a 2D plane and performing nearest-
(c)5locations. (d)10locations. neighbor searches. We let a be the approach direction of the
Fig. 4. Collected force-displacement curve at one point and force rigid object and the normal of the projection plane, shown
predictions on the Lamb object, learned with different numbers of poking
in Fig. 6. To better approximate the shape of the underlying
locations.Pokinglocationsareindicatedascircles,coloredbythetrueforce.
dissettobe0.5mm.Becauseofcamerabias,thereisalreadysigniﬁcant continuous surface, we average the nominal displacements
amountofforceatthisdepth.[Bestviewedincolor] of the the 3 nearest deformable surface points for each
rigid surface point. Each nominal displacement is calculated
according to
surfacemodelS,andifso,whichpointsmustbedisplacedto
− − ·
resolve the contact. The contact force solver then computes d = (p p )T n , (1)
i rigidj deformablei deformablei
the 3D reaction force and torque and the deformed shape of where p ,n ∈ R3 are the equilibrium
the object. surface pdeofsoitrimonabloefi podienftorimaabnldeiits associated normal. We
averagetheequilibriumpositionsandnominaldisplacements
A. Contact Force Solver
of the 3 points to obtain the estimated equilibrium surface
Classic Herztian contact theory predicts that displacement point and displacement, which we refer to as q and d. By
at a surface point on a deformable object will cause neigh- keepingonlythepointswithd>0,wehaveN pairsofrigid
boring surface points to move in a manner described by a surface points and its corresponding estimated equilibrium
functionofdistanceandmaterialproperties(Fig.5a).Hence, surface points along with nominal displacements.
we cannot simply sum the forces caused by each indepen- 2) Force Solving: The force solver uses the nominal dis-
dent point displacement, but instead have to account for placements calculated above combined with an indentation
correlations in displacement. We assume that normal forces basis function to compute the actual displacements.
and displacements are the dominant effect, and experiments The shape function is deﬁned as follows. For each pair of
on our object set suggest this assumption is reasonable for points on the deformable object, we deﬁne a shape function
R → R
normally-displaced objects. g(r) : to describe the correlation of a point
1649
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:57:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 6. An illustration of how the nominal displacements are calculated
forapolyhedralrigidobject.
Fig. 7. Predictions errors of our semi-empirical simulator on novel rigid
objectsandthatofpuredata-drivenmodels.Errorsondifferentobjectsare
indentation on its neighborhood. Here r is the Euclidean shown in different colors. We also include the errors of the point models
usedinpredictionsasareference.
distance between 2 points on the equilibrium surface, and
we use the inverse function:
g(r)=c/(c+r) (2) To predict the displacement of the entire object, not only
thepointsincontact,wesumupcontributionsfromtheshape
f(r) describes an inverse relationship between points’ rel- function over every positive actual displacement.
ative displacement and equilibrium surface distance, which
matchestheHertziantheory.Theconstantc>0ispickedby B. Experiments
observation. However, for future work, we could determine
Throughout this section, we use the point deformation
this constant using a camera tracking the shape of deforma-
models trained with Auto-ET and data from 10 poking
tion during poking. While this constant may actually vary
locations. All implementation is performed in Python code
across the object surface, we keep it constant across the
with the Numpy package for linear algebra, and all timing
object in this paper.
is conducted on a desktop PC with an Intel i7 3.8GHz
By calculating the relative distance ri,j between all pairs processor.
of deformable points qi and qj in collision with the rigid 1) Simulation accuracy for Line and Cylinder contact:
object,weobtain a linear complementary problem (LCP) Fig. 7 shows evaluation of our simulator with line and
relating nominal and actual displacements:
cylinder probe contact in predicting 3D force and torque
    
d  g(r ) g(r ) ... g(r )d˜  vectors.Thesimulatorpredictionerrorsarecomparedtopure
w=d...12−g(r...12,,11) g(r...12,,22) ...... g(r...12,,nn)d˜...12 (3) lpweoahkreenrsienfgArouumstoint-hEgeTtghreisoucaonlrdsroetcruuttshgeedloinmaesetartnyhd,etcrryaeliginnreeddsesrdoiprr.reocWbtlieyngnoondtai1tca0e,
dn g(rn,1) g(rn,2) ... g(rn,n) d˜n that the actual displacements calculated could exceed the
≤ ⊥ ≥ range of displacements in the point training data. We simply
0 w [d˜1,d˜2,...,d˜n]T 0, extrapolate the training data following the estimated force-
displacement slope to incorporate all possible queries from
where the subscripts denote the indices of the deformable
thesimulator.Overall,oursimulatorperformsslightlyworse
surfacepointsincollision.Whentherearenotanyduplicated
(cid:54) than pure learning, better on Lamb and Bird, and worse on
points, i.e. g(r ) = 1 except for i = j, this symmetric
i,j Vest and Shoe. We believe this is mainly due to the fact
matrix is invertible. We solve the LCP by iteratively as-
that Vest and Shoe are made of composite materials with
suming equalities, solving the system of linear equations
a mixture of elastic and inelastic components. As a result,
by matrix inversion, and removing the points with negative
shapefunctionsapproximatethedeformationoftheseobjects
actual displacements.
sub-optimally and lead to errors in the simulator. The key
Fromtheactualdisplacementswesumtheforcespredicted
advantageofourmethodisthatwedonotneedtore-acquire
bythepointdeformationmodeltoobtainthecontactwrench.
a new training set, and we can also predict force response
Given the N points with positive actual displacements,
final for different rolls and pitches of the rigid objects, which are
the total response wrench (F ,τ ) on the object are
total total not included as features in the learning-only training set.
calculated as follows:
− − 2) Simulation Visualization: We illustrate our simulator
fi =y([qi,di]) y([qi,di d˜i]) by visualizing the simulation of a line or cylinder probe
·
F =ΣNfinalf n (4) poking straight at different objects, resembling the data
total i=1 i i
× · collection process in Section III.A. An example is shown
τ =ΣNfinal(˜r ) (f n ),
total i=1 j i i inFig.8a.ThesimulationframesaredisplayedinFig.9.As
where r˜ is the vector from the torque center to the corre- the probes penetrate deeper, the calculated actual displace-
j
sponding rigid body point p . ments also increase, thus deforming the entire surface more
rigidj
1650
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:57:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) The minimum height at which (b)Computationtimevsnumberof
(a)Contactwithalineprobe. (b)Robotpackingsetup. therigidspherecanbepackedunder contacts,showingtotaltime(ttotal),
forcethreshold2N. displacement calculation (t ), colli-
Fig.8. Simulationexperiments,Lambobject. siondetection(tc),andpoidntmodel
queries(tm).
Fig.10. Resultsfromtheplanningproblem.
in the negative z direction once the interaction force limit
is exceeded, shown in Fig. 8b. A plot of minimum possible
height of the sphere on the x-y grid is shown in Fig. 10a.
On average in this experiment, a contact reaction force
query takes 0.086s. Each query consists of 0.0738s of
(a) Lamb probed by a line (b)Slothprobedbyalineprobe. collision detection, 0.010s of querying the point model, and
probe.
0.0017sofLCPsolvingbyoursimulator.Theaveragecom-
putationtimeasafunctionofthenumberofdetectedcontact
points m is plotted in Fig. 10b. The time for LCP increases
cubically with m, because it mainly involves inverting a
dense matrix. The time for querying the point model stays
somewhat constant. There is a lot of room for improvement
in speed, including implementation in a compiled language,
bettercollisiondetectionalgorithms[21],andparallelization.
V. CONCLUSION
The paper proposed a 2-stage data-driven framework to
(c) Shoe probed by a (d) Bird probed by a (e) Vest probed by a learnandsimulatetheforceresponsesofheterogeneouselas-
lineprobe. cylinderprobe. cylinderprobe.
tic objects. In the ﬁrst stage, a point deformation model of a
Fig. 9. Simulation of the line and cylinder probes poking straightly at
testing object is learned via a robot arm poking at the object
all5experimentobjects,withthenumbersindicatingtheamountofprobe
displacements.Theobjectsarecoloredwiththedisplacementsofthesurface a few times. In the second stage, a semi-empirical simulator
points,causedbytheprobes.[Bestviewedincolor] predicts the contact wrench between the deformable object
and a novel rigid object by integrating analytic calculation
and the learned point model to obtain the expected restoring
signiﬁcantly, calculated by the shape function. We can see forces at a series of contact points and summing them.
grooves on the Lamb, the Bird, and the Sloth that ﬁt the
For future work, we would like to relax several assump-
probe geometry at deep penetration. The Shoe and the Vest
tions made in this paper. First, learning and generalizing
are stiffer objects, with c in the shape function much greater shearandfrictionforceswithsmallnumbersoftouchesisan
than the other 3 objects. As a result, the grooves are harder
open problem. Perhaps the deformation and force response
to observe.
ofanoveldeformableobjectcanbebootstrappedbytransfer
3) Application to a Packing Problem: We consider a learning from an object that has already been acquired. We
simple packing problem as an illustration of our approach, would also like learn the deformation and force response of
shown in Fig. 8b. Given a rigid box with a deformable anobjectwhileitisundergoinggrossmovements,separating
object (the Lamb) already packed, we would like to know therigidbodyandelasticcomponentsofthemovement.This
if the robot can pack another rigid item (a sphere, with couldalsobeextendedtohandleplasticdeformation.Finally,
diameter = 40mm and discretized into 150 surface points) we would like to enhance our simulator to handle combined
into the box. In particular, we would like to know at what rigid and elastic deformation, as well as contact between
positions in the box the sphere can be placed such that its deformable objects.
interactionforcewiththedeformableobjectdoesnotexceed
2N. We perform a grid search over the x-y-z position of the
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
rigid sphere centroid inside the box, where z starts with the
maximum allowed height in the box and ﬁnishes the search WethankJoaoM.C.Marquesforproofreadingthepaper.
1651
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:57:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] J. Zhou, R. Paolini, J. A. Bagnell, and M. T. Mason, “A Convex
PolynomialForce-MotionModelforPlanarSliding:Identiﬁcationand
Application,”IEEEInt.Conf.Rob.Aut.,no.3,pp.372–377,2016.
[2] A. Kloss, S. Schaal, and J. Bohg, “Combining learned and an-
alytical models for predicting action effects,” in arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.04102,2017.
[3] J.Wu,J.-x.Wang,andH.Xiao,“Physics-InformedMachineLearning
forPredictiveTurbulenceModeling:APrioriAssessmentofPrediction
Conﬁdence,”inarXivpreprintarXiv:1607.04563,2016.
[4] M. Raissi and G. E. Karniadakis, “Hidden physics models :
Machinelearningofnonlinearpartialdifferentialequations,”Journal
of Computational Physics, vol. 357, pp. 125–141, 2018. [Online].
Available:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2017.11.039
[5] G.Carleo,I.Cirac,L.Cranmer,KyleDaudet,D.Bourse,M.Schuld,
L. Vogt-maranto, and L. Zdeborova´, “Machine learning and the
physicalsciences,”2019.
[6] Y.Zhu,L.Abdulmajeid,andK.Hauser,“AData-drivenApproachfor
Fast Simulation of Robot Locomotion on Granular Media,” in IEEE
Int.Conf.Rob.Aut.,2019.
[7] A. Oishi and G. Yagawa, “Computational Mechanics Enhanced by
DeepLearning,”Comput.MethodsAppl.Mech.Engrg.,vol.327,pp.
327–351, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.
2017.08.040
[8] A. Nealen, M. Matthias, R. Keiser, E. Boxerman, and M. Carlson,
“PhysicallyBasedDeformableModelsinComputerGraphics,”Com-
puterGraphicsForum,vol.25,no.4,pp.809–836,2006.
[9] B.Frank,R.Schemedding,C.Stachniss,M.Teschner,andW.Burgard,
“Learning the elasticity parameters of deformable objects with a
manipulation robot,” in IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intel. Rob. Sys., no.
October,2010.
[10] P. Boonvisut and M. C. Cavusoglu, “Estimation of Soft Tissue Me-
chanical Parameters From Robotic Manipulation Data,” Transactions
onMechatronics,vol.18,no.5,pp.1602–1611,2013.
[11] B. Bickel, M. Ba¨cher, M. A. Otaduy, W. Matusik, H. Pﬁster, and
M. Gross, “Capture and modeling of non-linear heterogeneous soft
tissue,”inSIGGRAPH,NewYork,NewYork,USA,2009,p.1.
[12] O. Deussen, L. Kobbelt, and T. Peter, “Using Simulated Annealing
to Obtain Good Nodal Approximations of Deformable Bodies,” in
EurographicsWorkshop,no.September,1995.
[13] S. Burion, F. Conti, A. Petrovskaya, C. Baur, and O. Khatib, “Iden-
tifying Physical Properties of Deformable Objects by Using Particle
Filters,”inIEEEInt.Conf.Rob.Aut.,2008,pp.1112–1117.
[14] T. Yamamoto, B. Vagvolgyi, K. Balaji, L. L. Whitcomb, and A. M.
Okamura, “Tissue Property Estimation and Graphical Display for
TeleoperatedRobot-AssistedSurgery,”IEEEInt.Conf.Rob.Aut.,pp.
4239–4245,2009.
[15] H.Salman,E.Ayvali,R.A.Srivatsan,Y.Ma,N.Zevallos,R.Yasin,
L.Wang,N.Siman,andH.Choset,“Trajectory-OptimizedSensingfor
ActiveSearchofTissueAbnormalitiesinRoboticSurgery,”inIEEE
Int.Conf.Rob.Aut.,2018.
[16] R.E.Goldman,A.Bajo,andN.Simaan,“Algorithmsforautonomous
exploration and estimation in compliant environments,” Robotica,
vol.31,no.1,2013.
[17] H.Liu,D.P.Noonan,B.J.Challacombe,P.Dasgupta,L.D.Senevi-
ratne, and K. Althoefer, “Rolling Mechanical Imaging for Tissue
AbnormalityLocalizationDuringMinimallyInvasiveSurgery,”IEEE
TransactionsonBiomedicalEngineering,vol.57,no.2,pp.404–414,
2010.
[18] Q.-y.Zhou,J.Park,andV.Koltun,“Open3D:AModernLibraryfor
3DDataProcessing,”arXiv:1801.0984,2018.
[19] M.Feurer,A.Klein,K.Eggensperger,J.Springenberg,M.Blum,and
F. Hutter, “Efﬁcient and Robust Automated Machine Learning,” in
AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,2015,pp.2962—
-2970.
[20] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg,
J.Vanderplas,A.Passos,D.Cournapeau,M.Brucher,M.Perrot,and
E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn : Machine Learning in Python,” Journal
ofMachineLearningResearch,vol.12,pp.2825–2830,2011.
[21] R. Weller, “A Brief Overview of Collision Detection,” in New Geo-
metricDataStructuresforCollisionDetectionandHaptics,2013,pp.
9–46.
1652
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 13:57:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 