2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Cooperative Autonomy and Data Fusion for Underwater Surveillance
With Networked AUVs
Gabriele Ferri1, Pietro Stinco1, Giovanni De Magistris1,
Alessandra Tesei1, Kevin D. LePage1
Abstract—Cooperative autonomy and data sharing can
largelyimprovethemissionperformanceofroboticnetworksin
underwatersurveillanceapplications.Inthispaper,wedescribe
the cooperative autonomy used to control the Autonomous
Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) acting as sonar receiver nodes
in the CMRE Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) network. The
paper focuses on a track management module that was inte-
grated in the robot autonomy software for enabling the share
of information. Track to track (T2T) associations are used
for improving track classiﬁcation and for creating a common
tactical picture, necessary for AUV cooperative strategies. We
alsopresentanewcooperativedata-drivenAUVbehaviourthat
exploits the spatial diversity of multiple robots for improving
targettrackingandforfacilitatingT2Tassociations.Wereport
resultswithrealdatacollectedatseathatvalidatetheapproach.
The reported results are one of the ﬁrst examples that show Fig.1. TheCMREcooperativeASWmultistaticsonarnetwork.
the potential of cooperative autonomy and data fusion in
and a radio modem, build the communications infrastructure
realistic underwater surveillance scenarios characterised by
of the network.
limited communications.
Several challenges (e.g. lack of standards, reduced power
I. INTRODUCTION and endurance of AUVs, real-time signal processing, under-
Anti-SubmarineWarfare(ASW)isacapitalasset-intensive water communications, etc.) must be solved to use this kind
activity traditionally performed by means of ﬁxed sensors of networks for conducting reliable and effective operations
such as sonobuoys, and/or vessels equipped with sonar in real-world applications [1].
sensors. The objective is the target detection, its accurate In littorals, where the CMRE network is generally de-
tracking and correct classiﬁcation [1]. ployed, real-time signal processing and underwater commu-
Today’s low-cost and small Autonomous Underwater Ve- nications are challenging. Acoustic transmission is charac-
hicles(AUVs)suggestnewapproachestounderwatersurveil- terised by high clutter and noise, and by poor propagation
lance [2]–[4]. They are characterised by lower sensing, conditions, that depend on the changing environmental con-
computational and communication capabilities if compared ditions [1]. In such conditions, the execution of effective
to traditional assets. However, they can build intelligent Detection, Classiﬁcation, Localisation and Tracking (DCLT)
networks to accomplish complex missions with features of algorithms onboard the robots becomes challenging. This is
reliability, persistence, scalability and adaptability [1], [5]. true also considered the limited computational capabilities,
These networks can offer the desired ASW monitoring at a typically available onboard AUVs.
fraction of the costs of traditional means. Duetothedescribedpooracousticpropagation,communi-
At NATO STO Centre for Maritime Research and Ex- cationsareaffectedbyseverelimitations[8],suchaslimited
perimentation (CMRE), we have been developing a multi- bandwidthandrange.Thisimpactsnetworkoperations,since
static sonar hybrid robotic network (Fig. 1). Sonar sources areliablecommunicationlinkbetweenrobotsandCommand
(transmitters),eitherlocatedonabuoyortowedbyourship, and Control (C2) centre cannot be guaranteed.
transmitsonarsignals.Theacousticwavereﬂectsoffobjects In this scenario, robot autonomy is the enabler to manage
and is collected by multistatic receivers (the two Ocean robotics networks at sea. Making autonomous decisions is
Explorer (OEX) AUVs towing a hydrophone array) [2], [3]. a way for a robot to improve the target DCLT, especially
Each AUV computes bearing-range contacts [6] that are fed when a command/conﬁrmation from the C2 centre cannot
into an onboard tracker based on a kinematic model of the be received. Robots can deviate from the pre-planned trajec-
target of interest. The tracker combines (spatially) related tories [1] on the basis of the collected data. These control
contactsovertimetoproducetracks.Fixed(buoys)ormobile strategies are named data-driven and provide ﬂexibility and
(WaveGlidersurfacevehicles[7]),equippedwithanacoustic a possible increase in mission performance, but they do not
assure the predictability of pre-planned missions typically
1NATO STO Centre for Maritime Research and Experimentation
used in marine robotics [1].
(CMRE), Viale San Bartolomeo 400, 19126 La Spezia (SP), Italy
Gabriele.Ferri@cmre.nato.int Cooperation of multiple robots builds on single-robot
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 871
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:04:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.2. Non-myopic,recedinghorizon,trackprosecutioncontrolalgorithm
fortheAUVheadingangle.TheAUVcreatesatreeofpossibledecisions
and selects the optimal sequence of actions that minimises the error of a
trackingﬁlter.
autonomy to increase the mission success. Multiple receiver
nodes of our multistatic sonar network exploit their spatial
diversity for creating different geometric distributions of
source-target-receiver to increase the probability of target
detection. Robots can exchange information produced by
Fig.3. SchemeofthetrackmanagementalgorithmsonGrouchoAUV.
the onboard processing (e.g. contacts and tracks) to enhance Track analysis is the core of onboard decision making.
target DCLT [4], [9]. Exchanging data is also important to Once a track is selected for further investigation, based on
create a common tactical picture, necessary for a dynamic the track information, an AUV adapts its navigation for
allocation of mission tasks to robots (e.g. patrolling an area) improving its tracking and detection performance.
and for cooperative autonomous behaviours [10]. The robot uses a non-myopic, receding horizon algorithm
In this paper, we describe a new cooperative autonomy to control its heading angle [3]. It evaluates a tree of
strategy for the CMRE AUVs. We focus on the cooperative possible future decisions predicting the position/heading of
track “prosecution” behaviour. For track “prosecution” or the receiver, source and target (see Fig. 2). Target motion
“optimisation” we mean a speciﬁc robot movement strategy is predicted using the information related to the track. Each
for improving the information collected about the possible leaf of the tree represents one heading decision sequence.
target that is generating the track. Each node of the tree corresponds to a conﬁguration c
i,j
Each robot calls the collaborators for a track prosecution (positions/headings of the receiver, source and target) where
task. The robots of the team use a coordinated non-myopic, i stands for the step of future prediction and j runs on the
receding horizon algorithm to control their heading angle number of nodes for a certain level of prediction i. The
for optimising target detection and tracking [3]. A track algorithmusesanonboardacousticpredictionmodelandthe
managementmodulewasintegratedintheonboardautonomy predicted spatial distributions of the source-target-receiver
software for computing Track-to-Track (T2T) associations for computing the expected target estimate covariance error
between tracks produced by different robots. T2T associa- P of a tracking ﬁlter.
tions are used for target conﬁrmation. We describe results i,j { }
The cost for the conﬁguration i,j is then computed
from the LCAS18 trial, held off the Piombino coast (Italy)
as J(c ) = Tr(P ). The total cost of a(cid:80)sequence of
inNovember2018.Inthistrial,tracksweresharedbyAUVs i,j i,j
decisions is calculated as the sum of conﬁguration costs
andbyNRVAlliance,fortheﬁrsttimecompletelyintegrated
M
in the CMRE network. composing the sequence, that is J(SM) = αiJ(ci,j),
Results from LCAS18 are one of the ﬁrst examples that where M is the future horizon and α a vectoi=r1of weights
demonstratetheeffectivenessofusingcooperativeautonomy assumedequalto1inthefollowing.Thesequenceofheading
with multiple robot platforms and data fusion in realistic decisions that minimises J(S ), S∗ =argmin J(S ) is
M M M
underwater surveillance scenarios. computed through the tree exploration. TheSﬁMrst decision of
II. CMREAUVAUTONOMY:SINGLE-ROBOT the sequenceis used forcontrolling the AUVheading angle.
TRACKPROSECUTION The process is periodically repeated.
The onboard signal processing receives the data col- The control policy reaches a trade-off between different
lected from the array hydrophones and computes bearings objectives [3]: keeping the target not far from the array
via beamforming and range using matchﬁltering and the broadside1; moving closer to the target for increasing the
knowledge of the ping time and source position [6]. The expectedcontactSignaltoNoiseRatio(SNR)(andtherefore
−
contacts are then created (georeferenced x y positions and the target probability of detection); seeking source-target-
Dopplermeasurements)andarepassedtotheonboardMulti- receiver geometries beneﬁcial from target localisation per-
Hypothesis tracker [3], [11].
Tracksaredescribedbyastatevectorcontainingthemean 1The term broadside refers to the target bearing relative to the hy-
drophonearray.Ifanarrayistowedstraightbehindthevehicle,broadside
values of the estimates of the target position/speed and a ◦
is90 relativetotheheadingofthevehicle.Whenatargetisatthearray
covariance matrix P that quantiﬁes the errors relative to the broadside,thearraygivesthehighestbearingresolution(lowermeasurement
e[xsti,mx˙at,eys. ,Ty˙he]Ts,tcaotensvisetcintogroaftxt−imyecokoridsinwatreitstewnitahsrexlaktiv=e e(brreoarrsi)n.gO1n8t0h◦e)ootrheinrhfaronndt,oaftathrgeetarartayor(nbeeaarrienngd0ﬁ◦re),,thhaastaispdoiorerclytlyrebseohlvinedd
k k k k bearing due to the poor bearing resolution (with likely breakage of the
velocities in a North-East local reference frame. currenttrack).
872
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:04:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. spective. The reduction of the measurement errors and the is necessary for achieving the ﬁnal target conﬁrmation and
increment of the probability of detection increase the target for reducing the number of tracks to investigate through
accuracy and the track lifetime. Longer track lifetime is trackprosecutionbehaviours.Intheaddressedscenario,track
a condition of the utmost importance for the classiﬁcation classiﬁcation is challenging due to the high clutter and high
process. reverberationenvironmentstypicallyencountered,andtothe
The non-myopic track optimiser behaviour has proved strong target strength dependency on the aspect angle [3].
effective in our scenario [3]. However, many false (not For track classiﬁcation, we aim at quantifying the so-called
related to a target) tracks are typically present in a realistic trackquality[13].Itisdeﬁnedastheprobabilityofexistence
scenario. It is therefore necessary to select a small subset of a target corresponding to the track. CMRE has been
of tracks to be prosecuted through data-driven strategies. To working on different track classiﬁcation approaches: from
this purpose, track classiﬁcation algorithms were developed the analysis of the statistical distribution of contacts [14]
together with a T2T association engine (see Fig. 3). Sharing to the evaluation of kinematic features [13]. Ongoing work
informationisnotonlyawaytoimprovetargetclassiﬁcation, is also addressing the use of Deep Learning approaches to
but also to create the common picture needed to make evaluate measurement spectral features [15].
cooperative decisions. In the results reported in this paper we use the approach
described in [13]. A track score is computed in real-time
III. TRACKCLASSIFICATIONANDFUSION
onboard the robots to quantify the track quality. The track
A T2T association engine runs onboard (see Fig. 3). The score takes into account the quality of the measurement-to-
engineattemptsT2Tassociationtests basedontheapproach trackassociationsandthetracklength[13].Themethoduses
presented in [12]. For the two tracks involved, the last an acoustic model and the kinematic features of the tracks.
estimates(tracklets)areconsidered.Thetrackstates(position Experimental results show that tracks related to a target are
and speed) and the relative covariance matrices are propa- morelikelytoproducealargerincreaseofscoringovertime
gated (if needed) in time to temporally align the tracklets. A if compared to tracks produced by clutter [13]. At each ping
nearly-constant velocity model is used for propagation [12]. time, the score for each active track is updated. A threshold
Thestatevectorispropagatedasx =Fx − ,withFbeing value is set based on historical data. The threshold is used
k k 1
the state transition matrix. For what concerns the covariance to modify the track class. Association events between local
matrix, P = FP − FT +Q, where Q is the covariance and remote tracks (see Fig. 3) increment the score, thereby
k k 1
matrix of zero-mean white Gaussian additive noise. inﬂuencing the classiﬁcation. These events are typically
Given two tracks, i and j, the difference of the two target related to the target presence or to the presence of persistent
−
state estimates is deﬁned as ˆeij(k) = xˆi(k) xˆj(k), and clutter areas. In the latter case, adaptive ﬁltering techniques
−
the difference of the true states is eij(k) = xi(k) xj(k). are used to identify these areas [16].
The hypothesis that the two tracks are related to the same A new track starts its life as initiated. If the track score
target is H : eij(k) = 0. The error in the difference crosses the threshold, the track switches to the conﬁrmed
0 −
between the state estimates is ˜eij(k) = eij(k) ˆeij(k). state, meaning it is likely related to a target. When a
It is zero mean and, assuming the independence of state conﬁrmed track terminates, it becomes unobserved. An un-
estimation errors (for reducing the computational burden), observed track is propagated in time and the T2T engine
has covariance computed as Tij(k) = Pi +Pj, with Pi, attempts to associate it with the initiated tracks. A success
Pj being the error covariance matrices relative to the two ofthetestimpliesthattheinvolvedinitiated andunobserved
tracks under evaluation. Assuming the estimation errors as tracks are assumed as being produced by the same target. In
Gaussian,theT2Tassociationtestisthefollowing:weaccept thiscasetheunobservedtrackisremovedfromthetrackpool
the hypothesis H if andtheinitiatedtrackbecomesreacquired.Ifthisoccurs,the
0
D (cid:44)ˆeij(k)T[Tij(k)]−1ˆeij(k)≤D (1) targetisconsideredreacquired.Incasenoassociationoccurs
α inacertaintimewindow2,theunobservedtrackisterminated
{ | }
The threshold D is such that P D >D H =α where, and removed from the pool.
α α 0
for instance, α=0.01 (see [12] for details).
IV. THECOOPERATIVENON-MYOPIC,
T2T association consists of two steps: computing a table
RECEDINGHORIZONTRACKPROSECUTION
of association metrics and selecting the best association
ALGORITHM
hypothesis, usually by some assignment algorithm.
The T2T association test is carried out for each track Thedevelopedtrackmanagementalgorithmsarenecessary
produced onboard (local) with the remote ones. During the to design the cooperative version of the non-myopic track
mission, each robot transmits a message with the three best prosecution behaviour. The AUVs share information and
tracks as scored by the onboard Track Classiﬁer. messages to trigger the non-myopic behaviour on a selected
In case of an association, this is recorded in the Track track on both the AUVs at the same time. The objective is
Tablethatstorestheinformationrelativetotheactivetracks. to control the spatial diversity of the robots to facilitate T2T
The Track Classiﬁer has the pivotal role of selecting from
2Thetimewindowlengthissetasproportionaltothescorevaluewhen
the track pool only those likely related to a target, that are
thetrackhasbecomeunobserved.Higherscoresaretypicalofatrackmore
generally a small subset of the produced tracks. This step likelyrelatedtoatarget,soalongertimeisgivenforthetargetreacquisition.
873
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:04:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. associations that can conﬁrm the selected track as target- The CMRE vessel NRV Alliance operated as C2 centre
related. (using a Wi-Fi modem), towed the CMRE ATLAS MF
A cooperation request is transmitted to collaborators by a source[3]anddeployedtheSLICTAtripletarray[18].NRV
requester AUV whenever it is prosecuting a track. The re- Alliance processed the data from SLICTA array up to the
questcontainsinformationaboutthetrackunderprosecution. track level. The produced tracks were sent to the other
Onboard the receiving robot, the request is accepted only network nodes for data fusion algorithms. The ship also
if the AUV is not already prosecuting a track. Then, the received the tracks produced by the AUVs and executed
Track Table is checked and: data fusion algorithms onboard. The vessel was, for the ﬁrst
• If an association with a local track is found, the robot time, fully integrated in the CMRE network in terms of data
selects that local track and starts its prosecution. sharing and data fusion. Several types of waveforms were
• If the received track has not been previously associated transmitted, in a bandwidth from 1.8 to 3.5 KHz.
with a local track, it is added to the task pool as InLCAS18,thetargetwastheecho-repeater[3]towedby
unobserved. Then robot prosecutes it for attempting its the other CMRE vessel, CRV Leonardo. The echo-repeater
association with some newborn initiated tracks. is a device that simulates a real target. It re-transmits the
The messages received remotely thereby inﬂuence the deci- waveforms received from an acoustic source with a user-
sions of the AUV and are used to coordinate the actions of speciﬁed amplitude gain after a speciﬁed delay.
different robots.
A. CMRE OEX CONTROL SYSTEM AT LCAS18
In the ﬁrst case, the AUV starts prosecuting a local track.
The new cooperative track prosecution behaviour with
The objective is to increase the tracking performance and to
the relative track management algorithms were integrated
produce T2T associations with the remote track to conﬁrm
in the intelligent Cooperative Autonomous Decision Mak-
the target presence.
ing Engine (iCADME) autonomy architecture (see [4] for
In the second case, the AUV prosecutes the unobserved
more details) (see Fig. 4). iCADME is a a three-layer,
track to acquire the target. A successful T2T association
hybrid [19] control architecture that manages cooperative
onboard the requester AUV between the initial and the
mission planning and task execution. iCADME runs in a
reacquired track conﬁrms the target presence. During the
Mission Oriented Operating Suite (MOOS) robotics soft-
cooperative task execution, the requester AUV keeps trans-
ware middleware [20] environment. MOOS-IvP is a set of
mitting the cooperation request with updated track informa-
open source C++ modules, built on the publish/subscribe
tion. This information, when received, is used to update the
paradigm, for providing autonomy on robotic platforms.
local unobserved track.
iCADME is executed on the so-called “backseat” computer.
V. RESULTSFROMLCAS18TRIAL According to the “backseat-driver” paradigm [3], [20], the
LCAS18 was a trial conducted off the coast of Piombino backseatcomputerrunsthe“intelligent”robotsoftware,such
(Italy) in November 2018. The area was characterised by a assignalprocessingandautonomy,andproducescommands
seaﬂoor at a depth (almost constant) of 130 m. The CMRE for the “frontseat” computer that generates commands for
multistatic network (see Fig. 1) was deployed in the area. the actuators and provides the interfaces with the onboard
A Gateway Buoy and two WaveGliders surface vehicles sensors.
operated as communications gateways, relaying messages Dependingonthetaskinexecution,theControlLayer ac-
from above to under water and vice-versa. The two CMRE tivatesadifferentsetofbehaviours.Eachbehaviourproduces
OEX AUVs (named Harpo and Groucho) were the sonar desired commands for the robot. Outputs are reconciled by
receiver nodes. They are 4.3 m long and 0.53 m wide, thepHelmIvP[20]MOOSapplicationusingIvPintervalpro-
with a typical endurance of 48 hours of operations at a gramming technique. The ﬁnal commands (typically speed,
cruise speed of 1 m/s. The Autonomous Underwater Vehicle headinganddepth)aretransmittedtothefrontseatcomputer.
(AUV)s towed the BENS slim towed array (SLITA) [2], [3]. iCADME decouples planning from task execution. The
BENSarrayshavethreenestedsetsof32hydrophoneseach. separation between the logic for task invocation, allocation
The used hydrophones were optimised for frequencies up to and execution facilitates the use of iCADME on heteroge-
3.47 kHz (0.21 m spacing). neous robots and system testing, crucial during the experi-
Eachnetworknodewasequippedwith7/17kHzEvologics ment before deployment at sea.
S2C low-frequency modems [17] for underwater acoustic During LCAS18 a Finite State Machine (FSM) [4] was
communication and with Wi-Fi modems for RF communi- used to control the AUV mission. The Mission Management
cations. The CMRE Cognitive Communications Architec- Layer handles the FSM and manages the state change
ture (CCA) [8] was used at LCAS18 for the ﬁrst time. conditions related to track classiﬁcation. The mission begins
Deployed on each node, CCA managed the network com- with the AUVs in the Area survey state. In LCAS18 they
munications infrastructure. CCA is a modular architecture coveredpre-ﬁxedrectangularpathscalledracetracks,evenif
thatprovidesanadaptiveandsoftwaredeﬁnedprotocolstack data-driven strategies may be employed [1]. The onboard
for the support of multi-modal communication systems and Track Classiﬁer processes the contacts and classiﬁes the
extensive cross-layering. CCA is ﬂexible and easily allows tracks. If some tracks become conﬁrmed, the highest score
to use different algorithms at different network levels [8]. track is selected and the FSM switches to prosecution state
874
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:04:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.4. TheiCADMEarchitecture.Thethreelayerautonomyframework
is reported. The World Model stores data relative to the environment and
tothetacticalscenario.
to optimise the selected track. The selected conﬁrmed track
is prosecuted until ﬁnal target classiﬁcation (e.g. supported
by T2T associations) or until the track breaks. In this
case, the track becomes unobserved, and iCADME switches
Fig. 5. Results from cooperative autonomy on 19 November. The
to reacquisition for an attempt to reacquire the target. In
transmitting source was the ATLAS MF source (identiﬁed by the label
the reacquisition state, the AUV prosecutes an unobserved TX) towed by NRV Alliance. Dark colours are used for showing items
track with the objective to produce favourable source-target- related to Groucho (its path is drawn in dark green), while light ones to
Harpo(itspathinlightgreen).Numbersidentifythetrackid.Thecolours
receiver geometry to ease the target reacquisition process.
are associated to the different classiﬁcation: blue initiated, red conﬁrmed,
The current state of the FSM determines the task that is magentaunobserved andredwithcrossesreacquired.Inorangewereport
passed to the Task Management Layer for execution. In all the trajectory of CRV Leonardo towing the echo-repeater that acts as the
targetintheexperiment.Theheadingsofthevesselsandvehiclesareshown
the described mission phases, tracks are prosecuted through
asshortblacklines.
the cooperative, non-myopic track prosecution strategy pre-
iCADME was activated to control the OEX operations.
viously described (see Sec. II). As described, messages
The vehicles started their mission in the area survey state,
received by collaborators modify the internal FSM state.
followingaracetrackrectangularpath.Grouchonavigatedat
B. COOPERATIVE AUTONOMY RESULTS a depth of 70 m and Harpo at a depth of 80 m.
Wereportresultsfrom19November.ThePulseRepetition WereportinFig.5thesituationatping#191.Darkcolours
Interval (PRI) was set to 20 s. Every PRI, contacts and are used for items related to Groucho (its path drawn in
tracks were produced by the onboard signal processing. dark green), while light ones are used for Harpo (its path in
The robot shared two messages, one containing the three light green). A track is drawn with its track number and the
highest ranked tracks and one containing seven contacts. colour is relative to the classiﬁcation: blue for initiated, red
These data were shared between the nodes through the for conﬁrmed, magenta for unobserved and red with crosses
acoustic communication channel. The CCA was interfaced for reacquired. In orange the ﬁgure shows the path of CRV
with MOOS and conﬁgured to use an ALOHA-based MAC Leonardo towing the echo-repeater that acts as the target in
protocol[8].Theobjectivewastoachieve,giventhenetwork the experiment. Short black lines show the headings of the
conﬁguration, a better use of the available bandwidth with vessels and robots. The acoustic source was the ATLAS MF
respect to the traditionally used Time Division Multiple source (identiﬁed by the label TX) towed by NRV Alliance.
Access (TDMA) [1], [8]. A restricted ﬂooding solution Harpo selected the conﬁrmed track #1824 for prosecution
was used at the networking layer to route messages in the at ping #188. Consequently, it started to control its heading
underwater network. From the communication perspective, (as visible in Fig. 5). At the same time it begins to transmit
the network was composed of: NRV Alliance with an RF a cooperation request to Groucho. Groucho received the
modem, the two OEX AUVs, one Gateway Buoy, equipped requestandaccepteditatping#189.Attherequestreception,
with two acoustic modems at depths of 40 and at 80 m (to Groucho was heading towards north-west in unfavourable
explore different acoustic channels) and one RF module on conditions for target detection (the target was at its array’s
the surface and one WaveGlider equipped with one modem endﬁre and the target-receiver distance was increasing).
at 40 m of depth and one RF modem on the surface. For Therefore, the non-myopic behaviour controlled Groucho to
the ﬁrst time in our research activity, NRV Alliance was head south-west for prosecuting the track #1824 received
completely integrated in CMRE network, not only receiving from Harpo. The situation at ping #209 with the completed
data from the robots, but also transmitting the AUVs the turn can be seen in Fig. 5. The movement was beneﬁcial
tracks produced onboard from SLICTA data. for target tracking. Groucho was able to detect and track the
875
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:04:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. target with the new track #2093. The track was locally asso-
ciated with the Harpo’s track #1824, achieving a successful
targetacquisition.Thevehiclescontinuedtosharetracks,and
T2T associations ﬁnally conﬁrmed the target presence. As
visible in Fig. 5 at ping #209, an association (in light green)
occurred on Harpo between its new prosecuted local track
#2859 (a track that reacquired the original track #1824) and
the track #2093 received from Groucho. T2T associations
between tracks of the two AUVs occurred also on Groucho
(indarkgreen).Inaddition,Grouchosuccessfullyassociated
its track # 2093 with a track received from NRV Alliance,
for an additional conﬁrmation.
These results show how the cooperative autonomy
can guide the robot navigation for reaching geometries
Fig. 6. Real-time T2T associations achieved onboard the two AUVs.
favourable for target detection and tracking. This increases T2Tassociationsinvolvetracksproducedbythetarget.Coloureddiamonds
the probability of T2T associations, improving target conﬁr- indicate the T2T associations achieved in real-time onboard Groucho and
Harpo.
mation/classiﬁcation and tracking. The results also demon-
strate the importance of data sharing to support cooperative This is also necessary to create a common tactical picture
decisions. to support cooperative decision making. It is therefore clear
the importance of optimising the network communication.
C. REAL-TIME T2T ASSOCIATIONS ON ROBOTS
This can be achieved both by using technologies and con-
The analysis of communication performance indicates a ﬁgurations suited to the environmental conditions [8] and
low packet delivery ratio between the two AUVs producing by effectively controlling the position/depth of the gateway
∼
tracks. Only 10% of the messages transmitted by the assets.
two underwater vehicle were received by the other. The
low packet delivery ratio is mainly due to the sound speed
VI. CONCLUSION
proﬁle that penalised the communication between the two
AUVsthatwerenavigatingatthealmostthesamedepth(70 Results from experiments at sea demonstrate how coop-
m and 80 m) and close to the thermocline. The full CCA erative autonomy can increase the performance of a robotic
system capability was used to improve the communication network for underwater surveillance. In LCAS18, data shar-
performance. The use of multiple communication technolo- ingsupportedtargetclassiﬁcationandenabledthecreationof
gies and message forwarding (using the Gateway buoy and the common tactical picture to make cooperative decisions.
the WaveGlider as relays) increased the data delivery in the iCADMEtriggeredcooperativetrackprosecutionbehaviours
∼
network. An average delivery ratio of 50% between the for investigating the few tracks considered as interesting
two underwater robots was achieved and an average packet [3]. The adaptive behaviour controlled the AUV heading to
∼
delivery ratio of 35% was obtained from NRV Alliance increasethetrackingperformance.Thecooperationexploited
to the two AUVs. the spatial diversity of the robotic network nodes and fa-
This achieved communication performance enabled the cilitated T2T associations from data produced on different
network nodes to share information making possible T2T assets. This is a way to conﬁrm the target presence and
associations onboard the AUVs. In Fig. 6 we show the to improve the network tracking performance. The reported
successful T2T associations computed onboard Harpo and experimentalresultsareoneoftheﬁrstexamplesintheliter-
Groucho in real-time in one hour of mission. In that time aturethatdemonstratehowcooperativeautonomy,supported
frame, NRV Alliance transmitted tracks to the AUVs during by data sharing, can effectively control a robotic network in
thesouthpartCRVLeonardopath.Numeroussuccessfulas- a realistic and challenging underwater surveillance scenario
sociations are indicated in the ﬁgures. Speciﬁcally, Groucho characterised by limited and unreliable communications.
had 59 associations with tracks from Harpo and 65 with
tracks from NRV Alliance. Harpo associated its tracks 63
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
times with Groucho’s tracks and 59 times with data coming
∼
fromtheship.Intheconsideredtimewindow( 1hour)200 This work has been supported by the NATO Allied Com-
trackmessagesweretransmitted.Betweenthevehicles,with mandTransformationundertheCooperativeAnti-Submarine
∼
the experienced packet delivery ratio of 50%, successful Warfare research programme. LCAS18 trial was held in the
associations occurred on about 60% of the successfully framework of the LCAS Multi National - Joint Research
exchanged messages. This is a high percentage, showing Project, with participants CMRE (NATO), DSTG (AUS),
the good tracking performance of the AUVs. In the ﬁgure DRDC(CAN),DSTL(GBR),CSSN(ITA),FFI(NOR),DTA
it is also visible how false tracks are not interested by (NZL), and ONR (USA). The authors want to thank the
T2T associations. Sharing information provides a way to CMREstaffinvolvedintheexperimentaltrialsaswellasthe
discriminate tracks produced by a target from false tracks. Italian Navy crews of NRV Alliance and CRV Leonardo.
876
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:04:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] G. Ferri, A. Munafo`, A. Tesei, P. Braca, F. Meyer, K. Pelekanakis,
R. Petroccia, J. Alves, C. Strode, and K. D. LePage, “Cooperative
roboticnetworksforunderwatersurveillance:anoverview,”IETRadar,
Sonar &. Navigation. Special Issue: Sonar multi-sensor applications
andtechniques,vol.11,no.12,pp.1740–1761,2017.
[2] K. LePage, R. Goldhahn, J. Alves, C. Strode, P. Braca, G. Ferri,
A.Munafo`,M.Oddone,J.Sildam,F.Baralli,S.Biagini,G.Canepa,
M.Colombo,V.Grandi,G.Grenon,M.Mazzi,M.Micheli,G.Parisi,
P. Saia, A. Vermeij, and G. Zappa, “Autonomous networked anti-
submarinewarfareresearchanddevelopmentatCMRE,”inOCEANS
2015-Genova,May2015,pp.1–6.
[3] G.Ferri,A.Munafo`,andK.D.LePage,“AnAutonomousUnderwater
Vehicledata-drivencontrolstrategyfortargettracking,”IEEEJournal
ofOceanicEngineering,vol.Volume:43,no.Issue:2,pp.323–343,
April2018.
[4] G. Ferri, R. Petroccia, G. D. Magistris, L. Morlando, M. Micheli,
A.Tesei,andK.LePage,“CooperativeautonomyintheCMREASW
multistatic robotic network: Results from LCAS18,” in OCEANS19,
Marseille(FR),2019.
[5] S. Sariel, T. Balch, and N. Erdogan, “Naval mine countermeasure
missions,” IEEE Robotics Automation Magazine, vol. 15, no. 1, pp.
45–52,March2008.
[6] A.Munafo`,G.Canepa,andK.D.LePage,“Continuousactivesonars
forlittoralunderseasurveillance,”IEEEJournalofOceanicEngineer-
ing,pp.1–15,2018.
[7] http://liquidr.com/.
[8] R. Petroccia, G. Zappa, T. Furfaro, J. Alves, and L. D’Amaro,
“DevelopmentofaSoftware-DeﬁnedandCognitiveCommunications
ArchitectureatCMRE,”inMTS/IEEEOCEANS’18,Charleston,USA,
October,22–252018.
[9] P.Braca,R.Goldhahn,G.Ferri,andK.LePage,“Distributedinforma-
tionfusioninmultistaticsensornetworksforunderwatersurveillance,”
SensorsJournal,IEEE,2015.
[10] G.Ferri,J.Bates,P.Stinco,A.Tesei,andK.D.LePage,“Autonomous
underwater surveillance networks: A task allocation framework to
managecooperation,”inOCEANS2018,Kobe(JP),2018.
[11] S.CoraluppiandC.Carthel,“Distributedtrackinginmultistaticsonar,”
IEEETransAerospElectronSyst,vol.41(3),pp.1138–1147,2005.
[12] Y. Bar-Shalom, P. Willett, and X. Tian, Tracking and data fusion: a
handbookofalgorithms. Storrs,CT:YBSPublishing,2011.
[13] G. Ferri, A. Munafo`, R. Goldhahn, and K. LePage, “Towards fully
autonomousunderwatervehiclesinASWscenarios:anadaptive,data
drivenAUVmissionmanagerlayer,”inOCEANS2015,Genova,Italy,
18-21May,2015,2015.
[14] J. Sildam, K. LePage, P. Braca, and M. Micheli, “On unsupervised
trackclassiﬁcationbasedonentropydistributionestimatedalongtrack
relateddetections,”in1stInternationalConferenceandExhibitionon
UnderwaterAcoustics,2013.
[15] G. De Magistris, P. Stinco, J. Bates, G. Canepa, G. Ferri, A. Tesei,
and K. D. LePage, “Automatic target classiﬁcation using convolu-
tional neural networks for anti-submarine warfare applications,” in
OCEANS19,Seattle(US),2019.
[16] M.Micheli,A.Tesei,G.Ferri,andP.Stinco,“Adaptiveﬁlterofseabed
clutteronboardtheAUVsofanactivemultistaticsonarnetwork,”in
OCEANS18,Kobe(JP),2018.
[17] Evologics, “Evologics S2C7/17 acoustic modems,”
http://www.evologics.de/,Lasttimeaccessed:April2019.
[18] P. Stinco, A. Tesei, A. Maguer, F. Ferraioli, V. Latini, and L. Pesa,
“Sub-bandsbeam-spaceadaptivebeamformerforport-starboardrejec-
tionintripletsonararrays,”inGlobalSIP2018,2018.
[19] R.Murphy,IntroductiontoAIrobotics. MITPress,2000.
[20] http://oceanai.mit.edu/moos-ivp/pmwiki/pmwiki.php.
877
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:04:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 