2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
UBAT: On Jointly Optimizing UAV Trajectories and Placement of
Battery Swap Stations
Myounggyu Won
Department of Computer Science, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, United States
mwon@memphis.edu
Abstract—Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have been that ﬁnds the optimal UAV trajectories with no constraints
widely used in many applications. The limited ﬂight time of on the number and locations of charging stations.
UAVs, however, still remains as a major challenge. Although
In this paper, we address the problem of deploying
numerous approaches have been developed to recharge the
charging stations that maximizes the system performance
battery of UAVs effectively, little is known about optimal
methodologies to deploy charging stations. In this paper, we speciﬁcallyconcentratingongeneratingoptimalUAVtrajec-
address the charging station deployment problem with an aim tories, while minimizing the number of deployed charging
to ﬁnd the optimal number and locations of charging stations stations. More speciﬁcally, we formulate the problem of
such that the system performance is maximized. We show
jointlyoptimizingUAVTrajectoriesandLocationsofBattery
that the problem is NP-Hard and propose UBAT, a heuristic
swap Stations (TLBS) as an optimization problem, and
frameworkbasedontheantcolonyoptimization(ACO)tosolve
theproblem.Additionally,asuiteofalgorithmsaredesignedto develop an optimization framework to solve the problem.
enhance the execution time and the quality of the solutions Especially, since ﬁnding a shortest trajectory for a single
for UBAT. Through extensive simulations, we demonstrate UAV visiting each region of interest (ROI) and returning to
that UBAT effectively performs multi-objective optimization
the base station, without even considering charging stations,
of generation of UAV trajectories and placement of charging
isessentiallythetravellingsalespersonproblem(TSP)which
stations that are within 8.3% and 7.3% of the true optimal
solutions, respectively. is NP-Hard, we propose a heuristic solution called UBAT
based on Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) motivated by
I. INTRODUCTION the fact that ACO is well known to solve TSP very
With recent breakthroughs in design and production of effectively [16]. The technical contributions of this paper
UAVs,UAVsareincreasinglyusedinmanyapplicationssuch are that the standard ACO is adapted to account for unique
as military surveillance [1], disaster response [2], oil gas requirements for solving the TLBS problem especially in
pipe inspection [3], precision agriculture [4], and delivery calculating the probabilities for path selection and updating
of goods [5]. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) the pheromone trails: (1) constrained energy of UAVs, (2)
estimates that commercial UAVs will grow 10-fold between simultaneous coverage of ROIs by multiple UAVs, and
2016 and 2021, and the global market revenue of UAVs will (3) joint optimization of UAV trajectories and number of
rise to $11.2 billion by 2020 [6]. One of the major obstacles charging stations.
thatconstrainsthehugepotentialofUAVsisthelimitedﬂight The proposed framework is ﬁne-tuned with novel algo-
time. This is a signiﬁcant problem as more and more UAV rithms that are designed to enhance the convergence speed
applications require coverage of a large geographical area, and the quality of solutions. More speciﬁcally, an algorithm
lengthening the mission duration well beyond the battery is developed to minimize the number of candidate locations
capacity of UAVs [7]. for deploying charging stations, thereby reducing the search
Numerous solutions have been developed to extend the space and lowering the computational overhead. We also
ﬂight time of UAVs focusing on utilization of charging design an algorithm that effectively tunes the parameters for
stationsthatrecharge/replacethebatteryofUAVs[8][9][10]. the proposed framework to enhance the quality of solutions.
While these solutions have successfully increased the opera- Additionally,the2-OPTlocalsearch[17]iseffectivelyincor-
tion time of UAVs, there is still a signiﬁcant knowledge gap poratedtofurtherimprovethequalityofsolutions.Extensive
on how to deploy charging stations to maximize the system simulations are conducted to evaluate the performance of
performance. Speciﬁcally, existing approaches are based on UBAT as well as the supporting algorithms. The results
a simplifying assumption for deploying charging stations. demonstrate thatthe proposed approacheffectively performs
Wei and Isler propose a solution based on a single charging joint optimization of UAV trajectories and placement of
station[11].Somesolutionsdeploychargingstationsonlyat charging stations that are within 8.3% and 7.3% of the true
ﬁxed locations [12] such as at the center of a ﬁeld [13] and optimal solutions, respectively.
the base station [14]. Yu et al. develop a solution based on WedeﬁnetheTLBSprobleminSectionIIandpresentthe
unmanned ground vehicle (UGV)-based charging, but these details of UBAT in Section III followed by descriptions of
UGVs are allowed to visit only the sites to be visited by the supporting algorithms in Section IV. Simulation results are
UAVs [15]. It remains as a challenge to develop a solution presented in Section V. We then conclude in Section VI.
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 427
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:14:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. II. TLBSPROBLEM landedonachargingstationlocatedinacella .Theresidual
j
energy of a UAV u at time slot t , i.e., E can then be
A. System Model i j ui,tj
deﬁned as follows.
R
Consider a target area A with an arbitrary shape in 2.
The target area is divided into a two-dimensional grid of − ·F
square cells, i.e., the target area is represented as a set A= Eui,tk =Eui,tk−1 −γfly fly(u·i,a−j,Ftk)
{ }
a1,a2,...,aNS whereeachelementisasubarea(cell),and +(EMAX Eui,tk−1) (1 fly(ui,aj,tk))(.1)
NS is the number of subareas. Among the cells are regions
ofinterests(ROIs)denotedbyasetR={r ,r ,...,r }⊆ Here·,Eui,tj−1 istheresidualenergyattheprevioustimeslot.
1 2 NR γ f (u ,t )representstheenergylossforﬂyingduring
A, where NR is the number of ROIs. We introduce the fly fly i j − · −
function F : A,A → R which deﬁnes the Euclidean the time slot, and (EMAX Eui,tj−1) (1 ffly(ui,tj))
dist F indicates replacement of the battery during the time slot.
distance between two cells. More speciﬁcally, (a ,a ) F → { }
dist i j We introduce the function : U,A,T 0,1
means the Euclidean distance between the centers of two uloc
indicating whether the UAV is located in a certain cell
cells a and a . F
i j at a certain time slot. For example, (u ,a ,t ) = 1
There are NU ∈ uloc i∈ j k
means that UAV u A is in a cell a A at time
UAVs denoted ∈ i F j
slot t T, and otherwise (u ,a ,t ) = 0. We also
by a set U = k F ul→oc {i j} k
{ } deﬁne the function : A 0,1 indicating that a
u ,u ,...,u . cloc
1 2 NU chargingstationisdeployedinacertaincell.Moreprecisely,
Assume a typical F ∈
(a ) = 1 if a charging station is in the cell a A,
UAV application cloc i F i
otherwise (a ) = 0. Let us deﬁne another function
where UAVs ﬂy F clo→c Ri
: U,T which indicates the Euclidian distance
over a target area, mov F
moved during a time slot. For example (u ,t ) means
perform sensing, ∈ mov i j ∈
thedistancemovedbyUAVu U duringtimeslott T.
and transmit sensed i j
data to the base Fig.1. Anillustrationofatargetarea,ROIs, Let vMAX be the maximum speed of the UAV.
andsensingcoverage.
station. We assume B. Problem Formulation
that UAVs ﬂy H Havingdeﬁnedallnotationsandfunctions,theproblemof
meters high from the ground. As such, the sensing coverage
· · jointlyoptimizingUAVTrajectoriesandLocationsofBattery
COV isπ (H tan(θ))2 whereθ istheangleofthesensing swap Stations (TLBS) is formulate(cid:88)d as follows.
2
cone. The sensing coverage is sufﬁciently large to cover a
whole ROI when a UAV is above the center of the ROI. { NS F }
Fig. 1 illustrates a target area divided into cells, three ROIs minimize t , (a ) (2)
(cid:88) finish cloc i
in the target area, and the sensing coverage. The time is i=1
{ }
discretized into time slots T = t1,t2,... where the length NS F ≤ ∀ ∈ ∀ ∈
of a time slot is denoted by LT. In particular, let t be (u ,a ,t ) 1, u U, t T (3)
finish (cid:88) u(cid:88)loc i j k i k
the time slot when all ROIs have been fully covered.
j=1
The ﬂight time of a UAV is limited due to its energy
capacity. To support continuous operation of UAVs, NC NUfinishF (u ,a ,t )≥1,∀a ∈R (4)
charging stations are deployed in the target area which are uloc i j k j
{ } i=1 k=1
denoted by a set C = c ,c ,...,c . More precisely, we
1 2 NC ≤ ∀ ∈ ∀ ∈
assumethatthesechargingstationsautomaticallyreplacethe 0<E E , u U, t T (5)
ui,tj MAX i j
battery of a UAV when it is landed on the charging station.
Let E be the maximum energy capacity of a UAV.
MAX ∈ F ≤ · ∀ ∈ ∀ ∈
Also, let E be the remaining energy of a UAV u U (u ,t ) LT v , u U, t T (6)
ui,tj∈ i mov i j MAX i j
at time slot t T. Assume that all UAVs are fully charged
j ∀ ∈
before operation, i.e., E =E , u U. We deﬁne F F ≥
γ be the energy lossuria,tt0e whilMeAaXUAViis ﬂying, which cloc(∀aj)+∈ f∀ly(ui∈,aj,∀tk) ∈1, (7)
fly u U, a A, t T
can be updated based on the factors that affect energy i j k
consumption such as wind. Each UAV u is in one of these
{ } i Equation 1 (8)
states S = s ,s at each time slot. The state s
fly rec fly
indicates that a UAV is ﬂying, and the state s indicates Constraint 3 asserts that each UAV can be located in
rec
that a UAV is landed on a charging station to get its battery only one cell at each time slot. Constraint 4 means that
replaced. each ROI is covered by at least one UAV when the UAV
F → { }
A function : U,A,T 0,1 is deﬁned to specify operationisﬁnished.Constraint5statesthateachUAVdoes
fly
whether a UAV is ﬂying over a certain cell at a certain time not deplete its energy completely during operation, and the
F
slot. For example, (u ,a ,t ) = 1 if UAV u is ﬂying residual energy should not be greater than the maximum
fly i j kF i
over cell a at time slot t , and (u ,a ,t )=0 if it is energycapacity.Constraint6assuresthateachUAVdoesnot
j k fly i j k
428
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:14:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. move faster than the maximum speed v . Constraint 7 B. Trail Update
MAX
means that if a UAV is not ﬂying, i.e., landed in a cell
The pheromone trails are updated in two ways: evapo-
for recharging, there should be a charging station in that
ration and reinforcement. The former mimics the natural
cell. Finally, Constraint 8 speciﬁes how the residual energy
evaporation of pheromone. More speciﬁcally, pheromone
of each UAV is updated at each time slot. The TLBS
τ between two cells a and a are reduced if τ > 0
problem is NP-Hard because it contains, as a simpliﬁed ij i j− · · ij
based on the formula: τ = (1 ρ) τ +ρ τ , where
instance, the traveling salesman problem (TSP) [18]. As ij ij 0
ρ is a parameter that controls the speed of pheromone
such, we develop a heuristic framework based on the ant
reduction, and τ is the initial pheromone. Evaporation is
colony optimization (ACO) motivated by the fact that ACO 0
particularly useful for preventing one path from dominating
is particularly effective in solving the TSP problem [16].
other possible solutions. Due to evaporation, other paths are
explored, potentially leading to a better solution.
III. PROPOSEDAPPROACH Once a path P is discovered, pheromone trails on that
A. Path Selection patharestrengthened,whichiscalledthereinforcement.The
reinforcementprocessisusedtoencouragetheuseofshorter
We represent UAVs and ROIs as ants and food sources,
paths and to increase the chance of using the edges of the
respectively. For simplicity, we assume that UAVs ﬂy at
currently known shortest path in ﬁnding potentially better
a speed of vMAX (Constraint 6), which can be easily paths subsequently. Formally, the pheromone trail of each
replaced by a vector to represent the time-varying speed.
edge of the selected path is reinforced as follows: τ =
We follow the energy model deﬁned in Eq. 1 to respect − · · ij
(1 ρ) τ +ρ Q, where L is the length of path P; Q is
Constraint 8. Compared to ACO with ants, we leverage ij L
a system parameter – Details on determining an appropriate
two advantages of UAVs. First, UAVs have memory; they
value for the parameter is discussed in Section V-B.
can keep track of visited ROIs so that they will visit only
ROIs that have not been covered by any other UAV. Second, C. Multiple UAVs with Minimum Charging Stations
UAVshavecomputationalcapabilities;theycancomputethe
We now extend the algorithm to account for general
distance between two ROIs. Based on these advantages, the
scenarios where multiple UAVs collaborate to cover ROIs
probability that a UAV in cell a a selects a ROI a to visit
 i j with an objective of minimizing the number of deployed
is deﬁned as follows.

charging stations. More speciﬁcally, each UAV u visits a
i
pij =0(cid:80)k∈Rτviαijs·iηtiβjτiαk·ηiβk iofthaejrw∈isRevisit (9) ppUoaAtrhVtiodnueinoo∈fteRdUObIbysePaLnudui.i.eDnTedhnseontu,eptothwemithliennihmgativhzienogtffaipnnaitshihn,dPwiuvieiduftorayrl
to minimize the maximum path length of all UAVs, i.e.,
Here Rvisit is the set of ROIs that have not been visited by 1≤mi≤aNxULui, rather than minimizing L. Consequently, the
any UAV (Constraint 4). τij is the pheromone intensity of phe−romo·ne updat·ing formula is rewritten as follows: τij =
athneeEdugcelicdoenannecdtiisntgantcweobceetwllseeani tawndoacej.llsηiajiisanthdeaijnvnearmseeolyf (1Weρ)theτnijta+keρint1o≤mia≤acNxQcUouLnuti.the number of deployed charg-
F 1 , which is used to ensure that a shorter edge is
sedliesct(teadi,ajin) ﬁnding a path. Two parameters α and β are ing stations in the pheromone updating rule for reinforce-
ment.Ifwedonotconstrainthenumberofchargingstations
introduced to adjust the inﬂuence of the pheromone and the
in ﬁnding a path, it may increase arbitrarily. To this end,
distance between two cells, respectively. After calculating
UBAT tries to make as many of the charging stations be
the probabilities for all ROIs, a UAV selects a ROI with the
shared by multiple UAVs such that the path length is also
highest probability and moves to the selected ROI.
optimized. The idea to implement this is to include the
If a UAV does not have enough energy to reach the
numberofdeployedchargingstationsNC inthepheromone
selectedROI,thestateoftheUAVischangedtothecharging
updating formula. More speciﬁcally, we aim to ﬁnd cells
mode,andtheUAVﬁndsasetofcellsthatitcanreachwith
to deploy charging stations such that both t and the
its residual energy (Constraint 5). A cell is selected from finish
number of deployed charging stations NC are minimized,
those candidate cells using a slightly modiﬁed probability
as speciﬁed in the objective function (Eq. 2). In order to
model compared to Eq. 9, and then the UAV moves to the
encourage the use of a path that minimizes both t
selectedcellinwhichachargingstationisplaced(Constraint finish
and NC, we can rewrite the pheromone updating formula
7). Speciﬁcally for the modiﬁed probability model, η is − · ·
ij as follows: τ =(1 ρ) τ +ρ ( Q1 + Q2 ).
sFet to the Euclidean distance between two ROIs (i.e., ηij = ij ij 1≤mi≤aNxULui NC
(a ,a )), instead of the inverse of it as speciﬁed in Algorithm 1 summarizes the operation of UBAT. Starting
dist i j ∈ ∈
Eq.9,tominimizethenumberofdeployedchargingstations fromthecurrentcellc A,eachUAVu U selectsthenext
∈
by assuring that a longer edge is preferred in the charging cellr RtovisitusingEq.9(Line6).Iftheselectedcellis
mode, i.e., we allow UAVs to ﬂy as far as possible with the reachablewiththeremainingenergyE ,theedgeconnecting
u
given residual energy because the battery will be replaced c and r, namely Seg is added to the path P of UAV u
cr u
anyways. (Lines 7-9). On the other hand, if r is not reachable, the
429
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:14:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Algorithm 1: ACO for TLBS problem
begin
1
2 Initialize α, β, τ , Q , Q and ρ.
0 1 2
3 while time < MAX ITERATION do
(cid:54) ∅
4 while R = do
visit ∈
5 for each u U do
∈
6 Find a cell r R to visit using Eq. 9. Convex Hull
−
7 if r is reachable with E E
u threshold
then Fig. 2. An illustration of Fig.3. Anillustrationofthe
← −{ } candidatecellselection. 2-OPTlocalsearch.
8 R R r . (cid:48)
←visit visit UAVtomovefromr tor .Wecanalwaysﬁndc suchthat
9 c current cell; F F 1 2 F (cid:48) F 1 (cid:48)
← ∪ (r ,c )+ (c ,r )= (r ,c )+ (c ,r ).
P P Seg . dist 1 1 (cid:48) dist 1 2 dist 1 1 dist 1 2
10 else u u cr Furthermore,c1 isabetterchoicebecauseitisclosertoother
⊆ ROIs considering that it may be used by other UAVs.
11 Find a set of cells Aˆ A that are
Tuning Parameters: Another key factor that affects the
reachable with residual energy.
12 Locate a cell a∈Aˆ to place a performance of UBAT is the parameters Q1 and Q2. If
we choose too large values for Q and Q , i.e., τ <<
charging station using the 1 2 0
Q1 + Q2 , the pheromone intensity of a new path
m←odiﬁed version of Eq. 9. 1≤mi≤aNxULui NC
13 c current cell; would become too strong. As a result, it will take long for
← ∪
P P Seg . the pheromone of a newly found path to evaporate down to
u ← u ca
14 (cid:83)NC NC+1. the level that other potential paths can be explored. On the
∀ ∈ other hand, if the values for the parameters are too small,
15 USpedgaitje∈/τij b∈a(cid:83)sePduio.n evaporation i,j A if in.eew., τp0a>th>wo1≤umil≤daQNxb1UeLcuoim+e tNQoCo2 ,stmheallphleearodminognteointhteenssiittuyaotifona
ui U ∀ ∈
16 Update τ based on reinforcement i,j A whereapotentiallygoodsolutionisdroppedtooearly,andas
ij∈
if Seg P . such, UBAT misses a chance to validate that it was actually
ij ∈ ui
←∅ ∀ u∈i U a good solution.
17 P , u U.
u We design an iterative approach to ﬁnd the values for Q
≈ 1
and Q such that τ Q1 + Q2 . More speciﬁcally,
algorithm locates a cell a to place a charging station based 2 0 1≤mi≤aNxULui NC
onthemodiﬁedversionoftheprobabilitymodelEq.9(Lines we set τ0 to 1 and start UBAT with arbitrary values for Q1
11-14). More precisely, a charging station is selected such and Q2. After only a few iterations, we get intermediate
that both NC and 1≤mi≤aNxULui are minimized, and the path sWoelutuiosensthaeseanidntebrmfoerdi1a≤tmei≤asNxolUutLiounisaansdnNewCv,arleusepsecfotirvetlhye.
segment connecting cells c and a becomes part of P . Since ← ←
anewchargingstationhasbeenplacedincella,theunumber parameters (i.e., Q1 a,Q2 b), and then, we repeat
the same process to obtain new values for the parameters.
of charging stations is incremented by one. This process is
Through experiments in Section V-B, we validate that this
repeated until all ROIs are visited by UAVs, and as a result,
approach is quick and effective requiring only one or two
weobtainthetrajectoriesforallUAVsandthecellsthathave
∀ ∈ iterations for ﬁnding adequate values of the parameters.
charging stations. Given the discovered paths P , u U,
u
the pheromone trails are updated based on evaporation and Improving paths: To make UBAT run faster and obtain
reinforcement (Lines 15-16). This whole process is repeated a higher quality solution, we perform correction on a path
until we reach MAX ITERATION (Line 3). found in each iteration by applying the 2-OPT local search
algorithm [17]. The algorithm was ﬁrst proposed by Croes
IV. ENHANCEMENTTECHNIQUES for improving the quality of a solution for TSP [19]. The
ReducingSearchSpace:Wedevelopanalgorithmtoim- idea is to detect a path that crosses over itself and perform
provetheexecutiontimeofUBATbyreducingtheoverhead reordering of cells so that the cross over is removed. More
forﬁndingasetofcandidatecellsAˆfordeployingacharging precisely,twoedgesthatcrosseachotherareremovedfroma
station (Lines 10-14 of Algorithm 1). The key idea is to path, and then the resulting two path segments after removal
make the search space smaller based on the observation that of the edges are reconnected such that the cross over no
→
a charging station can be deployed only within the convex longer exists. For example in Fig. 3, an edge r r is
→ → 2 3
hull of ROIs. Consequently, only the cells within the convex replaced by r r ; and an edge r r is replaced
→ 2 4 4 5
hull are considered in ﬁnding Aˆ. by r r , resulting in a shorter path with no cross
3 5
We can easily prove that deploying charging stations only over. Unlike the traditional 2-OPT local search, however,
insidetheconvexhullofROIsdoesnotinﬂuencethequality we ensure that the output of the algorithm does not result
ofsolution.Assumeincontradictionthatachargingstationis in increased path length for other UAVs and deployment of
placed outside the convex hull, e.g., c in Fig. 2 to allow the additional charging stations.
1
430
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:14:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. V. EVALUATION however, we cannot simply apply the TSP algorithm to ﬁnd
the true optimal solution for multi-UAV scenarios resulting
We implemented UBAT using C++ on a PC equipped
in huge computation time. A quick, yet effective solution to
with a 2.5GHz dual-core Intel processor, and 16GB RAM.
× this challenge is to test the algorithms with ‘semi’ random
A ﬁeld with dimensions of 20 20km2 was created which
× scenarios. Speciﬁcally, 5 ROIs are randomly selected from
was divided into cells with dimensions of 1 1km2, i.e., 400
the top of the ﬁeld, and the other 5 ROIs are randomly
cellsintheﬁeld.Randomscenarioswerecreatedbyselecting
selectedfromthebottomoftheﬁeldsuchthatthesetwosets
10 ROIs randomly. UAVs started operation from one of
ofROIsareindividuallycoveredbyeachUAV.Thiswaythe
the randomly selected ROIs. We conducted simulations with
2-UAV scenarios can be divided into two separate single-
differentnumbersofUAVsforwhichthebatterieswerefully
UAV scenarios that allows us to apply the TSP algorithm to
charged. The maximum distance that a fully charged UAV
obtainthetrueoptimalsolutionsquickly,whileUBATisnot
can ﬂy was set to 5km. The sensing range of a UAV was
aware of this conﬁguration and running normally. A similar
conﬁgured to fully cover a cell when it hovers over the cell.
simulation setting was used for 4-UAV scenarios, i.e., we
The parameters for ACO were set as α = 2,β = 2, and
deployed 10 ROIs randomly in NE, NW, SE, SW regions of
ρ = 0.3. The max iteration count was set to 30,000. The
the ﬁeld such that ROIs in each region can be independently
metricsmeasuredwere(1)thelength(km)ofthelongestpath
covered by each UAV. We leave the work of obtaining the
of all UAVs, i.e., (which will be referred to as ‘path length’
trueoptimalsolutionsformorecomplicatedscenarioswitha
hereafter), and (2) the number of deployed charging stations
large number of UAVs using a high performance computing
(CS). The path length and number of CS of UBAT were
system as our future work.
compared with the true optimal solutions. The effectiveness
ofthe proposedenhancement techniqueswas alsoevaluated.
30
Path Length (km)246000 ACO-Based Number of CS105 ACO-Based Path Length (km)12000 AECxaOc-tB Saosleudtion Number of CS1005 AECxaOc-tB Saosleudtion
Exact Solution Exact Solution 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Scenarios Scenarios
0 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Scenarios Scenarios Fig.6. Pathlengthfor2UAVs. Fig.7. NumberofCSfor2UAVs.
Fig.4. Pathlengthfor1UAV. Fig.5. NumberofCSfor1UAV.
Figs. 6 and 7 show the impressive performance of UBAT
for 2-UAV scenarios. The average path length of UBAT was
A. Comparison with Exact Algorithm
2.2% greater with STDEV of 1.1% in comparison with the
The performance of UBAT was compared with the exact exactalgorithm.TheaveragenumberofCSwas7.3%greater
algorithm which ﬁnds the solution using the brute force with STDEV of 8.4% compared with the exact algorithm.
search. A challenge for running the exact algorithm is The larger percentage difference for the number of CS
the huge computation time. Fortunately, the true optimal compared with the results for the single-UAV scenarios can
solutionsforasingle-UAVscenariocanbeeasilyandquickly be attributed to the fact that fewer charging stations were
calculated [20]. Speciﬁcally, the optimal path of a single deployed for the 2-UAV scenarios because only a half of
UAV is simply the output of TSP with a set of ROIs the ﬁeld was covered by a UAV. Also, even though the
as input, reducing the search space from 400 (number of percentage differencefor the numberof CS mayseem much
cells) to 10 (number of ROIs). Calculating path lengths for greater than that for the path length, it means only 0.8
all possible permutations for 10 ROIs completes in a few additional charging stations on average in comparison with
seconds. Given the shortest path, the minimum number of the true optimal solutions.
CS can be computed in linear time by deploying a CS at a
point on the shortest path that is farthest from the current
position of a fully charged UAV [20].
flceoonrmFgiUtpghasBr.oeA4dfTUwaanBindthAdT5tthhsweehaoterswxuae6ct.h3toe%patlpigmgaotrarheliathtlseemornl.ugwttOihoitnnhasn,aSdvaTennDrdauEgmteVhb,eetorhnfeuo2mfp.6bCa%teShr Path Length (km)11055 AECxaOc-tB Saosleudtion Number of CS105 AECxaOc-tB Saosleudtion
of CS was 4.3% greater with STDEV of 6.0%. Putting in 0 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
differentterms,UBAThada3.1kmlongerpathandrequired Scenarios Scenarios
0.5 additional charging stations on average in comparison Fig.8. Pathlengthfor4UAVs. Fig.9. NumberofCSfor4UAVs.
with the true optimal solutions under single-UAV scenarios.
We then measured the path length and the number of Similarly, Figs. 8 and 9 show the results for the 4-UAV
CS for multi-UAV scenarios. Unlike single-UAV scenarios, scenarios. The average path length and the number of CS
431
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:14:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. for the proposed framework were 8.3% (STDEV 2.8%) and
%)25
6op.pa7tth%imlae(SlnTgstoDhluEotVifoUnosfB,3Ar.eT6s%pwe)acgstirv1eea.l3tyek.rmIinnloocnothgmeerprawwrioistrohdns0,w.8tihtahedtadhvieteiortarnugaeel Difference (1250 Path Length Number of CS ngth (km)2300
charging stations compared with the true optimal solutions. entage 105 Path Le10 Before 2-OPT
Overall, the results demonstrate that UBAT produces very erc After 2-OPT
P 0 0
high-quality solutions with slightly longer path length and 2 4 6 8 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Scenarios Scenarios
less than 1 more charging stations compared with the true
optimal solutions in our simulation environments. Fig.12. Effectofparametertuning. Fig.13. Effectofpathcorrection.
iterations. As observed in the experiments for the max
B. Effect of Enhancement Techniques
iteration count, a sufﬁciently good solution is obtained in
the ﬁrst few iterations. The obtained intermediate solution,
i.e.,thepathlength,andthenumberofCSwereusedasnew
801 1
0.9 Path Length values for parameters Q , and Q , respectively. We then ran
ath Length (km)63000000005.......2345678 Number of CS 631005Number of CS CDF0000....2468 ABfeteforr Se eSaerachrc Sh pSapcaec Re eRdeudcuticotnion UwroefBistCuhAlStTtshwoiwneseirtFehoiigbmt.thap1eirn2oenvsdeehwdwowbiptyha1trhuaaaprmtbtietothtreea2rr4sip2l.a5yat%nhsdelaleencncodgtmet2dh1p.apa4ran%erddam(tht1hee0te.en5rru%se.msTuabnlhetdesr
P300.1 0 6.3% on average), respectively, when the parameter tuning
0012 60.2 7500.4 0.269,1700.8183,0711 0 1 2 3
Iteration Count Time per Iteration (sec) algorithm was applied.
Fig.10. Effectofiterationcount. Fig.11. CDFofexecutiontime. We then evaluate the performance gain when the param-
eter tuning algorithm is applied repeatedly. An interesting
Effect of Max Iterations: We investigate the effect of observationwasthattheperformancegainwasverymarginal
themaximumiterationcount(thedefaultissetto30,000).It even from the second time running the parameter tuning
is an interesting analysis because the longer we run UBAT, algorithm.Speciﬁcally,thepathlengthandthenumberofCS
the solution keeps improving. Speciﬁcally, we increased the were improved only by up to 0.3% on average. In the third
max iteration count to 400,000 while ﬁxing other settings time for tuning the parameters, virtually no improvement
for a 2-UAV scenario. We observed the following from was observed, indicating that running the parameter tuning
the results (Fig. 10): (1) a sufﬁciently good solution is process once or twice sufﬁces to obtain good parameters.
obtained within the ﬁrst few iterations; (2) after that, the Note that all simulation results were obtained using this
solution keeps improving but very slightly. In this particular parameter tuning method, showing the effectiveness and
example, the path length was signiﬁcantly decreased in the practicality of the proposed approach.
ﬁrst750iterations,anditwasreducedonlyby0.9%between Effect of Path Correction: We analyze the effect of the
750th and 68,432th iterations (and virtually no improvement path improvement algorithm. We measured the path length
after that); similarly the number of CS stayed the same with and without applying the algorithm, while ﬁxing all
after the ﬁrst few iterations, although in some cases, we other settings for the 2-UAV scenarios. It should be noted
observed that the number of CS was decreased after a very that the number of CS was not measured because the path
large number of iterations at the cost of the increased path improvement algorithm does not increase the number of CS
length. Overall, while the solution keeps improving as we atthecostofimprovingthepath.Theresultsaredepictedin
increase the maximum iteration count, the advantage is not Fig. 13. The path length was decreased by 2.5% on average
obvious considering that major progress is made in the ﬁrst withSTDEVof1.6%whenthepathimprovementalgorithm
few iterations and using a large maximum iteration count wasapplied.Theresultsindicatethatbyskippinglow-quality
signiﬁcantly increases the execution time. solutions(e.g.,pathswithself-crossings),thesearchspaceis
Effect of Search Space Reduction: To understand the explored more effectively, leading to better solutions.
effect of the search space reduction algorithm, we measured
the execution time (i.e., the time it takes to run a single
VI. CONCLUSION
iterationforUBAT)withandwithoutapplyingthealgorithm
under the 2-UAV scenarios. The cumulative distribution We have presented UBAT, an optimization framework
function (CDF) of the execution time is shown in Fig. 11. that jointly optimizes UAV trajectories and locations of
The results show that the average time for running a single charging stations. Enhancement techniques are developed
iteration without the algorithm was 0.44 seconds, and it was to improve the convergence time and quality of solutions.
decreased to 0.33 seconds when the search space reduction Through extensive simulations, we demonstrate that UBAT
algorithm was used, indicating 25% faster execution time. effectively calculates the UAV trajectories and placement of
Effect of Parameter Tuning: We evaluate the perfor- charging stations. The future work is to perform theoretical
mance of the parameter tuning algorithm. We started with analysis on the algorithm complexity regarding the number
some arbitrary values for the parameters Q and Q . We ofUAVs,ﬁeldsize,andscaleofdiscretegridsandtoconduct
1 2
then executed UBAT only for a few iterations, i.e., 1,000 experiments based on actual UAV robotic platforms.
432
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:14:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] D. Orfanus, E. P. de Freitas, and F. Eliassen, “Self-organization
as a supporting paradigm for military uav relay networks,” IEEE
CommunicationsLetters,vol.20,no.4,pp.804–807,2016.
[2] M. Erdelj, E. Natalizio, K. R. Chowdhury, and I. F. Akyildiz, “Help
from the sky: Leveraging uavs for disaster management,” IEEE Per-
vasiveComputing,no.1,pp.24–32,2017.
[3] D. Hausamann, W. Zirnig, G. Schreier, and P. Strobl, “Monitoring
of gas pipelines–a civil uav application,” Aircraft Engineering and
AerospaceTechnology,vol.77,no.5,pp.352–360,2005.
[4] P.Tokekar,J.VanderHook,D.Mulla,andV.Isler,“Sensorplanning
for a symbiotic uav andugv system for precision agriculture,” IEEE
TransactionsonRobotics,vol.32,no.6,pp.1498–1511,2016.
[5] C.C.MurrayandA.G.Chu,“Theﬂyingsidekicktravelingsalesman
problem:Optimizationofdrone-assistedparceldelivery,”Transporta-
tion Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 54, pp. 86–109,
2015.
[6] “Dronetrends,”https://blog.nationaldrones.com.au/drone-trends-2018,
accessed:2018-12-24.
[7] J.Gong,T.-H.Chang,C.Shen,andX.Chen,“Flighttimeminimiza-
tion of uav for data collection over wireless sensor networks,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 36, no. 9, pp.
1942–1954,2018.
[8] K. A. Swieringa, C. B. Hanson, J. R. Richardson, J. D. White,
Z.Hasan,E.Qian,andA.Girard,“Autonomousbatteryswappingsys-
temforsmall-scalehelicopters,”inRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),
2010IEEEInternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2010,pp.3335–3340.
[9] K. A. Suzuki, P. Kemper Filho, and J. R. Morrison, “Automatic
battery replacement system for uavs: Analysis and design,” Journal
ofIntelligent&RoboticSystems,vol.65,no.1-4,pp.563–586,2012.
[10] M. Lu, M. Bagheri, A. P. James, and T. Phung, “Wireless charging
techniques for uavs: A review, reconceptualization, and extension,”
IEEEAccess,2018.
[11] M. Wei and V. Isler, “Coverage path planning under the energy
constraint,”inProc.ofICRA,2018.
[12] C.-M. Tseng, C.-K. Chau, K. Elbassioni, and M. Khonji, “Au-
tonomousrechargingandﬂightmissionplanningforbattery-operated
autonomousdrones,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1703.10049,2017.
[13] A.Trotta,M.DiFelice,F.Montori,K.R.Chowdhury,andL.Bononi,
“Joint coverage, connectivity, and charging strategies for distributed
uav networks,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34, no. 4, pp.
883–900,2018.
[14] J. Scherer and B. Rinner, “Short and full horizon motion planning
forpersistentmulti-uavsurveillancewithenergyandcommunication
constraints,”inProc.ofIROS,2017.
[15] K. Yu, A. K. Budhiraja, and P. Tokekar, “Algorithms for routing of
unmanned aerial vehicles with mobile recharging stations,” in Proc.
ofICRA,2018.
[16] M. Dorigo and L. M. Gambardella, “Ant colonies for the travelling
salesmanproblem,”biosystems,vol.43,no.2,pp.73–81,1997.
[17] C.VoudourisandE.Tsang,“Guidedlocalsearchanditsapplication
tothetravelingsalesmanproblem,”Europeanjournalofoperational
research,vol.113,no.2,pp.469–499,1999.
[18] M.DorigoandL.M.Gambardella,“Antcolonysystem:acooperative
learningapproachtothetravelingsalesmanproblem,”IEEETransac-
tionsonevolutionarycomputation,vol.1,no.1,pp.53–66,1997.
[19] G. A. Croes, “A method for solving traveling-salesman problems,”
Operationsresearch,vol.6,no.6,pp.791–812,1958.
[20] C.-S.Liao,S.-H.Lu,andZ.-J.M.Shen,“Theelectricvehicletouring
problem,” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 86,
pp.163–180,2016.
433
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of New South Wales. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:14:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 