2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Motion Primitives-based Path Planning for Fast and Agile Exploration
using Aerial Robots
Mihir Dharmadhikari1, Tung Dang2, Lukas Solanka3, Johannes Loje3,
Huan Nguyen2, Nikhil Khedekar2, and Kostas Alexis2
Abstract—Thispaperpresentsanovelpathplanningstrategy
forfastandagileexplorationusingaerialrobots.Tailoredtothe
combined need for large-scale exploration of challenging and
conﬁned environments, despite the limited endurance of micro
aerialvehicles,theproposedplanneremploysmotionprimitives
to identify admissible paths that search the conﬁguration
space, while exploiting the dynamic ﬂight properties of small
aerial robots. Utilizing a computationally efﬁcient volumetric
representation of the environment, the planner provides fast
collision-free andfuture-safe pathsthat maximizethe expected
explorationgainandensurecontinuousfastnavigationthrough
the unknown environment. The new method is ﬁeld-veriﬁed in
a set of deployments relating to subterranean exploration and
speciﬁcally,inbothmodernandabandonedundergroundmines
in Northern Nevada utilizing a 0.55m-wide collision-tolerant
ﬂyingrobotexploringwithaspeedofupto2m/sandnavigating
sections with width as small as 0.8m.
I. INTRODUCTION
Fig. 1. Instances of fast and agile autonomous motion primitives-
Research in autonomous robotic exploration and map-
based exploration path planning in large-scale and narrow subterranean
ping of unknown environments is expanding into an ever environmentsutilizingacollision-tolerantaerialrobot.
increasingsetofapplications.Pushingthefrontiersofwhere
robots can be utilized as explorers [1–4], ﬁrst responders [5,
based on motion primitives, the new method inherently ac-
6], and inspectors [7,8], aerial vehicles, in particular, are
countsforthedynamicsoftheﬂyingvehicleandthusallows
currently employed in a multitude of civilian and military
for agile dynamic trajectories during the autonomous explo-
applications. However, despite the unprecedented progress
ration mission. Additionally, in contrast with most existing
in the domain and the variety of exploration path planning
methods(includingpreviousworkoftheauthors[13,15–17])
methods proposed [9–17], the current state-of-the-art in
the considered admissible paths do not assume a hovering
autonomous exploration, as demonstrated experimentally, is
condition (zero velocity) at the last vertex of each selected
limited to rather low-speed conservative missions as the
pathbutonthecontrary,considerpathsendingwithanyﬁnal
robots try to guarantee safe navigation and simultaneous
velocity, as long as a deaccelarating and stopping maneuver
optimized selection of subsequent exploration moves given
can be identiﬁed that, if required, can bring the robot to a
theirreal-timeonboardlocalizationandmappingcapabilities.
safe collision-free conﬁguration in the future. As such, the
However,low-speedexplorationdoesnotallowtheexploita-
sampled paths are optimized for navigation with agility and
tion of the full agility of small ﬂying robots and prohibits
thushavethepotentialtomaximizethelengthofexploration
large-scale exploration due to their limited battery life.
of robotic systems, especially for Micro Aerial Vehicles
Motivated by the above, this work proposes a Motion (MAVs) which are constrained by their limited onboard
primitives-Based exploration path Planner (MBPlanner) that battery. Each candidate admissible path is then evaluated
provides fast and agile paths particularly tailored to aerial with respect to its exploration gain given only the bounds of
robotic systems. By relying on a randomized search policy theunknownarea,andthebestsolution,reﬁnedforsafety,is
selected and executed, while the whole process is iteratively
ThismaterialisbaseduponworksupportedbytheDefenseAdvancedRe-
repeated. To further support this process of fast and agile
searchProjectsAgency(DARPA)underAgreementNo.HR00111820045.
Thepresentedcontentandideasaresolelythoseoftheauthors. exploration, the contributed planning method is combined
1 Mihir Dharmadhikari is an undergraduate student pursuing with an online volumetric representation method [18] that
Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering at Birla Institute
intrinsically provides Euclidean Signed Distance Field cal-
of Technology and Science (BITS) Pilani Goa Campus, India
f20160616@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in culationsandthusfacilitatesrapidevaluationofthecollision-
2 The authors are with the Autonomous Robots Lab, University of free properties of each candidate edge.
Nevada,Reno,1664N.Virginia,89557,Reno,NV,USA.
The proposed approach on fast and agile exploration path
3 The authors are with Flyability SA, Route du Lac 3, 1094 Paudex,
Switzerland.Theauthorshavecontributedequally. planning was experimentally evaluated with an emphasis on
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 179
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 10:53:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. subterranean environments which can be simultaneously of III. PROBLEMSTATEMENT
very large scale and very narrow, thus demanding efﬁcient
The problem of autonomous exploration, as considered
exploration and agile maneuvering. More speciﬁcally, ﬁeld
in this work, is that of incrementally unveiling a bounded
test results are presented from a collection of underground ⊂R
volumeV 3inamannerthatisefﬁcientandcognizantof
mine environments in Northern Nevada. Combining this
thedynamicabilitiesandlimitationsofaroboticsystem.This
research with a novel collision-tolerant aerial robot design,
is to determine which parts of the initially unmapped space
wepushthefrontieroffastandagileexplorationinconﬁned ⊂ ⊂
V in=it V are free V V or occupied V V. In
settings. In fact, even the very constraint of “last resort unm free occ M
thiswork,thevolumeisdiscretizedinanoccupancymap
safety”, after evaluating all possible deaccelarating paths, is ∈M
thatiscomprisedofcubicalvoxelsm withedgelength
relaxed in a certain experiment thus allowing to understand
r. Since for most sensors – including cameras – perception
the limits of autonomous aerial robotic exploration and
stopsatsurfaces,sometimeshollowspacesornarrowpockets
mapping in tight environments.
cannot be explored, thus leading to a residual volume:
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II outlines related work, followed by the problem Deﬁnition 1 (Residual Volume) Let Ξ be the simply con-
(cid:83) V ⊆
statement in Section III. The proposed approach is detailed nectedsetofcollisionfreeconﬁgurationsand ¯ Ξtheset
m
in Section IV. Evaluation studies are detailed in Section V, of conﬁgurations from which the voxel m can be perceived.
| V ∅
followed by conclusions drawn in Section VI. The residual volume is V = ∈M(m ¯ = ).
res m m
Theexplorationproblem,foravehiclewithstatevectorx
II. RELATEDWORK and control input u, is then deﬁned as:
Problem 1 (Volumetric Exploration) Given a bounded vol-
Robotic exploration of unknown environments has at-
tracted the interest of the research community and over the ume VE and a dynamic model of the vehicle dynamics
years a number of methods focusing on the exploration path x˙ = f(x,u), ﬁnd a coll∈ision free path σ starting at an
planing problem have been proposed [9–12]. Volumetric ex- initial conﬁguration ξinit Ξ that leads to identifying the
ploration of unknown spaces has been historically addressed free and occupied parts VE and VE , such that there
free occ
does not exist any collision free conﬁguration from which
by frontier-based methods [10], where the objective of the \{ }
path-planningalgorithmistoactivelyguidetherobottowards any piece of VE VE ,VE could be perceived. Thus,
∪ \ free occ
the frontiers of its sensor range. Similarly, sampling based VE VE =VE VE . Feasible paths σ of this problem
free occ res
methods have also been employed where the objective is respect the dynamic model x˙ = f(x,u), are subject to
to sample the “next–best–view” [9,13] of the environment the limited Field of View (FoV) of the sensor, its effective
whichmaximizesthevolumetricobservationoftheunknown sensing distance, and robot dynamics constraints.
space. More recent efforts in this domain have focused on
IV. PROPOSEDAPPROACH
multi-objective planning [14–16], where the planned paths
are optimized for multiple objectives either simultaneously The proposed motion primitives-based planner (MBPlan-
or in a cascaded manner. Emphasizing on large-scale ex- ner) is a new approach to the problem of exploration path
ploration, the work in [17] proposed a graph-based local planning that is tailored to aerial robots exploring complex,
search combined with a global re-planning architecture to possibly narrow but large-scale environments thus requir-
reposition the robot towards frontiers previously discovered ing agility and high speed. First, the method builds on
along large-scale underground topologies. Likewise, path top of an online volumetric representation paradigm [18]
planning paradigms involving teams of multiple robots for that intrinsically provides Euclidean Signed Distance Field
exploration have also been proposed [19,20]. However, de- (ESDF) calculations and thus allows for rapid evaluation
spite the fact that the generic problem of robotic exploration of collision-free paths. Second, the method exploits the
of unknown environments has been approached through a strengths of motion primitives with respect to their ability
variety of techniques, the current state-of-the-art has not to search the conﬁguration space of the robot, while simul-
presentedmethodsandsystemsfacilitatingagileandfastex- taneously offering paths that respect the vehicle dynamics
ploration especially in large-scale and narrow environments, and can thus optimize the navigation performance as high-
a fact contradicting known progress in fast autonomous speed exploration is the only way for battery-constrained
ﬂight [21–23]. Motivated by the above and cognizant of Micro Aerial Vehicles to explore large-scale environments.
the fact that especially for Micro Aerial Vehicles, speed To ensure sufﬁcient density in searching the conﬁguration
of exploration directly translates to exploration depth given space, every iteration of the method operates within a local
their limited battery, in this work, we emphasize on an windowaroundthecurrentrobotlocation.Third,themethod
agile path planning strategy to facilitate fast exploration in introduces the key feature of sampling paths that do not end
simultaneously large and narrow environments. As an ideal inleafverticesthatassumezerovelocitybutonthecontrary,
ﬁeld veriﬁcation campaign, we demonstrate this work in the arrive with a speed that can support the continuous need of
context of subterranean exploration and mapping with the fast exploration. As the sampled paths do not assume zero
robotsoperatingfullyautonomouslyandwithoutanyhuman ﬁnal velocity, admissible solutions are not only checked if
intervention. theyarecurrentlycollision-freebutalsoifthereisapaththat
180
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 10:53:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. can ensure that the robot remains safe in its future trajectory U from which possible control actions may be sampled. Let
{ }
given the ﬁnal conﬁguration of a certain candidate path. the overall interval of time (for the whole u˜p sequence)
k
Finally,admissiblesolutionsareevaluatedwithrespecttothe start at t and stop at t , where k is the current planner
k k+1
anticipated exploration gain, as further penalized by factors iteration and t a ﬁnal time that depends on the particular
k+1
that account for the path “safety” and its alignment with primitive.Thenprovidedthecurrentlyexploredsubsetofthe
M
previous exploration direction, and the best path is provided map , alongside the current state conﬁguration ξ , there
as a reference to the onboard controller, while the overall exists aEset Up(ξ ) of motion primitives that leads tok a tree
T k k { }
process is then iteratively repeated. This section details the of paths that are collision free σk+1 up to t , and
L k k+1
aforementionedstepsandprovidesinsightwithrespecttothe forwhichthereexistsapathβ(σk+1)thatbringstherobotto
k
underlying computational cost. a safe hovering situation starting from the end conﬁguration
of σk+1 as discussed in Section IV-C. For each of the µ
A. Algorithm Description k { }
functionals u˜p within the u˜p sequence, we acquire the
k,µ k
Algorithm1outlinesthemainstepsduringeveryiteration associated state transition ξµ = f (ξ ,u˜p) in which ξ is
k p k k k
oftheproposedmotionprimitives-basedexplorationplanner. the initial condition (the robot conﬁguration at algorithm
The planner assumes a rigid body model approximation of iteration k), and f represents the rigid body dynamics.
p
the aerial robot dynamics represented by the conﬁguration Similarly, and by extension, we acquire the whole state
state ξ =[x,y,z,vx,vy,vz,ψ], where v∗ are velocity states transition from ξk to ξk+1. This process is visually depicted
and ψ the heading. Every iteration starts by acquiring the inFigure2.Asvisualized,thisapproachallowstosearchthe
currentrobotconﬁgurationξ ,whileitisnotedthatinorder robot conﬁguration space within M by sampling a set of
0 { } E
toenablefastexploration,itisnotassumedthattherobothas paths σk+1 that respect the system dynamics and satisfy
k
arrivedatξ ,orwillbecommandedtoanewﬁnalconﬁgura- input constraints in terms of maxima and minima in the
0
tionwithzeroendvelocity.Subsequently,themethodutilizes commanded acceleration. Last but not least, it is highlighted
control space sampling, in particular, sampling sequences of that in hope of identifying paths that simultaneously ensure
control vector values u = [a ,a ,a ]T consisting of the efﬁcient and fast exploration, the process of sampling the
x y z
3D acceleration to be applied on the modeled rigid body control vector u is organized in two steps, with the ﬁrst
representation of the vehicle. A tree of motion primitives- sampling accelerations with directions around the previous
based paths is then built and the associated collision-free exploring direction, and the second sampling accelerations
and future-safe branches are extracted. Subsequently, an with uniformly chosen directions in order to enable the
exploration gain metric is evaluated across each of the search of the full conﬁguration space within M . In the
E
admissible branches before the best is selected and provided current implementation of MBPlanner, 25% of the sampled
as a reference to the robot controller to be tracked and controlvectorshavebiasedaccelerationdirections,whilethe
followed. The following subsections provide further detail remaining 75% enables the planner to do comprehensive
into the key functionalities of this process. search of the available volume.
Algorithm 1 Motion Primitives Based Exploration Planner
←
1: ξ GetCurrentConﬁguration()
T0 ←
2: BuildLocalTree(ξ )
L ← 0 T
3: Σ GetBranchesFromTree( )
L T L
4: ComputeVolumetricGain( ) (cid:46) For all vertices
← L
5: g 0
best ←∅
6: σ
L,best ∈
7: for all←σ ΣL do Fig. 2. Visualization of the use of motion primitives to search the robot
8: g ComputePathGain(σ) conﬁguration space within the currently explored map M . Each sample
σ E
9: if gσ >g←best then ← ccoonmtrmoalnadcetdio3nDu˜apkc,cµelecraantiotankeofathreanrodboomt cvoanlusteraui˜npke,drnodnlythbatyrseeﬂtemctisnimthae
10: g g ;σ σ
best σ L,best andmaxima.Startingfromacertainrobotconﬁgurationξ andsamplinga
11: end if sequenceofmotionprimitives{u˜p }themethodallowsktosamplepaths
12: end←for σkk+1 which are collision-free akn,dµfor the end conﬁguration of which
13: Σ GetSimilarPaths(σ ) thereexistsapathtobringtherobottoahoveringconﬁgurationinasafe
S ← L,best manner. Collision-free paths that fail to satisfy this latter requirement are
14: σ GetSafestPath(Σ ) ×
L,best S notadmissible,andmarkedwithared inthisvisualization.
15: return σ
L,best
C. Future-safe Paths
B. Motion Primitives for Fast Exploration
Asdiscussed,theplannedpaths-andthusalsotheselected
Forplanningpurposes,wemodeltheaerialrobotasarigid best path σ per iteration - often do not arrive at the
∈ L,best
body actuated by a constrained acceleration vector u U. end conﬁguration with zero ﬁnal velocity. This, however,
{ }
Let u˜p denoteamotionprimitive,whichisasequenceof raises the question of whether the robot is guaranteed to be
k,µ
µ functionals from an interval of time into the control space safe in the future. In order to ensure this desired constraint,
181
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 10:53:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. the MBPlanner further identiﬁes if there exists a candidate would perceive depending on the robot’s conﬁguration at
path β(σk+1) that starts from the end conﬁguration of each vertex. This volumetric gain is then utilized together
k
every admissible σk+1 and safely brings the robot to a with other decay functions related to time cost and direction
k M
hoveringconﬁgurationwithin .Thissafety-ensuringpath to compute the exploration gain for each path. In particular,
E | ∈ |
is identiﬁed by ﬁrst evaluating the effect of a) maximum for each path σi := σk+1 and νi σk+1 ,j = 1...m is
(cid:96) k i j k i i
deaccelaration in a direction opposite to that of the expected a set of vertices along that path, ExplorationGain(σi) is
(cid:96)
motionofthevehicletowardstheendconﬁgurationofσk+1, computed as follows:
{ k }
and then b) a ﬁxed set of (de)acceleration proﬁles abreak (cid:88)
max ExplorationGain(σi)= (1)
with different directions. Figure 3 illustrates the requirement (cid:96)
setforanadmissiblepathtonotonlybecollision-freeacross e−γSS(σi(cid:96),σexp)−γTT(σi(cid:96)) mi VolumetricGain(νji)
its length but also be future-safe.
j=1
T
where (σi) is the time cost to traverse the whole path
(cid:96) |
σi := σk+1 . Combined with a tuning parameter γT,
(cid:96) k i
this decay function aims to penalize slow trajectories in
order to achieve higher exploration rate. Moreover, when
the robot stays near the branching points of the environment
(e.g. intersections), vertices that lie at the edge of intercept
branches are usually assigned with signiﬁcant volumetric
gains towards locally occluded areas, which intuitively pri-
oritize paths that follow back-and-forth maneuvers between
those branches to maximize the current exploration rate.
Fig.3. AdmissiblepathsofMBPlannerarenotonlycollision-freeacross
Thisbehavior,however,issometimesundesirableinpractice
their length but also future-safe in the sense that the algorithm identiﬁes
at least one deaccelerating path that brings the robot back to a hovering sinceitproposesunnecessarychangeinexplorationdirection
conditioninasafemannerwithintheexploredmapME. leading to high jerk trajectories and also makes the planner
more sensitive to small occluded areas. To eliminate such
D. Underlying Mapping Representation S
behavior in certain scenarios, the function (σi,σ ) and
Careful consideration of the underlying mapping repre- itstuningfactorγS areintroducedtopenalizepat(cid:96)hswexitphhigh
sentation led to the selection of Voxblox [18], a volumetric dissimilaritytothecurrentlyestimatedexplorationdirection.
mappingpipelinebasedonTruncatedSignedDistanceFields The similarity metric in this case is derived utilizing the
(TSDFs). TSDFs are a common implicit surface representa- DynamicTimeWarping(DTW)methodwhichcomputesthe
tion widely used within the computer graphics and vision cumulativeEuclideandistancebetweentheplannedpathand
communities. TSDFs are built fast and simultaneously allow apseudostraightexplorationpathσ withthesamelength.
exp
to smooth out sensor noise by aggregating and ﬁltering Thedirectionofσ issimplyestimatedthroughalow-pass
exp
over multiple observations. At the same time, Voxblox has ﬁlter over a temporal window of the robot’s pose.
been demonstrated to dynamically build Euclidean Signed Based on the computed exploration gains as discussed, a
Distance Fields (ESDFs) out of TSDFs fast (e.g. faster than path with the highest gain is selected σ − for fur-
high gain
Octomap [24]) and with decreased computational cost, thus ther consideration. More speciﬁcally, to improve the robot’s
facilitating rapid collision checking functionality which is safety in high speed settings and narrow environments, the
essential for fast exploration. In fact, Voxblox has been planner performs an extra check to identify a similar but
shown to be 20 times faster than standard raycasting into a safer path from σ − . This step is proposed under an
high gain
TSDF, and up to 2 times faster than even grouped Octomap assumption that the difference in exploration gain between
insertionswhenperformingmergingonthepubliclyreleased similar paths is due to inevitable noise from the volumetric
EuRoC dataset [18,25]. In Section V we provide further gaincalculation;forinstance,asimpliﬁedmodeloftherange
computationalevidencethatjustiﬁestheselectionofVoxblox sensor and mapping noise. As a result, a set of neighboring
as the appropriate mapping representation framework. In paths Σ is ﬁrst identiﬁed using the DTW metric. Among
S
fact, given the limited onboard computational resources of Σ , the path with the largest safety margin, which is the
S
increasingly smaller Micro Aerial Vehicles and the simulta- minimumdistancefromthepathtoitsintermediateobstacles,
neous goal of fast and agile exploration, the selection of an is then selected as σ and ﬁnally conducted by the robot,
best
applicable volumetric mapping method is key into achieving while the whole procedure is iteratively repeated.
the envisioned performance.
F. Computational Cost
E. Exploration Gain
The proposed planner presents reduced computational
Provided the sampled collision-free and future-safe complexity, a fact largely assisted by the utilized volumetric
{ }
paths σk+1 the planner computes the associated representation framework. Assuming N spanned motion
k { } M
VolumetricGain for every vertex of each of the σk+1 primitive sequences of Navg vertices each on average and
k V
paths.Thiscorrespondstothecumulativeunmappedvolume averageedgelengthd ,thetwomajorcomputationallyex-
S avg
that an onboard depth sensor (or a collection of sensors) pensivestepsarerelatedtoidentifyingwhichofthepathsare
182
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 10:53:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. collision-freeandevaluatingthevolumetricgainacrosseach
candidate path. With Voxblox employing voxel hashing, the
lookups inside the volumetric representation have a compu-
O
tationalcostof (1)[18].Consideringaﬁxeddiscretization
and map resolution r, collision checking for the candidate
O
paths thus becomes (N Navgd /r). Similarly, assum-
M V avg
ing a depth sensor with range d , FoV [F ,F ] and
max H V
resolution [r ,r ], the growth rate for the volumetric gain
H V O
evaluationtakestheform (N NavgF F d /(r r )).
M V H V max H V
The aforementioned growth rate functions correspond to a
signiﬁcant reduction compared to other methods, especially
those utilizing more traditional octree-based occupancy map
representations such as in [13,17].
V. EVALUATIONSTUDIES
A set of experimental and simulation studies were con-
ducted to evaluate the performance of MBPlanner and in
Fig. 4. Simulation-based evaluation of the MBPlanner both in a subway
particular, its potential to enable fast and agile exploration
stationandinanundergroundmine.Selectedpaths:1)take-offandinitial
eveninlarge-scaleandgeometricallyconﬁnedenvironments. maneuver,2)ascendingtothenextlevelthroughtheopeningofastaircase,
The presented simulation studies involve different types of 3)alsoascendingtothenextlevel,4)handlinganintersectioninsideamine.
environments,whiletheexperimentalﬁeldevaluationrelates
to the autonomous exploration of challenging subterranean
diameter of 0.55m and can sustain collisions with obstacles
settings and speciﬁcally underground mines.
with speeds of up to 2m/s due to its design (Figure 1).
The ﬁrst ﬁeld experiment is presented in Figure 5. The
A. Simulation Studies
aerial robot is deployed outside the mine (at its portal)
In order to evaluate and ﬁne-tune the proposed motion
and is commanded to explore the whole underground drift
primitives-based planner prior to its experimental veriﬁca-
without any assumption of a prior map and only provided
tion,twosimulationstudiesinsidea)asubwaystation,andb)
general bounds of the space to be mapped. As presented,
an underground mine took place. The simulation studies are
the MBPlanner provides efﬁcient paths ensuring the quick
conducted using the RotorS Simulator [26], while the local
exploration of the underground environment. In fact, the
planning window of the planner (the volume within which
average ﬂying speed of the robot in this experiment was
the mo×tion p×rimitives-base×d tre×e is built) is set to DL of 1.8m/s which is very close to its safety limit for collision
length width height=40 40 8mandt×herobo×tbounding tolerance and allows efﬁcient large-scale exploration despite
box×DR ×is considered equal to length width height = the necessarily small endurance of such battery-powered
0.6 0.6 0.6m. Both simulation studies were conducted Micro Aerial Vehicles. Figure 6 presents the exploration
assuming a quadrotor MAV model integrating a LiDAR
rate in terms of new volume uncovered per second, while
◦
sensor with [FH,FV] = [360,30] and dmax = 50m and Table I presents the associated average statistics for the
the exploration speed was set to 2m/s. This test, depicted performance of MBPlanner in this experiment indicating the
in Figure 4, indicates the ability of the proposed method to
small computational cost of the method per iteration t in
explore both large-scale environments such as undergroud c
combination with its high exploration rate e .
mines and buildings with multiple levels (including going r
up ﬂoors through the opening of stairways). TABLEI
KEYSTATISTICSFORMBPLANNER
B. Experimental Evaluation
Towards a realistic evaluation of the outlined solution for er(m3/s) tc(s) davg(m)
LucerneMine 35.717 0.469 12.593
fast and agile exploration, we conducted experiments inside
ChollarMine 2.323 0.445 5.681
two underground mines in Northern Nevada, namely the
“Lucerne”newminedriftinVirginiaCitythatwasmorethan
170m in length, alongside the abandoned “Chollar Mine” The second ﬁeld experiment related to the deployment of
thatinvolvedextremelynarrowgeometry.Acollisiontolerant thecollision-tolerantaerialrobottoexploretheinitialsection
platform developed by Flyability SA is utilized for all the of the particularly narrow (cross-sectional width between
presented experiments. It is a prototype, equipped with a 0.8m to 1.2m) abandoned “Chollar Mine” also in Virginia
JetsonTX2onboardprocessorandanOuster3DLiDAR.The City, Nevada. In this experiment, the very constraint of
◦
OusterLiDARhas[F ,F ]=[360,30] andd =100m, prohibiting any possible future collision is relaxed and we
H V max
while the map update is only processed for the ﬁrst 50m for exploit the collision-tolerance of the utilized vehicle by only
enhanced measurement reliability. This ﬂying robot has a checking if a spherical volume with diameter 0.6m comes
183
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 10:53:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.5. AutonomousexplorationmissioninsideanundergroundmineinNevada,USA.Therobotenteredtheminefromthemainportalandthenrapidly
exploredthewholetunnel(165m)within1:30s.Thenominalvelocitywassetto2m/s.Sub-ﬁgure(1)presentsanexampleofthemotionprimitivebased
random tree built by the proposed planner, as well as its best exploration path in the ﬁrst iteration of the mission. Furthermore, the planner is triggered
beforetherobotreachesthelastwaypointofthecurrentlyconductedpathinordertoenablesmoothtransitionbetweenplanningiterations.Anindicative
exampleofthisapproachisshowninsub-ﬁgure(2)whichvisualizesacontinuouspathfromthesecondplanningstepappendedtothecurrentpath.Finally,
thetopﬁgurepresentsthefull3DpointcloudoftheenvironmentacquiredbytheonboardLiDARsensorandalsotherobot’svelocityplotwithanaverage
ﬂyingspeedof1.8m/s.
3000 100
Volume Explored Volume Explored
2500 90
80
2000
70
1500
60
1000
50
500 40
30
20 40 60 80 100 120 0 102030405060708090100
Fig.6. Volumeinm3 exploredasfunctionoftime.
in collision across the planner paths. Figure 7 presents the
relevant exploration result conducted with an average speed
of 0.4m/s, while Figure 6 and Table I present the relevant
statistics.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, a motion primitives-based path planner for
fast and agile exploration using aerial robots operating in Fig.7. Autonomousexplorationinsidetheabandonednarrowunderground
ChollarmineinVirginiaCity,Nevada,USA.Therobotwasdeployedatthe
large-scale and conﬁned environments was proposed. The
entranceoftheminetoexploretheinitialnarrowpartofthemine.Thetotal
algorithm is characterized by its ability to identify paths explorationdistancewas30matamaximumspeedof0.5m/swhilegoing
that exploit the dynamic properties of micro aerial vehicles throughpassagesasnarrowas80cm.Theimagesontheleftshowtherobot
atvariousinstancesintheexplorationprocess,whilethe3Dmapconstructed
and thus provide high exploration rate due to appropriate
usingpointcloudacquiredfromtheonboardLiDARoftherobotisshown
viewpointselectionandfastnavigation.Themethodisﬁeld- in thecenter. Sub-ﬁgure (1)on the rightshows an exampleof the motion
demonstrated in both active and abandoned underground primitivebasedtreewiththeselectedpathandsub-ﬁgure(2)showstherobot
(modeledasasphere)intheoccupancymaprepresentationhighlightingthe
mines using an autonomous collision-tolerant aerial robot.
extremelynarrowenvironment.Inthisexperiment,thecollision-freepaths
Futureworkwillinvolveﬁeldtestingindiversesettingssuch are evaluated by modeling the robot as a sphere with 0.6m diameter and
asmetrostations,cavenetworksandotherenvironmentswith allowingfuturepathstocomeintocollisionwithsmallvelocities(<2m/s)
exploitingthecollision-tolerancepropertiesoftheemployedﬂyingrobot.
sizes that demand fast exploration to mitigate the endurance
limitations of battery-powered small aerial robots.
184
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 10:53:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [13] A. Bircher, M. Kamel, K. Alexis, H. Oleynikova and R. Siegwart,
“Receding horizon ”next-best-view” planner for 3d exploration,” in
[1] B.Grocholsky,J.Keller,V.Kumar,andG.Pappas,“Cooperativeair
IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),
and ground surveillance,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine,
May2016.[Online].Available:https://github.com/ethz-asl/nbvplanner
vol.13,no.3,pp.16–25,2006.
[14] C. Papachristos et al., “Autonomous exploration and inspection path
[2] S. Khattak, C. Papachristos, and K. Alexis, “Keyframe-based direct
planningforaerialrobotsusingtherobotoperatingsystem,”inRobot
thermal–inertial odometry,” in IEEE International Conference on
OperatingSystem(ROS). Springer,2019,pp.67–111.
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),May2019.
[15] T. Dang, C. Papachristos, and K. Alexis, “Visual saliency-aware
[3] C. Papachristos, S. Khattak, F. Mascarich, and K. Alexis, “Au-
receding horizon autonomous exploration with application to aerial
tonomousnavigationandmappinginundergroundminesusingaerial
robotics,”inIEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutoma-
robots,” in 2019 IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 2019, p. to
tion(ICRA),May2018.
appear.
[16] C. Papachristos, S. Khattak, and K. Alexis, “Uncertainty–aware re-
[4] S. Arora and S. Scherer, “Randomized algorithm for informative
cedinghorizonexplorationandmappingusingaerialrobots,”inIEEE
path planning with budget constraints,” in 2017 IEEE International
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2017, pp.
2017.
4997–5004.
[17] T. Dang, F. Mascarich, S. Khattak, C. Papachristos, and K. Alexis,
[5] H.Balta,J.Bedkowski,S.Govindaraj,K.Majek,P.Musialik,D.Ser-
“Graph-based path planning for autonomous robotic exploration in
rano, K. Alexis, R. Siegwart, and G. De Cubber, “Integrated data
subterraneanenvironments,”inIEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceon
managementforaﬂeetofsearch-and-rescuerobots,”JournalofField
IntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),November2019.
Robotics,vol.34,no.3,pp.539–582,2017.
[18] H. Oleynikova, Z. Taylor, M. Fehr, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto,
[6] T. Tomic, K. Schmid, P. Lutz, A. Domel, M. Kassecker, E. Mair,
“Voxblox:Incremental3deuclideansigneddistanceﬁeldsforon-board
I. L. Grixa, F. Ruess, M. Suppa, and D. Burschka, “Toward a fully
mav planning,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
autonomous uav: Research platform for indoor and outdoor urban
RobotsandSystems(IROS),2017.
search and rescue,” IEEE robotics & automation magazine, vol. 19,
[19] J. Delmerico, E. Mueggler, J. Nitsch, and D. Scaramuzza, “Active
no.3,pp.46–56,2012.
autonomousaerialexplorationforgroundrobotpathplanning,”IEEE
[7] A.Bircher,M.Kamel,K.Alexis,M.Burri,P.Oettershagen,S.Omari,
RoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.2,no.2,pp.664–671,2017.
T.MantelandR.Siegwart,“Three-dimensionalcoveragepathplanning
[21] G. Loianno, D. Scaramuzza, and V. Kumar, “Special issue on high-
via viewpoint resampling and tour optimization for aerial robots,”
speedvision-basedautonomousnavigationofuavs,”JournalofField
AutonomousRobots,pp.1–25,2015.
Robotics,vol.1,no.1,pp.1–3,2018.
[8] A.Bircher,K.Alexis,M.Burri,P.Oettershagen,S.Omari,T.Mantel
[22] M. Beul, D. Droeschel, M. Nieuwenhuisen, J. Quenzel, S. Houben,
and R. Siegwart, “Structural inspection path planning via iterative
and S. Behnke, “Fast autonomous ﬂight in warehouses for inventory
viewpoint resampling with application to aerial robotics,” in IEEE
applications,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 4,
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May
pp.3121–3128,2018.
2015,pp.6423–6430.
[9] C. Connolly et al., “The determination of next best views,” in IEEE [23] K.Mohta,M.Watterson,Y.Mulgaonkar,S.Liu,C.Qu,A.Makineni,
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation1985. IEEE, K. Saulnier, K. Sun, A. Zhu, J. Delmerico et al., “Fast, autonomous
1985. ﬂight in gps-denied and cluttered environments,” Journal of Field
[10] B.Yamauchi,“Afrontier-basedapproachforautonomousexploration,” Robotics,vol.35,no.1,pp.101–120,2018.
inCIRA’97. IEEE,1997,pp.146–151. [24] A.Hornung,K.M.Wurm,M.Bennewitz,C.Stachniss,andW.Bur-
[11] M. Popovic, G. Hitz, J. Nieto, I. Sa, R. Siegwart, and E. Galceran, gard, “OctoMap: An efﬁcient probabilistic 3D mapping framework
“Onlineinformativepathplanningforactiveclassiﬁcationusinguavs,” basedonoctrees,”AutonomousRobots,2013.
arXivpreprintarXiv:1609.08446,2016. [25] M.Burri,J.Nikolic,P.Gohl,T.Schneider,J.Rehder,S.Omari,M.W.
[12] M. Nieuwenhuisen and S. Behnke, “Search-based 3d planning and Achtelik,andR.Siegwart,“Theeurocmicroaerialvehicledatasets,”
trajectoryoptimizationforsafemicroaerialvehicleﬂightundersensor The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 35, no. 10, pp.
visibilityconstraints,”arXiv:1903.05165,2019. 1157–1163,2016.
[20] T.AndreandC.Bettstetter,“Collaborationinmulti-robotexploration: [26] F.Furrer,M.Burri,M.Achtelik,andR.Siegwart,“Rotors-amodular
to meet or not to meet?” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, gazebomavsimulatorframework,”inRobotOperatingSystem(ROS).
vol.82,no.2,pp.325–337,2016. Springer,2016,pp.595–625.
185
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 10:53:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 