2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
High Force Density Gripping with UV Activation and Sacriﬁcial
Adhesion
Esther Lee*,1, Zachary Goddard*,2, Joshua Ngotiaoco2, Noe Monterrosa3, Anirban Mazumdar2
Abstract—This paper presents a novel physical gripping
framework intended for controlled, high force density attach-
ment on a range of surfaces. Our framework utilizes a light-
activated chemical adhesive to attach to surfaces. The cured
adhesive is part of a “sacriﬁcial layer,” which is shed when
the gripper separates from the surface. In order to control
adhesive behavior we utilize ultraviolet (UV) light sensitive
acrylics which are capable of rapid curing when activated
with 380nm light. Once cured, zero input power is needed to
hold load. Thin plastic parts can be used as the sacriﬁcial
layers, and these can be released using an electric motor. This
new gripping framework including the curing load capacity,
adhesive deposition, and sacriﬁcial methods are described in
detail. Two proof-of concept prototypes are designed, built,
and tested. The experimental results illustrate the response
Fig. 1. Monarch butterﬂy discarding shell through molting [19] (Left).
time (15-75s depending on load), high holding force-to-weight
Robotarmadheredtopayloadviasacriﬁciallayer(Right).
ratio (10-30), and robustness to material type. Additionally,
two drawbacks of this design are discussed: corruption of the
gripped surface and a limited number of layers.
surface geometry. Electrostatic adhesion applies gripping
Index Terms—Mechanism Design, Manipulation forcebetweeninducedsurfacechargesandelectrodes,which
require little to no power once switched on [1]–[5]. While
I. INTRODUCTION thesesystemsarelightweightandefﬁcient,theyrequirehigh
voltagetoproduceadequateadhesion.Suctiongrippershave
Grippingdevicesthatenablemobile robotstoexertforces
the ability to grasp delicate objects and have low holding
on their surrounding environment provide new abilities such
power input, but they work best with ﬂat or lightweight
as manipulation, use of tools, perching, and anchoring.
objects and require a heavy vacuum pump [6]–[8].Vacuum
However, grippers for mobile systems have substantially
jamming grippers are capable of gripping a wide range of
different requirements than manipulators designed for ﬁxed-
surfacegeometries;however,theystrugglewithporousmate-
baseroboticarms.Endeffectorsformobilerobotsarelimited
rialsandalsorequireavacuumpump[9]–[12].Lightweight,
to the maximum carrying weight and battery life of the
bistable reﬂexive grippers have also been designed, which
vehicle, driving the need for lightweight, high force density
requirenoholdingenergy,buthaveonlybeenshowntowork
grippers.Inaddition,mobilerobotsmayalsoneedtooperate
withasuitablehandholdtowraparound[13].Gecko-inspired
indifferentenvironmentswitharangeofmaterials;therefore,
dry adhesives have been used in several designs; however,
invariance to surface properties is valuable.
these typically work best under shear stress and dust may
The robotics community has made great advancements in
interfere with adhesion [14]–[18].
manipulator design; however, many existing approaches are
In this paper, we present a new framework for employing
not well suited to mobile robots in unstructured environ-
chemical adhesives in robotic gripping. Our approach draws
ments. Speciﬁcally, the ability to achieve high force density
loose inspiration from the biological molting mechanism.
grasping on a range of surfaces remains difﬁcult. Servo
Molting is used in nature to discard a layer that is no longer
driven actuators are often heavy and may require certain
needed. One example is when a butterﬂy caterpillar forms
*Theseauthorscontributedequally. a silk pad to attach to a structure and then discards it after
This program is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) metamorphosis [20]. We utilize a similar approach where a
REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research in Engineering (SURE)
robot can strongly adhere to an object and leave a sacriﬁcial
(1757401).
1E. Lee is with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engi- layer behind, rather than using excessive power to break the
neering at North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27606 (email: bond.Our newframework combinesa controllablechemical
eelee4@ncsu.edu).
adhesive with a stock of disposable sacriﬁcial layers to
2Z. Goddard, J. Ngotiaoco, and A. Mazumdar are with the Woodruff
School of Mechanical Engineering at Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA allow a release from the permanent bond. An illustration
30313 (email: zgoddard3@gatech.edu, joshuango@gatech.edu, and anir- depicting natural molting (butterﬂy) and engineered molting
ban.mazumdar@me.gatech.edu)
(our sacriﬁcial gripper) is provided in Fig. 1.
3N.MonterrosaiswiththeGuggenheimSchoolofAerospaceEngineering
atGeorgiaTech,Atlanta,GA30313(email:noejose1992@gmail.com) The core contributions of this work include formulat-
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 836
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:01:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ing multiple frameworks for utilizing controllable chemical 5) Capable of repeated use. Many applications such as
adhesion for grasping, and experimentally characterizing perchingandpackagehandlingrequiremultiplegrasp-
sacriﬁcial adhesive gripping performance. In addition, we release cycles. Therefore, grippers for mobile systems
design and demonstrate a fully functional prototype that must be designed for several repeated uses.
can be integrated into a range of robots and is capable Our review of literature did not identify a grasp frame-
of high force-to-weight ratio behavior on several diverse work that addresses these requirements. Therefore we have
materials. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the explored a new approach that leverages the strength of engi-
ﬁrst to use controllable chemical adhesives in combination neeredadhesives,controllabilitythroughlightsensitivity,and
with sacriﬁcial layers for robotic grasping. multiple uses via sacriﬁcial layers. We refer to this method-
Inordertoachievecontrollableadhesion,wecombineUV ology as “tunable adhesion with disposable elements.” Our
sensitive acrylic adhesives with shedding capacity. Speciﬁ- speciﬁc manifestation utilizes a UV cured acrylic adhesive
cally, our design can mechanically shed a sacriﬁcial layer in with disposable plastic layers. As we show in the following
order to release the strong bond with minimal energy input. sections this design meets the aforementioned functional
Our design utilizes multiple sacriﬁcial layers which enable requirements, and therefore holds great promise for a range
repeated use. This approach provides high force density of mobile systems.
(rangingfrom10to30),lowpowerconsumption,andmulti-
surface gripping capacity. III. TUNABLEADHESIONWITHDISPOSABLEELEMENTS
We acknowledge that leaving a layer on the surface may Webeginthissectionbyreviewingandevaluatingoptions
beadrawbackinsomecases;however,therearemanycases for the chemical adhesive. Next we overview materials and
where this is not a concern. Some examples include robots releasemechanismsforthesacriﬁciallayers.Wealsopresent
that may need to manipulate debris, handle boxes, or perch two methods for depositing the adhesive on the sacriﬁcial
on temporary structures. layer, both of which we implement as separate variants of
We begin our paper by describing our core functional our design.
requirements for mobile manipulators. We then describe
A. Adhesive Curing Mechanism
our overall sacriﬁcial-adhesion approach. Two methods of
operation are described: pump-based and pre-wetted. A Availableadhesivesvarybycompositionandcuringmech-
speciﬁc UV sensitive acrylic adhesive is characterized both anism, which in turn have different performance character-
temporally, and over a range of materials. Finally, this work istics. Examples include two-part epoxies, cyanoacrylates,
culminates with case study experiments using an industrial anaerobic adhesives, and photoinitiated polymerization.
manipulator. These results demonstrate the load capacity, Two-part room temperature adhesives are cured through
simplicity, and effectiveness of our approach. a chemical reaction between a resin and a hardener. This
method of curing is used with various chemical compo-
II. FUNCTIONALREQUIREMENTS sitions, namely epoxies and polyurethane adhesives [21].
At room temperature, these adhesives exhibit high bond
For mobile robotic gripping applications, weight, energy
strengthafterthetwocomponentsaremixedandcured[21].
consumption,andversatilityareimportantconsiderations.In
However, readily available two-part adhesives are generally
the following list, we outline functional requirements for a
designed to have a long pot life at room temperature [22]–
broadly applicable gripper designed for mobile robots.
[24]. A prolonged cure time reduces the applicability to
1) Holdingforcetoweightratiogreaterthan10:1.The robotic gripping. Additionally, multi-part adhesives require
abilitytobearlargeloadsrelativetothegripperweight the distinct components to be stored completely separate
is crucial for mobile systems. A 10:1 ratio between fromeachother.Thisaccommodationcancomplicatestorage
holdingforceandgrippermeansthattheoverallweight design and result in an overall heavier prototype.
contribution from the device is small. One-part adhesives demonstrate capabilities that are more
2) Controllable gripping. The ability to control attach- suited to a compact, robotic gripper. Cyanoacrylates react
ment and release enables broad usage. While central- rapidly to the presence of moisture, whether that be in the
izedcontrolisslowerthanreﬂexivebehaviors,itoffers air or on the substrate. The reaction is fast and requires very
greater robustness and versatility in operation. little moisture, thus the glue starts curing after exposure to
3) Low power consumption when initiating, holding air [25]. Although a rapid cure time is ideal in practical
and releasing grasp. Low power usage is essential applications,theinstabilityoftheadhesiveinairmayrequire
for mobile applications which must carry their own additional design constraints. A heat-cured adhesive on the
energy supply. Therefore power to initiate, hold and otherhandisstableatroomtemperature,butwillrequirethe
release the grasp should be minimized. additionofaheatsource,whichwouldsubstantiallyincrease
4) Relative invariance to materials and geometry. power consumption.
Mobile robots encounter a wide range of materials Photoinitiated acrylic adhesives are composed of a pho-
and surface properties while operating in different toinitiator and acrylate monomers. As ultraviolet radiation
environments. Therefore, the ability to handle a broad contactstheadhesive,thephotoinitiatorabsorbstheradiation
range of materials is very important. and releases free radicals, which initiates polymerization of
837
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:01:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.2. Schematicofscrewactuator,frontviewofpre-wetteddesign(Left),andsideviewofpump-baseddesign(Right).
the monomers [26]. This method of curing shares the same adhered surface may fail before the adhesive, which could
advantagesofaheat-curingsystemintermsofcontrollability, render the gripper immediately useless.
but we favor the photoinitiated adhesive due to the ability to We chose the screw actuated approach in order to maxi-
cure with relatively low powered LEDs. It is noted that UV mize reliability and simplicity. The design meets the criteria
light is typically a safety concern, and this would need to be outlined previously and can always separate from the sac-
mitigated in design or application process. riﬁcial layer, even in the case that the adhered surface fails
Ultimately we chose to use a one-part UV-cured acrylic before the adhesive.
adhesive. One-part light-curing adhesives offer the attributes
of single chambers, low power for initiation, rapid curing
C. Adhesive Deposition
and relative environmental stability.
Our framework requires a method for depositing the
adhesive onto the sacriﬁcial layer. In this work we consider
B. Sacriﬁcial Layer
two means of adhesive deposition. The ﬁrst design uses a
Based on our choice of the UV-curing adhesive, we pump to apply the adhesive from an on-board reservoir onto
desireatransparentlayermaterialforsimpletransmissionof the target surface. The second implementation pre-wets the
UV light. Additionally the layer and its release mechanism sacriﬁcial layers with the adhesive prior to loading the grip-
shouldbestrongandlightweighttomeetthepriorfunctional per.Bothvariants,aspicturedinFig.2,haveadvantagesand
requirements.Sincethesacriﬁciallayerslimitthenumberof drawbacks, and their use depends on the desired operation.
consecutive uses, we desire a mechanism that can be easily The primary beneﬁt of the pump-based deposition is that
reloaded. the adhesive is kept contained and protected from ambient
We narrow down our selection to glass and clear plastics. radiation until it is needed. The drawbacks to this method
Between these two categories, we favor plastics due to the are the added weight of the pump and the time required
brittleness of glass and a typically higher tensile strength. to pump. The adhesive used in our design has a relatively
·
Ultimatelywechooseclearcastacrylicbasedonitsstrength, high viscosity, 15-26 Pas, making it difﬁcult to pump
weight, and transparency. quickly. However, pumping time can be reduced through
We consider two options for release. The ﬁrst method is pump/chamber design as well as operation considerations.
to use a thin acrylic plate actuated by a screw and back-lit Pre-wetted sacriﬁcial layers can eliminate the weight,
withUVLEDs.Multipleacrylicplatesmaybestoredonthe complexity,andtimelagassociatedwithpumping.However,
screw and moved up as old layers are removed. The screw suchmethodsaremoresusceptibletoUVradiationfromthe
may be reversed to reload new plates once the gripper is LEDs and the environment. Therefore, additional shielding
empty. Since the acrylic plates are transparent, LEDs may layers are required.
be mounted behind or to the side on the plates for curing.
An alternative method would be to use only the adhesive IV. SYSTEMCHARACTERIZATION
asthesacriﬁciallayer.Inthiscase,theacrylicplatewouldbe
a permanent component of the device and a cleaving action We require a model for the adhesive behavior in order
couldbeusedtoseparatefromtheadheredsurface.Asimilar to use it as part of a controlled system. Speciﬁcally, we
design has been demonstrated for releasing a magnetic foot would like to predict holding force based on cure time.
from a metal surface [27]. Using only the adhesive as a This information can be used to estimate maximum force
sacriﬁcial layer is advantageous for simplicity of the layer; as well as necessary cure duration. A relation between the
however, there are two drawbacks to this design. The ﬁrst is strength of our gripper and exposure time to UV light
the need for a high force to induce adhesive failure, which is constructed empirically. Additionally we investigate the
may require a heavy gear train. Additionally, there may be changes in strength due to varying surface materials. Finally
some adhesive left on the acrylic after every adhesion. This we conduct analysis of the acrylic threads to determine the
could gradually reduce UV transmissivity. Furthermore, the failure strength of the device itself.
838
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:01:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.4. Graphicaldepictionofcuretimeloadtestdata(median)
Fig.3. Ultravioletcuringprocessfortesting
m, and n are constants, which we use as ﬁtted parameters.
For our model, we assume C starts near 1 and the monomer
A. Adhesive Cure Dynamics is completely spent by the end of the reaction. Furthermore,
To test the strength of the adhesive against different weassumethattheholdingforceisproportionaltothedegree
criteria, we built a test rig to apply a variable tensile load of cure, resulting in the following:
to the cured adhesive. We deposited uncured Loctite AA352 − ·
F =(1 C) F +F (2)
between a 29x25x3mm acrylic plate and a 29x44x3mm test max 0
material before initiating the cure process on a test bench whereF istheholdingforce,F istheholdingforceafter
max
pictured in Fig. 3. fullcure,andF istheforceappliedbytheuncuredadhesive.
0
The UV curing station is composed of 20 LED UV Using a numerical ﬁt, this yields the empirical model shown
emitters (VAOL-5EUV8T4), a control circuit, and a power in Fig. 4. This may be used to predict a minimum cure time
supply. We adjusted the power supply to ensure that each to increase operation rate.
LED was drawing approximately 20mA of current at 3.3V
B. Material Dependence
per its speciﬁcations [28].
We tested the strength of the adhesive over different cure The results from the material test, presented in Fig. 5,
times and materials. The cure time tests were taken in 15 show most of the materials fail at similar forces to the
secondincrementsbetween0-105seconds,inclusive.Forthe aluminum test piece. Additionally, we observe that the test
temporaltests,weusedaluminumasthetestmaterial,sinceit pieces fail between the acrylic and adhesive for all except
is readily available and widely used in various applications thecopolyesterplasticandcardboard,thusitcanbeassumed
[29]. The materials tests comprised of curing the adhesive that the limiting factor for adhesive failure is the bond to
between the same acrylic plate and six new materials to the acrylic. This inspires future work to explore alternative
replacethealuminum:cardboard,acrylic,copolyesterplastic materials for the gripper’s adhesive plates.
(3D printer ﬁlament), steel, plywood and nylon. Thecopolyesterplasticandcardboardtestsresultedinsig-
Fig. 4 summarizes the ﬁndings from the cure time tests. niﬁcantly reduced performance. The cardboard sample piece
We include error bars to depict the range in the data points. itself failed during the test, so the diminished performance
Additionally, we observed that all failures in the adhesive can be attributed to material integrity. In the copolyester
were between the acrylic piece and the cured adhesive. plastic tests, we observe that breakage occurs between the
The load capacity of the adhesive follows a positive trend
until it plateaus at approximately 130 N after 75s of LED
UV activation. We assume that this corresponds to the full
cureoftheadhesive.Evenatshortercuretimes,theadhesive
has the potential to grip signiﬁcantly more weight than the
prototype itself (3.89 N). In practice, this means that the
prototype can utilize shorter cure times when small loads
are anticipated.
Prior literature has shown that photoinitiated polymeriza-
tion can be modeled as an autoaccelerated reaction [30]. We
ﬁt our data to an equation from the literature shown below:
−dC −
=k Cm(1 C)n (1)
dt au
Fig.5. Graphicaldepictionofmaterialsloadtestdata(median).Theerror
IntheaboveequationC istheremainingmonomerandk , barsshowonestandarddeviation.
au
839
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:01:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.6. Mechanicaldesignofthegripperprototype:3Drendering
cured adhesive and test material. We attribute this failure
to lower compatibility between the material properties and
adhesive,sinceadhesiontoglassypolymerstendstobeweak
[31]. These results show that the performance of the gripper
may be constrained by the material properties and structural
integrity of the target object.
C. Thread Analysis Fig.7. (a)LEDcureprocess.Theangledmountsurfacedirectstheview
angle of the LEDs to be pointed towards the target surface. (b) Peristaltic
The strength of the screw-acrylic interface imposes an
pumpcloseup.Siliconetubingrunsfromtheadhesivereservoir(syringe)to
upper bound on grip performance. The acrylic plate is the theadhesivelocation.
weakerofthetwomaterials,thuswefocusontheshearstress
ontheinternalthreads.Thefollowingequationcalculatesthe
effective shear area of internal threads under load: 1) Dispensing the adhesive. The pump dispenses adhe-
1 − sivefromthesyringeontotheadhesionsurfacethrough
A =πnL D ( +0.57735(D E )) (3)
n e s,min 2n s,min n,max silicone tubing. The design uses a peristaltic pump,
which keeps the adhesive separate from moving parts
inwhichnisthenumberofthreadsperinch,L isthethread
e in case of premature curing. Fig. 7(b) presents a clear
engagement length, D is the minimum major diameter
s,min view of the components involved in this process. The
of the external thread (screw), and E is the maximum
n,max pre-wetted deposition method would not require this
pitchdiameteroftheinternalthread(acrylic)[32].UsingEq.
step.
3, as well as the internal/external dimensions of M6x1mm
2) Dispersing the ﬂuid. The lowermost acrylic plate is
threads per ANSI/ASME B1.13M-2005 [33], the shear area
pushed onto the surface to spread the adhesive.
of the internal threads calculates to 26.5mm2. To obtain the
3) Curingtheadhesive.TheLEDUVemitterarrayturns
pulloutstrengthofthethreadedinterface,weusetheaverage
on for a set time to cure the adhesive. As seen in
shear strength of cast acrylic (55.2 MPa [34]), which results
Fig. 7(b), the LEDs are angled slightly to orient them
in the maximum pull out force calculating to 1464N. This
towards the adhesion surface.
value serves as the theoretical maximum gripping force of
4) Holding.Duringthisstepthegripperrequiresnoinput
the prototype, assuming the adhesive does not fail ﬁrst.
energy or signal.
V. PROTOTYPEDESIGN 5) Release. This process utilizes the screw mechanism to
In the following section, we detail the design and fabri- release the sacriﬁcial layer. The assembly is clearly
cation of a fully functional gripper prototype. Our design is depicted in Fig. 8.
intended to be modular and can be easily converted between
pump-based methods and pre-wetted techniques.
VI. FULLSYSTEMIMPLEMENTATION
A rendering of our design is shown in Fig. 6. We utilize
FDMstyleplastic3Dprintingformanyoftheparts.Acrylic
plates are used for the sacriﬁcial layers. Off the shelf elec- Once the full prototype was fabricated we devised case-
tronics are used for the pump (INTLLAB 606015745013) study experiments to demonstrate its performance using a
and the LEDs (VAOL-5EUV8T4). The gripper functions conventionalrobotarm.Theseexperimentsaredescribedbe-
using the following procedure: low. The accompanying video illustrates these experiments.
840
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:01:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.8. Sectionviewofthegripper.Themotorandscrewallowtheacrylic
platestomoveeitheralongtherails.
A. EPSON Robot Arm with Pump-Based Deposition
Followingthecompletionoftheprototypebuild,wetested
the functionality of the device as an end effector on an
Fig.9. Fullgrippersysteminobjectretrievalprocess.a)Theadhesiveis
EPSON C3 Manipulator [35]. Fig. 9 shows the full gripper dispersedontothetargetsurface.b)TheLEDUVemitterarrayisenergized
system in the process of retrieving an object and placing it to cure the adhesive. c) The arm moves to new position. d) Acrylic plate
releasesalongwiththetargetobject.
in a new location. The payload used in the retrieval process
was a 50x100x150mm aluminum block with mass of 2.2kg.
The cure time was 20 seconds. sacriﬁcial layers for release. The tensile strength of the
The EPSON arm’s speciﬁcations state that the maximum curable adhesive was tested across cure time and surface
payload is roughly 3kg, and the target object used in testing material,andafunctionalprototypewasbuilttodemonstrate
approachedthislimit(totalof2.6kgwiththegripper).Given operation in practical application. Analysis was performed
the payload, the robot arm was operating at 85% capacity, to quantify a theoretical model of the performance of the
while the gripper only reached approximately 15%. The gripper based on cure time and surface material.
longestsub-processofthegrippingprocedurewasdispensing The experimental results of the load tests illustrate the
the adhesive (approximately 30 out of 60 seconds), which adhesive layers’ response time (15-75s depending on load),
motivated us to explore the pre-wetted deposition method. robustnesstomaterialtype,andhighholdingforcetoweight
ratio (10-30). Both the pump deposition method and pre-
B. EPSON Arm with Pre-wetted Layers
wetted deposition method were tested on a robot arm.
Toaddressthelengthyprocesstimeoftheoriginalgripper
The pre-wetted acrylic plates substantially reduced overall
design, we modiﬁed the gripper design to incorporate the
process time.
alternative adhesive deposition method of pre-wetting the
Current work is focusing on incorporating the gripper
acrylic plates. We removed the pump and syringe from the
intomobileapplicationsanddesigningasoftroboticgripper
assembly and added opaque shielding layers to protect the
using this framework. A small-scale UAV has been selected
adhesive from the LEDs. The shielding layers alone do not
asaplatformthatwillbetheﬁrsttousethegripperprototype
protect the adhesive from ambient radiation, but including
toperchandhangfromasurface.Replacingthehardacrylic
an enclosure around the acrylic could solve this.
platewithasoft,elasticmaterialmayallowforawiderrange
This new design signiﬁcantly reduced the weight of the
of use on different surface geometries. Recent advances
gripper to be 2.76 N. The overall procedure time also
in plant-based UV-cure resins [36] may also allow for an
decreased to 30 seconds.
ecologically friendly implementation.
VII. CONCLUSION This work serves a model for future exploration into
utilizing gripping mechanisms with curable adhesive, and
This paper explored the use of cured adhesives and sac-
introducing disposable elements into the grasping process.
riﬁcial layers for robotic gripping. Cured adhesives offer
high force capacity with low input energy across a wide ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
rangeofmaterials,makingtheiruseidealformobilerobotics
TheauthorsthankAdamForis,RaymondKim,andKevin
applications in unstructured environments.
Choi for their assistance with troubleshooting.
We outlined the design of a robotic end effector which
employs UV-curable adhesive as a gripping mechanism and
841
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:01:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [24] T. E. Gismond, D. J. Damico, et al., “Structural adhesive composi-
tions,”May31988. USPatent4,742,113.
[1] M. Graule, P. Chirarattananon, S. Fuller, N. Jafferis, K. Ma,
[25] H.Coover,D.Dreifus,andJ.Oconnor,“Cyanoacrylateadhesives,”in
M. Spenko, R. Kornbluh, and R. Wood, “Perching and takeoff of a Handbookofadhesives,pp.463–477,Springer,1990.
robotic insect on overhangs using switchable electrostatic adhesion,” [26] M.KaurandA.Srivastava,“Photopolymerization:Areview,”Journal
Science,vol.352,no.6288,pp.978–982,2016. ofMacromolecularScience,PartC:PolymerReviews,vol.42,no.4,
[2] O.Millet,P.Bernardoni,S.Re´gnier,P.Bidaud,E.Tsitsiris,D.Collard,
pp.481–512,2002.
andL.Buchaillot,“Electrostaticactuatedmicrogripperusinganam-
[27] A.MazumdarandH.H.Asada,“Mag-foot:Asteelbridgeinspection
pliﬁcationmechanism,”SensorsandActuatorsA:Physical,vol.114, robot,” in 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
no.2-3,pp.371–378,2004. RobotsandSystems,pp.1691–1696,IEEE,2009.
[3] H. Prahlad, R. Pelrine, S. Stanford, J. Marlow, and R. Kornbluh, [28] VCCOptoelectronics,UVLEDLAMP.
“Electroadhesive robotswall climbing robots enabled by a novel,
[29] S. Das and W. Yin, “Trends in the global aluminum fabrication
robust, and electrically controllable adhesion technology,” in 2008 industry,”JOM,vol.59,no.2,pp.83–87,2007.
IEEEinternationalconferenceonroboticsandautomation,pp.3028–
[30] I. V. Khudyakov, J. C. Legg, M. B. Purvis, and B. J. Overton,
3033,IEEE,2008.
“Kinetics of photopolymerization of acrylates with functionality of
[4] H.Wang,A.Yamamoto,andT.Higuchi,“Electrostatic-motor-driven 1- 6,” Industrial & engineering chemistry research, vol. 38, no. 9,
electroadhesiverobot,”in2012IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceon
pp.3353–3359,1999.
IntelligentRobotsandSystems,pp.914–919,IEEE,2012. [31] P. De Gennes, “Weak adhesive junctions,” Journal de physique,
[5] K.H.Koh,M.Sreekumar,andS.Ponnambalam,“Hybridelectrostatic
vol.50,no.18,pp.2551–2562,1989.
andelastomeradhesionmechanismforwallclimbingrobot,”Mecha-
[32] H.FanandJ.Malsbury,“Handbookforboltedjointdesign,”2007.
tronics,vol.35,pp.122–135,2016.
[33] “Metric Screw Threads: M Proﬁle,” standard, The American Society
[6] N.Tsourveloudis,K.Valavanis,R.Kolluru,andI.K.Nikolos,“Posi-
ofMechanicalEngineers,2006.
tionandsuctioncontrolofareconﬁgurableroboticgripper,”Machine
[34] “Overviewofmaterialsforacrylic,cast.”
IntelligenceandRoboticControl,vol.11,no.2,pp.53–62,1999.
[35] Epson,“Epsonc3compact6-axisrobotmanual,”2011.
[7] J.Schick,K.Schmalz,W.Schmalz,andT.Eisele,“Grippersystem,in
[36] M. Lebedevaite, J. Ostrauskaite, E. Skliutas, and M. Malinauskas,
particularvacuumgrippersystem,”Jan.72003. USPatent6,502,877.
“Photoinitiator free resins composed of plant-derived monomers for
[8] W. Zesch, M. Brunner, and A. Weber, “Vacuum tool for handling the optical µ-3d printing of thermosets,” Polymers, vol. 11, no. 1,
microobjectswithananorobot,”inProceedingsofInternationalCon-
p.116,2019.
ference on Robotics and Automation, vol. 2, pp. 1761–1766, IEEE,
1997.
[9] E. Brown, N. Rodenberg, J. Amend, A. Mozeika, E. Steltz, M. R.
Zakin,H.Lipson,andH.M.Jaeger,“Universalroboticgripperbased
on the jamming of granular material,” Proceedings of the National
AcademyofSciences,vol.107,no.44,pp.18809–18814,2010.
[10] Y. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Yang, and Y. Wei, “Passive particle jamming and
itsstiffeningofsoftroboticgrippers,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,
vol.33,no.2,pp.446–455,2017.
[11] A. Jiang, G. Xynogalas, P. Dasgupta, K. Althoefer, and
T. Nanayakkara, “Design of a variable stiffness ﬂexible manipulator
with composite granular jamming and membrane coupling,” in
2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems,pp.2922–2927,IEEE,2012.
[12] N. G. Cheng, M. B. Lobovsky, S. J. Keating, A. M. Setapen, K. I.
Gero, A. E. Hosoi, and K. D. Iagnemma, “Design and analysis of a
robust,low-cost,highlyarticulatedmanipulatorenabledbyjammingof
granularmedia,”in2012IEEEInternationalConferenceonRobotics
andAutomation,pp.4328–4333,IEEE,2012.
[13] R.Jitosho,K.Choi,A.Foris,andA.Mazumdar,“Exploitingbistability
forhighforcedensityreﬂexivegripping,”in2019InternationalCon-
ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1241–1247, IEEE,
2019.
[14] E. W. Hawkes, D. L. Christensen, A. K. Han, H. Jiang, and M. R.
Cutkosky,“Graspingwithoutsqueezing:Shearadhesiongripperwith
ﬁbrillarthinﬁlm,”in2015IEEEInternationalConferenceonRobotics
andAutomation(ICRA),pp.2305–2312,IEEE,2015.
[15] M. Modabberifar and M. Spenko, “Development of a gecko-like
roboticgripperusingscott–russellmechanisms,”Robotica,pp.1–9.
[16] M. P. Murphy and M. Sitti, “Waalbot: An agile small-scale wall-
climbingrobotutilizingdryelastomeradhesives,”IEEE/ASMEtrans-
actionsonMechatronics,vol.12,no.3,pp.330–338,2007.
[17] S. Kim, M. Spenko, S. Trujillo, B. Heyneman, V. Mattoli, and
M. R. Cutkosky, “Whole body adhesion: hierarchical, directional
and distributed control of adhesive forces for a climbing robot,” in
Proceedings 2007 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation,pp.1268–1273,IEEE,2007.
[18] M. Carlo and S. Metin, “A biomimetic climbing robot based on the
gecko,” Journal of Bionic Engineering, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 115–125,
2006.
[19] “Transitionisachrysalis,”TransitionUniverse,Jun2012.
[20] K.Lasky,Monarchs. HoughtonMifﬂinHarcourt,1993.
[21] S. R. Hartshorn, Structural adhesives: chemistry and technology.
SpringerScience&BusinessMedia,2012.
[22] C. Vu and J. Y. Jadhay, “Two-component polyurethane adhesive,”
Aug.201991. USPatent5,041,517.
[23] J. W. Becker, “Adhesive composition,” Nov. 14 1978. US Patent
4,125,522.
842
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:01:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 