2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
CAMI - Analysis, Design and Realization of a Force-Compliant Variable
Cam System
Dominik Mannhart, Fabio Dubois, Karen Bodie, Victor Klemm, Alessandro Morra, and Marco Hutter
MX-64R
Abstract—This work presents a novel design concept that pulley
achievesmulti-leggedlocomotionusingathree-dimensionalcam
system. A computational framework has been developed to
analyze and dimension this cam apparatus, that can perform
arbitrary end effector motions within its design constraints.
Themechanismenablescontinuousgaittransitionandinherent torque-cam 3D-cam
force compliance. With only two motors, any trajectory of
a continuous set of gaits can be followed. One motor is
used to actuate the system and a second one to morph its
torque 
movement. To illustrate a possible application of this system,
swivel lever
a working prototype of a bipedal robot is developed and
validated in hardware. It showcases a smooth velocity change cam 
by transitioning through different gaits from standing still to swivel lever
walkingfastat124mm/swithin2.0s,whilefollowingthegiven contact ball
end effector trajectory with an error of only 2.47mm. parellel leg mechanism
Fig. 1: Rendering of the bipedal CAMI prototype labelled
I. INTRODUCTION with its main components.
Coordination of multiple actuators to execute arbitrary
repetitive motion to shift the complexity from software to
movement in 3D space can nowadays be achieved accurately
hardware, minimizing the risk of failure. Finally, this new
with complex and often heuristics-based motion planning
concept is validated on the real world Continuously Adaptive
algorithms in software. Yet there are applications where
Motion Inducer (CAMI) prototype, depicted in Fig. 1.
the use of one actuator only is still beneﬁcial and superior.
Industrial machines or mechanical contraptions that perform A. Related work
any kind of repetitive motion are often driven with only Thepotentialofmechanicalassemblieshasbeenknownand
one motor to minimize their cost and to circumvent their leveraged since the industrial revolution for an abundance
dependency on mechatronical subsystems. Even in cars, the of motion applications. Four-bar linkages and cam-based
combustion engine’s rotating camshaft is the only actuation systems are nowadays found in various applications e.g. in
needed to operate a number of poppet valves simultaneously. robots [1] or clockwork mechanisms [2]. In some contexts
Thus,whereaparametrizablemotionisdesired,motionofthe these mechanisms are also integrated in works of art, as
actuated parts can be embedded in mechanism components. shown by Jean Tinguely’s intriguing kinetic machines [3] or
Rotating cams are commonly used to transform constant Theo Jansen’s Strandbeests [4], [5].
rotary motion into any desired periodic motion. However, With rapid and customized fabrication techniques now
cam disks also have the limitation that their movement is widely available, new possibilities of feasible design space
predeﬁned and ﬁxed, without allowing for any compliant or have emerged, enabling us to build machines with increasing
adaptive behavior. complexity more quickly and at a lower cost. [6] presents a
Today’s walking robots are typically designed as multiple computational design of planar articulated characters. Simple
open link actuation chains controlled by complex motion barlinkagemechanismsareusedasbuildingblocksconnected
generation and planning algorithms to ensure stability. Here, toasemi-automatedgeartrainassemblytomovethecharacter
repetitive gait cycles and smooth motion transition suggest with a single input driver. In order to assist the user during
that much of this complexity can be addressed through the kinematic linkage design for complex 3D motions, [7]
mechanical design as well. propose the iterative method remove one motor add a
This work investigates the use of a continuously variable link. By introducing links at pairs of points with minimal
mechanismdesigntogeneratevariousgaitsforleggedsystems. distance variation a single-motor topology with minimal
We propose the application of these design principles for trajectory deviation is achieved. As an alternate approach,
fastandinteractivelinkageediting,formulatedasclosed-form
Dominik Mannhart, Karen Bodie, Victor Klemm and Alessandro
kinematics, is aimed for in [8]. Compared to constraint-based
MorraarewiththeAutonomousSystemsLab(ASL),ETHZürich,8092
Zürich,Switzerland,(email:dominikm@ethz.ch,karen.bodie@mavt.ethz.ch, simulation, here the authors make use of symbolic kinematic
vklemm@ethz.ch,morraa@ethz.ch). processing, where the mechanism can be decomposed and
Fabio Dubois and Marco Hutter are with the Robotic Systems Lab
solved recursively allowing higher iteration rates. [9] apply
(RSL), ETH Zürich, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland, (email: duboisf@ethz.ch,
mahutter@ethz.ch). stochastic optimization for the design of walking automata.
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 850
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Based on a heuristic cost function for stable walking the leg
design is optimized with the covariance matrix adaptation
(CMA) algorithm in looped physical simulation.
In the last couple of years, evolution of legged robots has
moved largely to open-chain actuation systems [10], [11],
[12], [13], [14], away from traditional walking machines
[15], [16]. While these actuator chains provide limitless
Fig.2:PictureofaWhippetdog.Astheupperpartandlower
possibilities for leg conﬁgurations, legged animals in nature
part of the leg are almost parallel at any time, the leg can be
have developed repetitive and efﬁcient gait cycles that are
simpliﬁed to a two bar linkage. For the centralized actuation,
robust to changing terrain [17]. For many types of terrain,
the linkage is closed, to form a parallelogram.
a cam-based mechanism with few actuators and inherent
compliance presents a promising alternative to the current donetokeeptheinertiaandsizeofeachlegjointrathersmall.
open-chain actuator concept that dominates legged robotic By extending the leg segments to form a parallelogram, the
development. entire actuation can be accomplished from the axis-aligned
joints connected to the body. This centralized conﬁguration
B. Our contribution
is used for example in the Ascento robot [1], which has the
Our contribution consists of a novel cam-based concept center of mass close to the main body to reduce the inertia
that solves the issue of traditional cam-based systems that of its legs.
are neither force complaint nor allow for adaptive behavior.
B. 2D-Rotating Cam
This work realizes and presents CAMI: The new concept of
a compliant variable cam system together with an automated A conventional cam system consists of a rotating cam that
parametric design framework in MATLAB [18]. transforms constant rotary motion into any desired linear or
Repetitive trajectory motionsare varied continuouslyalong rotary motion through a mechanical linkage. By letting a
an additional degree of freedom (DoF) with the help of contact element (e.g. a roller or a ball) follow the contour
a 3D-cam mechanism. As the cam mechanism performs a of a speciﬁcally designed constantly rotating cam shape,
position constrained movement, the leg mechanism itself is any desired motion within the constraints (6) given by the
not compliant to its surroundings and might damage the geometry can be adopted from the contact element.
cams upon external impact. Therefore, an integrated spring- To achieve the desired actuation of the parallel leg mecha-
like torque-cam is introduced. This series elasticity [19] nism, a deﬁned rotary motion is imposed on its links. The
allows for force compliance and robustness. The underlying cam contact element C is a roller mounted on a swivel lever
mathematical models are derived in Section II. OC whichisdirectlyconnectedtotheupperleglinks(Fig.3).
To validate the capabilities of this new mechanism, we In order to fully prescribe the leg position, two cam systems
present a physical prototype of a bipedal walking robot in are needed for each leg.
Section III. It uses a single motor to drive both its legs and E r (t) r (t) C ()
a second motor to transition seamlessly between gaits. We F˜rFE(t) E C D˜rDCt
focusedonaplanarmotion(sagittalplane)forsimplicity.The
R
resultsoftheperformedexperimentstovalidatetheprototype F˜rP(t) y˜ x F C y ˜ x  D˜rP(t)
are presented in Section IV and discussed in Section V. An F D D
extension to a three DoF leg system would be integrated y
r r
analogously with the proposed cam mechanism, possibly F D
O x
employed in a quadrupedal platform, able to walk statically
stable.
B
II. METHOD
A. Leg Geometry A
ThegoalofthisprojectistoshowthecapabilitiesofCAMI r (t)
A
with a leg mechanism that performs a planar motion. A set Fig. 3: Coordinates and geometry of a general cam driven
of two independent coordinates is needed to describe the leg mechanism.
position of the end effector, i.e. the foot. The end effector
Firstly,theinversekinematicsaresolvedtoobtainaunique
itselfisassumedtobeapoint,anditsorientationisneglected.
set of positions for the rollers C and E for any feasible
By observing the whippet dog as a natural reference, it
position r .
appears that the hind limb can be approximated by three A − −
r =f 1(r ), r =g 1(r ). (1)
connected links (Fig. 2). Inspired by this observation, we C A E A
select the geometry to be a closed-chain parallel linkage [20] The following derivation is performed for one cam only,
to imitate this simpliﬁed model of the whippet dog. i.e. the cam attached to the D˜ frame. It can be analogously
For actuation of the leg, a centralized conﬁguration is extended to the second cam attached to the F˜ frame or any
chosen rather than placing an actuator at each joint. This is cam with similar speciﬁcations.
851
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. limitations
(cid:20) (cid:21)
In the coordinate frame of the cam D, the trajectory
followed by the center point of the roller is given by:
cos(ω t) sin(ω t) −
r (t)= − D D (r (t) r ), (2)
D˜ DC sin(ω t) cos(ω t) C D
D D
!
where r denotes the vector pointing from D to C,
D˜ DC
represented in frame D˜, and ω represents the constant
D
angular velocity of the cam attached to D, i.e. the origin of
frame D˜. To ﬁnd the points of contact between roller and A B
ctoamb,ethoeffsceetntpeerrppoeinndticcuurlvarelyoftothethr(cid:20)eolmleor,tiio.en(cid:21). Dd˜irreDcCti(otn),onfeethdes Fcaigm. 4sh:aApe)s.LBarygefurloﬁlllleirngracdriiiteRrioCnc(a6n),laeafdeatsoibliempsoolsustiibolne
roller with respect to the cam frame. is guaranteed. B) Solution of a cam pair, that lets the end
effector follow the ETH-logo.
r (t)= r (t)+sign(ω ) −0 1 |D˜r˙DC(t)|R .
D˜ P D˜ DC D 1 0 r˙ (t) C
D˜ DC (3) coordinate frame. By choosing the z-position of the contact
element on the rotating 3D-cam, any desired cross-sectional
To calculate the cam shape with higher computational Dominik Mannhart 15.09.2019 !1
shape can be selected, and thus any desired motion of the
efﬁciency and to allow for trajectories that may not be
end effector carried out. This allows the transition between
describable in closed-form, a numerical approach is chosen:
different end effector trajectories to happen continuously
We descretize the time derivatives occurring in (3) by using
instead of in discrete, predeﬁned shapes, as seen in Fig. 5.
theEuler-Forwardscheme,resultinginﬁnitedifferences.That
For the 3D-cam, a contact ball is required in order to have a
way, any desired trajectory can be descretized as an array of
(cid:20) (cid:21) deﬁned contact point.
points, where the distance between two neighbouring points
directly relates to the velocity of the end effector:
r [i]= r [i]+sign(ω ) −0 1 |∆D˜rDC[i]|R ,
D˜ P D˜ DC D 1 0 ∆ r [i] C
D˜ DC
(4)
−
where ∆ r [i]= r [i+1] r [i]. (5)
D˜ DC D˜ DC D˜ DC
To ensure a guided motion of the contact element on the
cam, a mechanism is needed. Groove cuts are often used in A B
2D cams but are infeasible for 3D cams due to the additional Fig. 5: A) Polynomial interpolation through three end
DoF. Spring based mechanisms are also impractical as the effector trajectory objectives: Square, Triangle and Circle.
external forces can cause the swivel lever to loose contact B) Calculated 3D-cam D to execute this motion.
when exceeding the retaining spring force.
To derive the parametric surface of the 3D-cam, the
To address this challenge a novel approach is introduced
formulas derived in Section II-B now also have to factor
which uses two complementary cams for each swivel lever
in the contact height z. The main difference is the offset
(Fig. 1). This mechanism guides the movement uniquely
curve in (3) which now needs to be adapted for the contact
through the bilateral constraint. The shape of the counterpart
ball. The result r (t,z) obtained in (2) for the center
cam can be calculated by moving the rotation center rD to point trajectory, Di˜s eDxCtended (cid:20)to a three-di(cid:21)mensional vector
the other side of the lever.
r (t,z) to form a surface around the center axis:
To avoid an infeasible cam geometry, the curvature radius C,3D
of (cid:12)(cid:12)the center po(cid:12)(cid:12)int trajectory (2) must be gre(cid:20)ater t(cid:21)han the r (t,z)= D˜rDC(t,z) . (7)
(cid:12) (cid:12) C,3D z
roll(cid:12)er radius: (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(x˙2+−y˙2)32 ≥R , where r (t)= x(t) . (6) wThitehn,thtehefoflalcoewionfgfsectalfcourlatthioenc:ontact ball can be performed
x˙y¨ y˙x¨ C D˜ DC y(t) n
r (t,z)=r (t,z)+sign(ω )| C,3D|R , (8)
This criterion can be interpreted as a limit to the acceleration P,3D C,3D D nC,3D C
of the end effector. To follow a sharp corner, the end effector ∂ × ∂
where n = r (t,z) r (t,z). (9)
needs to decelerate and come to a full stop, such that C,3D ∂t C,3D ∂z C,3D
the velocity function remains smooth and continuous. A Similar to the 2D-cams discussed in Section II-B, 3D-cams
smallerrollerradiusR allowsformoredetailedendeffector have the same criteria to prevent overlapping in the rotational
C
trajectories like in the example of the Swiss Federal Institute direction. Furthermore, the curvature radius in the z-direction
of Technology Zurich (ETH)-logo (Fig. 4). has to be greater or equal to the contact ball radius as well,
resulting in a similar criterion to (6).
C. 3D-Rotating Cam
D. Gait Trajectory
The idea of the 3D-cam concept is to vary the cross-
sectional shape of a 2D-cam by extending it along its For the description of gait trajectories in the world frame,
rotational axis, deﬁned as the z-axis of the cam-ﬁxed we rely on a parametrization through a polynomial basis. By
852
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. choosing gait parameters as boundary conditions and solving With the spring function s(φ) found, the contact roller can
asetoflinearequations(Fig.6),nearlyanydesiredtrajectory be mounted in any conﬁguration w.r.t. the spring, and the
∗
can be well approximated. torque-cam can be calculated using the methods described in
†
Furthermore, the gaits are deﬁned to be symmetric for sim- Section II-B for the 2D-cam.
plicity. By re-sampling points on the trajectory, a sinusoidal
F. Force Compliance
velocity proﬁle is applied.
With the above methods derived to generate the torque-
phase start dt cam, an adequate torque function is now evaluated for the
ﬂatness
CAMI mechanism. Our approach consists of describing the
desired compliance behaviour in the task space of the end
lift-oﬀ angle height
effector and to map these objectives to joint space to attain
% stance phase
the best ﬁtting torque function. The compliance behaviour
stride length can be described with any desired force ﬁeld F(x,y) around
Fig.6:Parametersthatdeﬁnethegaittrajectory.Forasmooth the end effector, Fig. 8. If the end effector is moved from
gait transition these parameters are varied by polynomial its prescribed position r to a disturbed position r ,
A,des A,dist
interpolation and re-sampled to obtain the desired velocity the end effector tries to return to its prescribed position by
−
proﬁle with constant ground speed. applying a reaction force F(r r ).
A,dist A,des
E. Torque Cam
The torque-cam system can be seen as a torsional spring
element, following a desired torque function τ (φ) (Fig. 7).
des
To turn the torque-cam, external work W (φ) needs to be
cam
applied. This energy is stored internally by the pretensioned
spring in form of potential spring energy E . Due to
spring
energyconservation,thesumoftheseenergytermsisconstant:
(cid:90) A B
E (∆s)+W (φ) =C,
spring cam
1 φ (10) Fig. 8: A) Desired force ﬁeld around the end effector. B)
2k∆s2+ τdes(φ)dφ =C. Fitted torque function τ(φ) through the point cloud.
0
Once a desired force ﬁeld is deﬁned, the required torque
The torque τ is deﬁned to be 0 at φ = 0 and the
des (cid:41) value is mapped onto a τ-φ-space for ten different leg
initial spring deﬂection at this point ∆s . With these initial
0 positions within the range of motion needed for the gaits
conditions, the constant C can be calculated as
deﬁned by the gait creator. For each leg position, the end
τ(φ=0) =0 ⇒ C = 1k∆s2. (11) effectorisdeviatedwithinaﬁnelyspacedgrid(100×100).A
∆s(φ=0) =∆s 2 0 polynomial function of 7th order is then ﬁtted throughout the
0
resulting 105 points to deﬁne the optimized torque function
(10) can be solved for the deﬂection ∆s to obtain a relation
(cid:115) τ(φ).Withthisnumberofevaluatedpointssufﬁcientaccuracy
between the torque cam rotation φ(cid:90) and the spring deﬂection
could be ensured, whilst keeping the computational effort
∆s for any desired torque function τ (φ):
des reasonable.
− 2 φ With the torque-cams implemented into the CAMI system,
∆s(φ)= ∆s2 τ (φ)dφ. (12)
0 k des the legs now allow for a compliant behaviour. To compensate
0
the body’s weight, the gaits are modiﬁed (Fig. 9) to follow
C a force proﬁle F (t) (Fig. 16), which also considers the
pr
) weight distribution between its two legs.
(ϕ
Δs
III. EXPERIMENTALSETUP
+
s0 A. Hardware Prototype
O A
ϕ The discretized 3D-cam shape obtained in Section II-B
following the gaits derived in Section II-F are imported into
a Computer Aided Design (CAD) environment and shaped
Fig. 7: Design and coordinates of a general torque-cam. With
to form the 3D-cams (Fig. 10).
thespringdeﬂectionfunction∆s(φ)found,themotionofthe The CAMI leg mechanism has a modular design. Two
roller C can be described by placing the spring anywhere at CAMI-"blocks" can be connected to build a bipedal system,
the links OA and AC. The torque-cam shape is then derived where still only one main motor is needed to actuate the
with the methods shown in Section II-B.
legs. Scaling of the leg size can be chosen freely, but is
∗
We note here that the polynomial basis is a design choice, which
†
enables an intuitive description of the gait trajectory through its deﬁning Weassumethatthedynamicsofthespringaresigniﬁcantlyfasterthan
features. therotationofthetorquecam,thustheproblemcanbeanalyzedstatically.
853
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. force trajectory generator
objective trajectory
Dynamixel 
Camera-Tracked 
desired trajectory Gait Measurement Torque Measurement
0° R = 100 mm
Kinovea  R = 200 mm
Motion-Tracking Theoretical RoM 
Practical RoM 
Fig. 9: To compensate the body weight, the gait trajectory is z 45° Optimal RoM
modiﬁed to follow the desired trajectory (black) with force x Rokubi 
Dominik Mannhart 15.09.2019 !15 Force Measurement
compliance provided by the torque cam. Without gravity, the
end effector would follow the objective trajectory (red).
Fig. 12: An overview of the experimental setup; A camera is
mounted on the side to track the swivel lever position and
estimate the gait; the torque measurement in the Dynamixel
main motor is estimated by the current; motion tracking of
the end effector, knee, hip, swivel, lever and the treadmill
is performed with the software Kinovea and the Rokubi
sensor is used to measure forces applied onto the treadmill.
The theoretical RoM, the practically reachable space by this
A B C D E
Fig. 10: The resulting point cloud from our MATLAB implementation and the optimal operational space, which is
framework (A) is ﬁtted with splines (B), a surface (C) is deﬁned by the space where the leg mechanism can bear its
swept through the resulting curves, the surface is ﬁlled to maximum load without violating construction constraints, are
form a body (D) and shelled (E) to form the ﬁnal 3D-cam marked in blue, red, and green respectively.
in CAD software.
the ground-reaction forces exerted by the foot contact, the
subject to a trade-off between size and loads on the system. treadmillissuspendedontopofaRokubi6-axisforcesensor.‡
As its size is inversely proportional to the forces it can apply,
long links will lead to high loads on the CAMI-mechanisms IV. RESULTS
whereas short legs only allow for small gaits but are more A. CAMI Speciﬁcations
robust.Synchronizationofthemechanismisachievedthrough
Speciﬁcations of the current CAMI prototype are shown
a single toothed belt for each leg. To actuate the CAMI
in Table I.
mechanism the "Dynamixel MX-64R" servomotor is used.
To change the gait, the contact point on the 3D-cam is Category Value
moved laterally by sliding the swivel levers on the rods. Weight 2.309kg
× × × ×
This sliding motion can be adjusted by the user through a LL×WW ×HHwwithitohultelgesgs 36429×717817×82471∼7830m1mmm
secondary actuator, as shown in Fig. 11. Max.walkingspeed 124mm/s
Min.gaittransitiontime 2s
Max.loadperleg 25.5N
Max.tractionforce 30N
TABLE I: Geometrical and performance speciﬁcations of the
current CAMI prototype.
B. Motion Tracking
The motion of the end effector is assessed through the
motion tracking software Kinovea [21]. An overlay of
the experimental results with the desired trajectories from
Fig. 11: This rendering shows the lower D-cam and F-cam. MATLAB shows the accuracy of the cam mechanism, see
The black contact balls follow the shape of the 3D-cams Fig. 13. The root mean squared error (RMSE) of the two
and pass their motion through the sliding swivel levers onto trajectories averaged over six different gaits is 2.47mm with
the central brass rods. These rods are then joined with the a standard deviation of 1.63mm for link lengths of 100mm.
torque-cams implemented into the upper leg links.
C. Speed
B. Sensorized Treadmill
To measure the speed of CAMI throughout different gaits,
To test the motion of the CAMI end effector in interaction
the robot is placed onto the sensorized treadmill (Fig. 12).
with the ground, a passive sensorized treadmill was devised
The main actuator is set to a constant speed and the gait is
as shown in Fig. 12. A belt drive with 3D-printed stepping
elements features a light-weight and low-inertia design ‡
A high accuracy 6-axis force/torque sensor. See https://www.
allowingfornonstopmotionexperiments.Inordertomeasure botasystems.com.
854
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 13: Overlay of the experimental results with the de-
sired trajectories from MATLAB for 6 different gaits with
corresponding sample points highlighted in gray.
Fig. 15: A) Torque overlaid with motion tracking to illustrate
spacial energy consumption. B) Dependency of motor torque
andvelocityfordifferentgaits.C)Torquerequiredthroughout
different gait cycles.
Fig. 14: Velocity of the walking robot measured on the
treadmill throughout different gaits (black). The measured
left and simulated right leg movement are shown in red and
blue.
smoothly transitioned from standing to walking fast (Fig. 14).
Fig. 16: Overlay of the desired force proﬁle from MATLAB,
Thenon-smoothnessofthevelocityproﬁleduringslowgaitsis
themeasuredverticalforceonthetreadmillandthecalculated
causedbytheimperfectbeltdriveofthetreadmill.Compared
downwardforcebymotiontrackingthetorque-camdeviation.
to the desired MATLAB-velocities, the RMSE is 1.38mm/s
with a standard deviation of 0.99mm/s for the faster gaits. forces. The concept is realized in the form of a bipedal robot,
D. Torque presentingthemechanicaldesignofaworkingprototype.The
CAMI system is further validated in bipedal walking tests
The performance of the mechanism is evaluated by mea-
on a force-sensing treadmill.
suring the torque applied by the primary motor. The results
Thepresentedconceptfunctionsasdesiredwithinitsdesign
inFig.15showthatmosttorqueisrequiredduringthestance
intent and is even able to walk with suspension wheels.
phase. Furthermore, the amplitude of the torque waveform
For applications in mostly predictable environments, the
becomes more equalised for faster gaits, whereas for slow
inherent compliance allows for reasonable terrain adaption.
gaits the energy consumption ﬂuctuates. The motor speed
We encourage the reader to watch the accompanying video
correlates linearly with the required torque.
for further graphical explanation and to see the CAMI robot
E. Force in action.
The last experiment analyzes the force applied to the A possible future work includes the individual gait tran-
treadmillthroughoutdifferentgaits(Fig.16).Comparedtothe sition of each leg, to allow for turning. Furthermore, since
desiredforceproﬁlefromMATLAB,aRMSEof1.34Nwitha the CAMI-mechanism is not constrained to walking, any
standarddeviationof1.08Nwasmeasured.Bycomparingthe number of 3D-cams can be coupled to add more DoF to
measurement to the motion-tracked torque-cam deviation, the the mechanism. For example with three 3D-cam systems a
series elastic component could be validated as well, showing delta-robot could be designed, which is able to move its end
a RMSE of 0.77N with a standard deviation of 0.59N. Both effector along any desired 3D-trajectory.
calculated errors are averaged over three gait cycles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
V. CONCLUSIONANDDISCUSSION
We show the complete design formulation of a novel The authors would like to thank Jessica Stromer for
compliant and variable 3D-cam actuation concept for a her support in manufacturing the prototype and testing
continuous set of periodic motions. An additional series environment, as well as Klajd Lika and Ilias Patsiaouras
elastic component is introduced, which allows to design a from BOTA Systems to provide the calibrated Force/Torque
desired compliance behaviour subject to end effector contact sensor for the prototype testing.
855
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] V.Klemm,A.Morra,C.Salzmann,F.Tschopp,K.Bodie,L.Gulich,
N.Küng,D.Mannhart,C.Pﬁster,M.Vierneiseletal.,“Ascento:A
two-wheeledjumpingrobot,”2019IEEEInternationalConferenceon
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),pp.7515–7521,May2019.
[2] Dominik Mannhart and Victor Klemm. Bachelor Thesis "ETIUM"
TeaserVideo.Youtube.[Online].Available:https://youtu.be/bhliprgoiVs
[3] JeanTinguely.Tinguely@Tinguely.ANewLookatJeanTinguely’s
work.Youtube.[Online].Available:https://youtu.be/GmrDEX4P5l8
[4] TheoJansen.STRANDBEESTEVOLUTION2017.Youtube.[Online].
Available:https://youtu.be/LewVEF2B_pM
[5] M.MohsenizadehandJ.Zhou,“Kinematicanalysisandsimulationof
theojansenmechanism,”Ph.D.dissertation,LamarUniversity,2015.
[6] S. Coros, B. Thomaszewski, G. Noris, S. Sueda, M. Forberg,
R. W. Sumner, W. Matusik, and B. Bickel, “Computational
design of mechanical characters,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 32,
no. 4, pp. 83:1–83:12, Jul. 2013. [Online]. Available: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/2461912.2461953
[7] B.Thomaszewski,S.Coros,D.Gauge,V.Megaro,E.Grinspun,and
M.Gross,“Computationaldesignoflinkage-basedcharacters,”ACM
Trans. Graph., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 64:1–64:9, Jul. 2014. [Online].
Available:http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2601097.2601143
[8] M. Bächer, S. Coros, and B. Thomaszewski, “Linkedit: Interactive
linkage editing using symbolic kinematics,” ACM Trans. Graph.,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 99:1–99:8, Jul. 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2766985
[9] G. Bharaj, S. Coros, B. Thomaszewski, J. Tompkin, B. Bickel, and
H.Pﬁster,“Computationaldesignofwalkingautomata,”inProceedings
ofthe14thACMSIGGRAPH/EurographicsSymposiumonComputer
Animation,ser.SCA’15. NewYork,NY,USA:ACM,2015,pp.93–
100.[Online].Available:http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2786784.2786803
[10] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, A. Lauber, F. Gunther, C. D. Bellicoso,
V. Tsounis, P. Fankhauser, R. Diethelm, S. Bachmann, M. Bloesch,
H.Kolvenbach,M.Bjelonic,L.Isler,andK.Meyer,“Anymal-toward
legged robots for harsh environments,” Advanced Robotics, vol. 31,
no.17,pp.918–931,2017.
[11] C.Semini,V.Barasuol,J.Goldsmith,M.Frigerio,M.Focchi,Y.Gao,
and D. G. Caldwell, “Design of the hydraulically actuated, torque-
controlledquadrupedrobothyq2max,”IEEE/ASMETransactionson
Mechatronics,vol.22,no.2,pp.635–646,2016.
[12] N. A. Radford, P. Strawser, K. Hambuchen, J. S. Mehling, W. K.
Verdeyen,A.S.Donnan,J.Holley,J.Sanchez,V.Nguyen,L.Bridg-
wateretal.,“Valkyrie:Nasa’sﬁrstbipedalhumanoidrobot,”Journal
ofFieldRobotics,vol.32,no.3,pp.397–419,2015.
[13] G.Bledt,M.J.Powell,B.Katz,J.D.Carlo,P.M.Wensing,andS.Kim,
“Mitcheetah3:Designandcontrolofarobust,dynamicquadruped
robot,”2018IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobots
andSystems(IROS),pp.2245–2252,2018.
[14] BostonDynamics.IntroducingSpotMini.Youtube.[Online].Available:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tf7IEVTDjng
[15] S.-M. Song and K. J. Waldron, Machines that walk: the adaptive
suspensionvehicle. MITpress,1989.
[16] K.WaldronandR.McGhee,“Theadaptivesuspensionvehicle,”IEEE
ControlSystemsMagazine,vol.6,no.6,pp.7–12,1986.
[17] R.M.Alexander,“Thegaitsofbipedalandquadrupedalanimals,”The
InternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,vol.3,no.2,pp.49–59,
1984.
[18] MATLAB, version 9.6.0 (R2019a). Natick, Massachusetts: The
MathWorksInc.,2019.
[19] G. Pratt and M. Williamson, “Series elastic actuators,” in
Proceedings1995IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligent
Robots and Systems. Human Robot Interaction and Cooperative
Robots. IEEE Comput. Soc. Press. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/iros.1995.525827
[20] A.Sprowitz,A.Tuleu,M.Vespignani,M.Ajallooeian,E.Badri,and
A.Ijspeert,“Towardsdynamictrotgaitlocomotion:Design,control,
andexperimentswithcheetah-cub,acompliantquadrupedrobot,”The
InternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,vol.32,072013.
[21] J.Charmant,“Kinovea,”https://www.kinovea.org,2019.
856
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 