 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)  
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Proof-of-concept of a Pneumatic Ankle Foot Orthosis Powered by a 
Custom Compressor for Drop Foot Correction  
Sangjoon J. Kim, Junghoon Park, Wonseok Shin, Dong Yeon Lee and Jung Kim, Member, IEEE 
  
Abstract— Pneumatic transmission has several advantages in 
developing powered ankle foot orthosis (AFO) systems, such as 
the  flexibility  in  placing  pneumatic  components  for  mass 
distribution  and  providing  high  back-drivability  via  simple 
valve  control.  However,  pneumatic  systems  are  generally 
tethered to large stationary air compressors that restrict them 
for being used as daily assistive devices. In this study, we 
improved a previously developed wearable (untethered) custom 
compressor that can be worn (1.5 kg) at the waist of the body 
and  can  generate  adequate  amount  of  pressurized  air 
(maximum pressure of 1050 kPa and a flow rate of 15.1 mL/sec 
at 550 kPa) to power a unilateral active AFO used to assist the 
dorsiflexion (DF) motion of drop-foot patients. The finalized 
system can provide a maximum assistive torque of 10 Nm and 
induces an average 0.03±0.06 Nm resistive torque when free 
movement is provided. The system was tested for two unilateral 
drop-foot patients. The proposed system showed an average 
improvement of 13.6° of peak dorsiflexion angle during the   
Fig. 1 System overview of the fully portable pneumatic AFO.  
swing phase of the gait cycle.  
I.  INTRODUCTION  To minimize such counterproductive effects, a lightweight 
portable  soft  exosuit  was  developed  with  garment-like, 
The number of people with age related disabilities and 
functional textile anchors and cable-based transmissions [5], 
impairments have been steadily increasing worldwide [1], [2]. 
[6], [11]–[13]. Electric motors and Bowden cables were used 
Among the wide range of realms of possible disabilities, gait 
to remotely transmit the force generated at the waist of the 
related impairments have been of great interest as walking is a 
body to the ankle. In this way, the system was configured so 
fundamental function of one’s daily routine. As solutions to 
that heavy mechanical and electrical components were placed 
resolve such burdens, many forms of ankle foot orthoses 
closer to the trunk of the body (center of mass of the body), 
(AFO) have been actively developed to provide functional 
and therefore greatly reducing the metabolic penalty to the 
independence to people with gait abnormality.   
wearer and minimizing distortion of the natural motion.  
With  the  recent  advances  in  actuator  and  sensors 
In case of remote actuation with cable-based transmission, 
technology,  a  great  amount  of  research  efforts  has  been 
the tension in cables is a critical aspect that must be considered 
directed towards the development of powered AFOs. Powered 
for high bandwidth force transmission, back-drivability and 
AFOs are developed to provide assistive force/torque for 
robot-to-user  compliance  [14].  High  tension  in  cables  is 
plantarflexion (PF) or dorsiflexion (DF) of the ankle according 
desirable in perspective of the control bandwidth for force 
to the gait phase to improve forward propulsion symmetry or 
transmission, however can lead to undesired resistive forces 
assist foot clearance [3]–[8]. Many of these systems showed 
causing  discomfort  to  the  wearer.  Assistive  force  also 
promising results in improving foot clearance and in reducing 
becomes a function of the cable position or posture of the 
compensatory gait patterns (kinematic asymmetry) such as hip 
wearer, properties of the textile anchors and structure and 
hiking  or  circumduction.  However, despite  the noticeable 
compliance of the human tissue that supports the anchors [14]. 
improvements  in  functional  performance,  the  usages  of 
Therefore,  complex  pre-tensioning  control  algorithms  are 
systems  that  have  considerable  masses,  bulky  sizes  or 
required.  
off-board  actuators  hold  limitations  in  the  practical 
perspective. It has been reported that small mass additions to  Another widely used remote actuation method in wearable 
the ankle can affect the natural biomechanics during gait and  systems is using pneumatic transmission [4], [12], [15]–[19]. 
has large penalties in terms of the net metabolic rate [9], [10].   Pneumatic transmission has many advantages in wearable 
  robotic  applications  since  there  is  flexibility  in  placing 
*This  work  was  supported  by  the  Bio  &  Medical  Technology  pneumatic components because bending of air tubes does not 
Development Program of the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded  significantly affect the transmission output. This allows to 
by the Korean government (MSIP) (No. NRF-2017M3A9E2063101)  easily distribute the weight of the system over the body. The 
S. Kim, J. Park, W. Shin and J. Kim are with the Korea Advanced Institute  inherent compliance generated by the compressibility of air 
of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 305701, Republic of Korea 
also allows safe user to robot interaction without additional 
(phone: +82-42-350-5270; e-mail: jungkim@kaist.ac.kr).  
control or elastic mechanisms. Moreover, back-drivability can 
D. Lee. is with the Dept. of Orthopedic Surgery at Seoul National 
University Hospital, Republic of Korea (e-mail: leedy@snu.ac.kr).  be easily and effectively realized with simple valve control.  
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 747
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
However,  in  order  to  provide  sufficient  assistive 
force/torque for wearable robotic systems, generally, large 
stationary  air compressors  with  high output pressure  and 
flowrate are required. In this study, based on our previous 
work  on  developing  a  high  output  pressure  portable 
compressor [20], we propose a fully portable pneumatic AFO 
system.  The  flow  rate  of  the  custom  compressor  was 
optimized  to  provide  sufficient  pressure  for  periodic 
assistance of drop-foot patients with weak dorsiflexor muscles. 
For the design of the AFO system, to minimize the effect of 
additional mass attached to ankle, unnecessary and heavy 
components were placed at the trunk of the wearer and the 
AFO was simplified.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section II includes the 
hardware design and characterization of the fully portable 
pneumatic AFO system and the control algorithm for drop foot 
assistance. Section III includes system validation by testing 
 
the proposed system on two unilateral drop foot patients. 
(a) 
Finally, possible improvements that can be made to the system 
and our future work are discussed in Section IV.  
II.  HARDWARE DEVELOPMENT 
The  overall  system  can  be  divided  into  two  parts:  a 
pneumatic AFO and a trunk unit (Fig. 1). All components 
with considerable mass including the custom compressor, 
controller, battery pack and air reservoir were included to the 
trunk unit. The mass distribution of the key components of the 
proposed system are as shown in Fig. 2-(a). 
A.  Hardware design of the pneumatic AFO 
 
The main components of the pneumatic AFO are an output  (b) 
Fig. 2 (a) System overview with masses of the key components. Most of the 
pneumatic  cylinder,  a  metallic  slider-crank  mechanism, 
mass is attached to the trunk of the body to minimize metabolic penalty and 
custom thermoplastic braces, two 2-way solenoid valves, a  kinematic asymmetry. The pneumatic AFO can be worn within the pants. (b) 
pressure sensor, a magnetic encoder and two custom optical  highly modular MOLLE vest to place components on the trunk. 
type ground reaction force (GRF) sensors as shown in Fig. 
as shown in Fig. 3-(b). The moment arm (R) is a function of 
3-(a).  
the stroke of the pneumatic cylinder (l ). The output torque 
The two 2-way solenoid valves (EC-2-12, Clippard, USA)  cyl
(T ), therefore, varies depending on the angle of the ankle, 
are used to supply and discharge pressurized air to the output  assist
θ , by 10 %. As cross-sectional area of the cylinder is 
cylinder (SD16N75-B, Taiyo, Japan) and the pressure sensor  ank
proportional to assistive torque, with higher cylinder pressure 
(PSE540, SMC, Japan) is used to monitor the pressure of the 
the cylinder size can be reduced leading to a lighter AFO.  
output cylinder. An absolute magnetic encoder (I2A systems, 
Rep. of Korea) was installed to monitor the ankle flexion  A.  Trunk unit 
angle and the two custom optical GRF sensors were installed  The trunk unit consists a custom compressor, a controller 
on the foot brace at the toe and heel for gait phase detection  (NI-myRIO-1900, National Instruments, USA) attached to a 
[20], [21]. The thermoplastic braces were designed so that the  custom master board, an air reservoir and a 33.6 V Li-ion 
pneumatic AFO can be worn within the shoe and pants.  battery pack (33.6 V for 5.7 Ah, Powercraft, Rep. of Korea) 
A  basic  slider  crank  mechanism  was  implemented  to  as shown in Fig. 2-(a). On the custom master board, there are 
transform the linear motion of the pneumatic cylinder to  two solenoid valve drivers (EVPD-2, Clippard, USA), a buck 
rotational motion for the ankle joint. The output torque, Tassist,  converter to step-down the 33.6 V battery to 12 V and 24 V, a 
provided by the output cylinder can be calculated with the  pressure sensor (ISE30A, SMC, Japan) and a DC motor 
following equation,   driver (G2 High-Power Motor Driver 24v13, Pololu, USA) to 
Fcyl = PcylAcyl  (1)  control the custom compressor. A more detailed explanation 
of the custom compressor is included in the following section. 
The custom master board is connected to the pneumatic AFO 
T = F R sin(α +β)  (2) 
assist  cyl 
via a 1.2 m cable. The cable was bounded together with an air 
where Fcyl is the force generated by the output cylinder, Pcyl is  tube (6 mm diameter) using braided cable sleeves. All sensor 
the pressure of the cylinder, Acyl is the cross-sectional area of  data  acquired  at  the  master  board  is  transferred  to  the 
the cylinder, R is the moment arm and α and β are the angles  controller. Data is saved within the controller and can also be 
748
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
transferred to a PC in real-time for monitoring via Wi-Fi. All 
mechanical  and  electrical  components  were  distributed 
evenly over the trunk using a MOLLE vest (VTAC LBE 
Tactical  Vest,  5.11  Tactical,  USA)  and  sizable  MOLLE 
pouches (Fig. 2-(b)). The high modularity and compatibility 
of pouches allowed varying the locations of each component 
and distributing the masses as desired.  
B.  Custom pneumatic compressor  
There are a few portable pneumatic energy sources that 
have been introduced throughout the literature for wearable 
robotic applications [22]–[31]. There are sources that rely on   
direct chemical reactions [22], [23], [25]–[28], [32], sources  (a) 
that use compressed gases or liquids in a vessel or sources that 
mechanically compress ambient air from the atmosphere [4], 
[7]. All sources carry distinct advantages and innovative 
results  have  been  reported  showing  great  potentials  for 
wearable applications. In this study, based on our previous 
work [33], we implemented a high pressure custom dual 
piston crank compressor that is powered by a DC motor. It is 
a safe (hazard free), clean (no chemical byproducts) and 
robust method to continuously generate high pressure air 
based on electric power which makes it suitable for daily 
applications.  In  this  study,  we  improved  the  previously 
 
developed compressor by optimizing the rate of compression  (b)                                                (c) 
Fig. 3 (a) Overview of the active ankle foot orthosis (AFO). Two 2-way 
to  the  rate  of  air  consumption  required  to  power  the 
solenoid valves are used to control the supply and discharge of pressurized air 
pneumatic AFO.   to the output cylinder.  (b) Kinematic model of the slider crank mechanism 
The design requirement of the custom compressor was set  used to transfer the linear motion of the output cylinder to rotational motion 
and (c) the moment arm, R, with respect to the stroke of the output cylinder 
to  power  the  unilateral  pneumatic  AFO  for  drop  foot 
(l ). The stroke of the output cylinder is 0.075 m. 
correction. Drop foot patients commonly have difficulty in  cyl
 
foot clearance during the swing phase of the gait cycle (GC), 
thus only requiring assistive torque during this phase. The 
assistive torque required for full dorsiflexion for patients with 
spasticity or muscle weakness was set to 10 Nm. With (1) and 
(2),  the  minimum pressure required  to generate  10  Nm, 
considering the variation in the moment arm (R), is 550 kPa. 
We have selected a functional frequency of 1 Hz based on the 
average stride of adults [34].   
With these requirements, the main goal was to accumulate 
sufficient amount of pressurized air in the reservoir during the 
stance phase (when no assistive torque is required), then 
transmitting the accumulated pressurized air to the output 
cylinder  by  controlling  the  supply  valve  (V )  and 
supply  
discharge valve (Vdischarge) during the swing phase. Therefore,  Fig. 4 Dual crank compressor to power the proposed AFO. The custom 
sufficient amount of air must be accumulated during the  compressor is 1.5 kg. 
stance  phase  which  is  generally  60  %  of  the  GC  or 
 
approximately 0.6 s [34]. Therefore, considering the output  Q = 1.91 V (2K)  (3) 
c
cylinder  volume  of  the  AFO,  the  theoretical  rate  of 
compression must meet 550 kPa at a rate of 15.1 mL/s to  where Vc is the volume that is compressed during a single 
accumulate enough pressurized air during the stance phase.   compression cycle (volume at TDC) and K is the nominal 
We have utilized the identical dual piston crank parameters  number of rotations per second of the DC motor. 1.91 is the 
as introduced in [33], but have replaced the DC motor that  ratio between the maximum pressure, 1050 kPa, and the 
powers the compressor.  Depending on the rotational velocity  required pressure, 550 kPa. 2 is a factor due to the double 
of the DC motor, the rate of compression (Q)  can be changed.  piston. A DC motor (RE35, Maxon Motor, Switzerland) with 
The maximum flow rate to generate 550 kPa of pressurized  a nominal velocity that meets the requirement to compress 
air can be calculated as,   15.5 mL/s of 550 kPa of pressurized was selected.  The 
experimental evaluation of the compressor is given in the 
749
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
following section.   Trunk unit Pressure 2-way valve Pressure
C.  Control strategy  sensor (Discharge) sensor Output 
cylinder
Custom optical GRF sensors are used to detect different 
phases during the GC. The GC is divided into four phases  Custom
Compressor
(heel strike, foot flat, heel off and toe off) based on the  2-way valve
activation of the sensors. The sensors provide a continuous  (Supply)
Reservoir
analog output voltage; therefore, the activation is determined   
based on a user-defined threshold level.   (a) 
During the entire GC, the custom compressor is activated  Trunk unit Pressure 2-way valve Pressure
at nominal ratings. When stance phase of the GC is detected,  sensor (Discharge) sensor Output 
V  is closed blocking the transfer of pressurized air from  cylinder
supply
the reservoir and air tubing to the output cylinder. This leads  Custom
to the accumulation of pressurized air in the reservoir and air  Compressor
2-way valve
tubing  up  to  the  point  of  the  V   (Fig.  5–(a)). 
supply (Supply)
Instantaneously, V  is opened so that air within the  Reservoir
discharge  
output cylinder can freely move back and forth between the  (b) 
environment (atmosphere). This allows free movement of the  Fig. 5 Pneumatic circuit of the system. (a) During the stance phase, Vsupply is 
closed and the V is opened. This allows free movement of the ankle and 
ankle during the stance phase. Generally, the weight of the  discharge 
accumulation of air in the reservoir. (b) During the swing phase, the 
body  allows  drop-foot  patients  to  achieve  normal  ankle  accumulated air is supplied to the output cylinder to assist dorsiflexion. 1.2m 
kinematics.   air tubing between the trunk unit and pneumatic AFO. 
During the swing phase, as assistive torque is required by 
the  proposed  AFO,  the  accumulated  pressurized  air  is 
transferred to the output cylinder by controlling V  and 
supply
V  in an on-off manner (Fig. 5–(b)). The swing phase 
discharge
starts with the toe off state and ends with heel strike.  
D.  System validation 
The proposed system was tested to validate if sufficient 
amount of pressurized air can be accumulated during the 
stance phase of the GC. The experimental setup is as shown in 
Fig. 5. The DC motor of the custom compressor was activated 
at nominal ratings and a continuous feedforward 1.67 Hz 
square voltage waveform was applied to the two solenoid 
valves. The square voltage inputs were inverted for V  and 
supply
V . The excitation frequency of the square waves was 
discharge
 
selected  considering  that  the  stance  phase  of  the  GC  is 
(a) 
approximately 0.6 s during overground walking [34]. This 
excitation is equivalent to the condition of a 0.6 s stance phase 
followed  by  a  0.6  s  swing  phase.  Fig.  6-(a)  shows  the 
resulting reservoir and output cylinder pressure. Since the 
reservoir of the pneumatic circuit was initially empty, it takes 
approximately 8 s to generate full desired pressure in the 
output cylinder. During this period, as we optimized the 
compressor to generate 550 kPa at a rate of 15.1 mL/s (to 
achieve 10 Nm), however, not as much is being consumed (or 
exhausted) at the output cylinder, air accumulates within the 
reservoir. However, after 8 s, as the rate of compression and 
the rate of air consumption becomes identical, the output 
pressure saturates at approximately 550 kPa. The saturated 
maximum pressure of the output cylinder can be reduced 
depending on the required output torque by activating the DC 
motor  of  the  custom  compressor  at  slower  rotational   
(b) 
velocities.  
Fig. 6 (a) Reservoir and output cylinder pressure when custom compressor 
The back-drivability of the system was also tested. As  was activated with nominal ratings and a square wave form with a frequency 
aforementioned, free movement is provided during the stance  of 1.67 Hz was fed to the two 2-way solenoid valves. (b) Resistive torque 
during a full GC. Free movement is only allowed during the stance phase; 
phase (0~60% of the GC). The pressure of the output cylinder 
however, the full GC was tested.  
750
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
was measured during this period while V  is closed and  Table 1  Demographic information of the two foot drop patients 
supply
V  was opened. With the pressure of the output cylinder,  Age  Weight  Height  Chronicity 
discharge Patient  Paretic 
the resistive torque applied due to the ankle can be estimated  No.  yr  Gender  kg  cm  side  yr 
using  (2).  The  resistive  torque  generated  from  the  AFO 
during this period is as shown in Fig. 6-(b). The generated  S01  63  Male  68.9  173.4  Left  8 
resistive torque was highly correlated to the velocity profile, 
namely, due to viscous friction. An average resistive torque of  S02  61  Female  64.4  152.0  Left  1 
0.03±0.06 Nm was generated during 0~60 % of the GC.  The 
peak resistive torque during the stance phase was 0.18 Nm. 
Note that the peak resistive torque during the swing phase is 
approximately 0.81 Nm and the average resistive torque is 
0.04±0.21 Nm, however, is not considered in this study as 
assistance is applied during this phase. 
III.  UNILATERAL DROP FOOT PATIENT WALKING TEST 
A.  Experimental setup  
To  validate  the  feasibility  of  the  proposed  system  in 
assisting hemiplegic drop foot gait, a test was conducted on 
two unilateral drop foot patients. Both patients were able to 
walk independently for 10 min without rest. The experiment   
Fig. 7 Experimental setup for the patient walking test.  
focused on evaluating the effect of the proposed system in 
assisting foot dorsiflexion while not disturbing natural gait 
during the stance phase. Detailed demographic information of 
the  patients  who  have  participated  in  the  experiment  is 
reported in Table 1.  
Patients were asked to walk along a 9-m track equipped 
with 12 motion capture cameras (Motion Analysis, USA). 
Data was collected with a sampling rate of 120 Hz. The 
three-dimensional accuracy of the system is less than 0.6 
(standard  deviation  0.2-0.3)  mm.  Intra-  and  inter-session 
repeatability  of  motion  analysis  was  reliable  (intra-class 
correlation  coefficients  for  lower  extremity  motion, 
0.93-0.99). The experimental setup is as shown in Fig. 7.  
For three different conditions: walking 1) with common 
commercial shoes, 2) with the proposed AFO unpowered 
(AFO ) and 3) with the proposed AFO powered (AFO ). 
OFF ON
For the two AFO conditions, identical shoes with condition 1)    
(a) 
was used. We use the common commercial shoe as the 
baseline, instead of the barefooted condition, to minimize the 
effect of the error in optical marker attachment.  
For each condition, the patients were asked to walk ten laps 
of the 9-m track. For the AFO condition, the compressor 
OFF 
was not powered and the discharge valve was opened to 
provide free ankle movement. For the AFO  condition, the 
ON
velocity of the DC motor for the custom compressor was 
adjusted  for  each  participant  so  that  positive  ankle 
dorsiflexion  angle  was  achieved  during  the  swing  phase 
(60~100% GC). Approximately, 0˚ ankle dorsiflexion angle 
during the swing phase can prevent major falls during gait [5].  
All walking conditions were self-paced and a 10 min resting 
period was provided between each condition. All walking 
trials were supervised by a licensed physical therapist (PT). 
The average of five representative strides was used in the 
analysis. Joint kinematics was calculated using Visual 3D    
(b) 
software (C-Motion Inc., USA). The experimental protocol 
Fig. 8 Ankle flexion angle in the sagittal plane of S01. a) the ankle with drop 
was approved by the International Review Board of Seoul  foot and b) the unaffected ankle. The shaded regions show the standard 
National  University  Hospital  (SNUH).  Written  informed  deviation of the five representative walking trails. Positive values are the 
consent and assent were obtained from each participant.   dorsiflexion angle and negative values are the plantar flexion values. 
751
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
the AFO, leading to bulky system size and weight [4]. The 
blockage of air tubing due to freezing from endothermic 
expansion  of  highly  pressurized  gases  must  also  be 
considered  since  gait  assistive  devices  require  repeated 
continuous high flow of pressurized fluids.  
In this study, we introduced the concept of applying a 
compressor that mechanically compresses ambient air using 
an electric motor. This is a safe (no major safety hazards) and 
clean  (no  chemical  byproducts)  method  to  generate 
compressed air. The output pressure levels and compression 
rate  of  the  compressor  can  be  designed  and  optimized 
according to the power requirements of the wearable device 
(another example is shown in [18], [19]). The use of electrical 
power (Li-ion battery pack) to produce pressurized air is an 
advantage as most robotic systems require electrical power 
 
for  sensors  and  controllers,  therefore  not  requiring  an 
Fig. 9 Average dorsiflexion angle for five steps during 70~100% of the GC 
with standard deviations.  additional power source. 
The current mechanical output of the custom compressor, 
Table 2 Mean and standard deviation of the ankle dorsiflexion angle during  however,  is  approximately  8W  which  is  relatively  low 
70~100% GC 
compared to most previously introduced AFO systems. In the 
Cond.  Shoe  AFOOFF  AFOON  current version of the compressor, we have mainly focused on 
producing large maximum pressure, approximately 1050kPa, 
S01  -11.2±1.1  -2.9±1.0  5.5±0.6 
to reduce the output cylinder size used in the AFO (the 
S02  -4.2±0.8  -0.6±0.6  6.2±0.6  cross-sectional  area  of  the  pneumatic  cylinder  can  be 
  reduced).  As  shown  in  [33],  starting  from  800  kPa, 
considerable  air  leakage  between  the  piston  head  and 
B.  Results  
compression cylinder was observed. In our future work, we 
In this study, we focused on the immediate improvements 
will  lower  the  compression  ratio  while  increasing  the 
in the ankle kinematics with DF assistance, not on long-term 
compression rate so that we can achieve the same output but 
changes  that  may  arise  from  sustained  usage.  Ankle 
with less leakage. We will also improve the sealing between 
kinematic  data  in  the  sagittal  plane  for  five  steps  of  a 
the piston head and compression cylinder of the compressor.  
representative patients is as shown in Fig. 8. Ankle flexion 
In terms of the AFO system, we have not considered the 
angle is defined using the coordinate system as shown in Fig. 
accurate timing of assistance and have only tested the system 
3-(b). Positive values are for ankle dorsiflexion and negative 
with a basic ON/OFF controller which is activated based on a 
for plantar flexion. The average plantarflexion angle during 
70~100% of the GC for the three conditions (shoe, AFO   user-defined  GRF  detection  algorithm.  This  led  to  the 
OFF
and AFO ) is shown in Fig. 9. The mean and standard  hindrance during ankle push off state. In our future work, we 
ON
deviations  are  shown  in  Table  2.  An  average  13.6°  will  systematically  investigate  the  response  time  of  the 
improvement in peak dorsiflexion was achieved between the  transmission system and the effect of gait phase detection 
shoe and AFO  condition. Dorsiflexion angle also improved  time, to improve the timing of assistance.  
ON
by an average of 6.0° for the AFO  condition. This was due 
OFF
to viscous friction of the output cylinder during the swing  REFERENCES 
phase. 
[1]  G. Anderson and J. Horvath, “The growing burden of chronic 
disease in America,” Public Health Rep., vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 
IV.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  263–270, 2004. 
[2]  M. Ory, M. K. Hoffman, M. Hawkins, B. Sanner, and R. 
Previously,  an  fully  portable  pneumatic  AFO  system  Mockenhaupt, “Challenging aging stereotypes: Strategies for 
powered by a compressed CO  vessel has been developed and  creating a more active society,” Am. J. Prev. Med., vol. 25, no. 3 
2
SUPPL. 2, pp. 164–171, 2003. 
analyzed  [4][7].  The  system  was  the  first  fully  portable 
[3]  J. A. Blaya and H. Herr, “Adaptive Control of a 
pneumatic system and promising clinical results have been  Variable-Impedance Ankle-Foot Orthosis to Assist Drop-Foot 
reported showing the advantages of pneumatic transmission  Gait,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 
24–31, 2004. 
throughout  the  literature.  The  use  of  high-pressure  fluid 
[4]  K. A. Shorter, G. F. Kogler, E. Loth, W. K. Durfee, and E. T. 
vessels, however, have several limitations. Due to the limited  Hsiao-Wecksler, “A portable powered ankle-foot orthosis for 
duration of operation, vessel replacements or increased size  rehabilitation,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 459–472, 
and weight of the vessels is required which can be undesirable  2011. 
[5]  L. N. Awad et al., “A soft robotic exosuit improves walking in 
for wearable applications. Furthermore, additional pressure 
patients after stroke,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 9, no. 400, pp. 1–13, 
regulation components are required, to modulate the high  2017. 
supply pressure to pressure levels that can be used to power  [6]  L. N. Awad et al., “Reducing Circumduction and Hip Hiking 
During Hemiparetic Walking Through Targeted Assistance of the 
752
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
Paretic Limb Using a Soft Robotic Exosuit,” Am. J. Phys. Med.  [27]  K. Kim, Y. Hong, K. Kim, and S. Kim, “Design of a compact 
Rehabil., vol. 96, no. 10, pp. S157–S164, 2017.  pneumatic power generator with a self-regulating mechanism for 
[7]  M. K. Boes et al., “Six-Minute Walk Test Performance in Persons  mobile application,” IEEE Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 4435, no. c, 
With Multiple Sclerosis While Using Passive or Powered  pp. 1–9, 2017. 
Ankle-Foot Orthoses,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 99, no. 3,  [28]  A. Kitagawa, H. Wu, H. Tsukagoshi, and S.-H. Park, 
pp. 484–490, 2018.  “Development of a portable pneumatic power source using phase 
[8]  J. Kwon, J. Park, S. Ku, Y. Jeong, N. Paik, and Y. Park, “A Soft  transition at the triple point,” Trans. Japan Fluid Power Syst. Soc., 
Wearable Robotic Orthosis for Ankle Rehabilitation of Post-Stroke  vol. 36, pp. 158–164, 2005. 
Patients,” pp. 2–8, 2019.  [29]  K. B. Fite and M. Goldfarb, “Design and rnergetic characterization 
[9]  R. C. Browning, J. R. Modica, R. Kram, and A. Goswami, “The  of a proportional-injector monopropellant-powered actuator,” 
effects of adding mass to the legs on the energetics and  IEEE Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 196–204, 2006. 
biomechanics of walking,” Med. Sci. Sport. Exerc., vol. 39, no. 3,  [30]  M. Okui, Y. Nagura, Y. Yamada, and T. Nakamura, “Hybrid 
pp. 515–525, 2007.  pneumatic source based on evaluation of air compression methods 
[10]  R. L. Waters and S. Mulroy, “The energy expenditure of normal  for portability,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 
and pathologic gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 9, pp. 207–231, 1999.  819–826, 2018. 
[11]  L. M. Mooney, E. J. Rouse, and H. M. Herr, “Autonomous  [31]  M. Wehner et al., “Pneumatic energy sources for autonomous and 
exoskeleton reduces metabolic cost of human walking during load  wearable soft robotics,” Soft Robot., vol. 2, no. 00, pp. 1–12, 2014. 
carriage,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 11, no. 1, p. 80, 2014.  [32]  R. F. Shepherd et al., “Using explosions to power a soft robot,” 
[12]  P. Malcolm, W. Derave, S. Galle, and D. De Clercq, “A Simple  Angew. Chemie Int. Ed., vol. 52, pp. 2892–2896, 2013. 
Exoskeleton That Assists Plantarflexion Can Reduce the Metabolic  [33]  S. J. Kim, H. Chang, J. Park, and J. Kim, “Design of a Portable 
Cost of Human Walking,” PLoS One, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1–7, 2013.  Pneumatic Power Source with High Output Pressure for Wearable 
[13]  Z. F. Lerner et al., “An untethered ankle exoskeleton improves  Robotic Applications,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 
walking economy in a pilot study of individuals with cerebral  4351–4358, 2018. 
palsy,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 26, no. 10, pp.  [34]  H. Stolze et al., “Gait analysis during treadmill and overground 
1985–1993, 2018.  locomotion in children and adults,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. 
[14]  A. T. Asbeck, R. J. Dyer, A. F. Larusson, and C. J. Walsh,  Neurophysiol. - Electromyogr. Mot. Control, vol. 105, no. 6, pp. 
“Biologically-inspired soft exosuit,” IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil.  490–497, 1997. 
Robot., 2013.   
[15]  P. Malcolm, P. Fiers, V. Segers, I. Van Caekenberghe, M. Lenoir, 
and D. De Clercq, “Experimental study on the role of the ankle 
push off in the walk-to-run transition by means of a powered 
ankle-foot-exoskeleton,” Gait Posture, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 322–327, 
2009. 
[16]  D. P. Ferris, K. E. Gordon, G. S. Sawicki, and A. Peethambaran, 
“An improved powered ankle-foot orthosis using proportional 
myoelectric control,” Gait Posture, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 425–428, 
2006. 
[17]  P. C. Kao, C. L. Lewis, and D. P. Ferris, “Invariant ankle moment 
patterns when walking with and without a robotic ankle 
exoskeleton,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 203–209, 2010. 
[18]  U. Heo, S. J. Kim, and J. Kim, “Backdrivable and Fully-Portable 
Pneumatic Back Support Exoskeleton for Lifting Assistance,” 
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1–1, 2020. 
[19]  J. Park, J. Choi, S. J. Kim, K. Seo, and J. Kim, “Design of an 
Inflatable Wrinkle Actuator with Fast Inflation / Deflation 
Responses for Wearable Suits,” vol. 3766, no. c, pp. 1–7, 2020. 
[20]  S. J. Kim, G. M. Gu, Y. Na, J. Park, Y. Kim, and J. Kim, “Wireless 
Ground Reaction Force Sensing System Using a Mechanically 
Decoupled Two-Dimensional Force Sensor,” IEEE/ASME Trans. 
Mechatronics, vol. 4435, no. c, pp. 1–1, 2019. 
[21]  J. Park, S. J. Kim, Y. Na, Y. Kim, and J. Kim, “Development of a 
Bendable Outsole Biaxial Ground Reaction Force Measurement 
System,” 2019. 
[22]  M. Goldfarb, E. J. Barth, M. A. Gogola, and J. A. Wehrmeyer, 
“Design and energetic characterization of a 
liquid-propellant-powered actuator for self-powered robots,” 
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 254–262, 
2003. 
[23]  Y. Hong, S. Member, K. Kim, K. Kim, and S. Kim, “A novel 
pneumatic generator with pressure-feedback mechanism for 
self-injection of hydrogen peroxide,” IEEE Trans. Mechatronics, 
vol. 4435, no. c, pp. 1–11, 2017. 
[24]  T. G. McGee and J. W. Raade, “Monopropellant-driven free piston 
hydraulic pump for mobile robotic systems,” J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. 
Control, vol. 126, no. March 2004, pp. 75–81, 2017. 
[25]  H. Wu, A. Kitagawa, H. Tsukagoshi, and C. Liu, “Development of 
a novel pneumatic power assisted lower limb for outdoor walking 
by the use of a portable pneumatic power source,” Proc. IEEE Int. 
Conf. Control Appl., no. October, pp. 1291–1296, 2007. 
[26]  M. Gogola, E. J. Barth, and M. Goldfarb, “Monopropellant 
powered actuators for use in autonomous human-scaled robotics,” 
Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., vol. 3, no. May, pp. 
2357–2362, 2002. 
753
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 