2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
How far are Pneumatic Artiﬁcial Muscles from biological muscles?
(cid:3)
Omid Mohseni1; , Ferre´ol Gagey2, Gouping Zhao3, Andre Seyfarth3 and Maziar A. Sharbaﬁ1;3
Abstract—There is a long history demonstrating humans’ forces between the inner tube and the outer mesh. A few
tendency to create artiﬁcial copies of living creatures. For static PAM models have been proposed based on the PAM
moving machines called robots, actuators play a key role in
working principles (energy conservation, virtual work) [14-
developing human-like movements. Among different types of
17]. By adding friction components to the static model from
actuation, PAMs (pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles) are known as
the most similar ones to biological muscles. In addition to [14], Tang and Liu developed a dynamic PAM model that
similarities in force generation mechanism (tension based), the describedthePAMforceasahighorderpolynomialfunction
well-accepted argumentation from Klute et al., states that the of pressure, contraction length and velocity, and external
PAM force-length (fl) behavior is close to biological muscles, loads[18].Sharbaﬁetal.[19]derivedadynamicPAMmodel
while the force-velocity (f ) pattern is different. Using the
v by ﬁtting a polynomial function to the measured data. The
multiplicative formulation of the pressure (as an activation
term), f and f beside an additive passive parallel elastic PAMforcewasmodeledasathird-orderpolynomialfunction
l v
element, we present a new model of PAM. This muscle-based of PAM pressure, contraction length, and velocity [19]. All
modelcanpredictPAMdynamicbehaviorswithhighprecision. thesemodelscandescribethePAMbehaviorstosomeextent,
Withasecondexperimentonatwo-segmentedleg,theproposed
butthereisnowell-acceptedPAMmodelthatcanaccurately
modelisveriﬁedtopredictthegeneratedforcesofPAMsinan
mimic the PAM dynamics and can be easily implemented
antagonistic arrangement. Such a dynamic muscle-like model
of artiﬁcial muscles can be used for the design and control of in simulations. In addition, although the PAM has similar
legged robots to generate robust, efﬁcient and versatile gaits. properties as biological muscles (e.g., tunable stiffness and
inherentcompliance),itremainsunclearhowfarthePAMis
I. INTRODUCTION
from the biological muscle. Therefore, the goal of this study
Skeletal muscles in animals and humans can be consid- is to derive an accurate dynamic PAM model which has a
ered as biological actuators which exert joint torques and similarstructureasthatofthebiologicalmusclemodel(Hill-
generate movement. It has been shown that the intrinsic type[20])sothatwecaninvestigatethesimilaritiesbetween
muscle properties (inherent compliance, i.e., muscle force- the PAM and the biological muscle.
length and force-velocity relationships) play an important In this paper, we present a systematic approach to model
role in generating stable, robust and efﬁcient locomotion PAMs as biological muscles and to identify the parameters.
behaviors[1-4].Therefore,employingactuatorswithmuscle- Then experimental studies are performed to verify the iden-
like properties in legged robotic systems can be beneﬁcial. tiﬁed PAM models and evaluate their performance. Finally,
In the current robotic systems, the McKibben type pneu- the similarities between the PAM and the biological muscle
maticartiﬁcialmuscle(PAM)isoneofthemostwidelyused are analyzed and discussed.
muscle-like actuators because of its simplicity and low-cost
II. METHODS
manufacturing[5],[6].Comparedtoothertypesofactuators
(i.e., electric motors and hydraulic actuators), PAMs provide A. PAM Identiﬁcation Experiment
more beneﬁts in the conditions where high energy density, The experimental setup used in this study for identifying
low added mass, almost no reﬂected inertia, and inherent the PAM parameters is shown in Fig. 1. It is similar to the
compliance are required. For instance, in robotic legs [7], setup described in the previous study in [19]. It consists of
[8], robotic arms [9], [10], and exoskeletons [11-13]. a brushless DC motor (E8318-120KV, Hymotor, China), a
APAMiscomprisedofaninnerrubbertube(expandable) PAM, and a force sensor (ALM-170, AMOS, Germany), all
surrounded by an outer mesh sheath (made from nonelastic connectedinserieswithnon-stretchableDyneemaropes.The
Nylon ﬁbers). It is rather difﬁcult to build an accurate PAM elongation was calculated by the motor angle and the
analytical PAM model because of the nonlinearity of force- radius of the pulley. The PAM air pressure was measured
lengthrelationshipsintherubberandthecomplexinteraction by an air pressure sensor (PSE 530, SMC, Japan). A Matlab
xPC (2015b, Mathworks, USA) target machine was used to
1Omid Mohseni and Maziar A. Sharbaﬁ are with School of
ECE, Control and Intelligent Processing Center of Excellence control the motor and collect data at 1kHz.
(CIPCE), College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran. In the PAM identiﬁcation experiment, the PAM was ﬁrst
o.mohseni,sharbafi@ut.ac.ir inﬂated to a certain initial pressure (with rope being slack).
2Ferre´ol Gagey is with E´cole normale supe´rieure Paris-Saclay.
ferreol.gagey@ens-paris-saclay.fr The initial pressure ranges from 200kPa to 600kPa. Then a
3Gouping Zhao, Andre Seyfarth and Maziar A. Sharbaﬁ forcecontrollerwasappliedtostretchtherope(desiredforce
are with Lauﬂabor Locomotion Lab, Centre for Cognitive of10N).Themotorencoderdatainthisconditionwereused
Science, TU Darmstadt, Germany. zhao,seyfarth,
to calculate the PAM rest length. Finally, the motor velocity
sh(cid:3)arbafi@sport.tu-darmstadt.de
Correspondingauthor was controlled with a randomized proﬁle for 200 seconds.
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1909
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Dyneema rope we found the combination of CE and PEC the most useful
PAM motor one to represent the PAM|behavi{ozr [23].} | {z }
F (P;l;v)=PFf (l)f (v)+Ff (l) (4)
PAM la v lp
air pressure sensor
Active Passive
force sensor pulley whereP,landvdenotethedependencyofthePAMforceon
the instantaneous pressure, PAM length, and PAM velocity
(i.e., rate of length variation), respectively. The parameter
Fig. 1: Schematic of PAM identiﬁcation experimental setup.
F is a constant playing the role of a ﬁxed gain for the
output PAM force; as in F in (1). Here, the active
max
and passive parts represent the CE and PEC in biological
B. Muscle-like Modeling of PAM
muscles, respectively. The inner functions (f and f ) in (4)
l v
Since PAMs offer characteristics like being light-weight are considered as follows:
and inherently compliant (due to the compressibility of air) f (l)=1+a l+a l2+a l3
la 0 1 2
and also due to their decreasing load-contraction relation,
f (v)=1+b v (5)
they are often regarded and referred to as human skeletal v 0
f (l)=c +c l
muscles. Though several research studies have attempted lp 0 1
to model these actuators from different perspectives (e.g., where[a ;a ;a ],[b ],and [c ;c ] areunknowncoefﬁcients
0 1 2 0 0 1
geometrical, phenomenological, or empirical) [21], still to to be determined. It is also noteworthy to mention here
the best of our knowledge no well-accepted dynamic model that the above functions are selected based on the PAM
has been proposed. In this study, we present a new dynamic measurement data, which will be discussed in more details
model inspired by the muscle tendon complex model. in Section III. The form of the model proposed here in (4)
The key elements in the muscle modeling are Contractile reﬂects that the PAM dynamics is governed by an active
Element (CE) and Elastic components in Series (SEC) or part (CE) with P as the activation, and a passive part (PEC)
in Parallel (PEC). In the Hill-type muscle model [20], the working in parallel. Though other types of inner functions
generated force by the CE (F ) is given by: rather than polynomials may be used for f and f , these
CE l v
polynomials are found sufﬁcient to provide accurate force
F (A;l ;v )=AF f (l )f (v ) (1)
CE CE CE max l CE v CE estimation in later experiments.
where A is the muscle activation level. In addition, lCE, C. Parameter Identiﬁcation Protocol
v and F are the muscle length, contraction speed and
CE max The ﬁrst step to identify the model parameters is to create
maximum isometric force, respectively. For the force-length
[ (cid:12) (cid:12) ] training and testing sets of data. For that, we randomly
f (l ) and the force-velocity(cid:12)f (v ) re(cid:12)lations, here we
l CE (cid:12) v CE (cid:12) split the experimental data to ensure that the training and
explain the equations introduced(cid:12) by [22]. (cid:12)
testing sets are similar which in turn minimizes the effects
(cid:0)
l l 3 of data discrepancies. Here, we divided the data into two
fl(lCE)=exp c CEl wopt (2) sets: one with 75% of the source data, for training the
opt
model and one with 25% for testing. For calculating the
where lopt is the optimal CE length, w denotes the width of coefﬁcients [a0;a1;a2], [b0], [c0;c1] and [F] in (4), we used
the bell-shap8ed fl(lCE) curve and c is a constant value that the fminsearch function in Matlab with random initial
cfan(vbec)onissid>><aserfeodllaoswtsh:emusclestiffness.Theforce-velocity cnounmdeitriiocanls.oOptfimciozuartisoen, imtesthhooudlsdcbaen nboeteedmphleoryeedthaats owthelelr.
v CE
(cid:0)
>>: vmax vCE Finally, for evaluating the performance of the ﬁtted model,
v <0 weinputtedthetestingdatasetintothemodelandcalculated
v +(cid:20)v CE ∑
fv(vCE)= max (cid:0)CE v +v (cid:21) the renowned R2 coefﬁcient of determination metric which
N +(N 1) max (cid:0)CE v 0 is deﬁned as: ∑
7:56(cid:20)vCE vmax CE (cid:0)
(3) (cid:0) (y f )2
R2 =1 i i (cid:0) i (6)
where, vmax, (cid:20) and N are constant values representing the i(yi y(cid:22))2
maximum contraction velocity, the curvature constant and
where y and f denote the testing and estimated data
the eccentric force enhancement. i i
samples, respectively. Also y(cid:22) is the mean of the testing
A quick glance at (1) shows that the CE force is in fact dataset.
obtained by multiplication of four terms. It also reveals that
D. Veriﬁcation Experiments
the force is dependent on the length (l ) and velocity
CE
(v ). Motivated by this, we seek to ﬁnd a similar rela- Identiﬁcation of a model’s unknown parameters based
CE
tionship for describing the PAM force as a function of its on a given set of data does not necessarily guarantee the
related parameters. Among different combination of parallel correctnessoraccuracyofthemodelinfaceofeverypossible
and serial elastic elements for describing muscle behavior scenario. A comprehensive and well-identiﬁed model must
1910
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. the PAM parameters are identiﬁed correctly. Calculating the
R2 coefﬁcientforthisdatasetalsoshows98.12%correlation.
Itmustbealsonotedherethattheaforementionedevaluation
process stated here was repeated for two other PAMs with
differentlengths(12and22cm)anditwasshownthatﬁtting
our muscle-like model (4) on PAMs yielded R2 correlations
of above 98%. The identiﬁed coefﬁcients of the model for
all of the three PAMs are summarized in Tab. I.
The general behavior of our PAM model with its consid-
eredpolynomialinnerfunctions(5)canbebetterunderstood
by comparing it to the muscle inner functions in (2)and (3).
For comparison, the values of muscle parameters are chosen
commensurate with those reported in [24]. The normalized
force-length graphs for both PAM and muscle are shown
in Fig. 4a. For normalizing the PAM force-length relation-
ship, we divided the length and force by their maximum
values. This way the PAM force-length ﬁgure can be easily
compared to that of muscle which is already normalized
according to (2). However, it must be noted here that the
muscle force-length is plotted only in the interval where it
reaches its optimal length (i.e., l ). Now, it can be seen
opt
from Fig. 4a that the cubic polynomial considered for the
PAM force-length mimics the rising edge of the muscle
Fig.2:ExperimentalsetupusedforveriﬁcationofthePAMs. force-length, except the plateau at the end. In addition,
Fig. 4b displays the force-velocity of PAM and muscle.
Again here, the related graph for the PAM is normalized
then be applicable to other possible conditions and applica- for comparison. An insight into this ﬁgure shows that the
tionsratherthanjusttheoneitistunedfor.Inthisregard,we nonlinearforce-velocityofthebiologicalmuscleissimpliﬁed
tried to verify our proposed bioinspired PAM model (4) in a to a linear relation in a limited range which is shown by
different experimental setup to provide supportive evidence the thick line. By performing identiﬁcation tests in a wider
for sufﬁciently accurate prediction of PAM behavior. For rangeofcircumstances,itcanbeexpectedthatthebehavioral
that, we installed two PAMs in an antagonistic arrangement patterns of our PAM model observed in here (either force-
onajointofatwo-linkrobot;seeFig.2.Ascanbeseenfrom length or force-velocity relations) better mimic those of
this ﬁgure, a pair of PAMs denoted by extensor and ﬂexor biological muscles.
with lengths of 22 and 16cm respectively are placed on a
joint for actuation. The experiments for verifying the model B. PAM Veriﬁcation
are conducted in two cases: 1) the robot link is actuated by In order to evaluate our proposed PAM model and verify
an electrical motor to move sinusoidally and the PAMs are its accuracy, we conducted two experiments wherein two
inﬂatedwithaﬁxedamountofairpressure,and2)therobot PAMs are located antagonistically on a joint; see Fig. 2.
link is actuated directly by sinusoidal inﬂation/deﬂation of In the ﬁrst experiment, both PAMs are inﬂated with a
the PAMs and the motors are turned off. constant 500kPa air pressure and the joint motor is moved
sinusoidallywhilethePAMvalvesareclosedentirelyduring
III. RESULTS
the whole experiment; meaning no air pressure is let in or
A. PAM Identiﬁcation
out.Wethencapturedthejointangle,velocity,instantaneous
In order to identify the parameters of our model (4), we pressure of the PAMs and also their force via the xPC target
used the dataset from Subsection II-A. An insight into this in Matlab, Simulink. Thereafter, these measurements were
dataset(foraPAMwithalengthof16cm)whichisdepicted inputted into their corresponding PAM models to give us an
in Fig. 3a shows the nonlinear dependency of PAM output estimate of the force. The experimental results are shown
force on its length, velocity and pressure. To better observe in Fig. 5. In this ﬁgure, the measured forces are compared
the relations between different PAM parameters which may with those of the model both for the extensor (Fig. 5a) and
not be clear in this 3D curve, one can refer to [19]. ﬂexor (Fig. 5b). Calculating the R2 metric yields 97.9% and
Usingthetrainingdataandtheproposedmuscle-likePAM 97.4%fortheextensorandﬂexorforces,respectively;which
model (Eqs. 4 and 5) we predict the generated force for the indicates that the identiﬁed PAM models still hold for this
testing data. The comparison between the experimental data experiment.
andmodelprediction(forthePAMwith16cm)isillustrated In the second experiment, however, the electrical mo-
in Fig. 3b. The randomly zoomed area in this ﬁgure show tors were turned off and the PAMs were controlled in a
thatthemodeliswell-ﬁttedtotheexperimentaldataandthus sinusoidal manner with 500kPa magnitude and 180 de-
1911
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 200
Experiment
Model
150
100
50
80 80.5 81
(a) (b)
Fig. 3: (a) Experimental data acquired from the PAM identiﬁcation experiments in different initial pressures (ranging from
200 to 600kPa) for a PAM with the length of 16cm. (b) Real PAM force versus PAM output force from modeling. An
interval of one second is zoomed here for illustration purposes and better comparison.
(a) (b)
Fig. 4: Comparison between muscle and PAM in terms of force-length and force-velocity dependency.
TABLE I: Identiﬁed model parameters of PAMs
F a a a b c c
0 1 2 0 0 1
PAM (22cm) 0.3235 16.99 -298 3600 -0.16 -592.32 6430
PAM (16cm) 0.2849 25.22 -267 7600 -0.22 -499.54 7488
PAM (12cm) 0.1562 104.93 -2064 80500 -0.36 -482.38 6338
gree phase difference. The frequency was also set to 1Hz. PIDcontrolledusingthepressuremeasurementsasfeedback
Needless to say, as a result of such actuation, the robot variables. Fig. 6 illustrates the results obtained from this
joint moves sinusoidally. For conducting this experiment, experiment and it shows that the model’s estimated force
each PAM was equipped with two continuous valves (PVQ- acceptably resemble the measured force both in terms of
series proportional solenoid valves), one for supplying the pattern and magnitude, which in turn shows the validity
air pressure and one for exhausting it. Then, PAMs were of our model. The discrepancies between the model and
1912
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Measured Model
Measured Model
(a) (b)
Fig. 5: Comparison of PAMs’ measured forces with PAM model during sinusoidal movements of the robot link by means
of an electrical motor. (a) shows the results for the extensor and (b) displays the force for the ﬂexor PAM.
Measured Model Measured Model
(a) (b)
Fig.6:ComparisonofthemeasuredforceofthePAMswiththeforceoutputtedfromourPAMmodelduringanantagonistic
actuation experiment of the PAMs. (a) shows the results for the extensor and (b) displays the force for the ﬂexor PAM.
experimental results observed in here are due to the fact in light of our knowledge about biological muscle proper-
that the PAMs’ identiﬁcation experiments (Subsection II-A) ties. Different models have been developed for explaining
wereperformedwithconstantamountofairpressuresinside biological muscle behaviors and they are all comprised of
the PAMs. Overall, according to the obtained experimental contractile and passive elastic elements [25], [26]. In our
outcomes, it can be concluded that our proposed bioinspired empiricalinvestigations,wealsofoundthataCE(contractile
PAM model (4) is well-identiﬁed and accurate for cases element)besideaPEC(parallelelasticcomponent)canbetter
where the amount of air pressure inside the PAM is kept predict the PAM dynamics compared to previous studies.
constant,anditworksacceptablyinotherpracticalscenarios This bioinspired model plus a serial tendon could better
with variable pressure, as in the second experiment. approximate biological muscle behaviors [27].
IV. DISCUSSIONS
Withtheproposedcombinationofactive(CE)andpassive
In this study, we introduced a new perspective in un- (PEC) elements, different behavioral patterns can be better
derstanding the PAM (pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle) behavior understood. This way, the identiﬁed force-length and force-
1913
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. velocity relations of the active part were better represented. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Here, the similarity between the biological and artiﬁcial
The authors would like to thank Mitsuhiro Yabu and
muscle models is twofold: 1) structural level and 2) control
Prof. Koh Hosoda (Osaka University) for supporting us
level when they are considered as tunable impedance.
to develop the experimental setup and also thank Ayoob
Similarity in structural level: The results show that multi-
Davoodi (University of Tehran) for his helpful discussions.
plication of different functions of force versus velocity and
This research is supported by the DFG-Funded EPA Project
length, and the injected pressure as the activation signal is
under Grant AH307/2-1 and Grant SE1042/29-1.
crucial to understand the artiﬁcial muscle behavior. Previous
studiesondevelopingmodelsbyconsideringcombinationsof REFERENCES
differentfunctionsofpressure,lengthandvelocity[19],[28]
[1] Karin GM Gerritsen, Anton J van den Bogert, Manuel Hulliger, and
never described separate spring or damper like behaviors of
Ronald F Zernicke. Intrinsic muscle properties facilitate locomotor
the PAMs. From this viewpoint, multiplicative formulation controla computer simulation study. Motor control, 2(3):206–220,
and increasing and decreasing relations, respectively, for 1998.
[2] Monica A. Daley, Alexandra Voloshina, and Andrew A. Biewener.
force-length and force-velocity with comparable patterns to
Theroleofintrinsicmusclemechanicsintheneuromuscularcontrol
biological muscles are two important features of PAMs in of stable running in the guinea fowl. The Journal of Physiology,
thestructurallevel.Theintroducedformulation(4)isthekey 587(11):2693–2707,2009.
to expose the underlying dynamical behavior of PAMs. This [3] D F B Haeuﬂe, S Grimmer, and A Seyfarth. The role of intrinsic
muscle properties for stable hopping—stability is achieved by the
waythepresentedmodelcanpredictthesecond(veriﬁcation)
force–velocity relation. Bioinspiration & Biomimetics, 5(1):016004,
experimental results. Despite the general patterns of the f feb2010.
l
and f in PAMs which are comparable with their biological [4] Ayoob Davoodi, Omid Mohseni, Andre Seyfarth, and Maziar A
v Sharbaﬁ. From template to anchors: transfer of virtual pendulum
counterparts, the most signiﬁcant difference is the smaller
posturecontrolbalancetemplatetoadaptiveneuromusculargaitmodel
damping effect in the PAM compared to muscles. These increaseswalkingstability. RoyalSocietyopenscience,6(3):181911,
outcomes are in line with ﬁndings of Klute et al. [29]. 2019.
[5] Bertrand Tondu. Modelling of the mckibben artiﬁcial muscle: A
Control level:Similartotheactivationsignalinbiological review. Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures,
muscles, air pressure can be considered as an input signal 23(3):225–253,2012.
[6] Daniela Rus and Michael T. Tolley. Design, fabrication and control
to tune these muscles’ impedance. Multiplication of the
ofsoftrobots. Nature,521:467–475,052015.
activation signal with the intrinsic behaviors of the muscles [7] KohHosoda,TakashiTakuma,AtsushiNakamoto,andShinjiHayashi.
enable the system to be considered as variable impedance Biped robot design powered by antagonistic pneumatic actuators for
multi-modallocomotion.RoboticsandAutonomousSystems,56(1):46
actuators [30]. This property is very useful for locomotion
–53,2008. HumanTechnologies:Know-how.
control. Recently, PAMs are employed as variable compli- [8] K.Ogawa,K.Narioka,andK.Hosoda. Developmentofwhole-body
ances in a hybrid actuation design called EPA (electric- humanoid pneumat-bs with pneumatic musculoskeletal system. In
2011 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
pneumaticactuator)[19].Morerecentstudiespresentedtheo-
Systems,pages4838–4843,Sep.2011.
reticalmethodstodesignparallelcompliancesforincreasing [9] B. Tondu, S. Ippolito, J. Guiochet, and A. Daidie. A seven-degrees-
efﬁciency and robustness in locomotion [31], [32]. With our of-freedom robot-arm driven by pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles for
humanoid robots. The International Journal of Robotics Research,
proposedmodel,PAMscanbeutilizedtodesigntherequired
24(4):257–274,2005.
impedanceforincreasingefﬁciencyandrobustnesssupported [10] Festoairic’sarm.https://www.festo.com/group/en/cms/10247.htm.
by stability analyses. [11] M. Wehner, B. Quinlivan, P. M. Aubin, E. Martinez-Villalpando,
M. Baumann, L. Stirling, K. Holt, R. Wood, and C. Walsh. A
Based on the proposed model, we also implemented a lightweightsoftexosuitforgaitassistance.In2013IEEEInternational
Simulink model of PAM as a new actuator block. In this ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,pages3362–3369,May2013.
model, for each length and velocity (of the PAM) calculated [12] Yong-Lae Park, Bor rong Chen, Ne´stor O Pe´rez-Arancibia, Diana
Young,LeiaStirling,RobertJWood,EugeneCGoldﬁeld,andRadhika
by the kinematic relations, and the injected amount of air,
Nagpal. Design and control of a bio-inspired soft wearable robotic
the force F is calculated. If the valves are closed, the device for ankle–foot rehabilitation. Bioinspiration & Biomimetics,
PAM
instantaneous pressure can be also estimated based on a 9(1):016007,jan2014.
[13] PhilippeMalcolm, Samuel Galle, WimDerave,and Dirk DeClercq.
similar formulation to be set as another input in actuator
Bi-articular knee-ankle-foot exoskeleton produces higher metabolic
block. The developed PAM Simulink model can be used for costreductionthanweight-matchedmono-articularexoskeleton.Fron-
further simulations in the future. tiersinneuroscience,12:69–69,032018.
[14] Ching-Ping Chou and B. Hannaford. Measurement and modeling of
Since in the identiﬁcation experiment, the valves were mckibbenpneumaticartiﬁcialmuscles.IEEETransactionsonRobotics
closed, we did not expect to precisely predict the exper- andAutomation,12(1):90–102,Feb1996.
[15] N. Tsagarakis and D. G. Caldwell. Improved modelling and assess-
imental results while air ﬂow changes the amount of air
mentofpneumaticmuscleactuators.InProceedings2000ICRA.Mil-
insidethePAMsandconsequentlythedynamicbehavior.For lenniumConference.IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsand
this reason, the prediction precision of the experiments with Automation.SymposiaProceedings(Cat.No.00CH37065),volume4,
pages3641–3646vol.4,April2000.
closed valves (Fig. 5) was better than that of with controlled
[16] B.TonduandP.Lopez. Modelingandcontrolofmckibbenartiﬁcial
valves(Fig.6).However,withsuchafundamentaldifference musclerobotactuators.IEEEControlSystemsMagazine,20(2):15–38,
our model capability in prediction of the PAM behavior April2000.
[17] M. Doumit, A. Fahim, and M. Munro. Analytical modeling and
is noticeable. In the future, identiﬁcation experiments with
experimental validation of the braided pneumatic muscle. IEEE
controlled valves could further improve the model. TransactionsonRobotics,25(6):1282–1291,Dec2009.
1914
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [18] RuiyiTangandDikaiLiu.Anenhanceddynamicmodelformckibben modiﬁed hill versus an exponential decay model. Biological Cyber-
pneumatic muscle actuators. In Proceedings of the Australasian netics,83(6):491–500,2000.
ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,Wellington,NZ,USA,pages [27] TobiasSiebert,ChristianRode,WalterHerzog,OlafTill,andReinhard
3–5,2012. Blickhan. Nonlinearities make a difference: comparison of two
[19] MaziarAhmadSharbaﬁ,HirofumiShin,GuopingZhao,KohHosoda, common hill-type models with real muscle. Biological cybernetics,
and Andre Seyfarth. Electric-pneumatic actuator: A new muscle for 98(2):133–143,2008.
locomotion.InActuators,volume6,page30.MultidisciplinaryDigital [28] Ching-PingChouandBlakeHannaford. Measurementandmodeling
PublishingInstitute,2017. of mckibben pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles. IEEE Transactions on
[20] AVHill.Theheatofshorteningandthedynamicconstantsofmuscle. roboticsandautomation,12(1):90–102,1996.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, [29] GlennKKlute,JosephMCzerniecki,andBlakeHannaford.Mckibben
126(843):136–195,1938. artiﬁcial muscles: pneumatic actuators with biomechanical intelli-
[21] Eleni Kelasidi, George Andrikopoulos, George Nikolakopoulos, and gence. In 1999 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced
StamatisManesis.Asurveyonpneumaticmuscleactuatorsmodeling. IntelligentMechatronics(Cat.No.99TH8399),pages221–226.IEEE,
In 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics, 1999.
pages1263–1269.IEEE,2011. [30] Bram Vanderborght, Alin Albu-Scha¨ffer, Antonio Bicchi, Etienne
[22] XavierAubert.LeCouplagee´nerge´tiquedelacontractionmusculaire, Burdet, Darwin G Caldwell, Raffaella Carloni, MG Catalano, Oliver
parXavierAubert.The`se... EditionsArscia,1956. Eiberger, Werner Friedl, Ganesh Ganesh, et al. Variable impedance
[23] Koh Hosoda, Christian Rode, Tobias Siebert, Bram Vanderborght, actuators:Areview. Roboticsandautonomoussystems,61(12):1601–
MaartenWeckx,andDLefeber. Actuationinleggedlocomotion. In 1614,2013.
BioinspiredLeggedLocomotion,pages563–622.Elsevier,2017. [31] M. A. Shahri, O. Mohseni, H. J. Bidgoly, and M. N. Ahmadabadi.
[24] HartmutGeyer,AndreSeyfarth,andReinhardBlickhan.Positiveforce Proﬁle design of parallel rotary compliance for energy efﬁciency in
feedback in bouncing gaits? Proceedings of the Royal Society of cyclic tasks. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 25(1):142–
London.SeriesB:BiologicalSciences,270(1529):2173–2183,2003. 151,Feb2020.
[25] A.J.“Knoek”vanSoest,WouterP.Haenen,andLeonardA.Rozen- [32] M.A.Sharbaﬁ,M.J.Yazdanpanah,M.N.Ahmadabadi,andA.Sey-
daal.Stabilityofbipedalstance:thecontributionofcocontractionand farth. Parallel compliance design for increasing robustness and
spindlefeedback. BiologicalCybernetics,88(4):293–301,2003. efﬁciencyinleggedlocomotionproofofconcept. IEEE/ASMETrans-
[26] Gertjan JC Ettema and Kenneth Meijer. Muscle contraction history: actionsonMechatronics,24(4):1541–1552,2019.
1915
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 22,2020 at 01:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 