2 020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)  
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
SNIAE-SSE Deformation Mechanism Enabled Scalable Multicopter: 
Design, Modeling and Flight Performance Validation 
Tao Yang, Yujing Zhang, Peng Li, Yantao Shen, Yunhui Liu and Haoyao Chen 
   Abstract—This paper focuses on designing, modeling and  propellers/arms. The foldable quadcopter introduced in [5] 
validating  a  novel  scalable  multicopter  whose  deformation  can drive its propellers to rotate around the arms for reaching a 
mechanism,  called  SNIAE-SSE,  relies  on  a  combination  of  vertical flight mode configuration. The quadcopter depicted in 
simple  non-intersecting  angulated  elements  (SNIAEs)  and  [6] uses a servomotor to rotate its propellers in order to change 
straight scissor-like elements (SSEs). The proposed SNIAE-SSE  the wingspan of the copter, and relying on the equipped 
mechanism has the advantages of single degree-of-freedom, fast  springs to passively pull the arms when the rotors speed are 
actuation capability and large deformation ratio. In this work,  reduced,  a  quadcopter  in  [7]  can  deform  into  a  folded 
enabled by the SNIAE-SSE mechanism, a quadcopter prototype  configuration for the purpose of passing through a narrow gap. 
with  symmetrical  and  synchronous  deformation  is  firstly  These mechanisms help reduce the size of multicopters in one 
developed, which facilitates a novel and controllably scalable 
or two dimensions, but meanwhile it will increase the size in 
multicopter system for us to analyze its modeling, as well as to 
another  dimension,  which  results  in  achieving  partial 
validate  its  flight  performance  and  dynamics  during  the 
deformation that limits their adaptation to flight environments. 
deformation in several flight missions including hover, throwing, 
One interesting work presented in [8] facilitates four rotor 
and morphing flying through a narrow window. Experimental 
arms to rotate independently around the main body frame so as 
results demonstrate that the developed scalable multicopter can 
to adjust flight mode configurations during the flight. Based 
maintain its stable flight behavior even both the folding and 
on its technical description, the deformation ratio of the whole 
unfolding  body  deformations  are  fast  performed,  which 
indicates an excellent capability of the scalable multicopter to  frame is limited and is hard to be applied for a scalable 
rapidly  adapt  to  complex  and  dynamically  changed  mechanism with multiple rotor arms. Recently a deformable 
environments.  quadcopter was proposed in [9] by the author, it was designed 
with  an  actuated  scissor-like  morphing  structure  that  is 
I.  INTRODUCTION  capable of enabling a symmetrical deformation of whole body 
As reported, large multicopters can stably fly and perform  frame. It however needs a long guide rail to support the 
aerial tasks due to their significant torque output and balance  morphing structure, which reduces the deformation ratio and 
capability,  while  small  multicopters  with  highly  flexible  downgrades its fast actuation capability in certain degree due 
maneuverability allow them to rapidly travel through narrow  to the induced mechanical constraints and frictions. 
spaces [1, 2]. The both advantages of two-scale mechanisms 
are rarely found in a conventional multicopter, so there is a 
demand that a scalable multicopter owning the advantages 
from varied scale mechanisms thereby has capabilities to 
adapt to multiple ﬂight conditions and to fulfill various tasks.  
To date, several techniques have been reported to attempt 
achieving  the  multiple  scales  of  multicopter  through 
deformability.  For  instance,  a  self-deploying  quadcopter 
presented in [3] can quickly unfold its arms with the aid of the 
torque  generated  by  propellers  during  takeoff,  and  a 
 
quadcopter described in [4] is able to fold its arms using an 
extra actuator and unfold its arms automatically utilizing its 
origami structure’s spring effect during the flight. Both above 
mentioned foldable multi-rotors rely on an origami based 
deformation  mechanism.  The  deformation  mechanism 
however has a limited stiffness, and it doesn’t allow for a 
larger deformation ratio as well. In addition, there exists 
another  popular  way  to  change  body  configurations  of 
multicopters  using  the  rotationally  folding/pulling  the 
  Figure 1.  SNIAE-SSE  deformation  mechanism  enabled  scalable 
T. Yang and Y. Zhang are graduate students with HIT Shenzhen, China  multicopter in three typical conﬁgurations. (a) Full folded configuration. (b) 
(yangtao@stu.hit.edu.cn).   Semi-unfolded configuration. (c) Unfolded configuration. 
P. Li and H. Chen are with HIT Shenzhen, China（peng.li@hit.edu.cn）
and Li's work was partially supported by JCYJ20180507183456108 and  In this work, we address to develop a deformation enabled 
Chen's work was partially supported by the National Natural Science  scalable multicopter with fast actuation capability and large 
Foundation of China under Reference No. U1713206. 
deformation ratio, so as to enhance its flight adaptability to 
Y. Shen is with University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557, USA. 
complex environments and to facilitate multiple task-oriented 
Y. Liu is with the Chinese University of Hong Kong, China. 
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 864
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
versatility of such multicopter. As the scissor-like morphing 
mechanisms have the advantages of large-scale deformation, 
good structural stability, high efﬁciency of force transmission 
and  strong  maneuverability  [10],  and  further  inspired  by 
mechanisms from both non-intersecting angulated element 
 
[11-13] and straight scissor-like element, we propose and 
design  a  high-performance  scissor-like  deformation 
mechanism that well leverages the simple non-intersecting 
angulated elements (SNIAEs) with the straight scissor-like 
elements (SSEs), called  SNIAE-SSE.  The  SNIAE-SSE  is 
capable of allowing one degree-of-freedom (DOF) and fast 
Figure 2.  SNIAE consisting of a pair of different angulated rods. (a) Two 
actuation and yet large deformation ratio. These properties  angulated rods. (b) a SNIAE. 
suggest it is an excellent deformation candidate that enables a 
high-performance  scalable  multicopter.  Note  that,  the 
proposed  SNIAE-SSE  is  different  from  the  deformation 
mechanism for the quadcopter mentioned in [9] as it doesn’t 
need any long constrained guide rails for the support. It 
therefore promotes large deformation ratio and fast actuation 
capability of the scalable multicopter. In addition, due to the 
nature of stable, symmetrical and synchronous deformation of 
the SNIAE-SSE mechanism, it thus has less influences to 
multicopter dynamics,  making  the  multicopter be able  to   
stably fly even a fast folding and unfolding body deformations 
are performed during the flight, which indicates its excellent 
capability  to  rapidly  adapt  to  complex  and  dynamically 
changed environments. 
To  validate  the  performance  of  the  mechanism,  a 
quadcopter prototype is firstly developed. Its several typical 
folding configurations are demonstrated in Figure 1. Relying 
on this prototype, the dynamic characteristics in different 
flight missions: (1) hover, (2) throwing, and (3) morphing  Figure 3.  Standard closed-loop mechanisms. (a) Triangular mechanism 
flying through a narrow window are preliminarily validated.  containing three pairs of SNIAEs (n = 3). (b) Quadrilateral mechanism 
containing four pairs of  SNIAEs (n = 4). (c) Hexagonal mechanism 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
containing six pairs of SNIAEs (n = 6). (d) Octagonal mechanism containing 
presents the mechanical design of our scalable multicopter. 
eight pairs of SNIAEs (n = 8). 
Section III analyzes the dynamics model of the scalable copter. 
Section  IV  validates  the  dynamic  characteristics  of  the  FEG can be rewritten as FEA + ϕ + DEG, thus (1) 
prototype. Section V concludes the work.  can be re-described as 
FEA+DEG=−−                    (2) 
II.  DEFORMATION MECHANISM AND COPTER DESIGN 
Where FEA and DEG can be redefined as AEB/2 and 
A.  SNIAE-SSE Mechanism and Deformation Ratio 
CED/2, respectively. Substitute them into (2) gives 
Using common scissor-like structures, i.e. the Hoberman’s 
AEB+CED=2(−−)                   (3) 
angulated element [14] and/or SSE, it is difficult to synthesize 
an overall deformation of the body frame for the goal of 
It then has the form as 
scalable  multicopters.  To  reach  the  goal,  here  a  new 
scissor-like  deformation  mechanism,  called  simple  AEB++CED+=2                  (4) 
non-intersecting  angulated  element  (SNIAE),  is  firstly 
introduced. The mechanism consists of a pair of different  Substitute (3) into (4), the relationship between ϕ, θ and α 
angulated rods connected by a revolute joint  E and also  can be derived as 
enclosed an angle α in the middle, as illustrated in Figure 2. In 
=(−)/2                                (5) 
Figure 2(b) terminal points A, B, C, D are constrained and can 
move along their dashed lines. To ensure the mobilization, the 
Especially, when AE = BE = CE = DE, ϕ + θ =  is 
triangles AEB and DEC should both be isosceles, i.e. AE = BE, 
satisfied,  any  even  number  of  identical  SNIAEs 
CE = DE. Here, AED and BEC are defined as ϕ and θ, 
interconnected at terminal points can form a series of standard 
respectively. Figure 2 shows the EF and EG perpendicular to 
closed-loop mechanisms, which can be folded to its most 
the dashed lines, which form a quadrilateral with OF and OG 
compact state and has only single DOF. It can be then found 
to help us derive the relationship between ϕ, θ and α. So it can 
that 
be obtained as 
=/n (n3,n )                   (6) 
+FEG=                                (1) 
Where n is the pair number of SNIAEs. 
865
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
Based  on  SNIAE  mechanism,  several  standard  Then the deformation ratio r  of a copter can be derived as 
d
closed-loop foldable mechanisms  are  shown  in  Figure 3.  below: 
Through incorporating one of the closed-loop mechanisms 
R 1
with any number of SSEs, a new SNIAE-SSE deformation  r = max =                         (11) 
mechanism  can  be  well  formed  and  designed.  The  d R sin( /2)
min 0
deformation mechanism provides an excellent solution for 
designing the deformable body frame of scalable multicopters.  Equations (10) and (11) indicate that the deformation ratio 
Figure  4  demonstrates  the  SNIAE-SSE  deformation  of a copter is not heavily related to l0 and is mainly affected by 
mechanism for a scalable quadcopter. As displayed, it consists  n and m, the relationship of which can be found in Figure 5. 
of a SNIAE quadrilateral mechanism and twelve SSEs that are  The deformation ratio changes mainly with the change of the 
evenly  connected  to  four  external  endpoints  of  the  value of m and n. when the value of m is constant, the smaller 
quadrilateral mechanism to form the scalable arms of the  the value of n is, the larger the deformation ratio is. This 
quadcopter. The SNIAE’s rods are designed with the same  implies that tri-copter (If n = 3) has the biggest deformation 
length l  and the lengths of SSE’s rods are l ( i  { 1 , 2 , 3 } ).  ratio when the number of SSEs per rotor arm is equal. When 
0 i
the value of n is constant, the bigger the value of m is, the 
The controlled servo angle is , and the equivalent radius of 
larger  the  deformation  ratio.  Theoretically  speaking,  the 
the deformable body frame is R. In order to estimate the 
mechanism can be designed to allow the scalable copter with a 
deformation ratio of the scalable copter conveniently, we 
large deformation ratio. 
assume that  
l =l                                     (7) 
i 0
 
 
Figure 5.  Deformation ratio of a scalable copter varying with m and n. 
Figure 4.  The deformation mechanism of the scalable quadcopter. (a) 
unfolded configuration. (b) folded configuration. (c) one scalable rotor arm 
of quadcopter. 
For the scalable length of the rotor arm, it can be defined as 
   
   
 1  
R=l cos  +2m+1+sin cot      (8) 
0 2   2 n
 sin   
  n  
Where m is the number of SSEs per arm of a copter. In theory,   
if ignoring the width of the rods, the value of  should be 
Figure 6.  Scalable quadcopter. (a) unfolded configuration. (b) active unit 
satisfied with   [0,  ], and the minimum R of a copter 
min  consisting of servo motors and actuated scissor elements. (c) rotor mount 
arm occurs when  = , namely  with a very short guide shaft. (d) central body with four chutes.  

R =l cot                               (9)  B. Scalable (Deformable) Copter Design 
min 0 n
Based  on  the  SNIAE-SSE  deformation  mechanism,  a 
From (9), it can be seen that the minimum size of a copter  scalable quadcopter is designed as shown in Figure 6. Except 
(arm) is mainly affected by l0 and n. When both l0 and n are  for nylon rotor mounts, the whole deformation mechanism is 
changed, the size of a copter is also varied.  made  of  carbon  fiber.  Although  the  whole  deformable 
quadcopter only has one DOF and can be driven by one servo 
The maximum R of a copter (arm) occurs when  = , 
max  0 motor to deform, in the design we still use four simultaneously 
which can be calculated as follow: 
driven small servomotors instead of a larger one in order to 
 cos(/n)  make the mass distribution of the quadcopter more uniform. 
 =2arctan            (10)  Meanwhile,  the  adjacent  servomotors  rotate  in  opposite 
0 (2m+1)sin(/n)+1 direction,  which  makes  total  torque  on  the  body  frame 
generated by the servomotors cancelled. In Figure 6(c), it 
866
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
shows one of four rotor mounts with a very short guide shaft  I ()=I ()=10-5(4.13−242+18+58.3)
that ensures the rotor mount only moving along the axis of the   x y   (13) 
arm when the arm is folded or unfolded. Figure 6(d) displays  I ()=10-5(8.23−47.72+35.7+113.3)
 z
the central body with four chutes, which makes the body 
frame only folded and unfolded along the chutes. The design  Where I(), I() and I() are the moment of inertia of the 
x y z
not  only  enables  that  the  deformable  quadcopter  is  copter along x , y  and z  axis, respectively. 
b b b
symmetrically and synchronously deployed at any time in 
order to achieve the flight advantages traditional quadcopters 
B.  Identification of Scalable Arm Dynamics 
have, but also adapts the copter to the changeable environment 
The arm length of the copter is controlled by four AF 
through the deformation. 
D30T-3.3 MG servomotors. To build the deformable arm 
dynamics,  the  system  identification  method  is  employed. 
III.  DYNAMICS OF THE DEFORMABLE MULTICOPTER  Firstly, a high-speed motion capture system consisting of ten 
OPTITRACK cameras with 120Hz is employed to measure 
In this section we briefly describe the dynamics of the 
the step response data of one deformable copter's arm during 
deformable  quadcopter.  The  process  can  be  extended  to 
hover. Then,  with  the  system  identiﬁcation  toolbox from 
general  scalable  multicopters  with  the  deformation 
MATLAB, we identified the scalable arm dynamics model of 
mechanism. 
the  copter  during  folding  and  unfolding  respectively,  as 
presented in eqn. (14). Figure 8 shows the comparison results 
A.  Arm Length and Moment of Inertia 
on arm length between measured and simulated from the 
To model the copter, a world frame and a body frame are  identified model. As plotted, the measured results agree with 
set up as shown in Figure 6(a). {xe, ye, ze} are the world frame,  the values generated by the identified model very well. 
which is fixed during copter flight. The body frame {x , y , z } 
b b b
w{0i,l l1 t r, a2n s, l3a}te)  aarned t hroet athteru aslto anngd w mitohm tehnet  cgoepnteerra. tTedi   abnyd  iMth ri o(tio r,   L()=−42.4L()−502.7L()+505.8u4 folding (14) 
respectively. Different from the traditional quadcopter, the  −13.2L()−76.9L()+76.2u4 unfolding
arm length and moment of inertia of a deformable copter will 
Where u  is the command of the controlled servo angle. 
4
change during the deformation. A complete dynamics model 
can  be  achieved by deriving  the dynamics model of  the 
scalable rotor arms, and combining with the traditional flight 
dynamics model. The arm length of our scalable copter is 
denoted as L(), which can be seen from Figures 4(c) and 6(c) 
as below: 
L()=R+a                               (12) 
Where a is the distance from the last revolute joint to rotor 
shaft, as shown in Figure 4(c). 
To calculate the moment of inertia of the copter, a general 
method  is  to  calculate  the  moment  of  inertia  of  each 
component and add them together to get the total moment of 
inertia. However, the scalable copter and its arms have very 
complex geometry and it results in a high computation load. 
To  improve  the  computing  efficiency,  we  used 
SOLIDWORKS Mass-Property toolbox to obtain the moment 
of inertia when the copter’s arms are folded at different 
percentages to form the scalable copter. After conducting the 
cubic  polynomial  fitting  on  the  computed  data,  the 
relationship between the controlled servo angle and moment 
of inertia can be found as described in eqn. (13). The related   
data and ﬁtting results are plotted in Figure 7. 
Figure 8.  Comparison  results  on  arm  length  between  measured  and 
simulated from the identified model. (a) Arm length in the folded process. (b) 
Arm length in the unfolded process. 
C. Dynamics of the Scalable Copter 
Taking  into  account  the  scalable  arm  length  and  its 
moment of inertia, the motion dynamics of the deformable 
quadcopter in translational and rotational movements can be 
obtained based on the Newton-Euler equations [15, 16], as 
listed in equation (15). Combining (14) with (15), we can have 
 
the described dynamics model of the scalable quadcopter. 
Figure 7.  Fitting curves of moment of inertia with controlled servo angle. 
867
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
•  The bending deformation of the copter’s arm when 
 1
x= (sinsin+cossincos)u  hovering at different arm length configurations. 
 m 0

•  The  step  responses  in  the  folded  and  unfolded 
y= m1 (cossinsin−cossin)u0 processes of the copter’s arm. 

1 During the experiment, we found that the shape of the arm 
z= m(coscos)u0−g approximates straight before takeoff, and when the copter flies, 
=Iy()−Iz()− Jr + L() u (15)  tlhifeti nsgh afpoer coe fo tfh teh ea rrmot obre, caosm ilelus stthraet epda rinab Foilgau-lriek e9 .d Wueh eton  tthhee  
  Ix()  Ix() 2Ix() 1 arm bends, the thrust Ti results in a deflection angle   along 
the vertical direction, which makes the thrust T decomposed 
 I ()−I () J L() into a vertical component T  and a horizontal coimponent T . 
= z x + r + u ic ir
  Iy()  Iy() 2Iy() 2 Tshicr ipnrko vthidee sa rmthe l elnifgtitnhg  afnodr  pthreev ceonptst etrh, ew ahrimle  fTroirm a tteexmtepntssi otno  
 I ()−I () 1 (unfolding). As a result, the value of the angle  plays an 
= x Iz()y +Iz()u3 itmhep ocrotpatnetr .r oWlee i nh ethreeb lyif tminega saunrde dd etfhoer munabtieonnd pinegrf oarrmma nlecneg othf  
Where m is the mass of the vehicle, g is the gravitational  before takeoff, which can be regarded as the actual arm length 
constant, Jr is the moment of inertia of the rotor.  is the sum  to calculate the angle  in combination with the arm lengths 
of the rotating speed of four rotors. u0 is the control input of  measured  during  hover.  Obviously,  each  arm  length 
the main thrust. u1, u2, and u3 are used to control the movement  configuration corresponds to a special parabola. In order to 
of roll, pitch and yaw, respectively. To calculate ui ( i  { 0, 1 ,  calculate each angle , we first calculate the parabolic equation 
2 , 3 } ), the following equation can be applied:  corresponding  to  each  pair  of  actual  and  measured  arm 
lengths.  
u  k k k k 2
 0  d d d d  0 Based on the prototype, Figure 10 shows the relationship 
u k −k −k k 2
 1= d d d d  1         (16)  between the arm length and the angle  . It can be seen that the 
u2 kd kd −kd −kd22 deflection angle   decreases with the increase of the arm 
u3 −kb kb −kb kb 32 length,  which  roughly  conforms  to  a  quadratic  curve.  If 
aerodynamics is not taken into account, the longer the arm 
Where kd and kb are the thrust constant and moment constant  length, the smaller the Ti and Tir of the copter during hover. 
of the rotor respectively. i ( i  { 0, 1 , 2 , 3 } ) is the rotating  Moreover, the range of the Ti varies from 0.319N to 0.323N, 
speed of each rotor.  while the range of the T  varies from 0.035N to 0.061N. It is 
ir
also found that the bending deformation of copter’s arm has a 
IV.  FLIGHT DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS VALIDATION  little effect on lifting of copter, but it has obvious effect on the 
response speed of the deformable body frame due to it holds 
A.  Scalable Copter Prototype and Set Up  against unfolding of the arm. 
The prototype of our scalable copter is illustrated in Figure 
1, each arm consists of CNC-fabricated carbon fiber rods and 
a 3D-printed nylon rotor mount. The copter has a mass of 
127g and an arm length that varies from 66 mm to 162.5 mm. 
The  servomotors  required  for  morphing  have  an  overall 
weight of 20g, which corresponds to approximately 16% of 
 
the total weight of the prototype.  
Figure 9.  The bending deformation of the copter’s arm during hover. 
At the end of each arm, two 716mm 19000KV brushed 
motors drive a 3-blade, 120 mm propeller through a 1/4 gear 
reduction unit. The motors are controlled by a flight controller 
board.  The  flight  controller  board  includes  an  Inertial 
Measurement Unit (IMU), a Barometer, and an Optical Flow 
Module. The Barometer allows the copter to fly at constant 
altitude, and the Optical Flow Module allows the copter to 
hover at a fixed point. In order to validate  the dynamic 
characteristics of the deformable copter, we conducted the 
following flight behavior validation using the PID based flight 
 
controller [17, 18]: (1) hover, (2) throwing, and (3) morphing 
flying through a narrow window. 
Figure 10.  The variety of deflection angle with arm length during hover. 
B.  Hover  In addition, when the copter hovers, the step responses of 
the scalable arm’s folded and unfolded processes were tested, 
In  this  validation,  the  hovering  experiments  and  the 
respectively.  In  this  test,  the  fully  folded  and  unfolded 
relevant investigations were conducted as below:  
configurations  are  set  as  shown  in  Figure  1(b)  and  (c) 
868
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
respectively. The altitude reduction h caused by the folding  however decreased to 0.2s, which because the copter is in a 
and unfolding of the arm and the response time t required to  low gravity during throwing and the horizontal component 
fold and unfold the arm are two important measured indicators,  force Tir is smaller than that in hover, and the friction effects 
as shown in TABLE 1, where the mean  and standard  between scalable arms and central body are less affected. 
deviation  of h and t are shown for 10 trials. 
Experimental results demonstrate that our scalable copter 
has a very fast response speed in both folding and unfolding. 
The response time t of folding is shorter than that of unfolding, 
which is partially contributed by horizontal component force 
T . When folding, the altitude reduction h is larger than that 
ir
of unfolding, which means that our copter is more stable when 
unfolding. However, the standard deviations  of the two 
altitude reductions is a little larger than normal, which is that 
our current copter prototype can only supply a small lifting, so 
that  a  small  voltage  difference  can  lead  to  a  significant   
difference in the altitude reduction. Therefore, it is necessary 
Figure 12.  The variety of arm length and altitude during throwing. 
to manage the power output and noise for the copter in our 
future work. 
D. Morphing Flying through a Narrow Window 
We have successfully tested morphing flying through a 
TABLE I  
ALTITUDE REDUCTION AND RESPONSE TIME IN THE STEP RESPONSE  narrow space of our copter, as shown in Figure 13. In this test, 
EXPERIMENTS OF THE ARM LENGTH FOLDED AND UNFOLDED  the narrow space is a square vertical window of 325325mm. 
The results validate our copter has a fast actuation capability 
t (seconds)  h (m) 
Deformation  for  large  deformation,  which  indicates  its  excellent 
        morphological adaptability. 
Folded  0.20  0.01  0.155  0.072 
Unfolded  0.35  0.02  0.016  0.010 
C. Throwing 
The copter’s arm is usually fully folded in order to be 
stored easily during the absence of flight as shown in Figure 
1(a), which is the similar as the bird folding wings during the 
rest. This inspires us to mimic flight behavior of birds using 
the scalable prototype. As the birds take off following the 
morphological adaptation, the morphing behavior,  i.e. the 
wings  folded  and  unfolded,  can  be  mimicked  by  the 
deformation of the frame of the prototype. As a result, we 
designed a throwing experiment of our scalable copter, which 
 
can validate the dynamic characteristics of the scalable copter 
and  meanwhile  can  mimic  bird  taking-off  by  using  the 
Figure 13.  Morphing  flying  through  a  square  vertical  window  of 
deformation  capability  of  the  copter,  as  demonstrated  in 
325325mm. 
Figure 11. The three deformation states of our copter in this 
picture  correspond  to  the  three  morphing  states  of  birds 
respectively during takeoff.   V.  CONCLUSION 
In this work, we presented a scalable multicopter whose 
controllably folding/unfolding mechanism is based on the 
novel SNIAE-SSE deformation mechanism. The advantages 
of the SNIAE-SSE mechanism consist of its single DOF and 
fast actuation capability as well as its large deformation ratio. 
  Enabled by this SNIAE-SSE mechanism, a symmetrically and 
synchronously  deformable  quadcopter  prototype  was 
Figure 11.  Copter’s throwing inspried by bird take-off. (a) Fully folded  developed, its dynamics was then analyzed, and its dynamic 
configuration before take-off. (b) Semi-umfolded configuration allowing the 
characteristics during deformations in several flight missions 
rotors to start. (c) Unfolded configuration allowing the vehicle to hover 
stably.  were preliminarily validated. The results demonstrate that the 
new scalable multicopter can maintain stable flight behavior 
Figure 12 plots the measured variety of arm length and  even the fast folding and unfolding body deformations are 
altitude during throwing. The time t , t and t  correspond to  performed, which indicates its excellent capability of rapidly 
0 1  2
the three states shown in Figure 11. From Figure 12, we can  adapting to complex and dynamically changed environments. 
also see that although the fully folded arm length during  Ongoing  research  is  to  investigate  its  autonomous  flight 
throwing is shorter than that in hover, the response speed is  control under controllable deformations. 
869
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.    
REFERENCES 
[1]  V. Kumar, and N. Michael, “Opportunities and Challenges With 
Autonomous Micro Aerial Vehicles,” Int. J. Rob. Res., 31(11), pp. 
1279–1291. 
[2]  D. Falanga , E. Mueggler , M. Faessler , and D. Scaramuzza, 
“Aggressive Quadrotor Flight through Narrow Gaps with Onboard 
Sensing  and  Computing  using  Active  Vision,”  in  Robotics  and 
Automation(ICRA),2017 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 
2017. 
[3]  S. Mintchev, L. Daler, G. L’Eplattenier, L. Saint-Raymond, and D. 
Floreano, “Foldable and self-deployable pocket sized quadrotor,” in 
Robotics and Automation(ICRA),2015 IEEE International Conference 
on. IEEE, 2015, pp. 2190–2195. 
[4]  D. L. Yang, S. Mishra, D M. Aukes, and W. L. Zhang, “Design, 
Planning, and Control of an Origami-inspired Foldable Quad-rotor,” in 
American Control Conference (ACC), 2019.pp.2251-2256. 
[5]  C. Hintz, C. Torno, and L. R. G. Carrillo, “Design and dynamic 
modeling of a rotary wing aircraft with morphing capabilities,” in 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2014 International Conference 
on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 492–498. 
[6]  V. Riviere, A. Manecy, and S. Viollet, “Agile robotic ﬂiers: A 
morphing-based approach,” Soft Robotics, 2018. 
[7]  N. Bucki and M. W. Mueller, “Design and Control of a Passively 
Morphing Quadcopter,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019 
IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2019, pp. 9116–9122. 
[8]  D. Falanga , K. Kleber , S. Mintchev , D. Floreano, and D Scaramuzza, 
“The Foldable Drone: A Morphing Quadrotor that can Squeeze and 
Fly,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 2, pp.209-216, 
2019. 
[9]  N. Zhao, Y. Luo, H. Deng, and Y. Shen, “The deformable quadrotor: 
Design,  kinematics  and  dynamics  characterization,  and  ﬂight 
performance validation,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 
2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on. IEEE, 2017, pp. 2391– 
2396. 
[10] N. Zhao, Y. Luo, H. Deng, and Y. Shen, “The Deformable Quad-Rotor: 
Mechanism Design, Kinematics, and Dynamics Effects Investigation,” 
Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics, vol. 10, pp.1-5, 2018. 
[11] K. Wohlhart. “Double-chain mechanism,” in Deployable Structures: 
Theory and Application, Proceedings of the IUTAM-IASS Symposium 
on. 2000, pp. 457-466. 
[12] D Mao, Y Luo, and Z You, “Planar closed loop double chain linkages,” 
Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 850-859, 2009. 
[13] J  Cai,  X  Deng,  Y  Xu,  and  J  Feng,  “Constraint  Analysis  and 
Redundancy  of  Planar  Closed  Loop  Double  Chain  Linkages,” 
Advances in Mechanical Engineering, vol. 6, pp. 635423, 2014. 
[14] Z. You, S. Pellegrino. “Foldable bar structures,” International Journal 
of Solids & Structures, vol. 34, no. 15, pp.1825-1847, 1997. 
[15] N. Michael, D. Mellinger, Q. Lindsey, and V. Kumar, “The Grasp 
Multiple Micro-UAV Testbed,” IEEE Rob. Autom. Mag., vol. 17, no. 3, 
pp. 56–65, 2010. 
[16] D. Mellinger, N. Michael, and V. Kumar, “Trajectory Generation and 
Control for Precise Aggressive Maneuvers With Quadrotors,” Int. J. 
Rob. Res., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 664–674, 2012. 
[17] K. H. Ang, G. Chong, Y. Li, “PID control system analysis, design, and 
technology,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 
13, no. 4, pp. 559-576, 2005. 
[18] A. Z. Azfar, D. Hazry, “A simple approach on implementing IMU 
sensor fusion in PID controller for stabilizing quadrotor flight control,” 
in Signal Processing & Its Applications (CSPA), 2011 IEEE 7th 
International Colloquium on. IEEE, 2011, pp.28-32. 
 
870
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 16:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 