2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
A Compact and Low-cost Robotic Manipulator Driven by Supercoiled
Polymer Actuators
∗
Yang Yang1,2, , Member, IEEE, Zhicheng Liu2, Yanhan Wang2, Shuai Liu2,
and Michael Yu Wang2,3, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Thesupercoiledpolymer(SCP)actuatorisanovel
artiﬁcialmuscle,whichismanufacturedbytwistingandcoiling
polymer ﬁbers. This new artiﬁcial muscle is soft, low-cost and
showsgoodlinearity.Beingutilizedasanactuator,theartiﬁcial
musclecouldgeneratesigniﬁcantmechanicalpowerinamuscle-
like form upon electrical activation by Joule heating. In this
study, we adopt this new artiﬁcial muscle to actuate a novel
designed robotic manipulator, which is composed of two parts.
The ﬁrst part is a robotic arm based on the inspiration of
the musculoskeletal system. The arm is fabricated with two
ball-and-socket joints as skeleton and SCP actuators as driven
muscles. The second part is a Fin Ray Effect inspired soft
gripperthatcanperformgraspingtasksonfragileobjects.The Fig.1:Proposedroboticmanipulator.(a)3Dmodel.(b)Realprototype.
manipulatorprototypeisfabricatedandexperimentaltestsare
conductedincludingbothsimplebuteffectivecontrolofthebio-
inspired arm as well as characterization of the gripper. Lastly,
Biological muscle tissue is often used as a standard
a pick and place demonstration of a fragile fruit is performed
reference of performance to develop novel robotic actuators
utilizing the proposed manipulator. We envision that the bio-
inspired robotic manipulator design driven by SCP actuators [7].Biologicalmuscleshaveexcellentcapabilities,including
could potentially be used in other robotic applications. high power-to-weight ratio, high dynamic range, making
them unique and ideal actuators. Inspired by biological
I. INTRODUCTION
muscles, scientists have developed many artiﬁcial muscles
The musculoskeletal system (MS) is a signiﬁcant bio- that present the desirable properties of biological muscles.
logical system, which enables humans and other animals Among existing artiﬁcial muscles, the common ones include
to perform different and complex movements based on the pneumaticartiﬁcialmuscles(PAMs)[8],shapememoryalloy
contractionofmuscles.Variousroboticapplicationsbasedon (SMA) actuators [9], dielectric elastomer actuators (DEAs)
MS have been built, such as robotic arm [1], robotic hand [10],ionicpolymer-metalcomposites(IPMC)actuators[11],
[2], legged locomotion [3], etc. Biomimetic robots inspired supercoiled polymer (SCP) actuators [12] and so on.
by MS mostly rely on electric motors for actuation. Though Among the pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles, the most com-
they can provide enough force and accurate positioning, monly used are McKibben actuators, which pressurize and
electric motors have some disadvantages for robots based decompress the sheath for contraction and relaxation, pro-
on the musculoskeletal system [4]. Electric motors usually viding high output power and behave like skeletal muscles
requirecomplexgearsystems,whichleadstobulkystructure [8].Whereas,forthepneumaticactuators,anaircompressor
and large volume [5, 6]. Many of the common designs are is required to force gas into the actuator to create a differ-
building on a high-torque servo motor and a low backlash ence in pressure for actuation between the interior and the
reduction gear. These classical designs tend to be relatively surroundingenvironment,whichalsoleadstobulkystructure
expensive,heavy,andbulky.Particularly,highratioreduction and large volume.
gearshavebeenamajorlimitationtolow-costrobotdesigns. Shape memory alloy (SMA) materials often use these
Thus, electric motors are not ﬁt for the bio-inspired design, generator systems: electrical activation, photoactivation, and
which means that a muscle-like actuator is required to build chemical activation. This result, respectively, in cross-
a compact bio-inspired robotic system. sectional shrinking and expansion of the material during
activation and deactivation. Regardless of the conﬁguration,
Research is supported by the Startup Foundation for Introducing Talent
SMA relies on martensite versus austenite transformation,
ofNUIST,andtheHongKongInnovationandTechnologyFund(ITF)ITS-
018-17FP. creating a giant hysteresis throughout activation, limiting its
1SchoolofAutomation,NanjingUniversityofInformationScienceand controllability. Moreover, the recoverable strain of the SMA
Technology,Nanjing210044,China
wire is in the range of 4% to 8%, which is relatively small
2Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Hong Kong
UniversityofScienceandTechnology,HongKong. [9].
3DepartmentofElectronicandComputerEngineering,HongKongUni- Recently, a new type of actuator called SCP artiﬁcial
versityofScienceandTechnology,HongKong.
muscle has been discovered by Haines et al [12]. It was
*Corresponding author. Tel:+852-67264174,
meyang@nuist.edu.cn built by continually twisting polymer threads, and it would
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1827
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:30:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. form a coiled structure. Large tensile actuation (strain) is wrap around the object in spite of their shapes. And due to
produced by the actuator. According to the experiments of the soft material used, the gripper can grasp fragile objects.
Haines, SCP could provide tensile actuation with high load- The gripper is actuated by a single SCP actuator, thus it has
carrying capability. Also, it could be actuated by Joule heat- a simple structure and easy controllability.
ing, which means it is conveniently controlled by changing Theassemblyoftheproposedroboticmanipulatorisillus-
the current through the conductive coating surface of the trated in Fig. 1. Each SCP actuator is driven independently.
polymer, thus, it could be implemented simply based on The major contributions of this study include:
a thermomechanical property. Compared to the ﬁrst two • Novel design ofa compact and lowcost robotic manip-
actuators, SCP has notable advantages in various aspects. It ulator driven by SCP actuators;
is easily manufactured by commercial nylon ﬁbers such as • Simple open loop and closed loop control of SCP
nylon threads or ﬁshing lines. Thus, to fabricate the actuator powered robotic arm;
is relatively low cost. According to the experimental data, • Compact Fin Ray Effect inspired soft-material gripper
SCP has an ideal linear property, which could make help to powered by SCP for handling fragile and irregular
design a control system [13]. objects.
Unliketheexistingcable-drivenrobotdesignusedtheclas- The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
sical motor actuator [6], our design used the SCP actuators. II presents the design of the robotic manipulator prototype.
To actuate a ball joint in [6], three motors and capstans The fabrication and assembly of the whole robotic system
are needed, making the whole structure bulky and the cost are given in Section III. Then, the open loop and closed
is much higher than using the SCP actuators. In contrast, loop control of the robotic arm and the characterization of
the design in this study is light and the whole structure is soft gripper are given in Section IV. Grasping demonstration
compact. A further difference with motor & cable driven using the proposed robotic manipulator is also presented
designisthatSCPgeneratesdistributedforcealongitswhole in this section. Lastly, Section V concludes the paper and
length while force is transferred from one end to another in discusses future work.
motor & cable driven robot. As for the pneumatic artiﬁcial
II. DESIGNOFTHEROBOTICMANIPULATOR
muscle driven robotic arm, afﬁliated devices such as air
compressors and valves are also indispensable, making the A. Robotic arm
whole robotic system less compact. SMA actuated robotic ThecharacteristicsofSCPactuatorsaredesirableandwell
system is also compact and large stress can be generated. matched to the needs of artiﬁcial muscles. These include
However, SMA actuators usually suffer from limited con- linear output, simple control, and factor of slender shape.
trollability due to substantial hysteresis during the phase SCP actuators enjoy considerable controllability advantages
transition.Insummary,theexistingactuationapproachesfor over SMA actuators, where SMAs rely on phase transitions
continuum and hyper-redundant robotic arm all have their from martensite to austenite. Based on the characteristics
advantages and disadvantages, which calls out the need for of SCP actuators, we designed a bio-inspired arm, where
novel actuation technologies. In this research, we adopt the SCPactuatorsserveasmusclesandtheball-and-socketjoint
SCP actuators for driving both a bio-inspired robotic arm servesastheskeletalsystemoftheroboticarm.Basedonthe
and also a soft gripper. ball-and-socket joint, we built the robotic arm by cascading
Avarietyofroboticapplicationshavebeenreportedusing two of these joints. The novelty of this motor-free robotic
theSCPactuatorssuchashumanoidrobotichand[14],wrist arm design is the absence of the space occupying motor and
orthosis[15],inchworm-inspiredrobot[16],shape-morphing the motor holder, contributing to the system compactness
structure [17] and soft ﬁnger [18]. However, many aspects and possible applications in limited spaces where traditional
of the SCP actuation system are still under investigation, motors and pumps can not be used. In future, we can enrich
including the design, sensing and control [19]. The research the motion and improve the workspace of the manipulator
ofSCPisstillanunderexploredarea.Wuetal.haveinvesti- bycascadingmoreballjointsintheroboticarm(aselephant
gatedtheapplicationofSCPactuatorsinthemusculoskeletal truck type).
system recently [20]. They focused on the characterization As shown in Fig. 1(a), the proposed robotic arm has
of SCP muscle with a new fabrication approach and ex- two joints and SCP muscles have been used as contraction
perimental tests of the single joint musculoskeletal system. actuatorsdrivingtheball-and-socketjointtoprovidemultidi-
Different from their research, in this study, a single joint mensional motions. However, the degree of freedom (DOF)
musculoskeletalsystemservesasthebasicblockforbuilding of the robotic arm depends on the way to install the SCP
aroboticarm.Bothopenloopcontrolbasedonmodelingand actuators. For the current conﬁguration (Fig. 1(a)), 3 SCP
closed loop control with sensory feedback are investigated. muscles of equal length were placed in each joint with an
◦
Moreover, we also designed a compact Fin Ray Effect equal angle interval (120 ). The SCP muscles are in parallel
inspired soft gripper as an end effector assembled to the with the Z axis in the primary state, which makes the joint
robot arm to perform grasping tasks. rotating about X and Y axis. Thus, the robotic arm would
The Fin Ray Effect was discovered by biologist Leif have 4 DOFs. If the SCP actuators are installed inclined, it
Kniese of Evologics and is based on the deformation of the couldproviderotationaboutZaxis,thusthearmhas6DOFs
ﬁsh ﬁns [21]. The ﬁngers of the gripper can automatically in total.
1828
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:30:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.3:Micrographs.(a)Nylonﬁshingline.(b)One-plycoiledSCPactuator.
Fig. 2: Soft gripper design. (a) 3D model of Fin Ray effect inspired soft (c)Two-plycoiledSCPactuatorusedinthisstudy.
gripper.(b)GripperfreedeformationuponSCPactuationwithoutgrasped
object.(c)GripperdeformationuponSCPactuationwithgraspedobject.
The MS structure relies on the contraction of artiﬁcial
muscles to pull the skeleton for versatile movements. Each
actuator could be controlled independently to produce angu-
lar displacement of the joint. And to actuate two adjacent
actuators in each link could provide angular displacement
along the middle direction. As for the recuperative proce-
dure, as the actuated muscle contracts, the other unactuated
actuators extend due to the moving of the arm and thereby
store energy to accelerate the recovery procedure. To further
Fig.4:SCPartiﬁcialmusclefabricationsetup.
decrease the recovering time, unactuated actuator could be
actuatedduringtherecuperativeprocess.Thepositioningand
orientationoftheend-effectorarecontrolledbychangingthe
III. FABRICATIONANDASSEMBLY
lengths of the six linear SCP actuators which are ﬁxed on
A. Fabrication of SCP actuator
the base and joint platform.
The artiﬁcial muscles are made of twisted and coiled
B. Novel Fin Ray Effect inspired soft gripper
polymer thread for our musculoskeletal robot. Material se-
The traditional Fin Ray Effect module comprises a V- lection and ways to manufacture play important roles in the
shapewallstructureandparallelribstructureinsidethewall performance of the SCP actuator. SCP could be made with
structure. When a force is applied to the wall structure, the ﬁshing line and sewing threads made of nylon, polyethylene
structure tends to bend to envelop the force. Thus, the Fin orothermaterials[12].Inourdesign,weusedtheconductive
Ray Effect inspired gripper can adjust itself to the shape silver coated nylon thread, because it does not require a
of the object to be grasped [22]. Compared to traditional complicated manufacturing process. It could avoid twisting
parallel ribs structure, Bason has proved that when the ribs orwarpingaverythinresistancewire,whichishardandeasy
were slanted and curved, the Fin Ray Effect structure had tobreakduringthefabricationprocedureofthepolymer.The
29.3% lager deformation [23]. thread used in this study is conductive Silver Plated Nylon
Based on previous studies, we designed a Fin Ray Effect 6,6 sewing thread manufactured by Shieldex Trading, Inc
inspired gripper which is actuated by a single SCP actuator, (part number: 700000301091), which is shown in Fig. 3(a).
thedesignisshowedinFig.2(a).WhentheSCPisactivated Thethreaduseda200gload,whichshouldkeepthethread
by Joule heating, the two ﬁngers of the gripper tend to close taut and straight while being twisted, because it may twine
asillustratedinFig.2(b).Whenencounteredwiththegrasped during the coil-forming if the load could not keep the ﬁber
object, the Fin Ray Effect will operate and the ﬁngers will tight, also it should not be too heavy to make the thread
conform around the object to realize ﬁrm grasping as shown snap during the process. The setup of fabrication is shown
in Fig. 2(c). The gripper is fabricated by soft material so as Fig. 4. At a certain point, the twisting of the thread will
that it can handle fragile objects safely beneﬁted from its begintoformone-plycoilsalongitslength(Fig.3(b)).When
inherent compliance. The novelty of this gripper design is the thread is completely coiled, it is double-backed on itself
thatusingaSCPactuatortoactuatetheﬁn-raygrippermakes to create a two-ply polymer. This prevents the coils from
the whole structure lightweight and compact. Compared to unwinding, just as Fig. 3(c) shows.
the gripper in [22], a motor holder together with the motor After the initial procedure, the SCP could not behave
andpulleyarenolongerneeded,whichalsomakesitpossible well, as a precursor, we could ﬁnd that it is curly in a
for miniaturization of the gripper for applications such as natural state and could only perform few strokes. Thus,
in minimally invasive surgery. As an end effector attached coiled ﬁber needs electrothermal annealing and training to
to the robotic arm, the reduced weight contributed by this strengthen performance. A large load (400 g) is used during
novel gripper would improve the load carrying capability of theannealingprocess.Asquarevoltageof17Vpulseof2.5
the whole robotic manipulator. seconds on and then 20 seconds off was applied 5 times at
1829
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:30:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLEI:PARAMETERSOFTHEROBOTICMANIPULATOR
Parameters Values
SCPActuatorsLengthfortheRoboticArm 105mm
SCPActuatorLengthfortheSoftGripper 55mm
◦
MaximumAngleOutputforEachBallJoint 14
PowerSupplyforMaximumAngleOutput 14V,5A
OriginalGripperFingertipDistance 35mm
MaximumGripperFingertipDistanceVariation 30mm
Power Supply for Maximum Gripper Fingertip
7V,3.01A
DistanceVariation
Fig.5:Controlboardoftheroboticmanipulator.
ﬁrst, then one cycle of 5 seconds voltage on was applied
following 50 seconds rest time. This way could heat the
coiledﬁberrapidlyandthenprovideenoughtimeforcooling
and elongation before the next cycle. Upon further applying
cyclic voltage, the length of the coiled ﬁber would achieve
a maximum strain. Then, we replaced the 400 g mass load Fig.6:Modelforopenloopcontrol.(a)Geometricrelationoftherobotic
with a 100 g mass to continue the annealing training, to arm.(b)GeometricrelationofcontractedSCPinasinglejoint.
eliminate the effect of over elongation of the heavy mass
load. At last, we tested it with a cyclic voltage pulse 8 V
(20 s on and 50 s off) with 100 g load, and it could be output performance with applied electrical voltage under
observed that the displacement is stable. This could be seen isometricconditions.Thus,wecouldbuilddirectrelationship
as the ﬁnal stable state. Further details with regard to the between electric input and mechanical output based on the
fabrication process of SCP actuators can be found in [24, characteristics of the actuator, which means we could use
25]. Performance parameters of the fabricated SCP actuator a simple electro-mechanical open-loop control model to
(105mmlength)are:maximalstrokeof15%,weightof0.26 produce the desired displacement and force [27]. However,
g(withoutelectrode)andelectricalresistanceof0.05Ω/mm. open-loop control is usually not accurate especially when
there is disturbance in the working environment. Therefore,
B. Assembly of the proposed robotic manipulator
it’s also necessary to design a closed-loop system to control
The robotic manipulator consists of a robotic arm body, a the robotic manipulator. Open-loop and closed-loop control
soft gripper body and 7 SCP actuators. The ball-and-socket ofSCPactuatorsarealsoreportedinliterature[13],however
joints composing the robotic arm body are 3D printed by many parameters need to be tested and considered for the
polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) and the soft gripper body control. Moreover, the control in their study is aimed at a
is 3D printed by polyurethane. SCP actuators are assembled singleactuator.Differentfromtheirresearch,theclosedloop
to the two ball-and-socket joints and the gripper with pre- control in our study is aimed at a robotic module (joint),
tension of 0.2 N. Then we integrated the arm and the which is simple and easy to achieve.
soft gripper to build a robotic manipulator. The dimensions
and workspace of the proposed robotic manipulator are A. Open-loop control of the robotic arm
listed in Table I. The control board is shown as Fig. 5.
A geometric relation between the displacement of the
We used 4 serial 18650 Lithium ion batteries (maximum
SCP actuators and the rotational angles is shown as Fig.
output: 14.8 V/ 5 A) and adjusted the voltage input using a
6. According to the relationship between the displacement
voltage regular (LM2596S DC-DC). The voltage pulse was
of the SCP actuator and the applied voltage, we could get a
controlledusingtheelectromagneticrelay(SRD-05VDC-SL-
directrelationshipbetweentherotationangleofeachjointθ
C). An Arduino UNO was used to collect data, control the
and voltage input. To obtain the relationship, we have made
relay and communicate with PC.
some assumptions in this study:
IV. EXPERIMENTS 1) Ball-and-socket joint rotates smoothly with negligible
As discussed in previous sections, the accumulation of friction;
Joule heating is the driving force for the contraction of the 2) SCP Muscles keep tight and move smoothly through
SCP. However, a direct method to measure the temperature the ﬁxed holes without friction and jerks;
isnotavailableasthesmallsize ofSCP,whichprohibitsthe 3)InputdisplacementofSCPmuscleisknownpreviously
use of an infrared thermometer or thermocouple [26]. Fortu- for applied voltage using the linear model based on experi-
nately, SCP actuator could have an ideal linear displacement mental measurements [28];
1830
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:30:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 9: Closed-loop control for joint angle of the arm using a feedback
design.
Fig. 7: Open-loop control result of the robotic manipulator’s single joint. B. Close-loop control of the robotic arm
(a)Timedomainanglechangeundervariousvoltages.(b)Maximumangle
outputwithrespecttovoltage. From previous discussion, the relationship between joint
angle output and voltage input is nonlinear, thus in order to
get more accurate angle output, we need to use a feedback
controlsystemtocontroltheSCPmusclebasedontheangle
feedback.Inthisstudy,themeasuredjointanglefromtheGY
25 Tilt Mode is utilized to build the closed loop system.
The actuation of the SCP muscle is based on the Joule-
heating, thus we could use an impulse voltage and modulate
Fig.8:Pulsecontrolscheme.
the width of the positive pulse to adjust the accumulation of
Joule-heating. Fig. 8 shows the applied voltage pulse, here
T period is 0.5 s.
4) The extending of unactuated muscles due to the con-
Closed-loop control of angles is performed by closing the
tractionofactuatedmusclesdoesnotaffectthedisplacement
loop on the error between a reference angle and measured
of actuated muscle.
angle.Fig.9showstheclosed-loopcontroldesign,according
And from the Fig. 6(b), we can get the contracted SCP
length in (cid:52)ABC: to the error, we used a proportional term Kp to amplify it,
whichcouldreducetherisetime,however,wouldhavelarge
AB=BD−AD=l3−l3−col2stθanθ2 +l2tanθ2 (1) oastnvadetersdheerorrioovtra..tiTTvhheuetnse,rmmwaepKutdhseetodourtehtpdeuutacdetodtihtthieoenowvoeifdrstihhnotoeofgtrtahanledtpeosrtsmeitaidvKyei
pulse (T ) from 0 to T.
− − θ on
AC=l1+l2 (l3 l2tan2)tanθ (2) Using a 10 V power supply, we were able to achieve the
desiredanglewithasteadystatewithameanerrorof1.94%,
∠ asFig.10(a)shown.Here,thedottedlinesindicatethetarget
cos BAC=sinθ (3)
angle while the measured real angle data are ﬁtted using a
Using cosine theorem we can get: 7th order polynomial and shown as solid line. Fig. 10(b)
shows that with a higher power supply, it could have faster
− × × ×
BC2=AB2+AC2 2 AB AC sinθ (4) response without large overshoot and could produce larger
angle output (steady state mean error 1.73%).
Sincejointrotationangleθ issmallinthisstudy,approxi- According to Fig. 7 and Fig. 10, we can ﬁnd that closed
≈
mationismadeas:sinθ θ.SubstituteEq.(4)equationwith loop control can get a more accurate angle output (steady
Eqs. (1)-(3), we can get the relationship between the length state mean error around 2% for closed loop control and
of contracted SCP (denoted as L) and angle θ as follows: 8% for open loop control). Then, closed loop control has a
faster response (around 3 s response for 12-V power supply
×
θ =α L2+β (5) closed loop control and 5 s for open-loop control). For
open loop control, achieving different angle needs provide
where α =− 1 , β = (l1+l2)2 . various voltage, where closed loop control only needs a
2l1l3+2l2l3 2l1l3+2l2l3
Thus, we could control the robotic manipulator using constant power supply. Closed loop control can also solve
open-loopcontrolbasedontherelationshipbetweenθ andL environmental noise, because of the feedback loop. The
giveninEq.(5).WeusedaGY25TiltModetomeasurethe detailed comparison between closed loop control and open
angleandtheinputvoltageincreasedfrom8Vto14Vwith loop control is listed in Table II.
a 5s on. Fig. 7(a) shows the time domain angle changed
C. Characterization of the soft gripper
for a single ball joint moving under various voltage input
values. It is obvious that with larger voltage input, the angle Inthissection,wealsoappliedasquarevoltagetotheSCP
output reach the steady value faster. And Fig. 7(b) exhibits actuator. The contraction of the SCP leads to a shortening
a 2nd order relationship between the steady or maximum of the distance between the ﬁngers. The base of the gripper
angle output and increased voltage, which is validated from was ﬁxed and then we measured the distance between the
thegeometricrelationshipderivation.Thus,wecouldcontrol ﬁngertips.TheexperimentsetupisshowedinFig.11(a).The
the robotic manipulator with simple open-loop control. power-ontimeis5sand10s,andthepower-offtimeis40s
1831
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:30:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.10:Feedbackcontrolresult.(a)With10-Vpowersupply.(b)With12-V
powersupply.
TABLEII:THECOMPARISONBETWEENCLOSEDLOOPCONTROL
ANDOPENLOOPCONTROL
Fig. 11: Soft gripper characterization. (a) Experimental setup. (b) SCP
Typeofcon- Steady state Response Power Anti-
actuator5spoweron.(c)SCPactuator10spoweron.
trol meanerror time supply interference
Closed loop Constant
2% 3s Yes
control voltage
Open loop Various
8% 5s No
control voltage
and50s,respectively.Thedistance-to-voltagerelationshipis
illustratedinFig.11(b)andFig.11(c),wherewecanseethat
thedistance-to-voltagerelationshippresentsagoodlinearity.
Thus, we can simply get the desirable distance by adjusting
the applied voltage input.
D. Grasping demonstration of the robotic manipulator
In this test, we integrate the ball-and-socket joint based
robotic arm with a soft material gripper to build a compact
robotic manipulator. The robotic manipulator is used to pick Fig. 12: The process of pick and drop a strawberry using the proposed
andplaceastrawberryfromaplatformtoapaperboxbased robotic manipulator. (a) Approaching to the strawberry. (b) Grasping the
object.(c)Droppingtheobject.(d)Recoveringtooriginalstate.
ontheangularfeedbackcontrol,snapshotsoftheapplication
demo are shown in Fig. 12. Firstly, the robotic arm is
powered to approach the strawberry (Fig. 12(a)). Then, the
softgripperispowerontograspthestrawberry(Fig.12(b)). output. These controls do not rely on complicated model
Due to the soft material composing the gripper and the Fin with experimentally tested parameters, yet are proved to be
Ray structure, the gripper can perform safe contact with the effective.Atlast,weintegratetheball-and-socketjointbased
fragile object and adapt well to the object’s shape passively. robotic arm with a Fin Ray Effect inspired soft gripper as
After grasping, the robotic arm moves to the designated an end effector to build a whole robotic manipulator using
position and SCP muscle in the soft gripper is powered SCP muscles as actuators. For demonstration, this robotic
off to drop the strawberry in the box (Fig. 12(c)). Lastly, manipulator is utilized to pick and place a fragile fruit from
robotic manipulator returns and recovers to its primary state a platform to a box based on the angle feedback control.
(Fig. 12(d)) and a grasping task is completed. The grasping Both the bio-inspired robotic arm and the soft griper are
demonstration of the proposed robotic manipulator can also actuated by SCP muscles thus requires no extra motors,
be seen in the video attachment of this paper. makingthewholeroboticmanipulatorcompact.Thematerial
we used to 3D print the arm is PBT, which is $11.54 per
V. CONCLUSIONS kilogram. And for polyurethane, which used in soft gripper
Artiﬁcial muscles are attracting lots of academic attention is $28.26 per kilogram. Nylon ﬁshing line used to fabricate
recently[29-31]andtheyprovidenewalternativesforrobotic SCPis$0.3permeter.Thus,thetotalcostofourmanipulator
actuation. In this study, we have presented a novel robotic is$3.5,whichisextremelylow.Therefore,thewholerobotic
manipulator powered by the high-performance SCP artiﬁcial manipulator in this study is low-cost.
muscles. Themanipulator iscomposed bya roboticarm and In future, we can change the arrangement of the SCP
an end effector. The robotic arm design takes inspiration musclesintheroboticarmtochangethedegreesoffreedom
from musculoskeletal system. A simple open-loop control of the manipulator. More ball joints will also be cascaded to
of the bio-inspired arm is built, which is based on the construct a hyper-redundant robotic arm (as elephant truck
geometricrelationshipderivation.Furthermore,aclosed-loop type)[32].Inaddition,pressuresensorwillalsobeintegrated
controlisdesignedtoprovidemoreaccurateandsteadyangle tothesoftgrippertorealizeclose-loopcontactforcecontrol.
1832
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:30:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES [18] B.Pawlowskietal.,“ModelingofSoftRobotsActuatedbyTwisted-
and-CoiledActuators,”IEEE/ASME Trans.Mechatron.,vol.24,no.
[1] S. Ikemoto, Y. Kimoto, and K. Hosoda, “Shoulder complex linkage 1,pp.5-15,2019.
mechanism for humanlike musculoskeletal robot arms,” Bioinspir. [19] S. M. Mirvakili and I. W. Hunter, “Artiﬁcial muscles: Mechanisms,
Biomim.,vol.10,no.6,p.066009,2015. applications,andchallenges,”Adv.Mater.,vol.30,no.6,p.1704407,
[2] Z.XuandE.Todorov,“Designofahighlybiomimeticanthropomor- 2018.
phicrobotichandtowardsartiﬁciallimbregeneration,”inProc.IEEE [20] L. Wu, I. Chauhan, and Y. Tadesse, “A Novel Soft Actuator for
Int.Conf.Robot.Autom.,2016,pp.3485-3492. the Musculoskeletal System,” Adv. Mater., Technol., vol. 3, no. 5,
[3] C. Richter et al., “Musculoskeletal robots: scalability in neural con- p.1700359,2018.
trol,”IEEE Robot.Autom.Mag.,vol.23,no.4,pp.128-137,2016. [21] L.Kniese,“Loadcarryingelementwithﬂexibleouterskin,”European
[4] R.Bogue,“Artiﬁcialmusclesandsoftgripping:areviewoftechnolo- Patent,EP1040999A2,1999.
giesandapplications,”Ind.Robot,vol.39,no.6,pp.535-540,2012. [22] W. Crooks et al., “Fin ray effect inspired soft robotic gripper: from
[5] J.Mintenbeck,R.Estan˜a,andH.Woern,“Designofamodular,ﬂexible therobosoftgrandchallengetowardoptimization,”Front.Robot.AI,
instrument with integrated DC-motors for minimal invasive robotic vol.3,p.70,2016.
surgery,” in Proc. IEEE/ASME Int.Conf. Adv. Intel. Mechatron.,, [23] C.I.Basson,G.Bright,andA.J.Walker,“Testingﬂexiblegrippersfor
2013,pp.1249-1254. geometricandsurfacegraspingconformityinreconﬁgurableassembly
[6] C. B. Yigit and P. Boyraz, “Design and modelling of a cable-driven systems,”S.Afr.J.Ind.Eng.,vol.29,no.1,pp.128-142,2018.
parallel-serieshybridvariablestiffnessjointmechanismforrobotics,” [24] J.Zhangetal.,“Modelingandinversecompensationofhysteresisin
Mech.Sci.,vol.8,no.1,pp.65-77,2017. supercoiled polymer artiﬁcial muscles,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
[7] J. Zhang et al., “Robotic Artiﬁcial Muscles: Current Progress and vol.,no.2,pp.773-780,2017.
FuturePerspectives,”IEEETrans.Robot.,vol.35,no.3,pp.761–781, [25] F.KaramiandY.Tadesse,“Modelingoftwistedandcoiledpolymer
2019. (TCP) muscle based on phenomenological approach,” Smart Mater.
[8] P. Polygerinos et al., “Soft robotics: Review of ﬂuid-driven intrinsi- Struct.,vol.26,no.12,p.125010,2017.
cally soft devices; manufacturing, sensing, control, and applications [26] M. Suzuki and N. Kamamichi, “Displacement control of an
in human-robot interaction,” Adv. Eng. Mater., vol. 19, no. 12, antagonistic-typetwistedandcoiledpolymeractuator,”Smart Mater.
p.1700016,2017. Struct.,vol.27,no.3,p.035003,2018.
[9] H. Rodrigue et al., “An overview of shape memory alloy-coupled [27] T. A. Luong et al., “Nonlinear Tracking Control of a Conductive
actuatorsandrobots,”Soft Robot.,vol.4,no.1,pp.3-15,2017. Supercoiled Polymer Actuator,” Soft Robot., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 190-
[10] F.Chen,M.Y.Wang,J.Zhu,andY.F.Zhang,“Interactionsbetween 203,2018.
dielectric elastomer actuators and soft bodies,” Soft Robot., vol. 3, [28] Y. Yang et al., “A Novel Variable Stiffness Actuator Based on
no.4,pp.161-169,2016. PneumaticActuationandSupercoiledPolymerArtiﬁcialMuscles,”in
[11] K.Jung,J.Nam,andH.Choi,“Investigationsonactuationcharacter- Proc.IEEE Int.Conf.Robot.Autom.,2019,pp.3983-3989.
isticsofIPMCartiﬁcialmuscleactuator,”SensorsActuatorsA,Phys., [29] M. Kanik et al., “Strain-programmable ﬁber-based artiﬁcial muscle,”
vol.107,no.2,pp.183-192,2003. Science,vol.365,no.6449,pp.145-150,2019.
[12] C. S. Haines et al., “Artiﬁcial muscles from ﬁshing line and sewing [30] J. Mu et al., “Sheath-run artiﬁcial muscles,” Science, vol. 365, no.
thread,”Science,vol.343,no.6173,pp.868–872,2014. 6449,pp.150-155,2019.
[13] M. C. Yip and G. Niemeyer, “On the control and properties of [31] J. Yuan et al., “Shape memory nanocomposite ﬁbers for untethered
supercoiledpolymerartiﬁcialmuscles,”IEEE Trans.Robot.,vol.33, high-energymicroengines,”Science,vol.365,no.6449,pp.155-158,
no.3,pp.689–699,2017. 2019.
[14] L.Wuetal.,“Compactandlow-costhumanoidhandpoweredbynylon [32] Y. Yang et al., “3D printing of variable stiffness hyper-redundant
artiﬁcialmuscles,”Bioinspir.Biomim.,vol.12,no.2,p.026004,2017. robotic arm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2016, pp.
[15] L.Suttonetal.,“Designofanassistivewristorthosisusingconductive 3871-3877.
nylonactuators,”inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.Biomed.Robot.Biomech.,
2016,pp.1074–1079.
[16] Y.Yangetal.,“ALow-costInchworm-inspiredSoftRobotDrivenby
Supercoiled Polymer Artiﬁcial Muscle,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Soft Robot.,2019,pp.161-166.
[17] J.Sun,B.Pawlowski,andJ.Zhao,“EmbeddedandControllableShape
Morphing with Twisted-and-Coiled Actuators,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int.Conf.Intell.Robot.Syst.,2018,pp.5912-5917.
1833
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:30:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 