2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Design, Development, and Control of a Tendon-actuated Exoskeleton
for Wrist Rehabilitation and Training
Mihai Dragusanu1, Tommaso Lisini Baldi1, Zubair Iqbal1, Domenico Prattichizzo1,2, and Monica Malvezzi1
Abstract—Robot rehabilitation is an emerging and promis-
ing topic that incorporates robotics with neuroscience and
rehabilitation to deﬁne new methods for supporting patients
withneurologicaldiseases.Asaconsequence,therehabilitation
process could increase the efﬁcacy exploiting the potentialities
of robot-mediated therapies. Nevertheless, nowadays clinical
effectiveness is not enough to widely introduce robotic tech-
nologies in such social contexts. In this paper we propose a
step further, presenting an innovative exoskeleton for wrist
ﬂexion/extension and adduction/abduction motion training. It
is designed to be wearable and easy to control and manage. It
can be used by the patient in collaboration with the therapist
orautonomously.Thepaperintroducesthemainstepsofdevice
designanddevelopmentandpresentssometestsconductedwith
an user with limited wrist mobility.
I. INTRODUCTION
For a person with disabilities, technology plays an impor-
tant role, since it offers the opportunity to radically change
Fig. 1: Exoskeleton prototype. Top ﬁgure: the exoskeleton
her/his everyday life. Tools and supports can help in the
worn by the user. Bottom ﬁgures: two versions of the hand
autonomy of activities of daily living (ADLs), communica-
support and forearm support.
tion,study,andintheprocessofintegration.Nowadaysthere
are countless technologies in the medical and assistive ﬁeld
the functional systems that are intact, it seeks to guarantee
which allow people with disabilities to have a life that is
better control of one’s own person and the surrounding
almost completely “normal”.
environment, reducing the perception of discomfort deriving
Thanks to the progresses in health-care and medicine, the
from the limitations imposed by the disease. Its goal is to
vast majority of humans are living a longer and healthier
encourage,atleastpartially,therecoveryoflostfunctionality
life than in the past. On the other hand, the aging factor
and to enable the patient to be more autonomous in ADLs.
is signiﬁcant in rehabilitation, since most of the chronic
Traditionalphysicaltherapiesimprovefunctionalrecovery,
diseases related to the musculoskeletal and nervous system
but usually they are expensive, require a lot of workforce,
are within the aged people. According to the World Health
and the patient and the therapist must physically meet for
Organisation (WHO) statistics, nearly one billion people
the whole therapy duration.
worldwide are suffering due to the neurological and mus-
Forthisreasontheuseofroboticdevicescanbebeneﬁcial,
culoskeletal diseases [1].
as it requires a smaller workforce, and allows a more lasting
Technology in general and more speciﬁcally assistive
and more intense therapy. An evident advantage of these
robots will be effective if devices are accepted and regularly
technologies is the possibility of realizing the rehabilitation
usedbythepeoplewithphysicaldisabilitiesintheireveryday
process in patient’s home, providing the possibility of more
life,outsidehospitals,laboratoriesandrehabilitationcenters.
frequent and accessible exercises [3].
In this perspective, it’s worth to mention the Cybathlon
One of the ﬁrst examples of robot rehabilitation has
initiative, an international competition in which people with
been presented in [4], this study concluded that patients
physical disabilities compete in completing everyday tasks
in the post-stroke sub-acute phase exhibit greater functional
using latest robotic technology [2].
recoveryiftheyreceivedroboticassistanceinadditiontotra-
Rehabilitation has the objective of maintaining or recov-
ditionaltherapy.Robotsinrehabilitationreplacethephysical
ering the patient’s physical abilities. Taking advantage of all
effort of the therapist, facilitating recovery and maintenance
TheresearchleadingtotheseresultshasreceivedfundingfromtheEuro- of patient physical abilities, with advantages in terms of
peanUnion’sHorizon2020researchandinnovationprogrammeundergrant availability and the therapist’s strength. The use of robots
agreement n. 688857 of the project “ SOFTPRO - Synergy-based Open-
in rehabilitation needs to be used according to well deﬁned
sourceFoundationsandTechnologiesforProstheticsandRehabilitatiOn”.
1 arewiththeDepartmentofInformationEngineeringandMathematics, neuroscientiﬁc principles [5].
{
UniversityofSiena,ViaRom}a56,I-53100Siena,Italy. dragusanu,lisini, In general, the upper limb plays an important role for all
iqbal,prattichizzo,malvezzi @diism.unisi.it
daily activities, and various exoskeleton devices have been
2 isalsowiththeDepartmentofAdvancedRobotics,IstitutoItalianodi
Tecnologia,Genova,16163,Italy.domenico.prattichizzo@iit.it developed as support tools for this part of the body [6],
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1749
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [7]. In particular, different devices speciﬁcally developed
for the wrist have been presented [8]–[11]. Notwithstanding chain. Focusing on the upper body, commercially available
the technological developments and the evidence of clinical devices, like the Leap Motion (Leap Motion Inc., USA),
effectiveness of robotic technologies for upper-limb neuro- allow to simultaneously estimate the full hand and wrist
rehabilitation, there are still some limits in their diffusion. conﬁgurations. However, camera-based solutions have some
In [12] the main technological, behavior, and economic known limitations: cameras might not work correctly in an
barriers, and communication biases between the producers outdoor environment due to the lighting interference and
ofthetechnologiesthatstillneedtobesolvedarediscussed. occlusions of the body itself may induce a poor estimation.
Inthiswork,wepresentanexoskeletonforwristactuation Another way to estimate the pose of the human body is
that can be used both for daily activities as well as for to use Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) tech-
long term rehabilitation process (Fig. 1). The main criterion nology. In particular, a MARG (Magnetic, Angular Rate,
pursuedinthedesignprocessistheeaseofuse.Thepatient, and Gravity) board consists of a MEMS triaxial gyroscope,
even with limitation in upper limb motion capabilities, can accelerometer, and magnetometer. The sensors board can be
wear the device and use it also without the need of external integrated with a wearable device and used to reconstruct
support. The exoskeleton structure is made of thermoplastic the pose of the human body. The main drawback of MARG
material, that can be adapted to user’s speciﬁc needs. The sensors is that the majority of the algorithms rely on the
wrist is tendon-actuated and the number of components has magnetometer to estimate the orientation, thus they are sen-
beenlimitedasmuchaspossible.Actuators,electroniccom- sitivetolocalvariationsinthemagneticﬁeld.Inspiteofthat,
ponents,andbatteriesareincludedintheforearmpartofthe tracking systems based on this technology are commercially
exoskeleton,thedatatransmissionfrom/tothePCismanaged available and allow to accurately track the whole body,
by a wireless system. A graphical user interface allows the bothoutdoorandindoor,inunstructuredenvironments,under
user to choose the exercise and to set its parameters, as well different lighting conditions, and free from grounded/bulky
as to monitor it during the execution. hardware [14]. Focusing on arms and hands, systems using
Since the exoskeleton hand and arm parts are not con- inertial sensors were proposed in [15], [16]. In [15], the
strained by the mechanical structure, a key aspect of the authors made a whole-hand tracking system by means of
proposed exoskeleton is represented by the tracking of wrist sensors placed on the phalanges A similar device, using
movements. Also for this aspect, we selected a tradeoff triaxial accelerometers, was developed by Kim et al. [17].
between accuracy of the estimation and and ease-of use A sensing glove composed of inertial and magnetic sensors
of the device. The solution that we developed for the was proposed in [18]. For each ﬁnger, the authors exploited
tracking system is based on two Inertial Measurement Units only triaxial gyroscopes and accelerometers.
(IMUs),whicharelow-costelectronicdevicesintegratingan By considering the above mentioned tracking methodolo-
accelerometer and a gyroscope on a single board. In this gies, we focus on inertial MEMS technology to estimate the
work, we developed data acquisition and processing of IMU hand pose. This choice meets the requirements of designing
sensors, their translation in biomechanical information and a wearable, robust, and low cost sensing system capable of
onlinedatamonitoring.Theresultingtrackingsystemisable working indoor and outdoor, with no limitation in lighting
to record the user’s motion (e.g., an exercise suggested and condition. Moreover, differently from MARG devices the
guided by the physiotherapist), to monitor/control exercises magnetometerisnotusedtocomputetheorientation,thusthe
guided by the exoskeleton, and to monitor patient’s range of orientation estimate is reliable also in presence of magnetic
motionandimprovements.Tothebesttoourknowledge,this disturbances (i.e., the irregular magnetic ﬁeld generated by
representtheﬁrstattemptto combinealltheaforementioned the motors).
features in a single wearable device.
III. DEVICEDESCRIPTION
II. TRACKINGWITHIMUS,STATEOFTHEART
Several techniques for human body tracking are available, A. Mechanical design, kinematic requirements
both in a research phase and off-the-shelf. Optical trackers, Thetheexoskeletoniscomposedoftwoindependentrigid
camera based system, and fabric integrated sensors are the parts, one worn on the hand and one ﬁxed on the forearm.
most common and widespread technologies. Parts are connected by means of three tendons that are ﬁxed
Optical tracking systems such as Optitrack (NaturalPoint ononesidetothehand.Ontheotherside,theyarewrapped
Inc., USA) and Vicon (Vicon Motion Systems, UK) exploit around the pulleys connected to the shafts of three motors,
markers to estimate in real time the human posture with whose bodies are ﬁxed on forearm support. Assuming that
high precision and accuracy. On the other hand, they need the wrist can be modeled as a 2-DoF joint, three is the
a structured environment to work properly, thus they are minimum number of tendons that is necessary to actuate
neither wearable/portable, nor usable in outdoor scenarios. them (see for instance, the results presented in [19]).
Towards the concept of portability, camera-based tracking Letusindicatewithθ andθ theadduction/abductionand
a e
algorithms became a common solution due to improvements ﬂexion/extensionrotations,respectively.Duetotheabovein-
in computer vision techniques and progressive growth in troducedmotionrequirements,thefollowingvariationranges
GPU computational capabilities. are considered:
In[13],theauthorsdevelopedatrackerwhichemployeda
− ◦ ◦ − ◦ ◦
commercialRGBcameratoreconstructthehumankinematic 45 <θ <20 , 65 <θ <65
a e
1750
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig.2:Wristandexoskeletonscheme.Thewristismodelled Fig.3: CADmodel ofexoskeleton supportson thehand and
as a 2 DoFs universal joint, enabling the ﬂexion/extension on the forearm.
θ andadduction/abductionθ ofthehandw.r.t.theforearm.
e a
Three tendons connect the exoskeleton hand and forearm
supports and are actuated with three motors. Their angular
higher mechanical solicitations w.r.t. forearm support, so the
rotation is indicated with φ .
i advantage of thermoplastic material was not evident. For
thesereasonsdifferentversionsweredesigned,someofthem
Weindicatewithφ=[φ , φ , φ ]T avectorcollectingmo- were realized with Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS)
1 2 3
torrotationanglesandwithθ =[θ , θ ]T avectorcollecting material processed by a 3D printer, starting from a 3D-
a e
wrist rotation angles. The wrist/exoskeleton system can be CAD model of the hand and exploiting different shapes and
modeledasa2-DoFparallelmechanismwiththreeactuators, assemblies, to verify which was the optimal one in terms of
assketchedinFig.2.Aninversekinematicsrelationshipcan wearability. A 3D CAD model of the supports is reported in
bedeﬁned fromthe analysisof thesystem. Thisrelationship Fig. 3.
can be considered linear with good approximation Actuators, sensors, electronic components: Three Dy-
namixel XL-320 motors were employed. Each motor can
φ=J θ (1)
i generate a stall torque up to 0.39 Nm @ 7.4V, a value that
×
Inverse kinematics Jacobian matrix J is 3 2 and its terms is suitable for the exoskeleton applications. The position of
i
dependonwristandexoskeletonparameters.Itisinteresting the motors and the routing of the tendons on the forearm
tonoticethatφvaluescannotberandomlyselected,butneed waschosensotoguaranteebothasufﬁcientcomfortlevelto
Q
to belong to the 2-dimensional subspace whose basis is theuserandagoodtransmissionefﬁciency.Theexoskeleton
∈ Q ≤ ≤ ◦
deﬁned by J columns. If φ˜ , we can solve the direct range of motion depends on the rotation q (0 q 360 )
i i i
kinematic problem of each motor, resulting in a more effective control strategy.
θ =J#φ˜, (2) A 32bit Arm Cortex-M3 microcontroller controls the
i
motors by means of a library provided by the suppliers of
where # indicates the pseudo-inverse. the OpenCM9.04 board. While a RN42 Bluetooth module
Indicating with τ = [τ ,τ ]T the adduction/abduction embedded in the board, communicates data with a PC
w a e
and ﬂexion/extension wrist torques applied by the exoskele- application that allows the user to select and monitor the
ton and with τ = [τ ,τ ,τ ]T the torques applied the exercise.
m 1 2 3
motors, the following static relationship can be set: Overall, the forearm support includes the following com-
ponents: a board OpenCM9.04 C-Type; a Bluetooth module
τ =JTτ (3)
w i m RN42; three Dynamixel XL-320 Motors; two batteries of
B. Mechanical design 3.7V, 500mA; one IMU sensor (Xsens MTi-3). The hand
support includes only one IMU sensor. The IMU placed in
Supports: In the ﬁrst phase of mechanical design we
thehandispoweredusingthebatteriesplacedintheforearm.
compared and evaluated different solutions and manufactur-
IMUs raw data are transmitted to a remote PC using Xbee
ing processes. Realizing the entire exoskeleton (the part of
modules.
the hand and the part of the forearm) by means of addi-
Overall features: An image of the exoskeleton prototype,
tive manufacturing processes was not the optimal solution,
worn by the user, is reported in Fig. 1, whereas its main
especially for the part of the forearm, since a relatively
featuresaresummarizedinTableI.Itcanbenoticedthatthe
complex process was necessary to adapt the structure to
user’s forearm speciﬁc features, including for instance a 3D overall weight is quite low, about 300g, and also the overall
encumbrance is quite small, compared to other devices for
scan of the upper limb, the adaptation of 3D CAD ﬁles of
the same purpose [21], [22].
the support to the speciﬁc forearm, and the manufacturing
process itself. For the forearm support, we decided to adapt
IV. DEVICECONTROL
asolutionavailablefororthosesconsistinginshapingaplate
A. IMU
of thermoplastic material directly on user’s forearm [20].
Regardingthesupportonthehand,thiscomponenthasmore As aforementioned in the introduction, a viable way to
limited dimension, more complex geometry and relatively estimate the orientation of the hand is to use IMU sensors.
1751
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Parameter Value Unit
±
Range,ﬂexion/extension 65 deg
Range,adduction 45 deg
Range,abduction 20 deg
Fig. 4: Exoskeleton control scheme.
Weight 300 g
Actuatorstalltorque 0.39 Nm
× ×
Actuatordimensions 24 36 27 mm
respect to the initial conﬁguration results
Actuatorweight 16.7 g
⊗
Actuatornoloadspeed 114 rpm q (t)=Fq (t) Hqˆ
H H F
Maxyieldstress,forearmsupport 26 MPa
As a ﬁnal step, the result is converted into Euler Angles.
Maxyieldstress,handsupport 34 MPa
Maxtendonforce 15 N B. Control
Exoskeleton control scheme is sketched in Fig. 4. The
TABLE I: Main features of the wrist exoskeleton. input for the control scheme is the desired trajectory θ =
des
[θ ,θ ], that can be assigned by the user through
a,des e,des
The orientation of the hand with respect to the forearm the graphical user interface or previously recorded by IMU
(i.e., the wrist angles) is computed by means of two boards. sensors. θ values can be recorded for example during
des
AnIMUisplacedonthebackofthehand,whereasasecond the execution of an exercise in which the exoskeleton is
one is ﬁrmly attached to the exoskeleton. To compute the not actuated and wrist motion is manually guided by the
orientation of each board, we exploited and adapted the physiotherapist. Through inverse kinematic analysis, wrist
algorithm presented in [23]. The algorithm computes, for desired rotation angles are θ transformed in references
des
each IMU, the actual orientation with respect to its initial fortheactuators’controlsystemsφ (eq.(2)).Actualwrist
des
pose. Raw data from the sensors are collected and sent movement θ is monitored by the tracking system based on
wirelesslytoanexternalPCinchargeofallthemathematical IMU sensors during the exercise execution.
computations. The update rate for the system is 1kHz. In
C. User interface
what follows, we describe the procedure to calibrate the
sensinggloveandbrieﬂyoutlinethehandtrackingalgorithm A Matlab GUI interface (Fig. 5) has been developed to
based on IMU sensors. set exercise parameters and monitor them. When opening
1) Calibration: Each IMU board requires an initial cal- the application, the device has to be connected to the PC
ibration, which consists of two steps. In the ﬁrst step, the through the Bluetooth module.
user is asked to displace the hand in a known a-priori Once the exoskeleton is connected, the user can set a
position, e.g., the user places the hand in a ﬂat surface. In home position, or start the exercise. The user can also
thisphase,eachIMUboardcollects200samplestoestimate choose between an automatic or manual device control.
thegyroscopebias.Inthesecondstep,wecomputetheoffset Some exercises are already available in the interface, they
quaternion between the hand and the forearm. are the typical wrist exercises, like ﬂexion/extension and
2) Hand tracking algorithm: In what follows, we sum- abduction/adductionmotions.Foreachexercise,theusercan
marize the joint angles estimation, for more details, the select three different speeds (low, medium and high) and a
interested reader is referred to [23]. In this work, we use running time, thanks to the relative drop-down menus. The
quaternionstoestimatetheorientationofasingleIMUsensor user can also manually set a speciﬁc speed value and a
with respect to a reference frame. Using quaternion allows speciﬁc time duration for the exercise.
ustoovercometheproblemsintroducedbytheEulerangles, Once the start button is activated, the interface software
for instance, the gimbal-lock problem and the issues related takesallthedatasetbytheuserandsendittotheexoskeleton
to the trigonometric functions. In this algorithm and in the via Bluetooth communication. When the exercise starts, the
entire paper, we use the following convention to represent a software reads the values of motors’ rotation angles and
quaternion: q =[w x y z], where w is the real number. torquesandplotsthemonadiagramvisibleontheinterface.
LetSq (t)andSq (t)bethequaternionsthatexpressthe The manual control of the device is realized by four
H F
orientation, with respect to the Sensor reference frame Σ , buttonsontheinterface:ﬂexion(DOWN),extension(UP),ul-
S
of the frames associated to the hand, and to the forearm, nar adduction (LEFT) and radial abduction (RIGHT). While
respectively. Let Fqˆ be the offset quaternions between the one of the buttons is activated, the corresponding motion
H
hand and the forearm, estimated during the aforementioned is executed, until ﬁxed maximum thresholds are reached.
calibration phase. At a certain time instant t, the orientation Finally the disconnect button implements a function that
of the hand referred to the forearm can be computed as closes the Bluetooth communication and exits the program.
⊗ V. TESTS
Fq (t)=Fq (t) Sq (t),
H S H
Test 1: The system was evaluated on a subject with a
where Fq (t) is the conjugate quaternion of Sq (t). Then, severe limitations in extension motion (movement in ﬂexion
S F
thequaternionthatdescribestheorientationofthehandwith are with reduced problems) and some limitations in radial
1752
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. DesiredMotor1 DesiredMotor2 DesiredMotor3
Motor1 Motor2 Motor3
180
90
g]
e
D
[
s
gle 0
n
A
-90
-180
Fig. 5: Graphical user interface realised for device control.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Time[s]
adduction and ulnar abduction. Two typologies of exercises Fig.6:Test1,Flexion/Extensionrepresentativetrial.Dashed
suggestedbythephysiotherapistwereexploitedasvalidation curvesshowthedesiredangularpositionofthemotors,solid
mean. A ﬁrst set of tests were carried out to evaluate how ones represent the actual values. Desired motion of motors
motors follow a speciﬁc desired motion. Flexion/extension 2 and 3 are overlapped.
motion is obtained by setting the same proﬁle to actuators
2 and 3, and the opposite to actuator 1. To simulate a
ﬂexion/extension movement, the following reference values
were set to the actuators representativetrialforthistypeoftestsarereportedinFig.7.
− For the sake of space, we report in the paper only the
φ =φ =αsin(ωt), φ = αsin(ωt)
2,des 3,des 1,des motor reference/actual values for the ﬁrst experiment and
with α=1 rad, ω =1.1624 rad/s and 0<t<10 s. Each the estimated orientation data for the second one. Interested
trial lasted 10s. References and measured values of rotation readerisreferredtotheattachedvideoforfurtherdetailsand
angles of a representative trial are reported in Fig. 6. The plots.
ﬁgure shows how the actuators are able to follow the proﬁle
for the entire duration of the exercise. Ten repetitions of VI. DISCUSSION
the trial were performed and for each reference actual value
The increasing need for rehabilitation and assistance for
of the motors were recorded. We observed that the average
people with disabilities, implies that robotic care and reha-
◦
error in following the reference is 9.06 . Then we simulated bilitation may play an important role in the years ahead.
the ulnar adduction and radial abduction. To reproduce this
Nowadays,researchontheuseofroboticsystemsindifferent
motion, motor 1 is maintained steady, whereas motors 2 and
ﬁelds related to health-care is widespread and interesting
3 pull their tendons with opposite movements. To recreate
solutions are available in the literature. Robots are currently
this behavior the following reference proﬁles were used to
viewed as advanced therapy tools, even if in most of the
control the motors:
applicationtherapist’sguidanceisnecessary.Theavailability
− of more autonomous and intelligent processes in neurore-
φ =0, φ =αsin(ωt), φ = αsin(ωt)
1,des 2,des 3,des habilitation could increase the effectiveness of rehabilitation
with α = 1 rad, ω = 1.1624 rad/s and 0 < t < 10 s. process,sinceitwouldallowtoincreasethefrequencyofthe
Ten consecutive trials were performed. For each repetition exercises, reduce the costs for the patient and for the overall
desired rotation angle and real value of the motors were health-care system. However, there are still some barriers
recorded. We observed that the average error in tracking the in the diffusion of robotic systems in the daily life of the
◦
angular proﬁle was 9.94 . people, due to their complexity and costs.
Test 2: Another set of tests were aimed at verifying In this paper, we focus on the rehabilitation of upper limb
the capability of recording an exercise performed by a andwepresentthedesignandprototypeofatendonactuated
physiotherapist and reproduce it with the exoskeleton. As exoskeleton for wrist rehabilitation. The device is composed
graphically reported in Fig. 5, the system is able to record of two supports, one worn on the hand and one ﬁxed on
handmotionwithrespecttotheforearmthroughthetracking the forearm, connected by three tendons actuated by three
system. The recorded movement can be therefore trans- motors. The device actuates ﬂexion/extension and adduc-
formed in reference values for the actuators and reproduced tion/abductionwristmotions.Sincethedeviceistendonactu-
by the exoskeleton. A physiotherapist and a patient with ated, its conﬁguration is not constrained by the mechanical
limited mobility were involved in this test. We asked to the structure and a tracking system is needed to estimate the
physiotherapist to gently move for twelve seconds the hand relative motion between the hand and the forearm. We used
ofthepatientwhilethesystemwasrecordingthehandorien- twoIMUsensorstoperformthisestimation.Inthepaperwe
tation with respect to the forearm. Ten adduction/abduction describethemaincomponentsofthedevelopedexoskeleton,
and ten ﬂexion/extension exercises were carried out. One its control and how it can be used to realize wrist exercises.
1753
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 100
40 Roll Pitch Yaw Roll Pitch Yaw
eg] 20 eg] 50
D D
[ [
s s
gle 0 gle
n n 0
A− A
20
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Time [s] Time [s]
Fig. 7: Test 2 representative trials. (left) Adduction/Abduction motion (right) Flexion/Extension motion.
The main features of the developed device are: [9] H. Al-Fahaam, S. Davis, and S. Nefti-Meziani, “Wrist rehabilitation
– light weight: the overall weight, including actuators, exoskeleton robot based on pneumatic soft actuators,” in IEEE Int.
∼ Conf. for Students on Applied Engineering (ICSAE). IEEE, 2016,
sensors, batteries and electronic components, is 300 g;
pp.491–496.
– wearability and adaptability: the forearm support is [10] C.Lambelet,M.Lyu,D.Woolley,R.Gassert,andN.Wenderoth,“The
madeofthermoplasticmaterial,anditsshapecanbeadapted ewrist—a wearable wrist exoskeleton with semg-based force control
for stroke rehabilitation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Rehabilitation
to user’s speciﬁc characteristics, also hand support has been
Robotics. IEEE,2017,pp.726–733.
designed to be resistant, comfortable and easily wearable; [11] T. Higuma, K. Kiguchi, and J. Arata, “Low-proﬁle two-degree-of-
– ease of use: a graphical user interface allows the user freedomwristexoskeletondeviceusingmultiplespringblades,”IEEE
Robot.Autom.Lett.,vol.3,no.1,pp.305–311,2017.
or the trainer to easily set and monitor exercise parameters;
[12] G.Turchetti,N.Vitiello,S.Romiti,E.Geisler,andS.Micera,“Why
–costs:theoverallcostofthecomponentsthatwereneces- effectivenessofrobot-mediatedneurorehabilitationdoesnotnecessar-
sarytorealizetheprototypeisabout150euros,althoughthis ilyinﬂuenceitsadoption,”IEEEReviewsinBiomedicalEngineering,
vol.7,pp.143–153,2014.
estimation is approximated, and that a further optimization
[13] A. Qammaz, N. Plastira, V. Vouton, and H. GR70013, “Mocapnet:
process is needed, we believe that the price for the user will Ensemble of snn encoders for 3d human pose estimation in rgb
be relatively accessible for potential users. images,”2019.
Future developments of this research activity will include [14] A. M. Sabatini, “Estimating three-dimensional orientation of human
bodypartsbyinertial/magneticsensing,”Sensors,vol.11,no.2,pp.
theintegrationoftheexoskeletonwithothertypesofsensors 1489–1525,2011.
(e.g. electromyography sensors, EMG) and haptic devices, [15] T. Lisini Baldi, S. Scheggi, L. Meli, M. Mohammadi, and D. Prat-
to increase its versatility in neuro-rehabilitation processes. tichizzo, “GESTO: A Glove for Enhanced Sensing and Touching
Based on Inertial and Magnetic Sensors for Hand Tracking and
Furthermore, we will extend the study to other upper limb CutaneousFeedback,”IEEETrans.Human-Mach.Syst.,vol.47,no.6,
movements, including elbow and shoulder and we will ex- pp.1066–1076,Dec2017.
tend the tests to more users. [16] M.Mohammadi,T.LisiniBaldi,S.Scheggi,andD.Prattichizzo,“Fin-
gertipforceestimationviainertialandmagneticsensorsindeformable
REFERENCES objectmanipulation,”inProc.IEEEHapticsSymposium. IEEE,2016,
pp.284–289.
[1] W. H. Organization, World health statistics 2016: monitoring health [17] Y. S. Kim, B. S. Soh, and S. Lee, “A new wearable input device:
fortheSDGssustainabledevelopmentgoals. WorldHealthOrgani- Scurry,” IEEE Transaction on Industrial Electronics, vol. 52, no. 6,
zation,2016. pp.1490–1499,2005.
[2] R. Riener, “The cybathlon promotes the development of assistive [18] P. Kieliba, P. Veltink, T. Lisini Baldi, D. Prattichizzo, G. Santaera,
technology for people with physical disabilities,” Journal of neuro- A. Bicchi, M. Bianchi, and B. Van Beijnum, “Comparison of three
engineeringandrehabilitation,vol.13,no.1,p.49,2016. handposereconstructionalgorithmsusinginertialandmagneticmea-
[3] P.Lum,D.Reinkensmeyer,R.Mahoney,W.Z.Rymer,andC.Burgar, surementunits,”in2018IEEE-RAS18thInternationalConferenceon
“Robotic devices for movement therapy after stroke: current status HumanoidRobots(Humanoids). IEEE,2018,pp.1–9.
andchallengestoclinicalacceptance,”Topicsinstrokerehabilitation, [19] S.C.Jacobsen,H.Ko,E.K.Iversen,andC.C.Davis,“Antagonistic
vol.8,no.4,pp.40–53,2002. control of a tendon driven manipulator,” in Proceedings, 1989 Inter-
[4] H. I. Krebs, N. Hogan, M. L. Aisen, and B. T. Volpe, “Robot-aided nationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation. IEEE,1989,pp.
neurorehabilitation,”IEEEtransactionsonrehabilitationengineering, 1334–1339.
vol.6,no.1,pp.75–87,1998. [20] C. E. Dombroski, M. E. Balsdon, and A. Froats, “The use of a low
[5] G. Antonucci and S. Paolucci, “Tailored, technological therapy: cost3dscanningandprintingtoolinthemanufactureofcustom-made
Physician and therapists point of view on robotic rehabilitation,” in footorthoses:apreliminarystudy,”BMCresearchnotes,vol.7,no.1,
ConvergingClinicalandEngineeringResearchonNeurorehabilitation p.443,2014.
III: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on NeuroRe- [21] L.Cappello,N.Elangovan,S.Contu,S.Khosravani,J.Konczak,and
habilitation (ICNR2018), October 16-20, 2018, Pisa, Italy, vol. 21. L.Masia,“Robot-aidedassessmentofwristproprioception,”Frontiers
Springer,2018,p.261. inhumanneuroscience,vol.9,p.198,2015.
[6] R.Gopura,D.Bandara,K.Kiguchi,andG.K.Mann,“Developments [22] A.Gupta,M.K.O’Malley,V.Patoglu,andC.Burgar,“Design,control
in hardware systems of active upper-limb exoskeleton robots: A andperformanceofricewrist:aforcefeedbackwristexoskeletonfor
review,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 75, pp. 203–220, rehabilitation and training,” The International Journal of Robotics
2016. Research,vol.27,no.2,pp.233–251,2008.
[7] S. Hesse, H. Schmidt, C. Werner, and A. Bardeleben, “Upper and [23] T. Lisini Baldi, F. Farina, A. Garulli, A. Giannitrapani, and D. Prat-
lower extremity robotic devices for rehabilitation and for studying tichizzo,“Upperbodyposeestimationusingwearableinertialsensors
motorcontrol,”Currentopinioninneurology,vol.16,no.6,pp.705– andmultiplicativekalmanﬁlter,”IEEESensorsJournal,pp.1–1,2019.
710,2003.
[8] N.W.Bartlett,V.Lyau,W.A.Raiford,D.Holland,J.B.Gafford,T.D.
Ellis,andC.J.Walsh,“Asoftroboticorthosisforwristrehabilitation,”
JournalofMedicalDevices,vol.9,no.3,2015.
1754
Authorized licensed use limited to: Heriot-Watt University. Downloaded on September 21,2020 at 17:09:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 