2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
31 May - 31 August, 2020. Paris, France
Grasping Fragile Objects Using A Stress-Minimization Metric
Zherong Pan1, Xifeng Gao2, and Dinesh Manocha3
Abstract—We present a new method to generate optimal we want to formulate new grasp metrics that reduce the
grasps for brittle and fragile objects using a novel stress- stresses in fragile objects.
minimization(SM)metric.Ourapproachisdesignedforobjects Main Results: We present a novel stress-minimization
thatarecomposedofhomogeneousisotopicmaterials.OurSM
metric that takes into account the probability of the target
metric measures the maximal resistible external wrenches that
wouldnotresultinfracturesinthetargetobjects.Inthispaper, objectbeingbrokenintopieces.Basedonthetheoryofbrittle
we propose methods to compute our new metric. We also use fracture [10], we formulate the set of external wrenches that
our SM metric to design optimal grasp planning algorithms. can be resisted without causing fractures in the object. Sim-
Finally,wecomparetheperformanceo∞fourmetricandconven-
ilar to the Q metric [8], our metric measures the maximal
tional grasp metrics, including Q ,Q ,Q ,Q ,Q . 1
1 G11 MSV VEW size of the sphere-shaped subset of resistible wrenches. We
Our experiments show that our SM metric takes into account
the material characteristics and object shapes to indicate the refer to this new metric as the stress-minimization (SM)
fragile regions, where prior methods may not work well. We metricQ .WeshowthatQ canbecomputedefﬁciently
SM SM
also show that the computational cost of our SM metric is on using the boundary element method (BEM) [6], given a
par with prior methods. Finally, we show that grasp planners
surface triangle mesh of the object and a set of contact
guided by our metric can lower the probability of breaking
target objects. points. The cost of computing QSM is similar to t∞hat of
computing Q . Using a simple scenario, we also show
1
I. INTRODUCTION that most previous grasp metrics, including Q ,Q [8],
1
Grasp quality metrics are scalar functions deﬁned on QG11 [4], QVEW [17], and QMSV [4], do not reﬂect the
the set of possible grasps, which is used to compare the probability of the target object being broken, while QSM
does. Finally, we show that conventional optimization-based
qualityofdifferentgrasps.Theperformanceandpropertiesof
grasp planning algorithms [5], [26], [14] can be modiﬁed
(asymptotically) optimal grasp planning algorithms depend
heavilyonthetypeofgraspqualitymetricsused.Asummary to search for globally optimal grasps by maximizing Q−SM.
Based on our algorithm, we can compute optimal grasps
of these metrics can be found in [25]. The usual require- −
for a row of complex, high-genus objects with the lowest
ments for high-quality grasps include force closure, small
contact force magnitudes, the preference of normal forces probability of breaking them. Computing QSM takes 4 8s
overfrictionalforces,higherresiliencetoexternalwrenches, and ﬁnding optimal grasps under QSM takes 1 5hr on
∞ average using a global optimization algorithm [14] or less
and force resilience along all directions. For example, the
Q ,Q metrics [8] take all these factors into consideration, than 10min using a stochastic optimization algorithm [27].
1
while QVEW [17] is direction-dependent. The choice of a II. RELATEDWORK
metric is typically based on the requirements of an applica-
∞ We review related work in grasp quality metrics, material
tion, but may also affect the choice of the resulting grasp
and fracture modeling, and grasp planning.
planning algorithm. For example, the Q1,Q metrics are Grasp Quality Metrics: Although some grasp planners
submodular, which allow fast discrete grasp points selection
only consider external wrenches along some certain direc-
[26]. The Q metric has an optimizable lower-bound, which
1 tions [21], more pertinent characterization of a robust grasp
allows an optimization-based grasp planning algorithm [7]
requires resilience to external wrenches along all directions,
to jointly search for grasp points and grasp poses.
which is known as force closure [23]. However, inﬁnitely
However,allthemetricsconsideredsofarmakeacommon >
many grasps can have force closure and some of them are
assumption that the target object is rigid and stiff, and will
classiﬁed as good grasps based on different quality metrics
not crack or break due to to the forces exerted by the grasp.
[25]. Most of the metrics Q are designed such that Q 0
As a result, prior methods assume that the target object is a ∞
implies force closure. Closely related metrics to our Q
rigid body and all the forces and torques are applied on the SM
are Q ,Q [8], which measures the maximal radius of an
center-of-mass,whichgreatlysimpliﬁesthecomputationand 1
origin-centeredwrench-spacespherecontainedintheconvex
analysis of metrics. However, this assumption does not hold
set of resistible wrenches under contact force magnitude
whenarobotisgraspingfragileorbrittleobjects,andcertain
constraints.
weak locations on the objects should be avoided to prevent
Material and Fracture Modeling: Real world solid
fractures. Grasping of fragile objects has been considered in
objectsmayresultinbrittleorductilefracturesunderexternal
priorworks[22],[1],whichattempttoavoidbreakingobjects
forces, depending on the underlying materials. However,
by developing safe grippers. Our goal is complimentary, as
modeling the physics during fractures is difﬁcult because
they can undergo large deformations during fractures [10].
1ZherongiswithDepartmentofComputerScience,UniversityofNorth
Carolina at Chapel Hill. {zherong@cs.unc.edu} 2Xifeng Gao is with De- Fortunately, for grasp planning, we do not need to model
{ }
partmentofComputerScience,FloridaStateUniversity. gao@cs.fsu.edu these deformations precisely, but only need to detect where
3Dinesh Manocha is with Department of Computer Science and Electri-
fracturesmightoccur.Inthiscase,thetheoryoflinearelastic-
cal & Computer Engineering, University of Maryland at College Park.
{dm@cs.umd.edu} ity sufﬁces [10] and the stress induced by external wrenches
978-1-7281-7395-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 517
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. =
Q1 QSM Q1 QSM Q1 QSM Q1 QSM QSM C 4
= =
Fig. 1: First and second rows: We show globally optimal grasps for 8 different target objects based on Q (left) and Q (right) in
1 SM
each box. These grasps are generated by choosing C 3 contact points (frictional con=es in red) from N 100 potential contact points
usingBB,whichtakes1.7hrtocompute.TheoptimalgraspforthebunnyheadavoidstheearsofthebunnyundertheQ metric(black
SM
circle). Third and fourth rows: We plot the maximal stress conﬁguration (color coded). Using Q can drastically reduce the maximal
× SM
stress as indicated in the black circle. Finally, we show two optimal grasps with C 4 and Q on the right, which takes 5.4hr to
SM
compute.
W
on target objects can be computed efﬁcient using the ﬁnite where is the 6 6 positive semi-deﬁnite metric tensor in
elementmethod(FEM)[16]ortheboundaryelementmethod the wrench space.
(BEM) [6]. We use BEM as our computational tool because
However, the formulation of Q metric assumes that the
itcantakethematerialsofthetargetobjectintoconsideration 1
objectremainsrigidandwillneverbebrokenordecomposed
while only requires a surface triangle mesh, which is more
into parts, no matter how large the external forces are. To
amenable to robot grasp applications.
relax this condition, we have to make use of the numerical
GraspPlanning:Givenagraspqualitymetric,an(asymp-
models of brittle fracture, e.g., [10]. In these formulations,
totically)optimalgraspplanningalgorithmﬁndsagraspthat
weassumethattheobjectismadeofhomogeneousisotropic
maximizes the grasp quality metric. Early algorithms [27]
elastic material with λ,µ being its Lame´ material param-
use sampling-based methods for planning. These algorithms
eters [10]. This material model covers most target objects
areverygeneralandtheyareagnostictograspqualitymetric ( ) ∶ →
encountered in our daily lives, including objects made of
types. However, more efﬁcient algorithms such as [7], [26] ( ) ∶ → ( ) ∶ →
copper, rubber, glass, and porcelain. When under e×xternal
can be designed if quality metrics have certain properties ∀ ∈ ( ) ( ) ( )
force ﬁelds g x R3 R3, an inﬁnitesimal displacement
such as monotonicity and submodularity. A good grasp
u x R3∀ R∈3 a∶nd aás(tr∇ess+ﬁ∇eld σ)~x R3 R3 3 will
metriccanalsobeusedinlearningbasedgraspplannerssuch
occur x Ω.u x ,σ x canbecomputedfromg x using
as [19], [18], [20] that use precomputed metrics to train a á + ( )
the force balance condition:
grasp quality function represented by a deep neural network x Ω ∇⋅ +u = uT 2
and then use the function as a guidance.
σ 2µ λtr  I
∀ ∈ ∶ ( )⋅ +Q ( − ) =
III. PROBLEMSTATEMENT σ g 0 (2)
N=
In this section, we formulate the problem of stress- x ∂Ω n x σ δ x x f 0, ( )
i i
minimization grasp planning. Throughout the paper, we i 1
⊂ where we assume the boundary of Ω is smooth almost
assume that the 3D target object is in its reference space,
everywhere with the unit outward normal deﬁned as n x
wheretheorigincoincideswithitscenter-of-mass.Theobject
andδ istheDirac’sdeltaoperator.Classicaltheoryofbrittle
takesupavolumethatisaclosedsubsetΩ R3.Inaddition, fracture[10]furtherassumesthatthereexistsatensilestress
 
tehxeteornbajelcctoinstuacntdeforracnesexf1te,rn,Nala6tDcownrteanccthpowinatsndx1a,s,eNt owfiNth σcomnadxitiaonndhbo∀rlditstl:e=fractur∈es w∶ ill no(t h)app≤en if the following
unit co=n−tacQt normals n . If(a−grasp is)vali≤d, we have the
× 1, ,N d 1,x Ω dTσ x d σ .
following wrench balance condition: ( ) max
In order to make sure that the grasp metric always takes
N= f
w i s.t. I n nT f θnTf , (1) bounded value, we propose to slightly modify the above
x f i i i i i ∀ = ∈ ∶ − ≤ ( ) ≤
i 1 i i condition and limit σ x on both sides, leading to the
where θ is the frictional coefﬁcient. A well-known method following condition:
for comparing the quality of two different grasps is to
comparetheirQ1 metric[8],whichisthemaximalradiusof d 1,x Ω σmax dTσ x d σmax. (3)
the origin-centered inscribed sphere in the convex hull of all Notethatthestresstensormustbesymmetricsothatitssin-
= {   ≤ }⊆
possible resistible external wrenches when the magnitude of gular values coincide with its eigenvalues. Given the theory
fi is bounde{d. ∃Mathematically, this c(an)bQe expres≤se}d as: ofbrittlefracture, thegoalofour workistopropose agrasp
Q1 maxrs.t. wwTWw r2 metric QSM that measures grasp qualities with Equation (3)
w f1, ,N, s.t.Equation 1 , N= nTi fi 1 , aasnaalypzreecgornadsiptiopnl,anpnreinsegntalaglogroirtihtmhmssthtoatcoamrepubtaeseQdSMon, aonudr
i 1
518
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. = {   ≤ }⊆
Q metric. Finally, we are ready to give a mathematical deﬁnition of
SM
Q using the following optimization function:
SM
W
IV. THESTRESS-MINIMIZATIONMETRICQ Q maxr s.t. wwT w r2 W.
SM SM
From the mathematical deﬁnition of Q , we immedi-
Our construction of Q is illustrated in Figure (2). The SM
SM ately have the following properties of W:
basic idea behind the construction of Q is very similar
SM Lemma 4.1: W is a convex set.
to that of the Q metric. Intuitively, we ﬁrst deﬁne a convex
1 Proof: Equation (1) is a set of quadratic cone con-
subset W of the 6D wrench space, which contains resistible
straints, which deﬁnes a convex set. Equation (2) is a set
wrenches that does not violate Equation (3). We then deﬁne
of inﬁnite-dimensional linear constraints, which deﬁnes a
Q as the maximal radius of the origin-centered sphere
SM convexset.Equation(3)isaninﬁnite-dimensionalPSD-cone
contained in W.
constraint, which deﬁnes a convex set. Finally, Equation (4)
isalinearconstraint,whichalsodeﬁnesaconvexset.Asthe
A.∈Deﬁnition of W and Q ≠
SM intersection of convex sets, W is convex.
Given a certain wrench w, we nee(d t)o determine whether Lemma 4.2: W is a com∈pact set so that QSM is ﬁnite.
w W.Thiscanbeperformedbyﬁrstcomputingσandthen Proof: For any w 0, σ that satisﬁes all three
testing whether Equation (3) holds. However, Equation (2) conditions (Equation (1), Equation (2) and Equation (4))
  ( )  > >
is a relationship between σ and g x but not w, so we can>not be~zero for all x Ω, otherwise the last equ∉ation
needtoﬁndarelationshipbetweeng andw.Inotherwords, in Equation (2) will be violated. In other words, there exist
we need to ﬁnd a body force distribution such that the net d and x such that dTσ x d  0. If we multiply w by
( )
effectofgisequivalenttoapplyingwonthecenter-of-mass. α σmax , Equation (3) will be violated so that αw W.
Obviously, inﬁnitely many formulations of gs will satisfy Therefore, W is boun>ded and is obviously closed, so that
this relationship and different choices of g x will lead to W is compact and QSM is ﬁnite.
different variants of QSM metrics. In this paper, we propose In addition, the following property of QSM is obvious:
choosing g as a linear function in x. The most important Lemma 4.3: QSM =0 implies force closure.
reason behind this choice is that the computation of σ can The following property has been p√roved in [26] for Q1 and
be performed using BEM [6] i(f g)i=s a h+ar∇monic function of also holds for QSM by asim=ilar∈argument:
x, and BEM can be app∇lied to a surface mesh representing Lemma 4.4: QSM min maWx wTd.
the target object while FEM [16] requires a volume mesh. d, d 1w W
( )
Under∇this choice, we have: g x g0 ∇gx, where g0 is B. Discretization of QSM
the constant term, and g is the constant spatial derivative The computation of an exact Q is impractical because
SM
tensor.Clearlyg x has12degreïesof fr eedomï(3ing0 and it involves inﬁnite dimensional tensor ﬁelds: σ,, so we
9 in g) and we can solve for g and g to equate the havetodiscretizethemusingconventionaltechniquessuchas
ï 0ï[∇ ] ïï ( )
effect of g an=dSwas f×ollows: =ïïT ï[∇ ] ïïï FEM[16]orBEM[6].Weprovidethedetailedderivationof
ï ïΩ[∇g0]  BEMin[24]andsummarizethemainresultshere.OurBEM
g g algorithmapproximatesthestressﬁeldσ x tobepiecewise
T áw∫  × × dx× [∇x ] ,
x g g constant on each triangular patch of the surface. Assuming
Ω ∇ g y thïatth(etar)gïetobjecïthasKïsurfaceïtriaïngleswhosecentroids
∇ z ï[∇ ] ï
wﬁrhset,resecond,Ωandxxthir,dyxco∇l,uzmxnofdxg.,Arlesïsop[,e∇cti]vgeïlxy,.y,Hzïoawreevïtehre, arïïe:σx1((,x,K))ï, w=eAhaïïïve[[∇∇gK0]]diïïffe+reBntïïstfr⋮esïs va∀lue=s: 
there are 9 degrees of freedom in g but only 3 constraints x j g 1
∇ = S ∇  T ï[∇ ] ï=ï ï σ Ax B x j 1, ,K, (6)
so we have to solve for g in a least sïqu[∇are]sense:ï  σy xj j g y j f
∇ g w z j g N
x 4 z
g argmin gx 2dx s.t. g w , where , aredensecoefﬁcientmatricesdeﬁnedfromBEM
y 5
g Ω g w discretizationandthedetailedformulationsaregivenin[24].
ï ï z 6 O( )
the solution of which can be computed analytically. In Note that computing the coefﬁcients of these two matrices
ï[∇ ] ï ï ï
summarïy, we haïv=e: is computationally costly, for which a naive implementation
ï[∇ ] ï ï    M T TM T (cid:6)  O( )
ï[∇g0]  − − − of BEM requires K3 operations and acceleration tech-
g I niques such as the H-matrix [13] can reduce this cost to
M gá x∫ Ω (cid:6) ⊗1 T ⊗ 1 T 1 w, (4) Klog2K operations. However, these two matrices are
y T M
g constant and can be precomputed for a given target object
z
wprhoedruect. The mΩatxrixceTsdx , I aarnedconsdteannotstesanKdrocnaenckbeer sghr∀aasppe,psl=aonnthineg=.coAsftteorfdBi∶sEc−rMetizcaotmio≤pnu,twateio(narrii)sven≤oatt tahepaﬁrntitoef-
precomputed from the shape of the target object or, more dimensional version of the fracture condition:
speci=ﬁc{all y∃, from the inertia tensor. Given t(he)se deﬁn}itions, dá{ 1 ,∃j 1, ,K σ dTσ x d( )σ . }(7)
max j max
we can now deﬁne W as follows: The ﬁnite-dimensional version of W¯ :
W w g,f ,u,,σ, s.t.Equation 1 ,2,3,4 . (5) W¯ w g,f ,u,,σ, s.t.Equation 1 ,6,7,4 ,
1, ,N 1, ,N
519
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ∶∑   ≤ ∶   ≤
=
Q1 Ni1 fi 2 1 QSM dTσd σmax
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Equation(4) Equation(2)
(e)
Fig. 2: A toy example where we grasp a bunny head represented as a triangular surface mesh, with grasp points on two ears (frictional
cones in red). (a): When the bunny head is under an external wrench (blue arrow), the Q metric assumes that the wrench is applied on
1
the center-of-mass. (b): Our Q metric assumes that the external wrench is applied as a force ﬁeld all over the volume of bunny head
SM
(blue arrows). (c): We use BEM to solve for a surface stress ﬁeld (color coded on surface with high stress in red around connections
between the ears and the head). Q assumes that the stress along any direction d is smaller than the tensile stress, σ . (d): When
SM max
performinggraspplanning,weﬁrstconstructaKD-tree(transparentblueplanes)forthesetofN potentialcontactpoints.(e):Weselect
C contact po=ints (red points) by d{esce nding the≤tree.}⊆
and the ﬁnite-dimensional version of Q¯ deﬁned as: Algorithm (2). Note that Algorithm (2) is computationally
SM
Q¯SM argmaxr s.t. wwTWw r2 W¯ . costlier but it can approximate Q¯SM up to an arbitrary
precision , so we always use Algorithm (2) in the rest of
All the properties of the inﬁnite-dimensional W and Q
SM the paper.
hold for the ﬁnite-dimensional version W¯ and Q¯ by a
SM Compared with the Q metric, a major limitation of
similar argument. 1
using the Q¯ metric is that the computational cost is
SM
C. Computation of Q¯ much higher. Note that the computational cost of solving
SM
ComputingQ¯ amountstoanon-trivialglobaloptimiza- Equation (9) is at least linear in K and can be superlinear
SM =
tion. According to Lemma (4.4), the equivalent optimization depending on the type of conic programming solver used,
problem for Q¯SM is:  = ∈√ such as [3]. This K is the number of surface triangles on
Q¯ min max wTd, thetargetobject,whichcanbeseveralthousandsforcomplex
SM d, d 1w WW¯ objects. Fortunately, we can drastically reduce this cost by
for which direct optimization does not guarantee a global progressively adding constraints.
solution. In this section, we modify two existing algorithms
to (approximately) compute Q¯ , which were originally D. Performance Optimization
SM 
proposed to comput≤e Q1. In [26], the space of the unit ThenaiveexecutionofAlgorithm(2)canbeprohibitively
vectorsisdiscretizedintoaﬁnitesetofDdirections:d1, ,D. slowduetotherepeatedlysolvingofEquation(9).Theconic
As a result, we can com=pute an∈√upper bound for Q¯SM as: programming problem has K PSD-cone constraints with K
WecanmaketQh¯iSsMuppejrm1b,oinu,DndwamrbaWitxrWa¯riwlyTtidgjh.tbyiCnc⊆reasing bpeoiinngt mseevtehroadl t[h3o]uisnavnodlvs.esSorelvpienagteEdlqyuastoilovnin(g9)ausspinargseinltienreioarr
D. In another algorithm [28], a convex polytope W¯ is system with a size proportional to K. We propose a method
maintained using H-re≥presentation [12] and we can compute that can greatly improve the performance when solving
a lower bound for Q¯SM as:= ∈√ C Equation (9). Our idea is that when the global optimum
of Equation (9) is reached, most PSD-cone constraints are
Q¯ min max wTd. (8)
SM W inactive, so removing these constraints does not alter the
C d, d 1w
The global optimum of the optimization function in Equa- solution. This idea is inspired by [29] which shows that,
C
tion (8) is easy to compute from an H-representation of empirically, maximal stress only happens on a few sparse
C
by computing the distance between the origin and each points on the surface of the target object. However, we do
C
face of C.←This lower bound(Cca∪n{be iteratively ti}g)htened by not know⊂t{he active}constraints  a sâa prior. T{he(ref)o re∈, w}e
ﬁrst computing the blocking face normal d of and then propose to progressively detect these active constraints.
expanding via: √ In order to perform these computations, we ﬁrst select a
√ ∈ K K K
ConvexHull argmaxwTd . subset 1, ,K such that K and σ xi i
W are the stress constraints that are most likely to be violated.
Thesetwoalgor√ithmscanbeimplewmenteW¯difwecanﬁndthe Inotherwords,Kistheinitialguessoftheactiveconstraints.
K
supportingpointof WW¯ ,whichamountstothefollowing To select this set , we use a precomputation step and
solve Equation (9) for 1000 times using random d and
conic programming problem:
( ) ( ) r ec ord which PSD-cones are active. For each PSD-cone, we
W
argmax w−T d ( ) ∀ =  maintain hSow many times they become active during the
w,fi,σsx.tj.Equation 1 ,6,4 (9) 1K000PSsDol-vceosnoefsEtoqufoatrim√onK(9.S)A.WfteertsheelnecsteinlegctKt,hewmeomsatifnrteaqinueannt
K
active set that initializes to and we solve Equation (9)
σ I σ x σ I j 1, ,K.
max j max using constraints only in , which is denoted by:
Tbehesoclovneidc pursoinggramanmiinntgerrieofrorpmouinlattimonethinodEq[3u]a.tioGniv(e9n) tchains argm(ax)w−T Wd( )( ) ∀ ∈S
solution procedure, we summarize the modiﬁed version of w,fi,σ xj (10)
s.t.Equation 1 ,6,4
[26] in Algorithm (1) and the modiﬁed version of [28] in
σ I σ x σ I j .
max j max
520
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ( )
Equation (10) is convex and we can solve for its global Algorithm=2 Amodiﬁedalgorithmof[28]tocomputeQ¯
=  ( ) ( ) ▷ SM
optimum,afte∗rwhichwecheckthestressesontheremaining 1: sample initial directions d in SO 3
 1, ,D←
constraints andwe(∈{pic)k t(h}~eSm)ost v<iolated constraint: 2: for i 1, ,D do
j argmax σ xj σ xj 2. (11) 3: C ← Using Algorit(hm (3) )
j 1,∗ ,KS ∗ 4: Solve Equation (9) wCith←dC d for w .
If we have σ x∗ σ x σ , then the global iC i
j j 2 max 5: ConvexHull w
optimum of Equation (10) and Equation (9) will coincide. 0 =  1, ,D
6: Solve Equation (8) with for Q¯0
Otherwise, we add j to . This method is summarized in ▷ 0 SM
7: Store the blocking face normal on as d
Algorithm (3) and is guaranteed to return the same global ← 0 0
8: while k 1, do
optimum of Equation (9). The complexity of Algorithm (3) C ← (C ∪{ −})
9: Using Algorithm (3)
is hard to analyze, but in practice it is orders of magnitude −C ←C
10: Solve Equation (9) with d d for w
more efﬁcient than considering all constraints at once. k 1C k
11: ConvexHull w
k  −  < k 1 k
V. GRASPPLANNINGUNDERTHESMMETRIC 12: Solve Equation− (8) with k for Q¯kSM
13: Store the blocking face normal on as d
By grasp planning, our goal is to select C points that k k
tend to maximize Q¯ given a set of N potential grasp 14: If Q¯kSM Q¯kSM1  then return Q¯kSM
SM
pointssampledon∂Ω.Therearetwotypesofalgorithmsthat
∞
can be used for grasp planning, which are based on branch-
and-bound (BB) [5], [26], [14] and sub-modular coverage it with other metrics, including Q ,Q [8], Q ,Q
1 G11 MSV
(SMC) [26]. However, SMC requires the formulation in [4], and Q [17].
∞ S ← VEW
Equation (9) to be a sub-modular function in the set of
contact points. Although this property holds for Q ,Q , AlgorithmS3≠P{rogressi}ve solve of Equation (9)
whetherthispropertyholdsforQSM isstillanopenpro1blem. 1: K ( )
However, we can use BB that only requires Equation (9) to 2: while ∗ 1, ,K do
 ( ) ( ) <
be a monotonic function in the set of contact points, which 3: Solve Equation (10) for w,f ,σ x
( ) i j
isobvious.Wefollow[14]andbuildaKD-treeforthesetof 4: Pick j usi∗ng Equ∗ation (11)
N potential grasp points, as illustrated in Figure (2)(d) and 5: if Sσ←xSj ∪σ{ x∗}j 2 1 then
Figure (2)(e). We maintain a pointer to one KD-tree node 6: Return w(,f),σ x
i j
for each of the C selected points. Next, we descend the tree 7: else j
untilalltheC pointersreachleafnodesandkeeptrackofthe
8: Return w,f ,σ x
best set of C leaf nodes. BB can ﬁnd the globally optimal i j
set of C grasp points that maximize any monotonic grasp
metric (see [14] for more details). Parameter Choices: Computing Q requires more pa-
SM
( ) rameters than are necessary for computing Q . Speciﬁcally,
1
Algorithm=1 Amodiﬁedalgorithmof[26]tocomputeQ¯SM there are three additional variables: tensile stress σmax and
▷ Lame´ material parameters: µ,λ. However, if we transform
1: sample directions d in SO 3
2: for i 1, ,D do√1, ,D ← µ,λ to an equivalent set of parameters: Young’s modulus
{ } E and Poisson ratio ν [16], it is obvious that Q is
3: Using Algorithm (3) SM
proportional to σ and inversely proportional to E. Since
4: Solve Equation (9) with d d for w = =max
i i theabsolutevalueofagraspmetricismeaninglessforgrasp
W
5: Return min wiT di planning and only the relative value matters, we can always
i = ~ ( + ) = ~[( + )( − )]
set σ E 1 and choose only ν according to the
max
VI. EVALUATIONS material type of the target object, and then set:
=
WehaveimplementedouralgorithmsforcomputingQ µ 1 2 1 ν λ ν 1 ν 1 2ν .
SM =
and perform grasp planning using C++. The accuracy of In our experiments, we assume that objects are made of
BEM relies on the quality of the surface triangle mesh, so copper with ν 0.33. Finally, when running Algorithm (2),
we ﬁrst optimize the mesh quality to maximize the minimal we set  0.001.
∞
internal angles of each surface mesh triangle using CGAL Shape-Awareness: The most remarkable advantage of
[2]. We implement the BEM using a kernel independent Q over previous metrics, such as Q , Q , Q ,
SM 1 MSV
numerical integration scheme [9]. The most computationally Q , and Q , is shape awareness. In Figure (3)(a), our
VEW G11
costly step in BEM is the inversion of system matrices, for target object is a U-shaped tuning fork and we use a 3-point
which we use LU-factorization accelerated by H-matrices grasp. The shape of the tuning fork is asymmetric along
[13]. Finally, we use CGAL [15] to construct convex hulls the X-axis. According to Figure (3)(b), the best grasp under
with exact arithmetic [11] to avoid degenerate cases. All the all metrics are the same, i.e., grasping the centroid point.
experimentsareperformedonasingledesktopmachinewith However, previous metrics are not aware of the asymmetry,
two Xeon E5-2697 CPUs and 256Gb memory. In the rest of while Q correctly reﬂects the fact that grasping the
SM
thissection,weevaluatethepropertiesofQ andcompare leftmost point is better than grasping the rightmost point
SM
521
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Y Grasp Quality Change Grasp Quality Change Grasp Quality Change
1.0 1.0 1.0 QSLMow
C(Oa)M X Q1,∞,,,11,MSVVEWGSM0000....2468 (b) QQQQQQ1∞MVGSME1SW1V Q1,∞,,,11,MSVVEWGSM0000....2468 (c) QSM0000....2468 (d) QQSSMHMMiigdh
0.0 0.0
−10 −5 0 5 10 −10 −5 0 5 10 −10 −5 0 5 10
L L L L
Fig. 3=: (a):ThetargetobjectisaU-shapedtuningfor∞k.We=testa(3-pointgrasp(frictional)conesinred)wherethedistancetothecenter
ofmass(green)isL.(b):Wepl∞otthechangeofQ1,Q ,QMSV,QVEW,QG11,andQSM againstLunder4differentcond=itions,where
QWV=EW is not stable a=nd Q1,Q ,QMSV,QG11 do notWreﬂect asymmetric. Here, we apply equal weights to the forces and torques with
Id. (c): We use lower weights for torques with diag 1,1,1,0.01,0.01,0.01 , in which case the best grasp under Q is
bd c W SM
differentfromthatunderthefourothermetrics.(d):WeplotQ using andmeshesofdifferentresolutions(Low:K 5730,Mid:
SM bd
K 24204, High: K 94398).
=
Poisson disk sampling. The computational cost of BB, on
average, is 1.7hr under Q and 0.6hr under Q . When
SM 1
we choose C 4, the average computational cost under
Q increases to 5.4hr. Although the cost of computing
SM
Q is comparable to that of computing Q , we found that
SM 1
Q tends to create more local minima so BB needs to
SM
create a larger search tree under Q . In the third row of
SM
Figure (1), we show the maximal stress conﬁguration in W
and the corresponding stress conﬁguration under Q next
1
to each other. The advantage of Q , which suppresses
SM
the stress to resist the same external wrench, is quite clear.
Fig. 4: WecomparethecomputationalcostofcomputingQ and
1 For some target objects, the high stress is concentrated in
Q for 20 random target objects and grasps.
SM a very small region and we indicate these regions using
blackcircles.Finally,forapplicationswheregloballyoptimal
because it is less likely to break the object. If we change
W grasps are too costly to compute and only sub-optimal
the metric and emphasize force resistance over torque
graspsareneeded,userscanchoosestochasticgraspplanning
resistance, then the difference between Q and previous
SM algorithmssuchas[27],whichcanreturnasub-optimalgrasp
metrics is more visible and even the best grasp changes as
shown in Figure (3)(c). under QSM within 10min of computation.
Robustness to Mesh Resolution: The change of QSM VII. CONCLUSIONANDLIMITATION
is not sensitive to the resolution of the surface meshes, as
We present the SM metric, which reﬂects the tendency of
shown in Figure (3)(d), which makes QSM robust to target a target object to be broken during grasping. As a result,
objects discretized using small, low-resolution meshes. As
=− a grasp maximizing Q will minimize the probability
weincreaseK from5730to24204andﬁnallyto94398,the of breaking a fragile oSbjMect. We show that Q can be
change of QSM against L is almost intact, with very small computed using previous methods and its comSMputational
ﬂuctuations around L 5.A B cost can be drastically reduced by progressively detecting
Computational Cost: QSM has higher computational the active set. Finally, we show that grasp planning under
cthoestatshsaenmbQly1.oMf omstatorifcetshe c,om,pwuthaitciohnainlvoovlveerhseathdelideisreicnt QmeSnM∞tscsahnowbethpaetrQformedisuaswinagreBoBf gaelogmoreittrhimcsf.raOgiulirtyexwpheirlie-
SM
factorizationofalarge=,densematrix.However,=thisassembly Q1, ,MSV,VEW,G11 are not. We also show that using QSM
is precomputation=and is required only once for each target does not increase the computational cost of the resulting
object before grasp planning. In Figure (3)(d), this step grasp planning algorithm.
takes 112s when K 5730, 1425s when K 24204, and The major limitation of our work is that computing Q
SM
3892s when K 94398. After precomputation, the costs requires a costly precomputation step to solve the BEM
of evaluating QSM and Q1 are very similar, as shown in problem.Inaddition,theBEMproblemrequireshigh-quality,
Figure (4). This implies that using QSM does not incur a watertight surface meshes of target objects, while in many
higher cost in grasp planning. This is largely due to the applications we only have objects represented using point
progressiveAlgorithm(3),whichgreatlyreducesthenumber clouds. An avenue of future research is to infer the value of
of constraints in solving Equation (9). Without this method, Q for given unknown objects using machine learning,
SM
solving Equation (9) is prohibitively costly as it requires the as is done in [19]. Finally, Q requires user to input
SM
solve of a sparse linear system of a size proportional to K. the Poisson ratio, which is a material parameter. We are
=
GraspPlanning:InFigure(1),weshowgloballyoptimal considering detecting these parameters from casual inputs
=
grasps for 8 different target objects under both the Q such as RGBD images.
SM
and Q metric. To generate these results, we choose C 3
contact1points from N 100 potential contact points using ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
branch-and-bound. These contact points are generated using This work was supported in part by ARO Grants W911NF1910069,
W911NF1910315,NSF-IIS-1910486,andIntel.
522
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] A. Al-Ibadi, S. Nefti-Meziani, and S. Davis, “Active soft end effectors for
efﬁcientgraspingandsafehandling,”IEEEAccess,vol.6,pp.23591–23601,
2018.
[2] P.Alliez,C.Jamin,L.Rineau,S.Tayeb,J.Tournois,andM.Yvinec,“3Dmesh
generation,”inCGALUserandReferenceManual. CGALEditorialBoard,
2019.
[3] E.D.AndersenandK.D.Andersen,“Themosekinteriorpointoptimizerfor
linearprogramming:animplementationofthehomogeneousalgorithm,”inHigh
performanceoptimization. Springer,2000,pp.197–232.
[4] Byoung-HoKim,Sang-RokOh,Byung-JuYi,andIlHongSuh,“Optimalgrasp-
ingbasedonnon-dimensionalizedperformanceindices,”inProceedings2001
IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems.Expand-
ingtheSocietalRoleofRoboticsintheNextMillennium(Cat.No.01CH37180),
vol.2,Oct2001,pp.949–956vol.2.
[5] J.Clausen,BranchandBoundAlgorithms-PrinciplesandExamples. Citeseer,
1999.
[6] T. A. Cruse, D. Snow, and R. Wilson, “Numerical solutions in axisymmetric
elasticity,”Computers&Structures,vol.7,no.3,pp.445–451,1977.
[7] H. Dai, A. Majumdar, and R. Tedrake, Synthesis and Optimization of Force
Closure Grasps via Sequential Semideﬁnite Programming. Cham: Springer
InternationalPublishing,2018,pp.285–305.
[8] C.FerrariandJ.Canny,“Planningoptimalgrasps,”inProceedings1992IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, May 1992, pp. 2290–
2295vol.3.
[9] P. Fiala and P. Rucz, “Nihu: An open source c++ bem library.” Advances in
EngineeringSoftware,vol.75,pp.101–112,2014.
[10] G. A. Francfort and J.-J. Marigo, “Revisiting brittle fracture as an energy
minimizationproblem,”JournaloftheMechanicsandPhysicsofSolids,vol.46,
no.8,pp.1319–1342,1998.
[11] T. Granlund and G. D. Team, GNU MP 6.0 Multiple Precision Arithmetic
Library. UnitedKingdom:SamuraiMediaLimited,2015.
[12] B.Gru¨nbaumandG.C.Shephard,“Convexpolytopes,”BulletinoftheLondon
MathematicalSociety,vol.1,no.3,pp.257–300,1969.
[13] W.Hackbusch,“Asparsematrixarithmeticbasedonh-matrices.parti:Intro-
ductiontoh-matrices,”Computing,vol.62,no.2,pp.89–108,1999.
[14] K.Hang,J.A.Stork,N.S.Pollard,andD.Kragic,“Aframeworkforoptimal
graspcontactplanning,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.2,no.2,
pp.704–711,April2017.
[15] S.HertandM.Seel,“dDconvexhullsanddelaunaytriangulations,”inCGAL
UserandReferenceManual. CGALEditorialBoard,2019.
[16] T.J.Hughes,Theﬁniteelementmethod:linearstaticanddynamicﬁniteelement
analysis. CourierCorporation,2012.
[17] Z.LiandS.S.Sastry,“Task-orientedoptimalgraspingbymultiﬁngeredrobot
hands,”IEEEJournalonRoboticsandAutomation,vol.4,no.1,pp.32–44,
Feb1988.
[18] M.Liu,Z.Pan,K.Xu,K.Ganguly,andD.Manocha,“Generatinggraspposes
forahigh-dofgripperusingneuralnetworks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1903.00425,
2019.
[19] J. Mahler, J. Liang, S. Niyaz, M. Laskey, R. Doan, X. Liu, J. Aparicio, and
K.Goldberg,“Dex-net2.0:Deeplearningtoplanrobustgraspswithsynthetic
pointcloudsandanalyticgraspmetrics,”inProceedingsofRobotics:Science
andSystems,072017.
[20] J. Mahler, F. T. Pokorny, B. Hou, M. Roderick, M. Laskey, M. Aubry,
K.Kohlhoff,T.Kro¨ger,J.Kuffner,andK.Goldberg,“Dex-net1.0:Acloud-
based network of 3d objects for robust grasp planning using a multi-armed
banditmodelwithcorrelatedrewards,”in2016IEEEInternationalConference
onRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2016,pp.1957–1964.
[21] J.Mahler,F.T.Pokorny,Z.McCarthy,A.F.vanderStappen,andK.Goldberg,
“Energy-boundedcaging:Formaldeﬁnitionand2-denergylowerboundalgo-
rithmbasedonweightedalphashapes,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,
vol.1,no.1,pp.508–515,2016.
[22] B.Matulevich,G.E.Loeb,andJ.A.Fishel,“Utilityofcontactdetectionreﬂexes
in prosthetic hand control,” in 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
IntelligentRobotsandSystems,Nov2013,pp.4741–4746.
[23] V..Nguyen,“Constructingforce-closuregrasps,”inProceedings.1986IEEE
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,vol.3,April1986,pp.
1368–1373.
[24] Z.Pan,X.Gao,andD.Manocha,“Generatingoptimalgraspsunderastress-
minimizingmetric,”inarXiv:1907.08749,2019.
[25] M.A.RoaandR.Sua´rez,“Graspqualitymeasures:reviewandperformance,”
Autonomousrobots,vol.38,no.1,pp.65–88,2015.
[26] J. D. Schulman, K. Goldberg, and P. Abbeel, “Grasping and ﬁxturing as
submodular coverage problems,” in Robotics Research. Springer, 2017, pp.
571–583.
[27] Z.Zhang,J.Gu,andJ.Luo,“Evaluationofgeneticalgorithmongraspplanning
optimizationfor3dobject:Acomparisonwithsimulatedannealingalgorithm,”
in 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics, May 2013,
pp.1–8.
[28] Y.Zheng,“Anefﬁcientalgorithmforagraspqualitymeasure,”IEEETransac-
tionsonRobotics,vol.29,no.2,pp.579–585,2012.
[29] Q.Zhou,J.Panetta,andD.Zorin,“Worst-casestructuralanalysis,”ACMTrans.
Graph.,vol.32,no.4,pp.137:1–137:12,July2013.
523
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER. Downloaded on September 20,2020 at 14:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 