In relation to FTP theory, the findings provide evidence for the theoretical contention that change in career aspirations leads to change in the PI of specific academic courses (e.g., Hilpert et al., 2011, Shell et al., 2010). These relationships and the impact of these relationships on motivation, behavior, and achievement, however, appear to be complex. Further research is needed to explore this complexity and examine how these shifts in career aspirations and PI may influence and be influenced by other more dispositional aspects of FTP connectedness and valence (Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman and Shell, 2008).
Given the rapid technological advancements taking place in modern society, the field of CS has experienced a swell of job creation over the past decade. However, despite society’s increased demand for computer scientists, many undergraduate students elect to drop out of CS before completing their degree. Findings from the present study suggest that CS students experience a decline in their career aspirations across the semester, which may influence their desire to complete their degree. Moreover, participants shifted towards the belief that course grades were more instrumental to their future success than the actual computer science content they were learning. These shifts in career aspirations and PI appear to continue throughout courses from the introductory to senior level. Given the field’s current struggle to retain students in the computer science major (Giannakos et al., 2016)., findings from the present study suggest that students’ career aspirations and perceptions of instrumentality of undergraduate CS courses may contribute to this issue. On the positive side, students’ who increased in their career aspirations also increased in their endogenous PI or their belief that the course was important and instrumental to reaching their future goals. Thus, additional research is needed to understand how career aspirations and perceptions of instrumentality influence student motivation, persistence, and retention in undergraduate CS.
