In conclusion, we would like to share an anecdote from one of Ed's colleagues of almost 30 years, that illustrates Ed's tenacity and intellectual curiosity. 
Even though I joined the faculty at USC almost 30 years ago, Ed was always a towering figure for me both in term of seniority and in mathematical achievements. He was intensely curious intellectually and stubbornly persistent in his professional work. The following anecdote may illustrate these characteristics of Ed.In the 1990s the research on the function of neurons in all animals including humans attracted a lot attention in the scientific community. This was due to several factors. First, the development of technology to detect neuron firing impulse and brain imaging have provided valuable observations of the function of brain. Second, computer simulation has led to mechanistic understanding of the role of connected neurons in animal behavior. At the same time, researchers in artificial intelligence have achieved significant advances by using networks of very basic models of neurons in areas of natural language processing and image recognition.Ed was fascinated by all these developments. He studied existing biological models of neurons and developed his own computer models of networks of such models to simulate the complex system for learning. Unlike the simple neuron model used in artificial intelligence, Ed's neurons were actual representation of the biological objects. The simulation requires massive computing resources that our department, indeed our university, did not have in the early 2000s. These obstacles did not stop Ed. He worked with one of his students to developed their own computer cluster dedicated for their simulation. From complex mathematical models to building computer clusters the required knowledge spanned several disciplines of sciences and engineering.Ed was tireless in his pursuit of scientific truth. Miraculously, they managed to have a company donate many computers to their efforts and with the assistance of his student, they built one of first computer clusters on campus with their own customized operating system! Ed was never a “big operator”. He didn't have huge research grants or a large team of post-docs and graduate students. I suspect that he didn't find it fun to pursue that kind of fame. He enjoyed much basic pleasures of finding out things by himself in doing the nitty-gritty work like a tinker. We all admired him for that.In celebrating Ed's contribution to sciences, I am grateful to have had the good fortune to be one of his colleagues. (Email from Chunming Wang, Professor of Mathematics, USC Dornsife.)
In their personal lives, Ed was supportive and thoughtful of his colleagues. 
Ed was also a role model in my personal life, as he had a close family with three daughters and I soon did, too. He would often dispense words of wisdom on being a good Dad while holding down a job with long hours, which was more and more the case as I became an associate dean and now dean of the college of arts and sciences at Wayne State University. He and Lori always attended our beginning of the year parties at my home in the San Fernando Valley, a bit of a hike from and a lot hotter than their home in Brentwood. I am also amazed at how Ed continued to work at USC until his late 80's, through illness and changes at the university. I'm not sure that I would want to do the same, but hope to have the opportunity to decide! Ed Blum was a valued colleague, good friend and model of broad thinking in mathematics. I miss him greatly. (Email from Wayne Raskind, Professor of Mathematics, Wayne State University.)
We all appreciate this dynamic, energetic, intellectually curious, stubbornly persistent tinker and good friend, Edward K. Blum.
