In this literature review, we present e-learning tools for Computer Science students to support and practise the use of SRL strategies categorised by Zimmerman and Martinez-Pons’ taxonomy, and attempt to answer the question on how these strategies are applied in modern learning technologies.
•RQ1. Do modern Computer Science e-learning tools support the learning of SRL strategies presented by Zimmerman and Martinez-Pons’ taxonomy?Our literature review uncovered two categories, Category 6 (environmental structuring) and Category 11 (seeking social assistance of adult) that lack any investigation using modern technologies. These results do not suggest these strategies are not relevant in Computer Science platforms, since the existence of Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) can encourage students to adjust their digital space for better learning; and GitHub, a social programming platform, can be incorporated into students' learning as another outlet for assistance from experts.
Within some emerging tools, emotion regulation was a factor that assisted the learning and practising of SRL strategies. For this literature review, we did not investigate the influence emotion regulation has on SRL skills, suggesting the opportunity to research its impact further and determine if students are applying SRL skills differently when applying emotion regulation.
For some of the platforms presented in the literature review, the research does not present students' growth in self-regulated skills, opening up an opportunity for a more detailed investigation into these platforms to determine how students effectively engage in the self-regulated (SRL) and co-regulated (CoRL) learning behaviours. Perhaps re-evaluation of the these e-learning platforms might not be feasible, but examination of future tools attempting similar goals is a possibility, with researchers addressing the tool's ability to support SRL and CoRL strategies. Revisiting automated assessment tools to evaluate SRL behaviours might be advisable, due to the prevalence and active research of these tools, as exemplified by the high representation of these tools in Category 1 (self-evaluating).
Though automated assessment tools were originally designed to improve teachers’ grading processes for rapid return of graded solutions to students, the literature review recognises these tools can promote SRL strategies by students. Investigating how students use automated assessment tools to practise SRL strategies when developing programming assignments is another research question worth exploring.
