Most of the questions brought up by the empirical study are divided into three basic study objectives: (1) the general performance of the proposed system; (2) its performance when the subjects attempted to control the pointer with their eye movements; and (3) its performance when the subjects attempt to click on a point of the screen by fixing their gaze on it. To that end, in each test we examined various factors that were useful for breaking down the general performance of the device with respect to its objectives, by observing the adaptation of the subjects to its use, their movement precision, their clicking precision, the physical comfort of the participants during the tests, etc. Finally, collecting all the background information related to this research and studying all the results, the following conclusions were derived in relation to the adapted eye-tracking device and its inclusion in human-computer interaction.
In order to click on a point on the screen, the system requires the user to fix their visual attention on that point for a couple of seconds, and the system will carry out the action. The simplicity of this fact is reflected in the easy adaptation of the subjects to carrying out this procedure: more than 73% of them described it as easy or very easy to perform. Only 10% of them described it as a difficult procedure, sometimes because the subjects themselves moved their eyes unconsciously, restarting the time count that triggers the clicking action.
Adapting to moving the pointer with their eye movements was very easy (40% of test subjects considered it easy), showing that it is not overly complex for the user to understand that the behavior of the pointer is regulated by their own eye movements. After the tests, the subjects commented that, although it was strange to see how the mouse pointer moved synchronously with their visual attention at first, after a few minutes, this became normal and practically imperceptible. It should be noted that only 16.67% of the subjects described their adaptation as difficult, because at times the lag between the pointer and the user's point of visual attention caused confusion, and they unconsciously tried to follow and reach the pointer with their sight. Surprisingly, the time that the subjects considered they needed to adapt completely to moving the pointer by controlling their eye movements was shorter than expected; it took none of them more than 15 minutes to adapt, and more than half of them (60%) did so in less than 5 minutes. This result is key for future integration of an eye-tracking device as an alternative computer peripheral, because this means that the time needed by a user to become familiarized with it is minimal and does not depend on his technical knowledge.
As we have seen in the literature, the growing development of technology oriented towards users with motor skill problems is focused on improving their social integration, and their rehabilitation processes. Our system, in addition to providing a mechanism for controlling a mouse point, provides as simple and efficient means to modify any commercial eye-tracker into a user-monitor interaction system. The design and integration of this new system is low-cost, and can be installed on any eye-tracker with a software development kit (SDK), since it has been designed with open source code libraries (based on OpenCV).
Although our system was evaluated with volunteers with average visual, cognitive, and motor skills, the results are valid as long as they meet with the assumption that the user has normal visual capability. Otherwise, it would not be possible to consistently control the mouse pointer. Furthermore, we have employed head-mounted technology, since current devices are low-weight and easily adapted to the user, and allow for the user to move their head to a certain degree without losing system calibration. The greatest limitation is related to users that have glasses. For this group, there are two options: (1) fabricate specific optical lenses for the eye-tracker, since many of these have interchangeable lenses; or (2) adapt the patient's glasses to the eye-tracker in such a way that the focus of the lens is adjusted to that of the eye-tracker. In sum, the proposed system is an innovative and low cost modification for an alternative input peripheral for controlling the mouse pointer.
