In this document, we have described a didactic method to tackle HPC training for researchers and students with virtually no background in computer science. We have analyzed the quality metrics employed to obtain an estimate of the satisfaction of the attendees, which are also employed as an overwatch metric for funding institutions in the form of feedback statistics. Furthermore, we have discussed how an HPC programme could be improved in order to ease the learning curve and how to avoid pitfalls that are difficult to predict. In general:
•We have observed a pattern of incremental difficulty in the lessons that comprise an introduction to HPC. Moreover, this is motivated by the large number of domains that can benefit from HPC, and hence the background and expertise of attendees might vary strongly and sufficiently to cause difficulties in order to keep the level of attention uniform. This suggests that courses should be broken down into small lessons with a time break between them, in order to facilitate the absorption of contents. Moreover, a precise description of the prerequisites needed to understand and follow the course will help possible candidate students situate themselves in the spectrum of target audiences. If possible, such description can be accompanied with material previous to the course, aimed at introducing the main ideas of the course in a general and simple way.•Concepts must be consolidated through both theory and practice, but these should be carefully balanced. Theory lessons should be kept simple, with the aim of introducing concepts, whereas practice lessons should be aimed at consolidating knowledge, and if possible, allowing trial and error scenarios, which help students understand the reasons and motivation of the theory that is being learnt.•Use cases should be as real as possible (while keeping them controlled), avoiding scenarios that will not exemplify the benefit of the HPC techniques in use. However, using real-life examples might produce a considerable slowdown in the executions. To overcome this limitation, timing exercise executions with practical lessons are a key point to take into consideration.•If the course is intended to teach HPC applied to a certain domain, the examples utilized in the use cases must also attempt to be simple in their understanding, in the sense that a short number of non-HPC concepts related to the applied domain should be used. That is, new concepts that are not essential to the learning process should be kept to a minimum in order to let students focus.
Additionally, we have also discussed that the background and expertise of the attendees plays a key role in the organization and success of the course. Consequently, it is suggested that pre-course surveys are performed on the background of incoming students, with the aim of adapting the complexity of the teaching lessons and the Use Cases to fit the scope of both the course and the students, as much as possible. Furthermore, it is important to keep in mind the target audience of the course (For what type of student was it designed?), since content must be adapted depending on attendees at both professional (developers, researchers, business people, etc.) and academic level (undergraduates, master students, doctorates, etc.). A certain student, e.g. a developer, might look for concrete things, such as algorithms or programming techniques, whereas a doctorate student might be looking for concepts and paradigms that could be applied to their own research. In this line, the goals of the students will therefore affect their dedication to the course, since a researcher that needs specific training for continuing his or her research will dedicate more effort than one which is just naturally curious or interested. Such division of goals is related to the effectiveness of a virtual follow-up. More dedicated students aiming to complete their research will probably make more use of a follow-up platform to consolidate knowledge, whereas curious students might not if their expectations were not highly met.
However, virtual follow-ups should be carefully planned and balanced: a constraining follow-up that requires extensive work by the student might keep him or her away from attending the initial course, whereas a voluntary follow-up might not attract assiduous students. In this line, it would also be beneficial to organize a short (e.g. from one to a few hours) virtual post-course video conference meeting with the participants between 14 days to 3 months after the course. This scenario would enable participants to ask additional questions (particularly if these could not be solved among other students in the electronic platforms). Additionally, it would provide valuable feedback for upcoming courses, especially in the sense of discovering what points are students most troubled with. Long term feedback survey could also be done during such meeting.
Furthermore, we have shown and discussed that surveys (both instant and post-course) are a key tool for the teachers and organizers to obtain information on how the course is developing and the impact it leaves behind. From the experience gathered in this course, the authors of this manuscript highly recommend carrying out at least two types of surveys, and if possible, all three of them:
•Instant feedback. This procedure is mostly aimed at obtaining information in real time, particularly to evaluate the confidence of students on the current subject, and hence, allow to make adjustments in upcoming sessions based on it.•Short-term feedback. It is advisable to perform a short-term questionnaire right after the course finishes, as this will enable students to leave their opinions when they have completed the full course and remember the most from it, as opposed to post-course feedback.•Post-course feedback. On the other hand, post-course feedback will help gather statistics of the long term impact of the course, generate metrics and overall enable the organizers (and moreover, funding institutions) to evaluate the impact and future continuity of the course. In this case, it is advisable to not overextend questionnaires as there is no obligement feeling from the students towards filling up the questionnaire.
Still, it is also recommended to include short a priori surveys on the expertise of students to get a grasp of the general picture in terms of their preparation and capabilities. If this information is taken into account, the adaption of the upcoming material to the needs of students could positively affect the overall outcome of the course.
