We have presented a survey of Introductory Computer Graphics courses from 28 higher learning institutions from around the world. From these courses we collected data on which topics are being taught, the textbook used, and whether these courses are already teaching modern OpenGL or not.
The source of our survey was the list of topics publicly available. With the confirmation from 71.14% of the instructors, we claim that online repositories are a good source for our purposes. The criterion for selection of the surveyed institutions with its emphasis on research leaves out of the results many medium and small-sized high-quality educational institutions. It would be worth pursuing a survey similar to ours but over an even larger sample of schools. This would have to be a collaborative effort considering the amount of data it would generate and more automatic methods for clustering would be needed. Nevertheless, we think the collected data and clustering here presented should be useful for institutions looking into redesigning their curricula by providing a summary of current teaching contents. As we developed our investigation, it became more clear that, although we have a curriculum recommendation from ACM/IEEE [38], it would be worthwhile to look for inspiration from peers. That is basically how we approached this investigation: to give instructors and educators a look into how 28 institutions around the world are teaching the introductory course in Computer Graphics.
As presented, our survey is a snapshot of current state-of-practice for 28 HEIs around the world for the introductory course in Computer Graphics. For future work, we would like to check how these practices correlate with proposed learning outcomes, like the ones suggested in the ACM/IEEE recommendation. We would also like to try automatic or semi-automatic bottom-up hierarchical clustering algorithm, to compare with our clustering. It would also be interesting to compare and contrast our results using the KUs from the ACM/IEEE recommendation with other classification schemes such as the publication categories provided by the ACM Computing Classification System. Finally, we believe there is no research showing how instructors put together their list of topics for a given course. Which factors are at play when making course design decisions? An answer to these questions would shed light on why we see such variability among institutions.
