In this paper, we consider a state dependent impulsive feedback computer viruses model with the influence of media coverage. We use the continuity and monotonicity of the successor function to prove the existence and uniqueness of the order-1 periodic solution, respectively. There are two classes of periodic solutions dependent on the impulsive parameter. Hence, the corresponding stability results are obtained by the geometric method and analogue of the Poincaré criterion, respectively. These results show that the state dependent impulsive control can prevent the spread of computer virus, i.e., the number of the infected computers is under the threshold all the time. Obviously, a lower threshold is a preferred option. However, it requires the company to detect the virus and release the anti-virus software more quickly, and it increases the cost. Hence, how to choose an optimal threshold is important, and will be presented in the future work.
Theoretic and numerical analysis show that the media coverage is an efficient control of computer viruses. That is, it can reduce the transmission rate and delay the arrival time of reaching the threshold. Hence, it saves the valuable time to releasing new version of anti-virus software. In fact, there are other types of nonlinear functions representing transmission rate. Choosing a more appropriate function to describe the influence of media coverage on internet is another future work.
Recently, most works investigate the spread of computer virus on general network, which help us better understand how the viruses diffuse in real world, especially Yang et al. [[16], [18], [20], [21]]. Hence, how to extend the model to that on general networks deserves further exploration, i.e., studying the impact of media coverage or applying the impulse control on general networks. The extension is not an easy work, especially considering the impulse control on complex network. On heterogeneous network, different nodes may take impulse controls with different system parameters, which make the dynamics of the system more complex.
