In this paper we have shown that SBCs are a computational game changer, providing a new class of low-cost computers. Due in part to their low-cost and size they are utilized for a wide variety of applications. This popularity has ensured that newer and more advanced SBCs are constantly being released. We have shown that often these SBCs are used to build clusters, mainly for educational purposes. These clusters are well suited to educational applications due to their low-cost, but they also make good testbeds for some newer data center technologies, for example high core-density and ARM based architectures. In IoT architectures there is a move away from a centralized compute resource, to an architecture where the computational power is pushed out closer to the edge, for example near data generating sensors. SBC clusters are an ideal candidate for Edge Compute because of their power requirements and size. It is also possible to power-off some, or all, of an SBC cluster, powering on nodes only when computational resources are required, thus saving power and coping with burst computational demands, for example audio, video or seismic data processing based on trigger events. We identify that the maturity and advancing features in SBCs will translate into more powerful, optimized, and feature rich SBC based clusters.
We have identified multiple use cases for SBC clusters and see a strong future, especially as more advanced SBCs become available. Current cluster management technology has limitations for Edge Compute and the physical cluster construction is currently rather bespoke. Through the FRμIT project we are currently working on tools and techniques to simplify the software stack, support containerization and facilitate the update and maintenance of large numbers of distributed Edge Compute clusters. The FRμIT project also manages the physical construction of Raspberry Pi compatible clusters, through the introduction of a Pi-Stack interconnect board which includes both power and OS management capability, as shown in Fig. 2 (d); this reduces cabling, focuses air flow and adds independent power monitoring & isolation.
Small, portable, low-power clusters are the key to improving IoT architectures and overcoming limited or costly bandwidth restriction. As processor performance improves and SBC hardware advances, so will the clusters upon which they are based, unlocking new capabilities. If small, low cost, portable clusters are to become mainstream, we acknowledge that there is an overhead to convert applications to utilize clusters, rather than a single multi-core processor. We believe that as CPU speeds have plateaued and performance is achieved by increasing the number of cores, more applications will support multi-core and increasingly support clusters. SBC based clusters are a new and distinct class of computational power. Although in their infancy, they have the potential to revolutionize the next generation of sensor networks, and act as a fantastic exploratory tool for investigating the next generation of data centers.
