In this paper, we have developed a new formal framework for computer system specification and security policy enforcement. The FPE consists of three main components. The first is a new formalism for specifying computer systems that captures in an effective and elegant way the system's behavior and topology. We define a new calculus that draws from the agility of the mobile ambients and adds several original and powerful concepts such as access control for domains (access keys, protection changes) and communication interfaces. It facilitates the specification of a computer system's current state and its evolution. The second component is a new dedicated logic for defining security policies. The logic formulas allow expressing current and desired security policies. The semantics of the logic links policy satisfaction to compliant processes. Again, the system's evolution can be followed, in this case from the point of view of applicable constraints. The third original component is the quotient operator that allows an automatic calculation of required enforcements. Given a process P and a security policy Φ, we calculate X=ΦP as a first step. If X = 1, then the process P satisfies the policy Φ. Otherwise, the enforcement can be applied to update the process and make it policy compliant. The formal foundation of all components ensures that the enforcement produces a secured system, free of incomplete specifications, arbitrary interpretations or faulty implementation of policies.
Note that our approach is different from previous works as it allows both the verification of policy compliance and the application of corrective actions. The automated aspect of the methodology further enhances its value. A software implementation demonstrates its effectiveness and proves its applicability to practical problems. The versatility of FPE is supported by the numerous potential uses. It could be a free and lightweight tool employed by educators to simulate basic or complex network topologies, or to build and test security policies. A detailed specification that includes all potentially vulnerable systems is a worthwhile effort. Intrusion prevention systems of firewalls could take advantage of it by blocking exploits of known vulnerabilities through access key changes for the affected components. This should be done in conjunction with patch management systems, which could signal when access can be re-enabled. Cyber attacks could be modeled to determine whether critical systems can be reached, and under which conditions. They can be further analyzed to decide the best detection and prevention strategy. The approach can also be beneficial for business continuity planning while designing alternate configurations or disaster recovery scenarios. Such cases imply system specifications adapted to the potential crisis (natural or human-triggered disasters, hardware failure, wars, etc.). Our methodology could be used to validate whether the expectations (i.e. security policy) can be satisfied by the available computer systems (i.e. part of the new system specification). Further extensions of the calculus syntax, in particular, would increase the range of applications. In its current state, the access key incorporates all conditions necessary to enter an ambient. In practice, they correspond to more than just system credentials or access control lists. A finer granularity would allow a more precise control over process movement. A new action could model direct communications between a sender and a receiver that are not neighbors (encrypted channels, quantum computing, etc.). Other actions that do not relate specifically to mobility would enrich specifications to better reflect the complex set of computer system behaviors.
