A gulf separates the context of 1985 from that of 2018. It would have been a futile endeavour to attempt, at the beginning of CLSR's life, to predict the topics that would be engaging authors and readers 30 years later. The pace of change has increased, and so has the degree of inter-dependency among technological and associated social developments. The challenge to sooth-sayers is even greater now than it was at the time of CLSR's birth.
This article has contrasted the contexts in which CLSR was launched and in which it currently publishes, and suggested a range of implications of the contemporary context that the authors perceive to be relevant to research and practice in computer law and security during the coming years. Because of the rate and complexity of change, many of these observations are of course more like speculations than predictions. They are, however, supported by an amount of evidence and analysis, and many are corollaries of propositions put forward by enthusiastic proponents of the various technologies.
The term ‘singularity’ was used casually by von Neumann in the 1950s, harnessed by astro-physicists, and then utilised by sci-fi author Vinge to depict a technologically-induced major discontinuity in human existence. It has subsequently been presented as an embarrassingly mystical notion by a couple of IT industry figures who the media love to quote (Moravec, 2000, Kurzweil, 2005). The large number of threads that this article has identified in the technosocial context of 2018 suggests that an alternative notion that is far more likely to be useful is ‘multilarity’. Each of the many elements is capable of acting as a driver of change. However, the multiple confluences among those many threads of development may well have impacts even more significant than those of the more isolated technological changes of the previous few decades.
Artefacts have not achieved sentience and intentionality, both of which are likely to be needed if humankind is to be swept aside or subjugated by artificial descendants. This has, however, been anticipated by utopian and dystopian sci-fi authors alike, as one of our children's possible futures. At this stage, humankind's future remains in its own hands, and other alternatives exist, both apocalyptic and more positive from the viewpoint of human life and perhaps life more generally. Technology might yet be managed in order to serve human needs, balances might yet be achieved in human impacts on the biosphere, a spaceshield might yet be put in place, and colonisation of other planets and satellites might yet be enabled.
Every author and reader of CLSR is continually engaged in the identification of currently relevant topics. The purpose of this review, on the other hand, was to stand back a little, adopt a broader view than workaday practice, observation and research can reasonably take, and suggest some threads that may last a longer time into the future.
Laws stimulating, enabling and regulating information technology, information architecture and information infrastructure will continue to be a busy and contested field. Security is also a hectic area, including not merely protections for equipment, software and data, but for individuals, organisations and nations. Beyond effectiveness and efficiency considerations, the second 30 years of the journal will need to recognise and address issues concerning the survival of society and even of the species.
