5.1. ContributionsThis study proposed and validated the presence of a competition-cooperation relationship in dictionary-assisted reading. Computer-mediated dictionary-assisted learning processes comprise word meaning lookup and reading comprehension. Due to limited cognitive resources, the two types of processes form a competition-cooperation relationship, which is affected by participants' vocabulary size. Participants with a small vocabulary size are required to place more effort into computer-mediated dictionary lookup to acquire the meaning of unfamiliar words (low-level processes) and then invest the remaining cognitive resources into understanding the content of the text (high-level processes). By comparison, participants with a large vocabulary size only need to invest a small amount of cognitive resource into computer-mediated dictionary lookup, retaining a larger amount of cognitive resources for reading comprehension.
5.2. Developed a computer-mediated dictionary equipped with the checking-meaning function to facilitate users' cognitive resource investmentThe purpose of incorporating the checking-meaning function into computer-mediated dictionaries is to enhance participants' vocabulary acquisition performance during computer-mediated dictionary-assisted learning. This function forces participants to place increased effort into word meaning lookup, ensuring that they learn the correct word meaning of unfamiliar words. It also reduced the need to repeatedly look up unfamiliar words during computer-mediated dictionary-assisted learning due to the inadequate investment of cognitive resources.
5.3. Confirmed the target users for the checking-meaning functionThe findings of this study validated that the checking-meaning function improved the vocabulary learning performance of the participants with a small vocabulary size during computer-mediated dictionary lookup. However, it hindered the inferential comprehension of the participants with a large vocabulary size because they were required to invest additional effort into checking the correct word meaning.Based on the preceding contributions, the following prospects and practical implications were formulated:Foremost, this study argued the presence of a competition-cooperation relationship in computer-mediated dictionary-assisted reading and examined users' lookup processes (number of lookups) and the accuracy of word meaning selection to validate this hypothesis. Future researchers can consider using eye-tracking technology to record user eye movement during computer-mediated dictionary-assisted reading, thereby detailing users' cognitive processes.Moreover, although computer-mediated dictionaries are important reading aids for reading second-language texts, additional computer-mediated dictionary functions should be developed to facilitate participants' low-level dictionary lookup processes and improve their computer-mediated dictionary-assisted learning performance. Different education suggestions concerning the application of these functions should be proposed for participants with different vocabulary sizes. Unless participants with a small vocabulary size are able to independently infer meanings of words by text context, or analyze morpheme structure to guess meanings, the checking-meaning function is an effective strategy to help participants with a small vocabulary size with computer-mediated dictionary lookups. Conversely, the checking-meaning function should not be made mandatory for participants with a large vocabulary size. Rather, participants with a large vocabulary size should be encouraged to use such as inferring meanings of vocabularies according to text context so as not to hinder reading comprehension.
5.4. LimitationTwo limitations of the current study and further suggestions are displayed as follows. Firstly, the reliability of the subtest of reading comprehension test was low. One possible reason for this may be that this test included a small number of items. Future studies are suggested to develop more items in each subtests to improve the test reliability and verify the results of the current study. Besides, learners' vocabulary size and the difficulty of reading materials will influence learners' look up behaviors and performances in computer-mediated dictionary assisted learning. The results of the current study were based on the vocabulary size test with frequency level of words from third 1000 to seventh 1000 words and the reading material, which is difficult according to Frequency Level Checker (Maeda, 2010). Future studies could vary the word frequency of the vocabulary size tests and the difficulty of reading materials to verify the results of the current study.
