One of the benefits of IoT based health care systems is remote access to medical images such as Lung cancer CT-Scan images. IoT services have enabled that the data gathered by the remote machines can also be used for investigating the patterns of the disease and thus disease prediction could be done by using this data for training of CNN. In this paper, we proposed a novel classifier based on deep fully convolutional neural network. DFCNet is a generic classifier which can be used for detection and classification of biomedical images. However, in this paper DFCNet is used to detect and classify the pulmonary nodules in the CT-Scan images. The initial classification was done into two classes i.e. nodule (diseased-Malignant or Benign) and non-nodule (normal). The images classified as nodules are further classified into four lung cancer stages. In order to overcome the problem of limited dataset we used data augmentation techniques. Data augmentation improved the training of DFCNet and enabled it to capture more classification features and learning parameters from enriched training dataset. For the classification of nodule, it was necessary to have equal number of training images in each class, data augmentation techniques were used.
Our method outperformed the existing research work on lung nodule detection. The performance of our proposed method was high even in low-density small-sized pulmonary nodules. The average FP was 3.1 for the DFCNet which was improved to 2.79 using elimination technique. Proposed method used large number of training samples which helped in the improving the performance on the dataset which was not annotated. The limitation of the proposed work is using different dataset with varying scan parameters leading to FP results in case of malignant nodules. Optimal classification results can be obtained if the dataset has same scan parameters. Although using CT-Scan images acquired from varying clinical environment provide more challenging classification for the DFCNet yet improved performance can be achieved using dataset with homogeneous scan parameters. Experimental results and our analysis show that DFCNet achieves better performance than state-of-the-art methods TumorNet. In future, we will focus on using DFCNet for other biomedical images such as MRI for detection and classification of diseases namely breast cancer, brain tumor, colon cancer and diabetic retinopathy. We will detect lung nodule with the proposed method using unseen dataset for testing. Future IoT enabled healthcare methods will be used which aim to provide highly-customized access to rich medical information particularly lung CT images and efficient clinical decision making by the lung cancer CAD system to each individual with unobtrusive and successive sensing and monitoring. The proposed IoT-enabled CAD system could be used for the detection of other types of cancer as DFCNet is a generic method for detection.
