Examples of group and pair work for supporting students’ learning expand beyond mathematics to disciplines such as science and technology (Kapur, 2008; Mentz et al., 2008; Ritchie, 2002). National policy documents in the United States suggest that, to be successful in work and life beyond secondary school, students need to be able to communicate effectively, to resolve conflicts, to negotiate agreement around different ideas, and to consider ideas from alternative perspectives (National Research Council, 2012, p. 34). To provide teachers the resources to foster these skills in students, it is helpful to consider the building blocks in students’ interactions that can support an overarching practice of collaboration in the classroom. The value of the system of negotiation in this analysis comes from how the basic speech functions describe how a speaker positions herself—and, reciprocally, her peer—through action or speech. With this system it is possible to identify, and potentially teach, the constituent parts that contribute to collaboration on a broader scale.
Research can expand knowledge of students’ collaboration by providing links between the qualitative aspects of students’ work in groups and quantitative measures of productivity (e.g., Barron, 2000, Barron, 2003; Mercer, 2004). The method of identifying collaborative episodes may be useful in this regard, in particular for identifying the occurrence, frequency, or timing of episodes of collaboration among students during pair work at the computer. Rather than isolating specific behaviors or actions among pairs of students, the model of collaborative episodes may help to quantify how students interact and respond to one another for the purpose of contributing to shared understanding. This model can be used to measure differences among pairs of students in computer-based settings, or to examine the impacts of specific instruction or norms for supporting students’ collaboration.
There are also practical implications from this study for the work of teaching and learning around computers in mathematics classrooms. Building upon norms for group work (e.g., Chapin, O’Connor, & Anderson, 2003; Cohen, 1994a; Horn, 2012), teachers need resources to support students to collaborate with shared technology tools. Teachers may be able to support students’ collaboration by creating explicit opportunities throughout a lesson for students to reflect on the content of their work at the computer. Instruction focused on listening to one’s peer, and responding appropriately, can support students to recognize opportunities to ask questions, challenge a particular idea, or provide information. These practices can contribute to a more nuanced understanding, both in research and practice, of what collaboration looks like in technology-rich settings in mathematics.
