In this paper we present a classifier of the brain workload changes to assess learning processes. This classifier is based on the power spectral density analysis using the Welch periodogram and the Student's law. EEG powers are calculated in the θ and α bands especially in the posterior brain areas. Results obtained from the two used experimental protocols show that increasing the difficulty of the cognitive task reduces the power spectral density of θ and α bands in the specified areas. The performance assessment, using the performance characteristic parameters evaluation method, of the designed classifier reveals that the classifier performs well in brain workload distinguishing levels. This work shows that θ and α powers could distinguish cognitive load levels in two different cognitive tasks.
In relation to expert and intelligent systems design, the theoretical contributions made by this work act particularly at the level of decisional autonomy of these systems. In the context of distance learning and intelligent tutoring systems the distinguishing the user's mental effort levels allowed us, through a work in progress, to design a new architecture of these intelligent systems. Unlike the common ITS architecture based on the four classic modules, we have exploited these theoretical contributions to add a fifth module to this architecture namely the brain workload estimation module. In this module we incorporated each of the brain signals measurement and the mental effort estimation based on the presented approach. The aim of such a module is to make intelligent decisions about the learner's mental fatigue. Based on a multi-agent system, the estimation and decision result on cognitive load levels is exploited by a “Planning” agent at the pedagogical module. This planning consists in selecting the content likely to be adequate for the current learner's mental state. According to the rules given at the pedagogical module and according to the content structuring at the domain module, the adaptation of the content can be illustrated for example by the proposal of indicators of answers in the case where the learner engages in answering an exercise with a significant mental fatigue. Moreover, we expect extending these adaptations for applications in the context of road safety. In such a context, studying the driver's brain activity represents a new promising aspect of intelligence for designing new expert systems for cars computers. At this point, the presented classifier can be adapted to make estimations of the driver's mental fatigue as well as falling asleep. For such an adaptation, this classifier can be applied by considering a reference mental state in which the driver is considered in rest state. The estimation of the mental fatigue instants must be performed based on time windows during which this classifier is applied to make the comparison to the reference state in order to make a decision. In these two contexts, i.e., learning and driving, we plan to extend the present work and exploit the obtained results to study effects of some factors and aspects such as stress, stage fright, immersion, etc.
