Neutrosophy is an important tool for removing uncertainty from ultrasound images and is most widely used in image denoising. In this work, an automated CADe system for the segmentation of nodules in thyroid ultrasound images has been developed. A Neutrosophic domain Nakagami Total Variation method has been used for speckle reduction and Neutrosophic based Distance Regularized Level Set method is proposed for automated segmentation of thyroid nodules in ultrasound images. The experimental results show that the initial contours are automatically identified very near to the actual nodule boundaries of the thyroid gland which can be fastly refined by level set. In experiments, NDRLS is found to be highly efficient, robust and accurate. The NDRLS automatically approximates the optimal parameters from NLM and becomes stable as the implicit interface comes closer to the desired contours. The experimental results reveal that the NDRLS performed better than other methods in handling indeterminacy and in-homogeneity. The NDRLS can separate all nodules in spite of blurry and unclear edges. It can also prevent boundary leakage into adjoining tissues and can smooth vague background. Besides the above benefits, NDRLS can also segment multiple nodules. Additionally, NDRLS does not need any training and input from the user. Furthermore, the method is capable of revealing thyroid nodule boundaries in spite of intensity variations. The higher values of quality metrics achieved by the NDRLS method over other state-of-art methods, recommends its application in medical practice. Finally, a fully automated CADe system for the segmentation of nodules in thyroid ultrasound images has been developed with graphical user interface without any human intervention. It may be used as a second opinion tool to assist endocrinologists for automated and accurate delineation of thyroid nodules in ultrasound images. This helps to reduce the number of false positives and improves the accurate detection of thyroid nodules.
This research work successfully solved the computer-aided detection problems by systematically developing speckle reduction, automatic ROI extraction and segmentation methods that can improved the quality of ultrasound images and aid doctors in detecting the thyroid nodules. This work would definitely be an aid for future research as it provides techniques for speckle suppression and accurate detection of thyroid nodules in ultrasound images for an effective diagnosis. Additionally, the proposed detection system is fully automatic and requires no training but still there are many aspects need to be studied in the future in order to achieve better performance and accuracy. The present work suggests few directions and challenges for the researchers to further explore the area of thyroid ultrasound image processing and analysis in detail. In future, the work can be extended for the delineation of isoechoic thyroid nodules. As this research work has focused only on the development of CADe system for the segmentation of nodule from thyroid ultrasound images. The texture features and classification techniques can be combined to develop Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CADx) system with the proposed fully automatic CADe system, which will be more useful for thyroid nodule diagnosis. Furthermore, research utilizing larger datasets of real-time images with feedback information is required to validate the benefits of NDRLS on other tissues. The method is general and can be applied to other ultrasound images of diverse anatomical structures.
The further research can be extended to validate the proposed system to three dimensional ultrasound images and Doppler ultrasound images as this work only deal with B-mode ultrasound images. Other imaging modalities are still need to be explored with this system. Neutrosophy based techniques can be applied to other image processing problems such as image retrieval. Neutrosophic domain methods can be compared to wavelets to show their effectiveness over other domains.
