An improved CNN that integrates RGB, optical flow, and gray stream is proposed to accurately monitor and automatically assess worker activities to improve the management of construction projects. A new real-world dataset, which covers three categories of common action for steel reinforcement fixers (i.e., steel bending, transporting, and walking), is established and used in an experiment to validate the improved CNN that is introduced. The experimental results show that the improved CNN achieves good performance with an average accuracy of 85% and is promising for future real-world application.
The major contributions of this research are twofold. First, advanced image processing techniques are applied to analyze construction operations. Second, the developed CNN method can potentially enable productivity to be automatically monitored in real time providing instantaneous feedback to managers and workers. However, several limitations exist which will need to be improved to enable effective and efficient real-time monitoring:
•Real-time tracking of long sequences: The developed algorithm plays a key role in the accuracy of worker activity recognition. However, issues associated with occlusions often impact the ability to track workers, and therefore attention needs to focus on addressing occlusions.•Defining a time series of actions: Although the developed method can accurately recognize worker activity, its practical application (e.g., workers productivity) is limited because of the lack of knowledge to defining a time series of actions (e.g., the commencement and completion points).•Lack of a large-scale database: This study comprised of approximately 1000 clips that were used to train the hybrid CNN model, which deemed to be small. The lack of an available database is a major obstacle that can hinder the development of action analysis using computer vision. In collaboration with several construction companies, the researchers will in the future create an even larger dataset so that the accuracy of the proposed CNN systems will be improved.
The developed CNN was applied to recognize a limited number of tasks. Future research will focus on expanding the database of activities and examining a variety of tasks associated with various typical subcontract trades. Achieving a better performance on worker's activities recognition will make a contribution to the enhancement of construction site productivity performance in general.
