A CA on-street/curb parking model was proposed, taking into account the varied behaviour of drivers. The developed model is an extension of existing traffic models. Smaller cells in CA were used, resulting in the model being a better fit for urban traffic conditions. The model accounts drivers’ behaviour such as patience, perceptivity and the use of direction indicators. A simulation programme was developed and calibrated with field research data. The impact of individual motorists’ behaviour on traffic capacity (efficiency) was studied and assessed in terms of travel time and the average speed of traffic participants.
The results indicate that motorists’ patience is a feature that has a positive effect on road traffic, which is connected with changing lanes in a calm manner. However, excessive patience (in the sense of unnecessarily slowing down while following the vehicle in front) leads to increased congestion. Simulations have shown that controlled running out of patience (calmly overtaking the vehicle in front, without disturbing traffic flow) is desirable. However, it was not possible to find a factor indicating when motorists lose their patience. Another desirable feature of motorists is the power of observance, which streamlines road traffic and considerably eliminates congestion. The use of direction indicators has a positive effect on both types of drivers: patient as well as perceptive.
In terms of designing car parks, using a PGS (parking guidance system) is advisable and worth considering, as it has a positive effect on traffic capacity, especially when the car park is full. Parking in the designated spaces proved to be equally important. Taking care that other parking users have a place to park their cars has a positive effect on the travel time of road users.
The model proposed in this article and the simulation programme may be helpful in understanding some types of traffic behaviour and supporting designers of on-street/curb car parks. The investigated behaviour may be the subject of further analyses, and provide examples of correct driver reactions (e.g., early signalling one’s parking intention, overtaking the preceding vehicle in such a way as not to disturb the travel of other participants).
Further studies will focus on one-way single-lane roads, which are more numerous, especially in city centres.
