Using objective facial recognition software, the research presented specifically examined the recognizability of computer-generated facial approximations for potential utility in unidentified persons tracking systems. Seven types of computer-generated facial approximations were evaluated, six of which included weight and age adjustments or the presence (or absence) of visible eyes, or both. Candidate list inclusion rates across sex, population, and age cohorts were also evaluated. The results observed suggest that the approximations were more readily recognized by an objective facial recognition software than by human evaluators reported in previous studies, suggesting that approximations of the type used may be more effectively employed in an objective environment (potentially as a “background” process) than in public display situations intended to elicit response. Further, the evaluation of performance results for the approximations adjusted for weight, age, or visible eyes suggest that the average, thin, or heavy weighted approximations displaying no eyes may be the most effective approximations for use in automated facial recognition contexts. Finally, demographic cohort analyses indicate that the approximations performed comparably between the sexes and across the three-age cohort. The demographic cohort analyses further suggest that ReFace approximations may be more beneficially used for the African demographic than other population groups.
The purpose of this research was to gather data to inform on the paired utility of computer-generated facial approximations and image analysis technologies for a specific use-case, i.e., the potential enhancement of the cross-reference functions of unidentified person tracking systems. It is emphasized that this research was intended to show the potential operational utility of combining facial approximations with facial recognition software as part of a comprehensive investigation strategy for producing potential leads, not as a form of positive identification. The overall concept presented is not vastly different than when manual facial approximations are requested by investigating agencies, except that we propose that perhaps an automated version of the manual technique may also be operationally valuable under certain circumstances, e.g., when manual approximations are not feasible (as in mass disaster cases) or when more immediate leads are desired while waiting for a manually produced approximation. This is of particular interest given that some automated facial approximation methods, such as the one discussed here, are less time consuming and offer more immediate leads to which an investigator may respond until additional approximations by manual techniques are sought.
Although the research designs modeled are use-case specific and exclusively evaluated facial approximations produced by the ReFace software, broad methodological extrapolation to implementations employing other facial approximation and recognition software and identification scenarios is conceivable. However, due to the highly customized models utilized in this study, the performance metrics observed should not be generalized beyond the scope of this study. Future research should seek to inform on (i) potential operationally attainable performance through use of additional real-world representative galleries, (ii) additional approximation forms (e.g., clay models, and sketches), (iii) expanded population cohorts, and (iv) the use of alternative facial approximation and recognition software.
