In summary, we have demonstrated a technique to detect unreliable computer simulation of recursive functions. We show that, on the contrary to what is shown in many papers in literature, the logistic map simulations using the tested languages Matlab, Scilab, Octave, C and Fortran and double precision is not reliable for millions of iterates for the initial condition and parameters suggested in [15]. In fact, after less than one hundred of iterates, the simulation is no longer reliable in double precision. Even for a higher precision of approximately 256 bits on Matlab, the results are very distant from those presented in [15].
Our proposed method can be seen as test to falsify reliability of simulation based on the shadowing property for recursive functions, such as discrete maps. It is clear that a true orbit cannot agree with certain accuracy simultaneously to two pseudo-orbits that diverge from each other. This is the very basic idea that underlines our approach. Our method is compared with the principal result obtained by Hammel and colleagues [15] for the case of logistic map. After almost 30 years, and with more than 150 citations according to Scopus, that paper has been still receiving citations, considered by many as a corner stone to prove that the logistic map, for some combinations of parameters and initial conditions, present the shadowing property. On the contrary, we show that this is not a general true. One important aspect is that, following the principles of IEEE 754–2008 standard on floating point, we are able to find the same results for the five languages used in two different operating systems, as can be seen in Table 1. The number of iterates that the lower bound error is greater than 10−8 are the same for all tests. This seems to be an evidence of robustness of our method, and a clear evidence that the proved theorem by Hammel and colleagues is not valid for such cases. We believe that a diffusion of this result should be an important contribution to nonlinear science community.
This paper also used the largest Lyapunov exponent to indicate a critical simulation time (Ts) in order to stop the simulation of chaotic systems for a given precision P. Different from other methods present in the literature, as in [21], our method uses the lower bound error to calculate the largest Lyapunov exponent. Using this method, we make a clear connection between error propagation and the meaning of the Lyapunov exponent, offering in such way, a simple way to determine the maximum number of iterates. In our case, the logistic map with r=3.9 and x0=0.1 presents a largest Lyapunov exponent λ=0.198, which means that using double precision it would reliable to simulate around 79 iterates. This has direct implications, for instance, to build diagram bifurcation of the logistic map, for which, double precision allows to iterate a maximum of 79 iterates, considering the transient and stationary regime. This value is significant lower that number presented in the literature (See [35] to see a step-by-step method to build a bifurcation diagram, in which 500 iterates are considered as transient). For the polynomial NARMAX identified to Rössler equation, we found a λ=1.530 which gives a maximum simulation time of Ts=24. This is another important aspect that must be accompanied with the identified model to the user be aware of the limits on the simulation of such model.
The present paper emphasises the requirement of rigorous care to simulate the chaotic systems for long time without a serious care about the precision. This is important in order to build bifurcation diagram and free-run simulation of polynomial NARMAX, for instance. We believe that the result presented in this paper is important for the rigorous development of the nonlinear dynamics field, which is highly dependent on computer arithmetic [38]. The method presented is also an alternative tool to check non-reliable computer simulations based on recursive functions, such as maps or discretization schemes of continuous systems.
