Learning through problem solving involves sophisticated processes that are inaccessible to learners but often ignored in conventional instruction. Research has highlighted the importance of scaffolding or guiding learning in such contexts with a view to realizing the full potential of learning with real-world problems or authentic tasks. However, there is limited knowledge regarding how complex problem-solving processes can be externalized or scaffolded for effective thinking and reflection throughout the practice. While concept mapping supports the understanding and communication of complex ideas, it is inadequate in eliciting and representing the process of applying knowledge to practice.
In this study, a computer-based cognitive-mapping approach was used to extend traditional concept mapping by allowing learners to capture the essence of problem-solving experience in a set of key elements of cognition in a visual format. The proposed approach has a high potential to foster effective thinking and reflection in problem-solving contexts by representing complex ideas both verbally and pictorially. By comparing it to a note-taking approach that represents ideas in verbal-text only, this study demonstrated the promising effects of the cognitive-mapping approach on improving problem-solving performance, subject-matter knowledge, and intrinsic motivation to learn.
The findings of the study have some implications. First, reflection, the process of making sense of an experience by thinking about what one has been doing, is crucial to experiential learning (Dewey, 1938, Moon, 1999). However, given the contextual and dynamic nature of actual problem-solving practice, it is difficult for novices to capture the essence of the problem-solving experience and elicit the complex ideas in a meaningful way. The difficulty is often underestimated by instructors or experts, for whom many of the requisite processes have become largely subconscious or automated. While scaffolding is regarded as crucial to learning with complex problems or tasks, cognitive mapping plays an important role in externalizing and scaffolding the complex cognitive process in such contexts.
Second, cognitive processes in problem-solving contexts concern not only applying knowledge to solve problems using relevant methods but also constructing knowledge from past and current practice. The integration of content learning and process learning has long been recognized as important in science education (Lawson, 1995), and is embodied by learning in problem contexts. Learners have to be equipped with procedural knowledge enabling them to apply content knowledge to solve problems, which in turn stimulates them to identify misconceptions or knowledge gaps and develop new understanding. The construction of conceptual knowledge should pay more attention to articulating new ideas acquired from problem-solving experience and integrating them with prior knowledge into a coherent whole.
Third, while learning through problem solving is increasingly being employed in educational practice, there is a concern about its weakness in assessment methods (Pirnay-Dummer et al., 2010, Shute et al., 2009, Spector and Koszalka, 2004, Spector, 2008). The development of valid and reliable approaches to assess the outcomes congruent with the goals of problem-oriented learning is a prerequisite to improving learning in problem contexts.
Finally, cognitive mapping to support and assess learning can and should play a critical role in developing inquiry and critical thinking skills that so many believe are relevant for the future. Cognitive mapping can combine the power of words and visual representations to support the development of productive habits of mind in individuals and thoughtfulness and informed responsibility in citizens and workers.
