In summary, we presented a validation procedure for multiphase flow simulations, which is based on high-speed video recordings and computer vision. The proposed approach enables quantitative comparison of experiments and simulations over time-dependent flow events. We utilized this procedure for detailed analysis of droplet impact on hydrophobic and superhydrophobic surfaces by comparing videos produced by high-speed imaging and dynamically similar LB simulations. Our analysis was able to identify those test cases where the used modelling approach was not able to describe the physics of the droplet-surface interaction precisely enough. The hydrophobic coating used in this study showed notable contact angle hysteresis, a property which has been observed also in previous studies with coated or native hydrophobic surfaces [49], [50]. However, the contact angle hysteresis was not included in the model which assumed perfectly homogeneous surface. On the other hand, on superhydrophobic surface with insignificant contact angle hysteresis, videos produced by high-speed imaging and simulations were highly consistent.
Previous studies have benchmarked LB simulations against experiments by comparing system related values, such as the contact line velocity and wet length of a droplet [27], or snapshots (still images) of physical incidents [28], [31]. Also volume-of-fluid (VOF) based methods have been validated against experiments by comparing for example the height and diameter of a droplet during an impact [51], [52]. In addition to numerical values, visual comparisons about droplet profiles have been presented [51], [52]. However, our method provides a dynamical one-on-one comparison about the whole impact event, providing also quantitative data about position and shape comparison. Our results show that the proposed procedure can reveal very useful information about multiphase flow processes, which can be used in validation and development of simulation methods and modelling. Furthermore, when simulations have been proved to be consistent with experiments, they can provide information which cannot be extracted from experiments.
The present experimental setup had only one camera, whereby we had to assume that the velocity component in the camera direction was zero. However, the presented validation procedure can be straightforwardly generalized to two camera setup.
