In this paper, an ontology-supported CBR approach for computer-aided tolerance specification has been proposed. This approach mainly consists of three parts: the representation of tolerance specification cases, the retrieval of tolerance specification cases, and the reuse or revision of tolerance specification cases. The first part used OWL ontology to formalize the past tolerance specification cases as previous cases and to formalize each new tolerance specification problem as a target case. These formalizations can provide a semantic enrichment model for the information of tolerance specification schemes benefiting from the semantic representation capability of OWL ontology. The second part described how to use an ontology-based similarity measure to assess the similarity of toleranced features, the similarity of part features, and the similarity of topological relations and how to linearly combine these similarities to establish an ontology-based similarity measure with high accuracy to implement the retrieval of similar previous cases for a target case. The tolerance specification schemes in some of the retrieved previous cases are valuable resources for designers when designing tolerance specification schemes. The third part clarified the process of the reuse and revision of tolerance specification cases. The paper has also reported the implementation, illustration, and evaluation of the approach. The illustration shows that the approach can provide useful information to assist tolerance specification. The evaluation suggests that the tolerance specification case retrieval in the approach can highly correlate with the retrieval based on domain experts’ judgment.
The main contributions of the paper can be briefly summarized as follows: (1) The paper constructs and develops a tolerance specification ontology to represent the tolerance specification information in CAD systems. This ontology achieves an important change of representing tolerance specification information from a computer-readable level to a computer-interpretable level. It provides a feasible model of tolerance specification information for further implementing automatic tolerance specification in CAD systems. (2) The paper designs and implements a tolerance specification case retrieval algorithm to retrieve reference schemes for each new tolerance specification problem. This algorithm directly takes the CAD model of an assembly as input and returns reference tolerance specification schemes for each toleranced feature of each part of the assembly as output. This process is fully automatic and does not need know-how. In addition, the algorithm is applicable for all shapes of parts and has involved the generation of a complete tolerance specification scheme.
Future studies will aim especially at overcoming the following two limitations of the ontology-supported CBR approach: (1) The time complexity of the tolerance specification case retrieval algorithm is O(n), which may not be an acceptable upper bound if the number of previous cases n is very large. The ontology-supported CBR approach mainly considers obtaining high case retrieval accuracy. But like case retrieval accuracy, case retrieval speed is also a very important indicator to measure the performance of case retrieval. Hence, it is also of necessity to study the improvement of case retrieval speed when case retrieval accuracy is high enough. (2) The ontology-supported CBR approach mainly considers the influence of geometric information on tolerance specification in tolerance specification case retrieval (i.e. only implements first-order tolerance specification). This is not comprehensive enough since in addition to geometric information, design requirement information and manufacturing process information are other important types of information having influences on tolerance specification (they respectively correspond to second-order and third-order tolerance specifications). Thus, it is of significance to study the synthetic influences of the geometric information, design requirement information, and manufacturing process information on tolerance specification (i.e. study third-order tolerance specification).
