The paper elaborates on the development of a metric on the energy efficiency of servers, in the lack of an approach to properly rank and qualify the products on the market. The aim of the paper is to describe the procedural as well as the theoretical steps to date, towards the formulation of this metric. The preliminary results, discussed in this paper, show how the draft proposed metric is representative of the user pattern of servers, is scalable, technology neutral and does not entail excessive costs. Once available, policies aimed to improve the environmental impact of servers will highly benefit from this work. This will also be of importance for the activities under mandate M/462 [28], as a parallel approach between regulatory process and standardisation is surely beneficial for all stakeholders. The final choice for the various parameters of the metric (weightings, type of average for the workload efficiencies, etc.) will quite likely be confirmed once the legislative and standardisation procedure will be concluded.
The use of the proposed metric, in the first place, can potentially simplify legislative and compliance control activities (provided that the market surveillance issues linked to the declared server utilisation rate can be solved), as the complexity deriving from considering allowances for different configurations and components included in servers (such as in the case of the idle power requirements in the Energy Star [24] specification for servers) would be drastically reduced. Furthermore the metric would really allow assessing the "energy efficiency" of servers, and not simply "capping" their energy use in a number of situations and set-ups. Moreover the regulatory work may be characterised by more longevity, as the metric is technology agnostic, a crucial aspect in the swiftly evolving ICT market. Additionally a discrete grading of the efficiency level of these products would become possible and an energy label could be finally envisaged, providing an additional, objective comparison parameter to orient customers choice, for a first preselection of products to consider for purchase (although many other aspects need to be taken into account as well to this extent).
