Authentication is always the first step in any security architecture, in fact, until a system has managed to guarantee the identity of the user it cannot perform any kind of access control. Traditional authentication mechanisms, such as the static PIN/Password secret that is still the most commonly adopted one, greatly suffer from the growing sophistication of malicious software and the increasing computational power of computing platforms; thus, to mitigate their vulnerability researchers have proposed a preliminary form of a Turing test (CAPTCHA) to cull out the malware access attempts. CAPTCHA, however, have proved to be cumbersome and generally ill suited to the task, as the growing sophistication of the malicious software requires also increasing the complexity of the cognitive task to be solved. We proposed a new way of culling out malware access attempts (CAPPCHA) that, leveraging the physical nature of humans instead of their cognitive capabilities, does not introduces any cognitive overload for the users. To test the feasibility of our approach we developed a CAPPCHA scheme which asks users to tilt their devices to a specific angle to prove that they are humans before giving them access to the screen where they can enter their PINs.
The security analysis showed that the proposed scheme is resilient against brute force attacks, side channel attacks and spyware-based recording attacks. To evaluate the usability of our scheme we decided to perform an experiment similar to the one used in usability surveys for CAPTCHA schemes available in the literature, namely we performed the experiment described in  [9] with a significantly larger sample (more than 200 users). From a usability point-of-view, all the users involved in the experiment described our scheme as very intuitive and easy to use, thus CAPPCHA has the potential to replace CAPTCHA as the mechanism to cull out malware before traditional authentication mechanisms are used.
Despite the success of our experiment, the survey indicates that there are some new directions that need to be explored in future work. First, while the sample adopted was larger than the one used in other surveys, we should provide one with a larger statistical significance also when different age ranges are taken into account; in fact, the limited focus experiment we performed in addition to the large one to try identifying correlations between age and perception of our CAPPCHA scheme did not allow us to draw significant conclusions. Secondarily, the observation that a statically set, preferred angle of tilting resulted in faster authentication has to be compared with randomization of the angle in a smaller range to check if the effect we observed was due to some sort of motor memory or simply to easier gestures. Furthermore, while CAPPCHA currently targets mobile devices for the availability of sophisticated sensors on such a platform, several users suggested that porting it to traditional PCs would greatly enhance its usefulness; thus, we need to explore how the combination of a Trusted Execution Environment with physical sensors already present in the PC (e.g. the movement sensor in the mouse) could be leveraged to implement a CAPPCHA scheme. Finally, we need to study the usability of CAPPCHAs for users with impairments, as an example, serious sight problems and parkinsonisms can prevent users from successfully complete the CAPPCHA test we have implemented; thus, we need to study ways to test the physical nature of the user that can cope with physical impairments due to age or illness.
