Business analytics differs from business intelligence in two respects: (1) BI focuses on what happened in the past but BA emphasizes what will happen in the future and (2) BI examines the impact of a causal event but BA asks why it happened and how we can improve. Various schemes like descriptive analytics, diagnostic analytics, predictive analytics and prescriptive analytics have been developed to solve different domain problems. In general, the causal relationship in natural science is more systematic and simpler to be formulated. In contrast, the causality between the predictors in social science is relatively dynamic, complicated and difficult to be captured. Although BI&A has become a major research paradigm in the area of POM, three challenging issues need to be tackled: identifying significant predictors, capturing the dependences among the predictors to conduct stochastic simulation, and incorporating the impacts of leading predictors on lagging outcomes into forecasting.
Inspired by the concepts of statistical learning and machine learning, this research presents a novel framework comprising RF, BBN, and ARIMA to overcome the above-mentioned difficulties. Based on the concept of a smiling curve, this study illustrates three types of computer companies like the industrial PC, the fabrication PC, and the commercial PC to justify the validity of various business models (i.e. ODM, EMS, and OBM). In addition to the traditional descriptive analytics, this research demonstrates the following benefits in business analytics:
•Identifying the KPIs with regard to ODM, EMS and OBM sectors to determine the priority of the predictors for improving an outcome (diagnostic analytics),•Conducting Bayesian belief networks to consider the interrelationships among the KPIs for developing strategic maps (prescriptive analytics),•Constructing a time-series model to incorporate the temporal effects of the KPIs into performance forecasting (predictive analytics).
In future research, several directions are specifically pointed: (1) in addition to Bayesian belief network, system dynamics can be another way to capture dynamic causality and conduct “what-if” simulations in prescriptive analytics (Chuang & Oliva, 2015), (2) ARIMA (time-series) models consider linear relationships between leading predictors and lagging outcomes in predictive analytics. Nonlinear regression techniques, such as multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS), artificial neural network (ANN), and support vector machine (SVM), can be considered (Hastie, Tibshirani, & Friedman, 2001), and (3) for a firm, the best fit between Michael Porter’s generic strategies (focus, cost-leadership, and differentiation) and the development stages in the value chain depends on its strengths and available resources. More industrial samples need to be collected to link these issues into business analytics.
