A company specific assessment of social impacts for a HP All-in-one PC was conducted using SLCA approach. The methodology used in this paper sets its basis on the UNEP/SETAC guidelines and extends its application to a latest ICT product. The main contribution to the state of art is related to the impact assessment phase of the SLCA methodology, more specifically when applied to electronic screen products. The proposed framework used Cronbach alpha method to determine the relative weight of each subcategory and indicator in order to overcome the shortcoming of a weighting step in ranking the importance of subcategories. Such procedure is not found in the previous few case studies on SLCA of computers. Hence, the main outcome of the proposed framework is the integration of a robust stakeholder-based approach for the weighting step within IA phase. For the weighting approach, surveys are designed considering the possible social issues that would most likely impact/affect the involved stakeholders. Surveys are submitted to selected stakeholders who are directly or indirectly involved in the computer supply chain, in relation with the goal of the assessment. The survey responses are subject to statistical analysis to calculate the weighting factors. However, survey results are generally subjective. Hence, in future assessments, answers should be taken from the affected/involved stakeholders in each life cycle phase directly, though is extremely difficult and in some cases impossible. Computers have a global supply chain, however, when social implications of a specific electronic product are assessed, use of characterization models from a regional perspective provides better insight. It helps assess how individual companies exert pressure on suppliers in local/regional level. The case study also proposed a scoring methodology based on company behavior to normalize the indicators values, however, more deeper analysis is needed covering more subcategories and indicators to check the robustness of the proposed scoring system. Also, the end points here identified are compliant to a specific social assessment of a HP all-in-one PC, but they are not generic. In relation with the case study, a score is available at stakeholder level for each life cycle stage. Future works need to mainly focus on aggregating the above results and derive a final single score for the electronic product category.
Overall, with the impact assessment methods in SLCA not yet being standardized and a product that consists of complicated supply chains and confidential as well as sensitive data sources, we strove to use a transparent, replicable, secondary and generic data-based assessment method, which will enhance wide usage of SLCA within the electronics sector for various other electronic screen products. From this study, it can be concluded that, HP as a company has shown more compliant and committed behavior (positive social influence) than risky behavior for most of the stakeholder categories. However, HP all-in-one PC as a product was having more potential risks/negative social influences than positive impacts for most of the stakeholders (3/5). Value chain actors and consumers are less critical compared to workers, local community and society. Raw material extraction and production of basic materials were found to have more risks compared to the other life cycle stages of the desktop. Within the production phase, potential risks/negative social influences were found highest for workers, followed by society, and local community. Though there is a strong hypothesis that a good company behavior can influence the social impacts created by the product, it cannot be considered as the end-point indicator. Hence, it is important to develop clear pathways linking company behavior and social impacts, that could aid SLCA to measure positive and negative social impacts of a product, for which data is the key.
