Industrial problems, such as waiting times and bottlenecks in manufacturing companies that have continuous and complex processes, have a significant effect on productivity. In response, engineers continuously try to solve them, as these kinds of problems can increase production costs. This research chose a paint factory with a continuous and complex process as the case study, and based on the discussion with managers and engineers working in the company, the research team believed that increasing productivity is an important research issue. So, in order to gain a high level of profit, there is a need to implement a new approach by considering time and cost factors. This present research is the first research that implements the novel response surface methodology to improve productivity. The main goal of this paper is to identify how a new technique, specifically, the response surface methodology can be combined with simulation modeling and experimental design to improve the productivity in the paint industry in a cost-effective and timely manner. After conducting the simulation experiment, two factors, B (number of labor) and C (failure time of lifter) were identified as significant factors. Next, the steepest ascent method and response surface methodology were implemented to determine the optimum setting of the significant factors. Based on the final results and the regression model, the optimum productivity was achieved at the point of 93.5, that is relevant to the number of labor (B) = 26 and failure time of lifter (C) = 56.01 min. Moreover, the other two factors, A (Service rate of delpak mixer) and D (number of permil) should be located at a low level. This means that they are equal to UNIF (20, 40) and 3, respectively. As this paper is focused on finding the local optimum, other approaches like meta-heuristic algorithms can be used to find the global optimum. Further studies can also be done by selecting other response variables such as resource utilization, cycle time and cost.
