This paper has addressed a systematic mapping for investigating how the affective states (emotion, mood and personality trait) and socio-emotional factors are considered in CSCL and the research challenges faced in the creation of better intelligent CSCL environments. To conduct this research, six digital libraries and two international conferences (CSCL and ICLS) were consulted, and 1473 papers were analyzed. Among such papers, 111 met the criteria for inclusion and exclusion defined in this paper and only 58 (two included manually) contained relevant information to help answer the defined research questions: RQ01 identified the affective states and socio-emotional factors used in CSCL environment, RQ02 presented the techniques that recognize, model/represent and express affective states and socio-emotional factors in CSCL environments, RQ03 summarized the technological approaches using affective states and/or socio-emotional factors to support CSCL sessions, and, finally, RQ04 determined the empirical results for the use of affective states and socio-emotional factors in CSCL environments.
As major quantitative results, (i) over 90% of the studies considered emotion and personality traits in CSCL environments, (ii) most studies used personality recognition in CSCL environments through questionnaires answered by students, (iii) most papers used instruments as a technological approach for collecting, analyzing and/or representing emotions, and (iv) most papers that reported empirical experiments focused on “emotional awareness” and “interaction among students in a CSCL environment”. The diagrams in Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10, Fig. 11 show an overview of studies that use affect in CSCL. They are a good source of information for rapidly checking research gaps and opportunities in the field.
We have proposed three main research challenges to be addressed by the community in the next decade for the creation of better CSCL environments: (a) emotional awareness, (b) orchestration of students' interaction, and (c) group formation. We expect our research can contribute towards an increase in research on Affective Computing in CSCL contexts and encourage researchers from the scientific community to investigate the challenges and research gaps emergent in the area for the creation of affect-aware intelligent CSCL environments.
As future work we suggest a deep analysis of such research challenges with inclusion of other studies that cover other issues not reported by the primary studies selected by this systematic mapping, such as gender differences (Collazos, Guerrero, Llaña, & Oetzel, 2002) and tension/relaxation (Andriessen, Baker, & van der Puil, 2011) in CSCL environments. Additionally, we propose the development of models to design intelligent CSCL environments able to recognize, model, and express the affective states and socio-emotional factors in order to create more effective groups, promote students' engagement/interaction and instigate their emotional awareness.
