The aim of this paper was to systematize the very complex and dense scientific area of smart sustainable cities in terms of identifying, distilling, and structuring the core dimensions of a foundational framework for smart sustainable city development as a set of future practices. In doing so, it focused on a number of fundamental theories along with academic disciplines and discourses, with the aim of setting a framework that analytically relates city development, sustainability, and ICT, while emphasizing how and to what extent sustainability and ICT as theories have become influential in city development in modern society. This paper primarily serves to facilitate collaboration between the different theories and academic disciplines and discourses underlying the interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary field of smart sustainable cities for the sheer purpose of generating the kind of interactional and unifiable knowledge necessary for a broader understanding of the topic of smart sustainable city development. This is a key contribution that supports the foundational ethos of the interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity that characterize the research area of smart sustainable cities. While the interdisciplinary approach is about pooling approaches from two or more disciplines and adjusting them so that they are better suited to the problem of smart sustainable city development, the transdisciplinary approach goes beyond pooling and adjusting disciplinary approaches to include their fusion for readily exploring the respective problem in its complexity. Therefore, espousing an interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary strategy in this scholarly research makes it possible to flexibly respond to the topic under study in its intricacy and variety and thus uncover the best way of addressing it. This strategy is primarily aimed at contributing to an integral reflection over where the still–emerging field is coming from and where it is believed it should be headed, and how it should evolve in the next decades. With that in regard, the outcome of this work provides fertile insights into rethinking smart sustainable cities in terms of their development, with the capacity to create new methods for informing the city, sustainability, and ICT strands of urban planning and policy and to propose a holistic approach to conceiving of urban development.
In addition, in the subject of smart sustainable city development, the underlying theories and academic disciplines and discourses and their integration are a foundation for action. In other words, the theoretical, disciplinary, and discursive dimensions of the foundational framework have strong implications for smart sustainable city development as a set of future practices. The synergic interaction between these dimensions produces a combined effect greater than the sum of their separate effects. This implies that this multidimensional framework has a supporting, underpinning, and shaping role in smart sustainable urban development. As such, it justifies and underlies the applied theoretical approach to the PhD study being undertaken, which aims to develop a framework for strategic smart sustainable city development using a backcasting approach to planning, where the focus is on the application of a set of integrative theories and academic disciplines and discourses. In particular, the theories of sustainability and ICT have become influential and prevalent in many aspects of urban life, whether in the built environment, urban systems, urban domains, urban services, or urban forms. This PhD research focuses specifically on how sustainability can be integrated with ICT in their application to urban forms (design and planning of smart sustainable cities), and how this functions and is useful in an increasingly computerized and urbanized world. This theoretical integration is therefore of paramount importance as to how the subject of smart sustainable city development should be studied and applied. In other words, how sustainability and ICT theories are applied in the real world, how they work and how useful they are, constitute relevant subjects for the PhD study being conducted in the area of smart sustainable cities. There are many theories that are influential in how the subject of smart sustainable city development is studied and applied. There are some theories that may be strongly based on scientific evidence that would need expert knowledge to challenge, and others that are more philosophical and institutional and thus more open to general critical examination. What the implications of the integrated theories in this scholarly research are and whether such theories deliver what is claimed can be studied by examining actual case studies (city projects, programs, strategies, and future plans). In this way, theoretical issues and their effects are of primary focus in the PhD study. This kind of research combines investigation and understanding of theory—a literature–based activity in conjunction with consultations with influential thinkers and experts in the field, to study the application and effects of theories. The PhD study thus involves an interesting and varied set of activities that are suitable for combining thinking with doing. Indeed, with its strong applied focus, it is not alienated or divorced from real life; rather, it is to be carried out to inform the planning and design of smart sustainable cities as an urban development strategy and practice. In all, what underpins and motivates the pursuit or espousal of the applied theoretical approach is that this PhD study is profoundly theoretically–integrated yet under–researched, empirically underdeveloped, and inherently inductive. In addition, all institutionalized and socially–anchored actions are grounded in some kinds of theories and academic disciplines and discourses.
Furthermore, this paper offered an in–depth interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary discussion covering topics of high relevance to the PhD study and at the heart of the very synergic relationship between the theoretical, disciplinary, and discursive dimensions of the foundational framework underpinning smart sustainable city development. The key topics addressed include the following:
•Smart sustainable cities as complex systems•Urban sustainability from a systems thinking view•On deep urban and environmental sustainability•Complexity science for smart sustainable cities•The role of big data analytics in disentangling the intractable problems pertaining to urban sustainability•The role of urban intelligence functions in monitoring and planning smart sustainable cities•Urban simulation models for informing the future design of smart sustainable cities.
The intent of the discussion is to emphasize the synergies and implications of the theoretical, disciplinary, and discursive dimensions of the foundational framework for smart sustainable city development. This relates to the applied theoretical approach to the PhD study in the sense that such development is typically concerned with the application and effects of theories and academic disciplines and discourses. These are indeed influential in how the subject of smart sustainable city development is being studied and applied. The intent of the applied theoretical approach is to challenge or substantiate theoretical and discursive assumptions, discover contradictions, uncover fallacies, reveal paradoxes, and examine broad issues. Worth noting is that in smart sustainable city development practice, not all the challenges and solutions can be identified, and even the identified ones are usually not completely addressed and applied respectively—as urban problems are inherently of wicked sorts and thus pose special conundrums (Bibri, 2018). Further, what the implications of the integrated theories are, the extent to which they deliver what is claimed, and how they can be further enhanced—theoretical issues and their effects—can be always be further investigated by examining best practices, successful projects, and prevailing strategies. Lastly, this paper provides an important lens through which to understand a set of influential theories and established academic disciplines and discourses with high potential for integration, fusion, and practicality in relation to the practice of smart sustainable city development.
