In this work there are presented the description and some of the V&V results of the BERKUT fuel rod module of the EUCLID/V1 integrated computer code designed for the safety analysis and justification of reactor facilities with fast reactors under normal operating conditions and design basis accidents.
The calculations of the analytical tasks with the BERKUT module indicate that the employed numerical schemes and methods are stable and sufficiently accurate for the reactor simulation. The numerical solution converges to the accurate one with the decrease of time step and the increase of computational mesh density. The cross-verification of the BERKUT module with the MSC.MARC software evidences that both codes predict the same evolution of the stress–strain state of a fuel rod caused by the swelling of a fuel column. The discrepancy in stresses and thermal creep strains does not exceed 1%.
The BERKUT module has been validated on the existed experimental data obtained in the fast reactor tests of the fuel rods with the oxide and nitride fuels. To analyze the uncertainty and sensitivity of the calculated results with regard to the uncertainties in the fuel rod fabrication data, material properties and irradiation conditions the VARIA code was used. The uncertainty and sensitivity analysis has shown that the obtained calculated ranges of fuel rod parameters in most cases intersect the sets of experimental points. Thus, the BERKUT module gives a reasonable description of the fuel rod performance in fast reactors.
The carried out testing of the BERKUT module in coupled calculations with the neutronics and thermohydraulic modules has been demonstrated that it describes adequately the fuel rod behavior during the transient and accident regimes.
The advanced version of the BERKUT module which is incorporated in the second version of the EUCLID integrated computer code (EUCLID/V2) is being developed and verified at present. This advanced version includes the mechanistic models of the oxide and nitride fuel behavior in fast reactors. It is supposed that the mentioned models will extend the EUCLID code application field and allow to simulate the fuel behavior during various accidents, particularly, to model the interaction between the solid fuel and the sodium or lead coolant.
