The increasing need for cybersecurity workforce, today, is an unavoidable problem. In the last years, we have witnessed the evolution and maturation of the discipline of cybersecurity, as we can perceive, for instance, by the ACM efforts since the inclusion of the Information Assurance and Security KA into the computer science curricula guidelines until the recent definition of the cybersecurity curricular draft guidance. Meanwhile, universities have proposed undergraduate as well as graduate cybersecurity programs.
Considering the relevance of more specialised higher education programs in cybersecurity, we analysed cybersecurity master programs of top-ranking universities to identify, mainly, which cybersecurity topics they cover and how they distribute these topics through courses. In addition, we reviewed the cybersecurity discipline to reach the baseline of our analysis. Within this review, we noticed the increasing importance of less technological areas, such as the KAs of human, organisational, and societal security – this is one of the main conclusions of our work.
Another main conclusion of our findings is that the broad-spectrum cybersecurity master programs that include mainly core courses on security are in alignment with the 2017 JTF curriculum guidelines for cybersecurity post-secondary programs, including at least one or two courses from the six ACM KAs. In addition, some programs offer a personalised curriculum through the selection of more specialised or advanced elective courses. Some elective courses are very peculiar, for example, the course History of Art of War: from Ancient World to Network – Centric Warfare, offered by the Tallinn University, the course Criminal Behaviour – Applied Perspectives (Cyber Security), offered by the University of Southampton, or the course Industrial Espionage and Counterfeiting, offered by the University of Warwick. Moreover, new elective courses are used to cover more topical subjects, such as Quantum Computation or, predictably, soon, Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technology.
To remain up to date with the developments in the area and market needs, cybersecurity master programs evolve. Their evolution includes updating the contents of their courses as well as changing the structure of programs to incorporate more specific security courses into the set of core courses and to offer more elective courses. We point out that this evolution has been aligned with the available faculty and expertise.
To conclude, we elaborate on the current labour market for master cybersecurity specialists and their future expectations. First, even more than other fields, the market is characterised by employee mobility and remote work. Second, many cybersecurity experts and remote workers serve in geographical areas and countries other than those of their native universities. The core knowledge obtained during studies is universal and suitable for any professional and for any geography. However, there are some topics, such as cybersecurity legal regulations, private data protection rules, protection of intellectual property, and ethical hacking legal aspects that can vary widely across countries. Because cybersecurity specialists in their professional work are often approaching the thin line between legal and illegal activities, moving between countries, (and legal regulatory systems), they can easily fall into trouble. Finally, master studies in cybersecurity, in addition to general academic and practical professional skills and competences in the domain (Furnell et al., 2017), must not forget about students' social competences connected to a wider security culture.
As far as we know, our work is the first that analyses the evolution and maturation of the cybersecurity discipline (from higher education needs point of view) and that fills the gap in the literature regarding the analysis of existing cybersecurity master programs and their alignment with the ACM and the JTF curriculum guidelines.
