Despite various research being devoted to fall prevention, such as the removal of hazardous areas and the use of guardrails or safety net systems, little research focuses on supervising the appropriate use of PPEs. PPEs are a last protection measure that guarantees the safety of steeplejacks in case accidents happen, but they don't attract enough attention from researchers. This paper proposed an automated inspection method based on deep-learning assisted computer vision technology for the safety measures of steeplejacks. We considered that the best solution to prevent fall accidents is to thoroughly inspect the safety measures of steeplejacks before they enter an aerial working area. Therefore, we proposed an ASC classifier to detect the steeplejacks who are going through a window into an aerial working area. Then, an advanced object detector SSD and CNN classifier were employed in this paper to judge whether a steeplejack has been made adequately safe.
Due to advanced and thorough learning methods and the high resolution of the images, we achieved a high precision and recall rate. Also, the experiment results show that our method is robust to most changing scenarios, such as illumination, individual and window characteristics, and partial occlusion (our method still achieves high performance when the occlusion ratio is <0.6). We make a detailed comparison with other solutions in terms of technical applicability and cost, including indoor positioning and manual checking. Also, a computer vision-based solution proves to be the most cost-effective solution for solving safety monitoring of aerial work. Another limitation of this paper is that it can't distinguish between the anchorages that link to empty webbings from the ones that connect to the workers' harnesses. Considering that this would mean that the workers were cheating the method, and such behavior would not benefit them but put them in danger, it's expected that workers would rarely take such actions. We recommend that future research focuses on reward and punishment of steeplejacks after the detection of inappropriate use of PPEs using our method.
