In our study, we attempted to replicate previous findings on note-taking in the context of an open-ended learning environment for middle school science. However, different results were found in this study between the frog scenario and the bee scenario. In the frog scenario, the quantity of note-taking and quantity of note-reaccessing were both significantly positively associated with science inquiry performance, suggesting that the benefits of both taking notes in digital notepad (encoding function) and reaccessing notes as a precursor to note-reviewing (external storage function) on facilitating science inquiry performance within the environment. That is, the two functions of note-taking seemed to extend beyond traditional simple learning measures, to boosting performance on complex science inquiry tasks in the open-ended learning environment. These results corresponded to Chi’s claim that active note-taking is superior to passive learning, and contradicted previous research showing that taking notes in computer-based notepad and the quantity of note-taking in computers were negatively associated with performance because of the cognitive overload imposed by OELEs (e.g., Trevors et al., 2014). On the other hand, the quantity of note-taking/reaccessing behaviors was not significantly associated with performance among the note-takers in the bee scenario.
In addition, constructive learning (e.g., through making inferences in notes, combining disparate sources of information in the environment, and hypothesizing or drawing conclusions in notes) was related to better performance, in line with Chi’s ICAP framework. However, the predictions of Chi’s ICAP framework were only partially supported in the present study because the advantage for content elaborative note-taking over content reproductive note-taking was conditional on the source of notes taken. In particular, constructive elaboration appeared to be valuable for science inquiry performance when students took and reviewed notes from test results, while content elaborative notes were not necessarily superior to content reproduction when students took notes on the research kiosk information.
6.1. Theoretical and empirical implicationsThis research extends the existing note-taking literature by examining note-taking within an open-ended learning environment that assesses middle school students’ science inquiry skills in authentic classroom settings. Therefore, this study tests the robustness and generalizability of a broad list of findings from traditional research on note-taking and adds to the literature on computer-based note-taking in OELEs for science inquiry, which comprises a common learning activity nowadays.This piece of work also shows the value of analyzing the rich log files from online environments such as Virtual Performance Assessments. In this paper, we distilled quantitative features that represent both the quantity and content of notes from log data produced by around 2000 students, enabling a comprehensive analysis of note-taking behavior in this environment. We revised and enriched the existing coding scheme developed by Trevors et al. (2014) to enable analysis of the content of notes more comprehensively than in past work in open-ended learning environments.This study’s findings may also be of value to educational practice. Considering the importance of note-taking/reaccessing on science inquiry performance at least in some contexts, as indicated by this study and previous studies, it is critical for students, especially younger learners who lack sufficient note-taking/reviewing strategies and sophisticated self-regulatory skills (Greene et al., 2008, Pintrich and Zusho, 2002), to receive instruction and scaffolding on how to take and review notes effectively in OELEs (Bonner and Holliday, 2006, Peverly et al., 2003, Piolat et al., 2005). Nevertheless, in classrooms, most students are not provided appropriate instruction on note-taking/reviewing strategies (Bonner & Holliday, 2006). This study provides evidence on which strategies may be most effective. For example, our results imply that prompting students to reaccess notes as external storage frequently and encouraging them to spend sufficient time reviewing notes in the digital notepad might be beneficial for academic success. Alternatively, students can be encouraged by computer agents in real time to type more notes in order to promote their understanding and learning if the system detects low word count in notes. In addition, students should be instructed to evaluate the reliability of information and think critically as they take notes so that content from high-reliability sources will be prioritized and recorded – focusing on the information from the kiosk and tests rather than contradictory and possibly ill-informed NPCs. Adaptive scaffolding can also be embedded to guide students to take notes of high-importance information. For instance, cues and prompts can be provided in the environment as students read kiosk pages or test results to remind them to take and reaccess notes, while such scaffolds will not be provided as students make field observations or talk with NPCs.On the other hand, the lack of positive associations between note-taking/reaccessing and science inquiry performance in the more difficult bee scenario indicated that taking and reaccessing notes may not be as beneficial in environments that are more cognitively demanding. In these environments, students, especially the low-performing students, should be encouraged to focus their mental effort on the science inquiry tasks and ensure that sufficient time is distributed to the inquiry process itself before encouraging them to take and use notes. Perhaps the evidence from their inquiry process could be collected for them by the environment, for later review.Further, results from this study provide insights into where instructional designers should embed scaffolding to stimulate constructive learning and deep cognitive processing. Instead of being encouraged to take elaborative notes all the time, students should be asked to elaborate on certain data sources (e.g., connect content on lab tests with existing knowledge) in the environment. On the other hand, when note-taking is used mainly for recording declarative knowledge (such as information from the research kiosk) that can be reviewed later, elaboration is not necessary. Therefore, scaffolding on copying or paraphrasing relevant information would be sufficient in these cases to increase students’ declarative knowledge base. Results also suggested that only content elaborative notes were positively associated with science inquiry in the more difficult bee scenario while content reproductive notes were not. As such, scaffolding to stimulate elaboration could be important in the bee scenario.Open-ended learning environments like Virtual Performance Assessments impose a high cognitive load on learners’ working memory. Previous research suggests that individual differences in working memory ability may be associated with individual differences in note-taking strategies and the effectiveness of note-taking (Bui & Myerson, 2014). Our results indicated that the effects of note-taking on science inquiry performance could be different, depending on the amount of cognitive load imposed by the learning scenario. Thus, for students with relatively low working memory capacity, scaffolding could be provided to reduce the cognitive demands on students as they learn in challenging OELEs so that the optimal amount of cognitive load is imposed. For instance, scaffolds that minimize split attention could be used to reduce extraneous cognitive load for students with low working memory capacity, potentially helping them focus on the inquiry tasks and thus maximizing the benefit of note-taking.
6.2. Limitations and directions for future researchOne of the limitations of this study is the lack of robustness in the results. Most of the positive relationships between note-taking/reaccessing and performance found in the frog scenario were not replicated in the bee scenario, which was highly structurally similar to the frog scenario. As a result, many of our findings were only partially supported. Further investigation should be conducted with content experts and instructional designers to examine whether it was the design of the bee scenario or other elements specific to the bee scenario that caused the different results. Investigating the relationship between the difficulty level of instructional content, cognitive load, and the effectiveness of note-taking/reaccessing would also be meaningful to understand the different results. This would also elucidate the instructional design of open-ended learning environments to maximize the benefits of digital note-taking.In addition, replication and extension of our results should be conducted to validate the generalizability of these results across platforms, domain topics, populations, and types of tasks. For example, Trevors et al. (2014) suggested in their study on note-taking in a hypermedia learning environment that the quantity of note-taking and the quantity of content reproductive notes were negatively associated with performance, while we obtained the opposite results in the frog scenario. Additionally, the present study examined the relationship between note-taking and science inquiry performance for middle school students, while most of the previous research on note-taking has focused on older populations (e.g., undergraduates and adults). Researchers have found that even undergraduate learners have difficulties in applying self-regulatory strategies such as note-taking strategies effectively and may need additional scaffolding (Kiewra and Fletcher, 1984, Moos, 2009, Peverly et al., 2003, Piolat et al., 2005). As such, it is worth asking whether the relationships between note-taking and science inquiry performance we observed among middle school students, who typically exhibit less sophisticated note-taking and self-regulated learning skills, also apply to older adults. Therefore, further analyses testing whether our results transfer to other science open-ended learning environments, for older and more proficient learners, on a variety of learning tasks, would be extremely informative and may help us understand whether younger students need different support for note-taking and note-reviewing than older students.Another possible limitation of the study is that we have focused on note-reaccessing, which we defined as opening the notepad without adding or changing the content of notes, as an indicator of the external storage function and precursor to note-reviewing. It is worth asking how closely our findings link to the broader behavior of note-reviewing. Although reaccessing notes is the first step for note-reviewing, it does not necessarily mean that students were reviewing notes. For example, a student might rapidly open and close the notepad without spending time reading the notes. Alternate operationalizations, such as opening the notepad for a minimum amount of time, could be considered. It is also possible that a student also reviewed notes before or after entering information in the notepad while the notepad remained open. Future analysis could combine log data with eye-tracking data to provide a more valid and reliable measure of the frequency of reviewing notes that excludes actions where notes were accessed but not reviewed.We should, of course, note that no causal inferences can be made from this correlational study. For example, in addition to the benefits of notepad usage indicated by its positive relationship with performance, it is also possible that students who accessed the notepad differed systematically and shared certain characteristics (e.g., high prior knowledge) that led them to make use of the notepad. Previous research has indicated that prior knowledge plays a crucial role in the relationship between note-taking and performance (Moos & Azevedo, 2008). However, Virtual Performance Assessments was designed to assess science inquiry skills that were otherwise difficult and complicated to measure, and it is challenging to obtain a valid measure of prior knowledge on science inquiry. Therefore, we did not collect prior knowledge on science inquiry in this study and did not control for prior knowledge while exploring the relationship between note-taking and science inquiry performance.Furthermore, the online notepad provided to learners in this study is a plain text editor where students can enter any text. No additional features of existing popular note-taking applications such as collaborative note-taking, annotation, providing skeletal outlines for note-taking, and creating hierarchical lists, have been embedded within the notepad (cf., Bauer and Koedinger, 2006, Kauffman et al., 2011). In addition, students cannot create graphs in the notepad, which could be easily achieved in paper-based note-taking. Potential future research includes exploring the effects of enabling these features on note-taking and performance.Research has also suggested that note-taking is influenced by individual differences. For instance, gender difference exists in traditional paper-based note-taking (Cohn et al., 1995, McQuiggan et al., 2008, Williams and Eggert, 2002). Motivation also plays an important role in why students take notes and how notes influence learning (Moos, 2009). Future research should also include examining the role of individual differences (e.g., gender, intrinsic motivation, working memory) in both the quantity of note-taking/reaccessing behavior and content of notes in open-ended learning environments.Finally, the current study examined note-taking/reaccessing behavior within each scenario that lasted for approximately 30 min. Future studies could explore how computer-based note-taking strategies develop over time, and how they are related to delayed learning outcomes and robust learning.
