Deformation twins were segmented and identified through clustering and computer vision. By applying k-means clustering to a high-resolution, large field-of-view strain map, 100 million data points were individually segmented into clusters corresponding to different deformation features such as twinned, non-twinned parent, and other strain localizations. Clusters were classified as twinned or non-twinned based on two approaches: (1) by examining the similarity between the strain of cluster centroid with the expected surface strain of an available twin system, and the global Schmid factor of that available twin system; and (2) by tracking the size and shape evolution of the cluster.
Although a large number of data points (~ 100 million over 1417 grains) were examined, they existed within a single test specimen of specific material properties and under one set of test conditions. A strength of the proposed approach will be in its application across numerous test specimens to connect between material parameters, testing conditions, and resultant microstructural heterogeneities and globally-observed responses. However, this will result in an explosion in data size, which raises the question of how to best handle what could quickly become intractably large amounts of data.
In future work, identification accuracy and computational time in individual tests can likely be improved through the characterization and optimization of several interconnected factors. These include, among others, adaptive clustering approaches, coarse-graining points needed for cluster number and centroid evaluation, and integration of techniques such as principal component analysis to perform clustering in principal component space. Data pooling between individual tests can likewise be optimized. As the data have already been individually clustered within their individual testing conditions, the features of these clusters rather than the individual data points themselves could then be examined - i.e., the statistics of cluster evolution with respect to varied loading parameters. There is significant work to be done to determine how to optimally manage this information.
In addition to improvements to clustering and computer vision approaches, improvements in data quality will likewise improve analysis. Microscale digital image correlation is a recently emergent approach, and there are on-going efforts to improve sample preparation and the correlation algorithms. Strain gradients, such as those at a twin-parent interface, can cause smoothing errors in locally-based DIC methods which introduces error into the cluster position in strain space. On-going developments in microscale DIC, particularly emergent correlation codes that are adapted to address sharp discontinuities, will increasingly enable accurate strain fields and analysis of microscale deformation and damage mechanisms such as twinning, dislocation slip, and microcracking, in future experiments encompassing a range of materials and thermo-mechanical loading conditions.
