This study has made a comprehensive research on FT area in China from a bibliometric perspective. Our research results have indicated that FT has attracted more and more attention from Chinese scholars over the past 30 years. However, despite a significant growth of FT publications in China, the distributions are highly unbalanced at regional levels. Beijing, Jiangsu and Liaoning contributed 40.4% of all publications from 1986 to 2015. Furthermore, Beijing led with 2946 publications and it was followed by Jiangsu with 1613 publications. On the other hand, the ten least productive regions together contributed a total of 2.57% which is a very small share. During 1986–1995 and 1996–2005, only a few provinces or municipalities such as Beijing, Shanghai, Jiangsu and Liaoning are active in FT publications. However, during the period of 2006–2015, more and more regions such as Sichuan, Hubei, Zhejiang, Hunan, and Guangdong, become very active in the production of FT knowledge.
The co-authors with Chinese scholars were mainly from North America, Europe, Australia and Asia. In the period of 1986–1995, few foreign scholars co-authored with Chinese scholars in FT research area. However, this phenomenon has greatly changed as time went on. USA is China's most important partner in FT cooperative researches in all three different periods.
The most frequently cited work in FT area from Chinese scholars is Zadeh [80]. Furthermore, among the top 10 most co-cited documents, only three are multi-authored publications and the remaining seven publications were all single authored.
The research focuses have changed significantly from basic FT research to a comprehensive study. In earlier studies the basic theories were the main research focuses. However, these focuses have been shifted to applications.
Among various disciplines, Computer Science and Engineering are the most popular ones in the field of FT research from Chinese scholars. More and more researches about the applications of FT to Social Sciences, Mathematical & Computational Biology and Economics have appeared in recent years.
This study has some shortcomings, such as the selected database, SSCI, SCIE and AHCI, favors English-language journals ([42]; Tang and Shapira, 2011). In our constructed database, only less than one percent of FT publications were not written in English. Therefore, this may underestimate the research status since some excellent FT publications authored by Chinese scholars were written in Chinese.
