5.1. LimitationsResearch investigating innovation typically utilizes one of two methods. The first, directly measuring innovation, is difficult to administer and manage and is cost prohibitive because it requires gathering data from trade journals or directly from firms (Archibugi and Pianta, 1996). Therefore, most research relies on the second method, measures of patent activity as a proxy for innovation. This method has been found a valid measure (Acs et al., 2002; Jaffe et al., 1998; Acs and Audretsch, 1989), though criticized as imperfect as it neglects to take into account the impact that patents have on future innovations (Trajtenberg, 1990; Pakes and Griliches, 1980). Though many research studies use patent activity as a proxy for innovation activity, it is important to acknowledge the limitations of this connection. Patents should not be seen as a firm’s sole evidence of innovation. Many firms engage in innovation activities that never result in patents and most patents are never commercialized (Walker, 2015). In fact, Brouwer and Kleinknect (1999) show that smaller innovators have a lower probability of applying for patents, but those that do have more patent applications than larger firms. This demonstrates that a firm’s propensity to patent is not solely reflective of its innovation activities. Thus, patent counts may be an imperfect measure of innovation activity, but it is the most useful and efficient method we have.Another important limitation to consider is the criteria for receiving a design patent. Design patents do not overlap with utility patents and thus do not describe how an innovation functions, but design patents do describe the innovation’s unique, distinctive shape or appearance (USPTO, 2011). These criteria are arguably superficial and do not capture some of the more sophisticated principles of design thinking. For example, a unique shape may be granted a design patent, but the shape may only hint at the design’s ability to create an exceptional user experience for the consumer. In other words, a creatively designed handle may be patentable, but the ergonomics underlying the design decisions are not. Thus, design patent counts can be used as a measure of innovation activity, but they do not capture the underlying philosophy that a firm may use to direct innovation activities, which may be another contributing factor to its success. Steen et al. (2014), for instance, argue that design thinking projects are complex and steeped in uncertainty and that such projects might even require an organization to develop an ability to draw ideas and knowledge from multiple departments and other organizations.Another limitation of the study is that specific marketing expenses are unavailable for firms in our data set. Similarly, since firms are not required to report advertising expenses (since 1994), advertising expenses, which are only a subset of marketing expenses are sparse. While SG&A expenses are a proxy measure for marketing expenses, is utilized in literature and significantly correlated (.76) with advertising expenses (a subset of marketing expenses), in our dataset, it does not fully capture true marketing expenses.Finally, the results of this study may be industry specific. For instance, the furniture industry (Gemser and Leenders, 2001; Gemser and Wijnberg, 2001), may be seen as an industry where design (as opposed to technology) is more critical to firm performance, as compared to the industries in our sample. Gemser and Leenders (2001) also find that in the Dutch furniture industry, corporate reputation is a deterrent to competitive imitation, the foundational function of intellectual property. We do not make these observations with our sample.
5.2. Future researchTo date, the subject of design innovation has received little attention in the management and marketing literatures. It is our hope that this study will be the jumping off point for further exploration of this topic and we offer a few suggestions for investigation into related lines of inquiry.One area that needs further attention are the organizational climates that breed design and technology innovations. Applying both the system-structural (Silverman, 1970) and strategic choice (Child, 1972) theories of organization can help us understand the innovative capacity of firms and how their organizational climates might lead to one form of innovation over the other. Additionally, organizational leadership styles (Eagly et al., 2003) could be a possible driver of different types of innovation, especially as they relate to knowledge management (Politis, 2001).Another area worthy of attention focuses specifically on the differing performance outcomes associated with design and technology innovations. Differential outcomes could be a by-product of a firm’s incremental or radical innovation orientation (Tushman and Romanelli, 1985); future research could explore whether design or technology innovations are more associated with either of these orientations. A firm geared for incremental innovation might focus on lower risk projects where the reward is near term such as a design innovation where the obstacles are relatively small. A firm geared for radical innovation might take bolder technology innovation moves in the marketplace with less regard for risk and they might be the first to develop new products or technologies that would obsolete their own offerings.Being an early work on the drivers of design activity that relies on design and utility patents as a measure, we chose to examine the phenomenon during a period of economic stability. The influence of economic swings on the nature of design and technology innovation and the corresponding choices that firms make is an interesting topic for follow up work. Future research could also look at a subset of firms that have more direct measures of marketing expenses.Finally, future research should consider the longevity or “staying power” of the performance benefits these forms of innovation deliver. A longitudinal assessment of innovative firms would shed light on whether design and technology innovations make lasting impacts and what role firm culture might play.This research has shed light on a form of innovation output, design patents, that is new to innovation research yet, based on anecdotal evidence from practice, seems to be growing in strategic significance. While not equivalent, this project also represents a more scientific assessment of popular managerial trends such as design thinking. By establishing that design innovation is a unique and different phenomenon with different and available outcome measures, we hope to stimulate a new stream of quantitative, design-based research.
