A novel method was proposed for automatic and non-intrusive estimation of pH value in Thomson oranges based on computer vision in the visible range. By automatic we mean that the value of pH for each orange is estimated through regression from the image data without human intervention.
The novelty of the approach lies in the prediction of pH of Thomson oranges based on color and texture features that may be one of the most difficult and at the same time simplest non-destructive prediction system approaches in the visible range (available with an ordinary camera). The time used in non-intrusive pH value prediction was 0.53 s of which image segmentation took 0.20 s, feature extraction 0.15 s, and application of the ICA-ANN 0.15 s, on average for each orange image input sample.
To conclude, we recap that the method described in this paper includes image pre-processing to compute 14 relevant attributes from the orange population to estimate pH value by the hybrid ICA-ANN algorithm. Specifically, using PCA and RSM methods the algorithm predicted orange pH value with good accuracy in a non-intrusive fashion. As proven by results in computer simulations provided above, accuracy in pH value estimation is rather high, particularly considering the type of low-resolution visible range input images. Accurate classification in low-mid-high pH values of Thomson oranges could be valid for potential industrial real-time applications and/or non-intrusive automatic fruit pH sorting systems.
We believe accuracy in the performance was possible due to the following key factors:
1.The hybrid ICA-ANN algorithm, like most other optimization algorithms, is mainly influenced by values of its parameters. These parameters can be set manually or by using different optimisation approaches. By using the RSM approach, a large number of critical variables are tuned through a small number of experiments.2.The automatic and non-intrusive Thomson orange pH sorting system and prototype proposed in this study could be potentially used in industry, but in order to achieve a lower error sorting system, the following items should be taken into consideration:
a.Use of a camera with a higher resolution.b.Placing the camera at a suitable fixed distance to fruit in such a way that the real size of fruit is always shown.c.Use of appropriate lighting conditions without any disturbances or changes during the whole images acquisition procedure.d.Choosing a suitable color for the background avoiding any light reflections.
