In this study, we proposed a multi-kernel ELM-based method for EEG classification in motor-imagery BCIs. Two different types of kernels, i.e., Gaussian kernel and polynomial kernel were exploited to map the original CSP features to different nonlinear feature spaces that provide richer discriminant information. With multi-kernel learning, the two nonlinear feature spaces were integrated to achieve more robust classification of EEG. An extensive experimental comparison was carried out on two public EEG datasets to validate the effectiveness of the proposed MKELM-based method, in comparison with several other competing approaches. The superior performance based on the experimental results demonstrate that the MKELM method is a promising candidate for the development of an improved MI-based BCI.
It should be noted that our proposed method is not limited to BCI but could also be straightly applied to various other applications. Especially, the development of expert systems could significantly benefit from more extensions of MKELM. The following directions may be worthy of our further studies:

(1)Studying on sophisticated strategy for accurate estimation of kernel balance parameters. Developing improved kernel fusion algorithms such as semidefinite programming or ensemble learning is important for further improving the classification performance of MKELM.(2)Extending the MKELM to a deeper architecture. Follow the deep learning theory, studying the multiple layer encoding of kernel matrix will be an interesting topic. It is also worth investigating the deep feature based multi-kernel learning ELM algorithm for improved classification performance.(3)Studying on tensorial kernel function and feature fusion algorithm fr tensor kernels. Designing kernel-based multilinear learning algorithm for high-order extension of ELM could be potentially useful for exploring more discriminant features from the multi-dimensional structure of data.(4)Improving classification accuracy in small sample size, a very common issue not only in BCI but also various pattern recognition applications. Incorporating advanced learning algorithms such as transfer learning or reinforcement learning into ELM to reduce the required number of samples could be considerably important and worthy of further study.
