In the absence of clinically approved anti-Myc drugs, targeting the Myc-Max complex represents a critical step towards creating new therapeutics for lethal CRPC and NEPC. In this study, we identified a possible druggable site on the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of the structurally ordered Myc-Max complex and employed a computer-aided rational drug discovery approach to identify small molecules that inhibit Myc-Max functionality. A large-scale virtual screening protocol was utilized to select a set of top-ranked compounds that were subsequently characterized experimentally. A number of compounds were identified that inhibit Myc-Max activity with low to mid-micromolar potency and with no or minimal cytotoxicity, including VPC-70067, a compound highly similar in structure, potency and mechanism of action to 10058-F4. In addition, a novel compound VPC-70063 with a chemically different scaffold was identified as the best performer in a panel of in vitro assays as it inhibits Myc-Max transcriptional activity (IC50 = 8.9 μM; [95% CI: 6.6–11.8 μM]), Myc-Max downstream functions, levels of the AR-V7 splice variant in CRPC cells, and cell growth in various PCa cell lines. In addition, VPC-70063 induces apoptosis as expected with a Myc inhibitor. Its specificity was further illustrated by the observed inhibitory effect on the Myc-Max association with DNA and by the cell viability experiment with Myc-negative cell line HO15.19. It should be noted, however, that in the latter system some cytotoxicity has been detected at higher concentrations of VPC-70063. Even though the extent of inhibition of Myc-negative cells was much less profound than that for Myc-positive ones (7% versus 50% at 2.5 μM administration), the observed general cytotoxicity is a concern and will be addressed in our future optimization efforts for VPC-70063 series of Myc-Max inhibitors. On the other hand, it should also be mentioned that the positive control we have used – a compound 10074-G5 has also demonstrated 37% suppression of HO15.19 at 25 μM dosage. The most recently reported small molecule Myc-Max inhibitor MYCMI-6 has also exhibited about 15% inhibition of HO15.19 at 10 μM [87]. Thus, it is not impossible to speculate that those inhibitors could affect other Max containing complexes in HO15.19 cell line and/or that the corresponding prototypical small molecule Myc-Max inhibitors all require further optimization and reduction of Myc-independent cytotoxicity. As before, our integrative approach to drug discovery proved successful insofar in discovering novel Myc-Max inhibitors as promising far-reaching therapeutics for advanced prostate and other cancers.
