More than 55,000 single airborne particles from 83 samples were measured by CCSEM. These data were used for training a model based two-stage classifier. 227 different main classes and 465 subclasses have been found in total, so far. The first stage of the classifier, defining the main classes, is rule-based and does not need any training at all. The second stage is a robust model-based method, allowing safely classifying particles even when (some) particles belong to subclasses that have not been included in the training set yet. Ternary diagram matrices (Fig. 5), scatterplot matrices, heatmaps (Fig. 8), lattice scatterplots (Fig. 7) and lattice histograms of morphological and chemical quantities created automatically by the particle classifier help checking and interpreting data and classes. The detailed classification scheme allowed attributing a large proportion of the particles to well defined compounds. Depending on the context, subclasses may be aggregated to meta-classes, representing e.g. different particle sources, different particle formation processes or groups of particles with similar health effects. A paper about an applied study with more application-specific details is in preparation.
For the time being, the classifier is performing best for samples rich in mineral dust and traffic-derived dust due to the training samples used so far and because elements lighter than Na have been neglected. Neglecting these elements, leads to degenerations in the compositional space. This may complicate data interpretation. Previous studies demonstrated that boron crystals are suitable substrates for collecting and analyzing low Z element particles (e.g. Choël et al., 2005; Deboudt et al., 2010; Bingmeier et al., 2012). First experiments in our facility with boron substrates show that training the classifier for measurements including low Z elements quantified on boron substrates is feasible. For including C, N, O and F, the classifier has to be retrained leading to new main and subclasses. A quartz particle (SiO2) for example would change from the Si-class to the Si-O class. First analyses with a state-of-the-art EDS detector suggest that the minimum concentration threshold of 5 wt% for considering an element in the first stage of particle classification into main classes could be lowered without generating undesirable artefacts. This has the advantage that some elements used as source tracers (e.g. Zn, Sb and Sn in brake wear) could be considered, despite small concentrations, in the classification scheme.
