In this paper we investigate how primary school teachers' positive biases towards one of the genders reinforce this group's future academic achievements and orientation towards enrollment in advanced math and science studies in high school. We base the measure of teachers' gender-biased behavior on a comparison of primary school classroom boys' and girls' average test scores in a “non-blind” exam that the teacher marks, versus a “blind” exam marked externally. We also define another measure which exclude the gap between the two exams' scores of the student himself from the measure (jackknife version). We then estimate the impact of this measure of teachers' biases on the academic achievements of students in standardized national exams during middle school and high school, and on completion of higher level courses in math and sciences during high school.
For identification, we rely on the random assignments of teachers and students to classes within a given primary school in a specific subject. We compare students in the same primary school and in the same subject who are exposed to teachers, who might have different patterns of gender biases. We address several threats to the interpretation of our findings and demonstrate that our estimates reflect teachers' behavior and not students' characteristics or behavior.
Based on a sample of Tel-Aviv schools, the results we present suggest that teachers' more positive relative assessment of boys in a specific subject has a positive (negative) and significant effect on boys' (girls') overall future achievements in that subject. Moreover, the magnitudes of these effects are more pronounced for boys than for girls, especially when estimated using the jackknife version of the teacher bias measure. These effects persist through middle school and high school and actually have dramatic implications for matriculation exam scores and on the probability of receiving a matriculation diploma.
We also find that gender bias among math teachers has an especially large effect on students' math test scores and on total number of matriculation credit units in advanced math and science studies in high school. The estimates of the effect in math are of special interest because of the considerable gender gap in math achievements and its impact on future labor market outcomes. Moreover, since this gap in math achievement might partly results from teachers' biases against girls in math, eliminating these biases will go a long way towards reducing the math achievement gender gap, and it will also decrease the gender gap in enrollment in advanced math and science studies. The impact on the various end-of-high-school matriculation outcomes carries meaningful economic consequences, because these high stakes outcomes sharply affect the quantity and quality of post-secondary schooling as well as impacting earnings in adulthood.
