This cost-effective and efficient 32-channel system is designed using the SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) technique via LabVIEW software. This system can aid students in the learning processes. The system can be configured to work with any type of channel (digital or analog) and depends on the connected sensors data types. In the context of this research work, a grouping of an analog and digital channels is being used. For alarm triggering, most of the channels have an analog output. Sensor data can be alphanumerically monitored, logged, controlled and processed for alerting hospital via LabVIEW front panel and actuating actions can be enabled from the front panel screen. This feature is created in order to introduce to the alert the hospital in case of emergency. Decision making can be done manually or can be set to operate automatically. Further numerous applications can be created using this 32-channel system.
The patient monitoring case was implemented using a 32-channel system. This system includes monitoring the temperature, heart ECG signal, muscle signal, oxygen and pH in order to get the health condition of the patient. This system can be efficiently used for educational testing in biomedical and electrical engineering around the globe.
In summary, a 32-channel system and its library application are designed and implemented. Likewise, other applications can be implemented for understanding the human body health condition at homes. This system behavior is better than the traditional 16-channel systems when it comes to supporting learning in the field of the computer science at homes using this DAQ device because it contains more channels through which an alarm can be triggered and hospital can be alerted for patient data. The computerized software program can check the human data for the requirement and call for ambulance emergency if required. There are endless possible applications and study cases that can be created using this 32-channel hardware.
