Despite evidence of numerous initiatives (Vitores & Gil-Juárez, 2015) designed to elevate the status of CS as a career choice amongst females in the UK, the data from government sources (Tech Partnership, 2016) indicate that little has changed when looking at previous years. CS still appears to be a relatively unattractive study or career choice(Tech Partnership, 2016) (Papastergiou, 2008) (Goode et al., 2006). Our research studies the discipline of CS through the eyes of children providing unique insight into their thoughts beliefs, and understandings. Through the use of visuals and focus groups we have gathered picture representations and vocal quotes to show the problem situation from a child perspective. One could argue that we could have asked, in focus groups, interviews or questionnaires', the children rather than getting them to draw in pictures. However although this might have yielded some interesting results (see, Papastergiou, 2008) we wanted to appreciate a visual understanding of the problem situation and perhaps evidence tacit, perhaps unspoken, insight on the issue.
Our research questions ask “What do children in selected Scottish High Schools think about females in computing? and Do boys and girls differ in their teenage steriotypes regarding women as computer scientists? In providing a visual opportunity to share narratives we see that children indicate their understanding of CS being a predominantly male dominated industry. A sentiment repeatedly suggested was both gendered and specific regarding appearance “when I think of a computer scientist, I would immediately think of a man and he looks like a geek, and he's got the glasses, a tight shirt and tie”. Children further indicated that they attain such stereotypes mainly from their peers but also from the media and predominantly through television programmes as well as family and school environments. The primary issues children highlight when asked about computing as a female career choice are:
•A gendered physical appearance associated with females in CS•A lack of awareness of role models in the field•Limited peer encouragement towards a career in CS•An association of gaming and CS with the assumption that gaming is for boys and therefore girls cannot have computing careers•The gendered view of CS as being a male subject.
Within the 24 groups involved, 23 highlighted images of what they perceived to be a stereotypical computer scientist (a selection shown in Fig. 4). Computer scientists were described by children as being “nerd”, “geek”, and “smart”. Boys tended to use these expressions to describe male computer scientists whereas girls preferred to indicate intelligence with the word “smart” and use less terms such as “nerd”, “geek”. The repeating images the children drew depicted similar characteristics between both male and female computer scientists. For example, 96% of the RPs depicted a computer scientist with glasses and two thirds of these drawings were of square shaped glasses, 70% drew freckles, and predominance to red hair was drawn in 61% of the representations of a computer scientist. Green (52%) and black (43%) coloured hair were also a popular choice by boys but less favoured by girls There was only one depiction of a blond haired computer scientist and that was drawn by a girl. Red hair is possibly a result of this being a UK research study with UK children. Red hair can have stigmatization in western society with stereotypes such as quick temper, weirdness, avoidance of the sun, and intellectuality (Heckert & Best, 1997).
We found that girls depicted females who were not computer scientists as more interested in beauty, fashion and starting a family. This belief seemed to come from their friends rather than environments such as family, school or media. Girls further viewed female computer scientists as being unable to peruse such interests and in particular not being able to have children. Several groups of girls commented on the conflict between family and career and the singularity of such a choice. This pattern creates a strange dichotomy. Computing as a career choice for females can be a source of much positive attention from role models, media, and teachers however such positive attention from adults is not as crucial to the shaping of a sense of self as is the negative reaction from peers. Boys of a younger adolescent age group (aged 13 and 14) were much more negative about CS females' worth and ability than boys who were older teenagers (aged 16/17). Our study reflects similar results with Goode et al. (2006) in terms of female participation in computing science and the reasons why there are such low numbers. Goode suggests a lack of learning opportunities, negative classroom experiences with a narrow perspective on what CS is, and what a computer scientist does. In our study the children indicated that they had these beliefs from early childhood family experience and such beliefs were perpetuated throughout childhood and into adolescence by peers, media, family, and school environments. From this study the common themes of this impact included a low self-worth, a sense of being different, a sense of being at atypical, and a sense of being unattractive. Many of the images representing a computer scientist, drawn by both boys and girls showed a male scientist programing alone. Boys, seemed to accept and agree with this perceived isolation however the girls indicated that they do not wish to become a computer scientists because they enjoy the company of others and dislike being and working alone. This perceived theme of loneliness and isolation was also highlighted by Goode et al. (2006). An important, and new area of interest in this study is with the misconception that gaming is directly associated with ability to become a computer scientist. Boys, mostly the younger age groups, repeatedly brought up the issues of gaming and how girls were not good at gaming. There seemed to be an absolute belief within many all boy groups that girls were ‘rubbish’ at playing computer games and thus they would not and cannot become good computer scientists. Goode et al. (2006 p5) also noticed this gendered issue within gaming technology, “ for a sub stream of boys, video games and hours of related tinkering and experimentation are the “hook” that gets them interested in computer science. These games, designed by males for boys are not pulling in girls to the same extent”.
Going forward, this study has identified some interesting findings regarding women in computing and stereotypes as perceived through the eyes of children. In this study we identify perceived physical appearance, perceived personality type, and perceived digital ability that are associated with females in CS. Our study has identified a contemporary visual perspective on issues that are associated with the underrepresentation of females in computing science. Boys and girls clearly do have differing stereotype images and beliefs regarding women in computing. For both boys and girls the discipline is seen to be male driven, male oriented and not suitable for certain girl types. Boys relate computing to gaming and girls do not. Boys and girls associate CS with intelligence and isolation from peers. Girls perceive they cannot be attractive as computer scientists and also believe there is a reduced chance of having family and children in the future. These findings highlight the many and varied negative beliefs that our young people have in regard to perusing a career in CS.
In this study we provide a unique visual insight into the views of these adolescents and their perceptions regarding females in computing. How we change these stereotypical perceptions is the next challenge. This study indicates that there is a need for more females in computing education and more female CS role models represented in the media. The role of parents should not be underestimated and we need to encourage families to expose both girls and boys to computer technology from early childhood. The gaming industry needs to employ more females to write games, programmes, and activities for girls. School environments, regarding technology use, need to be inclusive and encouraging to girls as well as boys. We need to change the perception of computing scientists and the work they do with emphasis on the importance of communication and team work. Most importantly, we need to change the perceived stereotype perceptions of physical appearance, personality type and digital ability to encourage more females into the industry.
