In this work, DPD simulations were used to investigate the self-assembled process of CA-PHFBM-PEGMA tri-block copolymer homoporous membrane. The forced surface segregation is accompanied by the NIPS process, which eventually leads to the ordered distribution of blocks from the pore surface to the matrix of the membrane. Utilizing the density profile and pore size analyses, the effects of hydrophilic/hydrophobic block ratio, polymer concentration and the mixing ratio of CA40PHFBM6PEGMA6/CA on the morphology of homoporous membrane were studied.
The phenomenon of forced surface segregation and chemical composition on the surface of the membrane were explained. Simulation results show that the hydrophilic/hydrophobic block ratio has a great impact on microphase separation. Lower block ratio of PHFBM/PEGMA leads to smaller pore size. In the absence of hydrophilic groups, for the CA-PHFBM system, the PHFBM segments tend to be embedded in the CA matrix of the membrane. After grafting PEGMA segments, PEGMA side chains migrate onto the surface of the channel pore due to the hydrophilic effect and will drag the low surface energy PHFBM segments onto the polymer-water interface. As a result, the PHFBM-PEGMA segments enrich on the pore surface, so antifouling function is achieved.
The polymer concentration has an important influence on the morphology of the membrane. Lamellar structure or rod-like micelles will form at low polymer concentrations (<15%); when the concentration is higher than 45%, copolymer networks are too crowded to offer enough space for the copolymers to migrate and to form the channel pore. Only within the concentration range of 15–40% can the self-assembled homoporous membrane forms; the pore diameter decreased with the polymer concentration.
In addition, the importance of the mixing ratio of CA40PHFBM6PEGMA6 /CA to the morphology of the membrane was also discussed. Under over-low mixing ratio, introducing PHFBM-PEGMA onto the membrane will not seriously affect the morphology of the original membrane. With the increase of mixing ratio, the coverage of the modified group on the pore surface can be improved. However, low mixing ratio may cause the CA backbone of the membrane exposed to the pore surface of the membrane, resulting in the decrease of antifouling performance. It might be a good choice to keep the mixing ratio under 60% in order to control the surface structure of the homoporous membrane.
In the casting solution, the PEGMA segments tend to form the core of micelles due to the different solubility of each segment of the tri-block copolymer in DMF. During the process of solvent/non-solvent exchange, the CA BMMs aggregate and shrink. The difference of hydrophilicity results in the sequentially distribution of PEGMA, PHFBM, and CA segments from the surface of the membrane.
The simulation results in this work can provide valuable references for the design and optimization of homoporous membrane preparation. Moreover, it puts forward a new approach to promote better understanding about forced surface segregation.
