The identification of new working fluids that can improve thermodynamic performance and reduce system costs while meeting increasingly restrictive environmental legislation, along with the determination of novel and optimal ORC system architectures and designs based on combined thermoeconomic performance indicators are key steps toward improving the economic viability of ORC technology and enabling its widespread uptake for power generation or cogeneration from renewable or recovered waste-heat in many applications. The aim of this paper has been to incorporate, for the first time, thermoeconomic analysis, through component sizing and suitable costing correlations, into a CAMD-ORC framework that combines working-fluid design and thermodynamic ORC system optimisation based on the SAFT-γ Mie equation of state.
Discretised heat-exchanger sizing models based on group-contribution methods for determining transport properties have been developed and used to size the evaporator and condenser of optimised ORC systems, and the resulting system specific-investment costs (SICs) that include the costs of these components as well as the pump and expander have been determined using suitable cost correlations. In addition, the CAMD-ORC framework has been extended to allow the consideration of novel cycle architectures, including recuperated and partially-evaporated cycles, and also cycles operating with working-fluid mixtures. Both the thermodynamic model and heat-exchanger sizing models have been validated against data from NIST REFPROP, and a good agreement is found for the fluids and cases considered. The largest deviations observed in the heat-exchanger area were +18% and −13% when sizing the condenser for 2-butene and the evaporator for propene, respectively. These relatively small deviations confirm the suitability of the group-contribution transport property prediction methods used in this work.
From a series of case studies that span a wide range of conditions, it is found that working fluids that maximise the power output from ORC systems generally have the highest heat-exchanger area requirements. Therefore, working-fluid selection based on SIC minimisation can result in different optimal working fluids to those identified from an optimisation that considers power output or other common thermodynamic objective functions. Specifically, for the three heat-source temperatures considered in this work (150 °C, 250 °C and 350 °C, each with m˙cp=4.2kW/K, corresponding to small- to medium-scale applications) the ORC systems with the lowest SIC have isoheptane, 2-pentene and 2-heptene as their working fluids, with SICs of £5620, £2760 and £2070 per kW respectively. The corresponding power outputs for these ORC systems are 32.9 kW, 136.6 kW and 213.9 kW, which are 6.38%, 0.0% and 2.32% lower than the power outputs obtained for working fluids that maximise the system power output. This also corresponds to a reduction in the SIC of 6.95%, 0.0% and 6.82%. Overall, with three optimal working fluids having been identified for each of the three different heat-source temperatures, these results demonstrate the importance of considering thermoeconomic performance within the CAMD-ORC framework.
