This paper describes data center cooling systems that effectively use natural cold sources to reduce the energy consumption in CDCs. Two hybrid cooling systems are given which combine dew-point evaporative coolers and micro-channel separated heat pipes which both provide significant energy savings. The micro-channel separated heat pipe is designed in detail and the dew-point evaporative cooler is chosen based on previous studies of dew-point evaporative coolers. Then, the energy consumption rates of both systems are calculated based on Beijing weather conditions. The conclusions are:
(1)Two kinds of hybrid cooling systems are described that both combine dew-point evaporative coolers and micro-channel separated heat pipes along with the system operating modes that vary with the outdoor air temperature.(2)Micro-channel separated heat pipes are designed for the hybrid cooling systems based on the CDC design parameters. The pressure drops are calculated to check that the assumptions are reasonable.(3)The dew-point evaporative cooler for the hybrid cooling system is chosen based on previous experimental results and numerical simulations, The detailed design parameters for the dew-point evaporative coolers are given in the paper.(4)The energy consumption rates of the hybrid cooling systems are given for a typical year in Beijing and compared with the energy consumption of conventional vapour compression systems. The results show that the annual energy consumption is 32016 kW h and the average COP is 33 for system A. The annual energy consumption is 31470 kW h and the average COP is 34 for system B. But the actual energy consumption is larger than calculation results considering the energy consumption of dehumidification system.(5)Both hybrid cooling systems will use nearly 90% less electricity than a conventional vapour compression system. Thus, the hybrid cooling systems combining dew-point evaporative coolers with micro-channel separated heat pipes have great potential for reducing CDC cooling costs.
