In this paper, we have thoroughly reviewed the contribution of multiple criteria decision analysis frameworks in the climate policy support domain, especially focusing on their group decision making capacity, drawing from the trending necessity to include multiple stakeholders in the climate policy making process. Based on our analysis, we have concluded that TOPSIS appears to be a popular and fitting framework in this problem domain. In this respect, we have proceeded to develop a Behavioural TOPSIS-oriented approach to carrying out multicriteria analyses as well as supervising the consensus of involved stakeholders, and a respective user-friendly spreadsheet-based tool, MACE-DSS.
The proposed approach and tool consist of three key components. First of all, the use of linguistic variables enables the stakeholders to easily and meaningfully provide their knowledge, when evaluating the alternative options, and the capacity to include hybrid information can provide a sense of precision regarding stakeholder input. Secondly, the analysis component allows for dealing with real-world problems by supporting the assessment of up to twelve alternative options against up to twelve evaluation criteria, while involving up to twelve decision makers and comprises three different group decision making multicriteria analysis methodologies; as a result, the analyst can automatically address problems with a diverse set of methods, thereby enhancing the robustness of their results. Finally, MACE-DSS features the capacity to overview and gain insights into the decision makers' preference models, by means of a number of consensus control analyses, as well as impose weight penalties based on these insights towards balancing the identified collective bias or even re-engaging stakeholders in the aim of eliciting a feedback-driven round of input.
The development of the presented methodological framework and tool was motivated by the need to enhance climate policy making processes and the selection of the supported MCDA methodologies was driven by the need to effectively tackle the challenges associated with this domain. However, exploitation of MACE-DSS should not be limited to supporting climate policy. In fact, the software does not impose domain-related restrictions or limitations and can be applied in close areas—such as energy policy, environmental policy, sustainable development, etc.—as well as other problem domains with similar nature and type of input data, problematic and outcome requirements as well as necessity to include multiple stakeholders.
There currently exist a number of limitations regarding MACE-DSS and, therefore, as many aspects in which the tool can be further improved. These primarily consist of restrictions in the number of alternatives, criteria and stakeholders; and limitations concerning the number of linguistic variables, two scales of which are currently supported. Furthermore, MACE-DSS can be enhanced by incorporating the capacity to handle input in different formats, such as uncertainty-driven intervals (e.g. Martinez et al., 2007) or fuzzy preference relations (e.g. Herrera-Viedma et al., 2007); and integrating a more diverse set of consensus control and robustness indices.
Most importantly, MACE-DSS can be significantly improved by using a Fuzzy TOPSIS framework in order to effectively assess fuzzy linguistic information while overcoming the existing precision gap between linguistic and numerical data, which is described in the Methodology Section. In this direction, the 2-tuple representation model can again be used throughout the process, towards ensuring the elimination of any loss of information caused by the approximation procedures, as presented in (Doukas and Psarras, 2009) and (Doukas et al., 2010).
Finally, MACE-DSS features only a short collection of currently supported MCDA methodological frameworks, mostly oriented on the distance-based TOPSIS method. As the literature review indicates, other equally domain-popular methodologies (e.g. AHP, PROMETHEE, etc.) can address climate policy-related issues; incorporating them into the tool, can provide methodological diversity with the capacity to address problems of different nature, complexity or problematic.
