This article presents a systematic literature review which addresses video game development processes from a broad perspective, acknowledging that these processes both have highly structured components, which it shares with other types of software development, as well as highly creative components which it shares with other forms of creative products. The study formulates four research questions which cover video games development in general, the software development aspects of it, aspects regarding development of creative products, and finally how the duality of video games as both software and creative products has been studied.
An initial set of 2148 articles was narrowed down to 488 articles that were reviewed using a standardised protocol. Almost half of these articles (228) were found to have at least intermediate relevance for the overall aim of the study. The result from analysis of the quantitative elements in the review protocol for these articles has been presented in this article. The broad scope has led us to adopt a methodology that extends a traditional keyword search approach to conduct a more thorough mining process that aims to return a set of relevant articles identified through an organic search process.
The study shows that highly relevant research has been published in many different research fields ranging from software engineering to art/humanities. The management field is the one with most relevant research and that also seems to have the best balance between perspectives. The software engineering field has a stronger relevance regarding software development aspects, but has a much lower relevance on management of creativity. There is a great variation in how the different research questions are addressed. One thing that our result indicates is that most research that address the double nature of games comes from a software engineering or management perspective. The arts/humanities field is represented but at a much lower scale. One example of this is when it comes to methodological approaches to manage creativity. The most commonly mentioned methods were adaptations of methods from the software development tradition. It appears that even if guidelines and principles for creative production exist, they are much looser and disparate than is the case for software development. This is most likely in the nature of the field of video games but unless care is taken, the structured and established approaches will overshadow the subtler ones.
An awareness of challenges in software development is almost not present at all in articles that come from an art/humanities or sociological perspective. In fact, the article by O’Donnell [33] is the only publication in Table 9 that is not from the software engineering or management field. This may be problematic as the artistic and creative dimensions may be lost when they are framed by an engineering or management mind-set. On the other hand, game projects in the arts/humanities field may encounter huge problems if the inherent complexities of software development are not sufficiently acknowledged.
The Agile Software Development Manifesto was declared by a number of practitioners in early 2000 as a reaction to the engineering-dominated practices proposed by managers and researchers. The Agile principles have been embraced by game companies and are widely accepted. Game production is not run by software developers alone however. Composers, animators, graphic artists, game writers and game designers are all integral parts of the production. A strict software-oriented application of Agile methods has a risk to introduce the same tensions that gave rise to the Agile Software Development Manifesto. At the same time, the production practices used in other creative industries, such as movies & theatre, may not at all address the inherent complexities of software development and the challenges of including the audience to interact with the product. This study shows that the awareness of challenges regarding software development is very low in the arts/humanities field. The awareness of challenges regarding creative work is low in the software engineering field. There is much that suggests that game development should be handled as a craft in its own right, where software development is combined with the creative processes and where the user/audience/player has an important, interactive role.
Our analysis also reveals a worrying negative correlation in ranking between articles with respect to their relevance from a software development perspective compared to their relevance from a management of creativity perspective. This begs for further analyses of game development processes that carefully try to avoid this negative trend. The presented literature review forms a basis to find a deeper understanding of how to handle this dichotomy. In future studies we will conduct a thorough analysis of the individual research questions which will enable a more qualitative comparison of the similarities and differences between game development and other creative products.
