In this paper we have provided insight into the origins of the Data Science field, the intrinsic nature of Data Science, and how it can contribute to improving understanding and management of Environmental Systems. The new view of the field we have provided stresses the multidisciplinary nature of Data Science as a combination of data analytics, data processing, and knowledge management in order to provide added value for decision making. The term is still controverted as it is a high-level umbrella encompassing methods and techniques from many interrelated areas with a common ambition of providing global understanding of complex phenomena.
Indeed, “the magic” involved in Data Science (i.e. extracting wisdom from data as Hal Varian expected in 2009) requires specific skills that are not frequent yet in professionals Corporations realized the potential impact from highly qualified data scientists and underwent a deep transformation in recent years towards the new “data-centered” economy announced by Cukier in 2010. The phenomenon is not restricted to corporations and we are encouraged to see that academia has started to deploy new Data Science curricula. However, current efforts are still far from covering the existing shortage. One approach to addressing the lack of Data Science professionals (Challenges 1 and 2 above) is to promote a new culture where the keystone for Data Science is no longer a single multifaceted professional, but rather performing Data Science within a multidisciplinary team. Such teams could be composed of statisticians, machine learners, software engineers, knowledge engineers, and domain experts like environmental scientists for environmental applications that guarantee the highest levels of expertise in all the skills involved in real Data Science projects to achieve the “extraction of wisdom from data” already mentioned. In that case, a common language among such working teams is still required and needs to be part of specific, post-graduate curricula to be urgently developed by academia.
Our current ideas about what are necessary components of engineering and science curricula may also need to change to create a next generation of engineers and scientists who are better trained in Data Science and who are more capable of working in collaborative teams. This requires development of specific training aimed at transferring the basics of Data Science to environmental scientists and the basics of Environmental Sciences to data scientists. We anticipate working toward a new generation of professionals with the necessary skills to not only understand the scientific concepts within a domain, but who also have the data processing and computer science expertise to be able to work in computationally complex and data intensive fields. Stronger links may also be needed between academia and corporations to enable students to be actively engaged with corporations as part of their educational experience (without leaving their degree program entirely), making education more of a partnership between educators and employers.
The Environmental Sciences cannot elude the transformation produced by the penetration of Data Science (and data scientists or data scientist teams) that has been experienced in many other application fields. In fact, we have already seen how much potential Data Science has for analyzing environmental systems, providing a broad perspective of the complexity involved in these systems, and, as a consequence, a nice support for deeper understanding of environmental phenomena and enhanced information for decision-making. However, significant challenges remain. We envisage and encourage new research trends that contribute to integration between Data Science and Environmental Sciences.
At a high level, new tools that understand the structure of environmental problems and can refer analysts to a standardized family of reference environmental problems would be a major help in mapping environmental problems to Data Science methods and workflows that can provide an appropriate solution. Standardization of Data Science methods would also be a major benefit in this scenario, addressing Challenge 3 above, and would contribute to reproducibility and interoperability (Challenge 11). This is a high-level activity very much related to the design of Data Science processes.
On the other hand, specific criteria have to be developed to properly manage each of the internal steps within a Data Science workflow, including measurement, data transmission, data storage, analysis, and sharing (Challenges 6 to 11). Many users who have collected heterogeneous, noisy, non-linear, multigranular, spatio-temporal environmental data face the prospect of not knowing which methods to use, how to evaluate their effectiveness, or what constitutes an acceptable result (Challenges 8 and 9). Thus, further methodological development followed by software development supporting new methods and guidelines for appropriate usage is encouraged. To do this, a bespoke repository of environmental problems with their associated Data Science workflows could provide a basis to support research development, benchmarking, and a complementary platform of typical pre-processing methods, modelling tools (either predictive of descriptive), and post-processing methods. It could provide a focal point in the area of Environmental Data Science to centralize methodological achievements with their corresponding guidelines. These tools could be used with a level of intelligent guidance and explanation adapted to the level of expertise of the user and would be useful to train a new generation of data scientists as well.
The paper elicits that Environmental Data Science is a fruitful research area providing strategic added value to both corporations and environmental systems and merits attention for further developments in the short, mid, and long-term.
