This paper proposes two new sorting algorithms, viz. Brownian Motus Insertion Sort (BMIS) and Clustered Binary Insertion Sort (CBIS). BMIS is a variant of traditional Insertion Sort (IS), while CBIS a variant of Binary Insertion Sort (BIS). The performance of both the proposed algorithms has shown a significant improvement over their traditional methods. BMIS has been compared with IS, while CBIS with BIS. Measuring parameter for performance is time complexity which, in turn, is measured on the basis of a number of comparisons required by algorithms under consideration. The sorting made for each algorithm under consideration has been in the ascending order.
Unnecessary comparisons have been avoided in the proposed algorithms by way of using a novel methodology for location identification. An extensive theoretical analysis has been performed to calculate the best, average and worst case complexity of IS, BIS, BMIS, and CBIS. It has been further confirmed by experimental evaluations. The results of analysis have revealed that the average case time complexity of BMIS is asymptotically equal to O(n0.54), while that of CBIS is equal to O(nlogn). The space complexity of both the proposed algorithms remains equal to O(n). In the case of BMIS, the worst case time complexity is O(n2), whereas in CBIS it is O(nlogn), but the probability of getting the worst case sequence as already discussed in Section 6 is approximately zero. Reverse sorted list is the worst case scenario for IS and BIS with time complexity of O(n2) and O(nlogn) respectively, but for BMIS and CBIS, it is their best case scenario with the complexity of only O(n). Unlike IS and BIS, the performance of BMIS and CBIS is not affected by an increase in the size of a list. Both BMIS and CBIS have properties of stable, comparison, in-place, and online sorting algorithm.
Apart from the above, there are some other advantages of using BMIS and CBIS. Extensive experiments have been performed to compare IS, BIS, BMIS and CBIS on various sized (100, 500, 1 K, 1.5 K, 2 K, 4 K, 6 K, 8 K, 10 K, 20 K, 40 K, 60 K, 80 K, 100 K, 500 K, 1000 K) lists with different randomness levels, i.e., 100%,75%,50% and 25%. Experimental results reveal that performance of BMIS and CBIS has increased with a decrease in randomness level of a dataset. This performance is far better than that of traditional methods such as IS and BIS. The number of comparisons and execution time required by BMIS and CBIS approach to O(n) with a reduction in randomness level. Thus, for nearly sorted datasets the proposed BMIS and CBIS are the best choice.
