The performed comprehensive studies, including chemical synthesis, crystallographic analysis and molecular modeling together with the pharmacological evaluation, enabled a new series of potent 5-HT7R agents to be found with significant selectivity over five other competitive GPCR targets in vitro and confirmed their pharmacological properties in vivo.
Results of molecular modeling studies, supported by the crystallographic analysis and data from the radioligand binding assays, provided a deeper insight into the ligand-receptor interaction for the novel derivatives (4-19) of lead (1, MF-8). Molecular dynamic simulation confirmed the stability of the protein-ligand complex, whereas pharmacophore mapping resulted in the conclusion that the hydantoin moiety might be a bioisostere of the sulfonamide group. Special attention was paid to the role of substituents at hydantoin position 5. Thus on the one hand, favorable properties for mono-phenyl substituents of the 5-methyl-5-phenylhydantoin moiety, in comparison to those of di-aromatic ones of 5,5-diphenylhydantoin, were indicated. However on the other hand, para position for substituents within the mono-aromatic moiety (hydantoin position 5) as predominant in respect to both ortho and meta ones was found and explained in detail by molecular modeling simulations. Furthermore, the computer-aided insights into the ligand-receptor interaction provided some hypotheses that could be helpful to understand (i) the role of substituent types at position para of 5-phenylhydantoin and (ii) the decrease in the 5-HT7R affinity caused by the di-aromatic benzhydryl substituent at piperazine moiety. Most of the 5-phenyl-3-(3-(4-phenylpiperazin-1-yl)-2-hydroxypropyl)-5-methylhydantoin derivatives (4-12) displayed an excellent and selective action on 5-HT7R (Ki ≤ 20 nM). In addition, an antidepressant-like activity in vivo was confirmed for those tested in behavioral studies (5-8). A beneficial CNS-drugability for the whole series (4-19) was also predicted by the MPO method in silico.
Considering the promising results of the primary pharmacological screening, the most active members of the series should proceed to further stages of drug research and be included in development processes in the search for new antidepressant drugs acting via 5-HT7R.
