In this paper, we have analyzed the in-text citations of over five million articles from two large databases − the PubMed Central Open Access Subset and Elsevier journals. Differences between fields of science have been studied using the five fields defined in the CWTS Leiden Ranking. Perhaps most significantly, we find that there are field-level differences that are reflected in position within the text, citation interval (or reference age), and citation counts of references. These results are fundamentally different from the results of Bertin et al. (2016), who observed that the distribution of references as a function of text progression was relatively constant for PLOS journals. In general, the fields of Biomedical and Health Sciences (BHS), Life and Earth Sciences (LES), and Physical Sciences and Engineering (PSE) have similar reference distributions, although they vary in their specifics. For all three fields, citation counts of references peak at around the 30th centile, suggesting that methods papers are more highly cited than other types of papers. This contradicts the finding of Ding et al. (2013) that the most highly cited papers are mentioned in the introduction and literature sections.
The two remaining fields, Mathematics and Computer Science (MCS) and Social Science and Humanities (SSH), have very different reference distributions from the other three fields. References are more evenly distributed with respect to position in articles in these two fields than in the other three fields, with more references in the 15th to 50th centile range, and fewer references in the latter half of an article. These fields also differ in that citation counts to references peak at the 60th centile rather than at the 30th centile. These two observations may suggest that knowledge produced in MCS and SSH relies on previous work in a different way than in the other fields. More detailed work that analyzes semantic as well as positional structure will be needed to explore these conjectures.
We have also shown that numbers of sentences, references, and mentions have all increased over time for all fields. The numbers of mentions per reference have remained nearly constant over the past 15 years when considering the entire corpus. However, once again, there are variations by field. Mentions per reference have increased for MCS and SSH, while they have decreased for PSE. Another noteworthy finding is that references mentioned only once are much more highly cited than those mentioned many times. It could be of significant interest to explore possible explanations for this finding.
There are several limitations to this study that should be noted. First, while the study is large, it still covers only a relatively modest share of the articles published in recent years. Additional data from other sources could show different patterns. However, since coverage of the Elsevier full text data is broad from a disciplinary perspective (Boyack, Small, & Klavans, 2013), we do not expect potential differences to be large. Second, only five high level fields were considered, and it is possible that within-field differences may be just as large as the between-field differences shown here. Third, we did not attempt to normalize documents to the IMRaD structure in terms of section names, but simply used textual position as a basis of analysis. Thus, any variations in structural form are not accounted for in our results. We suspect that such normalization would create slightly sharper features in the distributions, similar to what was noted by Bertin et al. (2016) when they unified PLOS documents to the IMRaD structure. A final limitation in this study results from the fact that different parsing algorithms were used for the PMCOA and ELS datasets. However, this only affects comparison of PMCOA and ELS results at the sentence level, and does not impact any other part of the analysis.
Despite these limitations, we consider the results to be robust. This is by far the largest study of its kind that has been published to date, covering 100 times more articles and references than that of Bertin et al. (2016). Now that distributions have been quantified at a high level, we look forward to pursuing additional studies that explore features of full text articles at more detailed levels, using both positional and semantic analyses. Such studies have the potential to influence our understanding of citation theory and behavior, and to have practical influence on applications such as information search and retrieval and accurate modeling of the structure and dynamics of science.
