A novel Brownian dynamics algorithm [20] has been used to analyze the main experimental parameters which influence the structure of heteroaggregates composed of highly size-asymmetric particles. The unphysical caging effect observed in the classical Brownian dynamics simulations when a large particle is surrounded by smaller ones [12], [31] is now avoided, thus allowing the observation of aggregation in systems with a large amount of small particles for long time scales.
The results of our simulations allow to rationalize the outcome of a series of experiments reported in the literature. First, we observe in general that heteroaggregation between oppositely charged particles in systems with large size asymmetry is possible because large particles are linked by small particles. This observation is in good agreement with the experiments reported by Rollié et al. and Lee et al. [6], [5]. When smaller particles are destabilized, the bridge length is increased in agreement with the observations of Lee et al. [5].
Another parameter which influences the heteroaggregate structure is ionic strength. At increasing ionic strength, we observe that the structure of hetero-aggregates becomes more compact, which is also the case experimentally [8]. In addition, the simulations reveal that there are parameters which influence more strongly the final structure of the heteroaggregates: (a) the surface potential of the small particles and (b) the ionic strength of the suspension. On the other hand, changes in the surface potential of the large particles have a smaller influence.
The simulations also demonstrate the crucial role of the mobility of small particles when they are adsorbed on the large ones. In fact, we find that to reproduce the formation of large heteroaggregates, as those observed in several experiments, the small particles must be able to move and rearrange themselves when they are adsorbed on the large ones. This parameter, which is generally not discussed has nevertheless important consequences. It implies for example that heteroaggregation should be difficult to obtain when grafting occurs between the small and the large particles or if the roughness of the large particles is high enough to hinder the small particle mobility.
In conclusion, we note that the heteroaggregation of binary systems with size mismatch can lead to quite complex aggregation processes. The explanation of these processes involves general features of the colloids, such as surface potential, screening length, and mobility of small colloids on the surface of large colloids. For this reason, we believe that our results are relevant to a wide class of colloids which can be characterized in terms of size mismatch, attractive heterointeractions and repulsive homointeractions. The results of this paper can indeed rationalize the outcome of a series of experiments based on the heteroaggregation between size asymmetric colloids and can be used as reference to explain future experimental observations. This work can also be a first step for the development of simulations for polymer-based systems by representing the polymer as a flexible chain of small particles [32], [33], [34]. In this case, the conformation of the polymer should also have an influence on the aggregate structures.
