A priori, it is believed that the main factor determining the kinetics and the metal segregation in a bimetallic nanoparticle obtained from microemulsions by simultaneous reduction of the two metal salts is the difference in the reduction rates of the two precursors [67]. Thus, when the reduction rates are very different, the nanoparticle core would be composed of the fastest metal, and the subsequent layers would show a progressive enrichment in the slower one. This sequence of metal production gives rise to a core-shell structure, whose metal separation would be more pronounced as the difference between both reduction rates is higher. In contrast, if both reduction rates are similar, an alloy is expected. This argumentation, initially suggested for reactions in homogeneous media, was extended to synthesis in microemulsions without taking into account the compartmentalization of the reaction media. In fact, a particular pair of metals (Au-Ag [59], [60], [61], Au-Pt [21], [35], [52], [62], Au-Pd nanoparticles [63], [64], [65]) have been synthesized as alloys or core-shell structures by varying the microemulsion composition. It indicates that the whole process is more complex than a competition between reduction rates. Our hypothesis is that the resulting arrangement is a reflection of the combination of two factors, which are potentially limiting: the reduction rate of each metal ion and the intermicellar exchange rate. From the kinetic study of bimetallic nanoparticles synthesized in microemulsions it has been shown that chemical reduction in microemulsions is a pseudo first-order process, but not from the beginning. At the initial stage of the synthesis, redistribution of reactants between micelles is controlled by the intermicellar exchange rate, which is determined by microemulsion composition. This exchange control has a different impact depending on the reduction rate of the particular metal. The limiting step in Au reduction (very fast) is the intermicellar exchange rate. On the contrary, the reduction of metals with a slower reduction rate (equal or slower than Pt) is less affected by microemulsion dynamics, particularly at advanced stages of the reaction. This leads to a surprising result: the fact that the reaction takes place in a microemulsion affects more or less depending on the reduction rate of the particular metal in relation to the intermicellar exchange rate.
One can conclude that compartmentalization of reaction media drastically affects the chemical kinetics, and this is not a trivial matter, because it determines the sequence of metal production. In any case, the initial stages of the synthesis are controlled by the exchange rate, which will be reflected in the composition of the core and middle layers of the resulting nanoparticle. As a consequence, the final nanostructure in a bimetallic nanoparticle prepared from microemulsions depends on the difference between the reduction rates of both metals, and, in addition, on the reduction rate of each metal in relation to the intermicellar exchange rate. In conclusion, the intermicellar exchange rate is always a key parameter determining bimetallic nanostructures. What is more, the synthesis of nanoparticles in microemulsions must be considered in terms of two potentially limiting factors, chemical reaction itself and the rate of reactants exchange between micelles. This result is relevant not only to better comprehend the complex mechanisms controlling the microemulsion-based nanoparticle synthesis but also in designing the experiments to synthesize bimetallic particles with ad hoc nanoarrangements. Specifically, a key outcome from simulation results is that, for a given microemulsion, the minimum concentration to obtain a core-shell structure depends on the difference in the reduction rates. That is, the larger the difference in reduction rates of the two metals, the smaller the minimum concentration required to get core-shell nanoparticles.
In the future, it would be interesting to apply this study to systems in which the crystalline structure of the nuclei plays an important role.
