The feasibility and effectiveness of the ReHabgame were studied as stimuli for improving the motor performance in a post-stroke participant. It facilitates autonomous physical rehabilitation at patient's state as prescribed by the therapist. This system provided an environment that encourages patients to build greater strength and endurance on tasks that increase independence and enrich daily activity. The system monitors the trajectory of the hand during movements about the shoulder, arm, and elbow. The data taken from the devices are saved and accessed for further analysis as well as to generate the best game suitable for a patient with a certain disability through the intelligent computing system. The algorithm generates objects randomly and monitors the execution of the exercise, and the system provides direct feedback in real-time accordingly. The therapy provided an adequate physical and mental engagement that offered sufficient visual feedback throughout treatment sessions. The MCTS and ROG algorithms were used to control the intensity of the physical activity that happened gradually based on the player's performance. The data were obtained at devices local sampling frequency followed by performing linear interpolations to create a constant sampling interval while maintaining time and frequency domain signal integrity to achieve an identical sampling frequency to the kinematic data.
The subjective experience was conducted through the EQ to gather further information from the subjects about their experience of game playing. Some positive elements of the ReHabgame that was claimed by the player were the beautiful scenery and appealing feedbacks they received which had a direct relation to the engagement of a player. It aimed to distract the player's attention towards the exciting aspects of the game to avoid fatigue. The training engages users to allow for the constant intensive practice required for motor plasticity. It monitors and progressively corrects the abnormalities of the kinematic movement, coordination and assess the transmitted electrical signals as the muscles strain. The subjective experience was performed through the EQ to gather further information from the subjects about their experience in playing the games. Future work includes experiments involving individuals with motor impairment, with a specific focus on gait and balance. It also aims to incorporate the possibility of implementing social interactions through online gameplay at patient's home or could be arranged in social communities by patients carer or charity organisation. That increases the motivation by gathering more patients to cooperatively (or competitively) interact and play the game. It could enable a long-term recovery and could lead to better rehabilitation outcome [49], [48]. The open-ended questionnaire also will be used for developing the beta version of the ReHabgame in the future work.
