Previous TAM-based literature reviews provided a valuable insight into the research trend of the model. However, these review studies overlooked the investigation of TAM with regard to M-learning studies from the standpoint of research purpose, research methods, country distribution, disciplines/contexts, educational levels, and TAM studies distribution across their year of publication. In the present study, we conducted a systematic literature review for TAM related to M-learning studies aiming to provide a comprehensive analysis of the existing studies and to discuss the implications of analysis results.
The present review study points out 7 new findings. First, the research purpose of most TAM studies involving M-learning focused on extending the TAM with external variables, followed by the studies that extended the model by factors from other theories/models. Second, the main research problem that was frequently addressed among the analyzed studies was to examine the acceptance of M-learning among students; the studies that measure the students' acceptance of M-learning after its implementation as an information system. The second research problem that was frequently tackled by those studies was to investigate the adoption of M-learning among students; the studies that measure the students' adoption of M-learning preceding to its implementation in the future. Third, questionnaire surveys were the primarily relied research methods for data collection, regardless of research purpose. Fourth, most of the studies were undertaken in Taiwan, this is followed by Spain, China, Malaysia, respectively among the other countries. Fifth, most of the studies were frequently conducted in the humanities and educational context, followed by the IT and computer science context, respectively among the other contexts. Sixth, most of the mobile learning studies involving TAM were conducted in the higher educational settings. Seventh, with regard to year of publication, M-learning studies have witnessed an enormous attraction in the last four years (2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017) from many IS scholars who contributed to the enhancement of TAM in the mobile learning context. Additionally, the studies that extended TAM with external variables were ranged between 2007 and 2015 with a noticeable peak in 2017, and this represents the highest category of the total studies.
To that end, we believe that many other factors still need to be examined to verify their effectiveness as external variables to the TAM. Moreover, extending TAM with factors from other theories/models is still an open door for IS scholars to further investigate the M-learning acceptance and adoption. To conclude, the findings of this review study provide an insight into the current trend of TAM research involving M-learning studies and form an important reference for future studies in M-learning studies involving TAM.
As a limitation, this systematic review has focused on particular databases for collecting the articles (i.e., ACM Digital Library, ScienceDirect, Emerald, Wiley, Springer, IEEE, and Google Scholar). In that, these databases may not provide a representation of all studies published on M-learning with TAM. Further research could expand the current study by including studies from other databases such as: ERIC, Sage, Scopus, Web of Science among many others.
