In this paper, we proposed a hybrid peer to peer architecture for computational resource sharing. Users joining our network are able to share their unexploited computational resources and are rewarded by tangible credits. The computational power shared is used to solve difficult task submitted by other users. In order to guarantee the efficiency and effectiveness of the computation process, we designed a task partitioning and assignment algorithm that reduces the execution times while allowing satisfactory revenues for resource providers. We conducted extensive experiments in a real life scenario such as 3D rendering to assess our performances. As shown in our experimental evaluation our framework is able to improve the use of efficient digital solutions in “traditional” field like engineering and architectural design, by offering a new high speed and low cost tool for increasing their productivity.
7.1. Future workWe are currently developing specialized plugins for other challenging application fields such as medical and insurance simulation. Furthermore, we are in the process of evaluating the energy consumption achievable by leveraging our Coremuniti network. More in detail, the ICT industry currently accounts for about 2% of global emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2). Many international organizations recommendthe sector to “show the way for the rest of the economy by already reducing its own carbon footprint by 20% by 2016”. Coremuniti shows a possible way to reduce the impact of computing intensive processes by a P2P network that can induce a significant energy saving (as we do not need to power additional resources but better use already powered ones) compared to processes running on a single node or server farm. This reduction in energy consumption will reduce the pollution emission, characterizing our solution as an environment friendly solution for high performance computing. In order to better understand this beneficial effect, consider that data center energy consumption is about 5% (1,5% in 2007, 3% in 2011, 5% today) of the total electricity consumed and (excluding in-house solutions) the annual EU consumption is about 1600 million tons of oil equivalent (toe). By implementing our network, we hypothesize a reduction of at least 25 million toe per year when reaching the 75% of steady state. We do not report here our early results as these are based on the actual measurements we performed in the controllable environment of our test network. We are working on obtaining more reliable results on a large scale network.
