This study provides evidence that GS finds significantly more citations than the WoS Core Collection and Scopus across all subject areas. Nearly all citations found by WoS (95%) and Scopus (92%) were also found by GS, which found a substantial amount of unique citations that were not found by the other databases. In the Humanities, Literature & Arts, Social Sciences, and Business, Economics & Management, unique GS citations surpass 50% of all citations in the area.
About half (48%–65%, depending on the area) of GS unique citations are not from journals but are theses/dissertations, books or book chapters, conference proceedings, unpublished materials (such as preprints), and other document types. These unique citations are primarily written in English, although a significant minority (19%–38% depending on the area) are in other languages. The scientific impact of these unique citations themselves is, on average, much lower than that of citations also found by WoS or Scopus, suggesting that the GS coverage advantage is mostly for low impact documents. Taken together, these results suggest caution if using GS instead of WoS or Scopus for citation evaluations. Without evidence, it cannot be assumed that the higher citation counts of GS are always superior to those of WoS and Scopus, since it is possible that the inclusion of lower quality citing documents reduces the extent to which citation counts reflect scholarly impact. For example, some of the citations from Master’s theses may reflect educational impact. Therefore, depending on the type of evaluation that needs to be carried out, it might be necessary to remove certain types of citing documents from the citation counts, as suggested by Prins et al. (2016).
Spearman correlations between GS and WoS, and GS and Scopus citation counts are very strong across all subject categories but weaker in the Humanities (GS-WoS, Literature: 0.78) and Engineering (GS-WoS, Electrical Engineering and Telecommunication: 0.83). Also, correlations between GS and WoS (.78–.98) are weaker than between GS and Scopus (.92–.99). The weakest correlations are in the categories where there is a greater difference between the citation counts provided by GS, and the citation counts provided by WoS/Scopus. Thus, if GS is used for research evaluations then its data would be unlikely to produce large changes in the results, despite the additional citations found. It would be particularly useful when there is reason to believe that documents not covered by WoS or Scopus are important for an evaluation.
In conclusion, this study gives the first systematic evidence to confirm prior speculation (Harzing, 2013; Martín-Martín et al., 2018; Mingers & Lipitakis, 2010; Prins et al., 2016) that citation data in GS has reached a high level of comprehensiveness, because the gaps of coverage in GS found by the earliest studies that analysed GS data have now been filled. It surpasses WoS and Scopus numerically in all areas of research, and is greatly superior in the areas where WoS and Scopus have a poor coverage, including the Social Sciences and Humanities. However, at this point there is no reliable and scalable method to extract data from GS, and the metadata offered by the platform is still very limited, reducing the practical suitability of this source for large-scale citation analyses, although manual data collection is possible for small scale uses. Nevertheless, providing that a reliable method to extract citation data can be found, the lack of metadata could be solved by combining GS citation data with rich openly accessible data, such as that provided by CrossRef.
