We generalized the ideal-gas random-exchange trading model via introducing a distinction between the person F(w) and wealth W(w) distributions. We demonstrated by Monte Carlo simulations that for uniform saving propensity of the agents a fast decay of both distributions occurs, while for non-uniform λ a Pareto law for F(w) with the exponent ν=1.02±0.03 in Eq. (16) emerges, in line with Refs. [29], [50], [51]. Importantly, we showed that for both uniform and non-uniform saving propensities the distributions F(w) and W(w) behave as power laws but differently. In particular, for the case of distributed saving propensities for W(w) the scaling exponent β=0.12±0.05 in Eq. (17) was obtained, i.e. by about one smaller than the exponent ν of the person distribution in Eq. (16). This fact is consistent with the notion that in the limit of substantial windows dw the distribution W(w) can be regarded as the integral of F(w) distribution in the range of wealth {w,w+dw}. We believe that depending on the questions asked for the financial system under scrutiny the distribution W(w) may be more amenable to interpretation. Moreover, for poorer data the cumulative character of W(w) may return less noisy shapes of the distribution.
We then introduced open systems, in which trap agents at a given density ρ act as wealth sinks. Interestingly, our analysis demonstrated that the presence of trap agents only affects the amplitudes of the distributions F(w) and W(w), while the above mentioned scaling exponents ν and β of the power-law regions remain unaffected by the value of ρ.
A remarkable result was obtained for the time evolution of the cumulative wealth wΣ(t) in non-conservative systems with trap agents present at different densities ρ. Specifically, we found that the wealth decreases with time according to the KWW stretched exponential law. The decay rate was found to depend on ρ, as expected. However, the stretching exponent γ of the KWW law (19) turns out to be independent of ρ. Conversely, the value of γ was found to be a slightly increasing function of λ for the case of uniform saving propensities λ. For non-uniform λ the stretching exponent γ=γ4 assumes even smaller value.
We observed that the wealth distribution is independent of the saving propensity and trap agents density in the open trading system. Therefore, no special optimal saving strategy follows from our current analysis. However, in the current model the wealth inequality in the spirit of Pareto’s law originates from the randomness of the saving propensity, for both closed and open trading systems. In this sense, the saving propensity can be viewed as a control parameter of inequality in a society.
Note that the general trend in all industrialized countries is an overall increase of wealth and money for most market participants, instead of decrease of wealth as in our model with trap agents. This increase can be modeled via pumping a given percentage of total money into the system at each trading step. This corresponds to a non-zero inflation rate in the system, the inherent feature and the vital control parameter of economic growth and wealth distribution in capital-based societies. The law for the wealth evolution (19) in this case will depend on the amount of money growth due to pumping from external sources versus money decrease because of annihilation of wealth by the trap agents in each exchange event. Also, a modified agent-based model in which one agent gets finally all the money seems appropriate too: this scenario would mimic such economic players as global insurance companies, pension funds, and leading banks.
We finish by noting that the observed KWW relaxation dynamics will deserve closer attention in the future. In particular, it is of interest to investigate the connections of the agent-based models with anomalous diffusion dynamics [75], following the observation that the Pareto law is indeed linked to anomalous diffusion [76].
