This performance analysis has highlighted the growing body of knowledge on e-Participation, reflecting a gradual increase in the number of studies published in international journals since 2000, especially in the last five years. In addition, these articles deal mainly with e-Participation and the political sphere, accountability and transparency information, and technical aspects related to security and privacy. Likewise, our findings have confirmed the interdisciplinarity of the field.
Regarding political participation, the studies are focused on how the e-Participation platforms facilitate interaction between citizens and public managers, which increases the transparency of decision-making, and how there exist tools, means and systems to enable and enhance the formal procedure of voting (Peng, 2013). Likewise, politicians are using the Internet and social media tools to campaign and win elections (Vaccari, 2013). These sophisticated forms of new media have attracted the interest of the academic community, which has focused on the use of such technology to re-engage people with the democratic process.
On the other hand, the results indicate that citizens demand new tools and means with the aim of improving government transparency and accountability. Hence, the researchers have tried to analyse the direct link between participation and the political decision-making process. However, there is still an apparent lack of adequate tools in which public deliberation and decision-making can take place. Nowadays there are still only good intentions about putting this into practice (Hansson, Belkacem, & Ekenberg, 2015).
In any case, the widespread availability of new means and channels to favour e-Participation, require security and privacy guarantees in their use. These topics were dealt with in the past and seem to be solved. Currently, the academic researchers are mainly focused on improving interoperability with protocols and batch-verification that can have a great effect on trust in electronic government.
On the other hand, previous literature believes that technology is necessary, but not sufficient, for effective online civic engagement (Epstein et al., 2014). Thus, many contributions focused on the DIGITAL DIVIDE, exploring the relationship between e-inclusion research and e-Participation and how they can benefit each other. In other words, the problem that remains to be solved is focused on the possibility of citizens being able to access transparency and e-services on the Web, which could limit the possibility of using new technologies to receive these services.
In fact, e-Participation research shows a clear transformation in the methods of interaction with citizens – see Table 2. E-government initiatives over the past decade have been based mainly on first-generation Web-based resources (including websites, pages and services), which were based on HTML, a relatively primitive, static page mark-up technology that simply outlines what a page should look like onscreen (first sub-period of research). Nonetheless, a recent demand-side survey performed by the EC-European Commission (2012) has put emphasis on the need to change the way in which public services are provided (Chan, Lau, & Pan, 2008) in order to offer a new generation of e-government services revolving around user needs (EC-European Commission, 2012). The advent of social media using Web 2.0 technologies has opened up unprecedented new possibilities for engaging the public in government work, which have been seen as effective tools to promote public goals.
In brief, the e-Participation field of knowledge has received great attention in the last few years and has evolved to a more techno-social system, allowing a greater citizen engagement in public sector management, not only in the political area. To achieve this aim, it has been relevant to focus the efforts of public administrations on improving government transparency (access to information) and access to e-services. Also, interoperability issues and new technological tools have become relevant to perform efficient delivery of public sector services and to improve the social perspective of citizen participation in municipal life and in decisions regarding public affairs.
At this point, it seems that the debate is open. Findings indicate that the Internet favours the creation of a democratic model and the inclusion of the citizens. However, it is evident that there are inequalities and differences between citizens. Therefore, it might be adequate to carry out studies about the context, skills and attitudes that are necessary in order to ease the integration of citizens into public affairs. Likewise, researchers must analyse the technical aspects and context to guarantee privacy and security, which increases the trust of citizens, and therefore, enhances their participation in public affairs.
Finally, there are many e-Participation tools, applications and platforms, and the politicians use these apps in order to favour transparency, participation and accountability (Harrison & Sayogo, 2014; Nielsen & Pedersen, 2014), but are the inclusion and participation effective?; are citizens really taken into account in public decisions?; do the policy-makers and public managers really want to hear the views of citizens and take them into account? These questions have not been answered by previous research and they stimulate a lively debate about the scientific evidence needed to justify participation claims. In this regard, future research could undertake an empirical research to establish whether citizens are using e-Participation tools to get in touch with the governments and it could also analyse whether e-Participation tools are promoting the inclusion of citizens’ suggestions or preferences in public decision-making processes. In addition, an analysis could be made of the power that citizens have and the role they play in these decision-making processes.
If citizens’ suggestions or preferences are not taken into account in public decision-making processes, what is the strategy followed by policy-makers and public managers to enhance citizen participation? Is the purpose more propagandistic, and are there only good intentions? These questions still remain without answer. In this context, future research could analyse the strategy and the tactics that governments are employing with the use of e-Participation tools. That is to say, how the use of various platforms is in alignment with the organization’s mission (strategy) and how the new online practices can support the organizational mission (tactic) (Mergel, 2012). Therefore, it could be interesting to identify whether a ‘push’, ‘pull’ or ‘networking/mingling’ tactic – in terms of Mergel (2013) for social media use – is used by governments and the reasons and factors why they have selected this tactic in their jurisdiction.
