In this study, an integrated molecular and process level approach was used for the design of energy efficient reactive solvents for the chemical absorption PCCC process. The systematic method applied the CAMD approach in order to speed up the process of finding and generating feasible solvent candidates. This study reveals that 25 reactive single solvent candidates for the chemical absorption process were successfully generated from the amine and alcohol functional groups based on specified target properties. In addition, some of the amine solvents generated in this study were also found in previous studies. This proves that the approach used in this study can generate feasible solvents for CO2 capture.
The performance of all potential amine solvents was evaluated based on the energy required for solvent regeneration. In order to evaluate the process performance, the reaction stoichiometry for each potential amine solvent with CO2 was generated using the prediction of reaction method introduced in this work. This reaction stoichiometry is needed for the calculation of enthalpy of desorption. In this study, the value of enthalpy of desorption represents the amount of energy required for the solvent regeneration process. Based on the process performance result, it is found that all four tertiary amines solvents generated in this study have a value of enthalpy of desorption (range from 66.85 kJ/mol to 83.78 kJ/mol), which is lower than that of the conventional solvent, MEA (97.43 kJ/mol). These results show a significant reduction of regeneration energy of up to 31.4% that could be achieved with the new proposed reactive amine solvent. This proposed reactive solvent can help reduce carbon capture cost by reducing the energy requirement for the regeneration process.
In future works, additional process performance criteria will be considered in order to select the best reactive solvent with high CO2 capture efficiency, low regeneration energy, low degradation rate, and minimised cost of the capture process. It is also recommended that the experimental work be conducted and high priority be given to the promising solvent suggested in this study. This work will also be extended to include the design of reactive solvent blends for the chemical absorption process.
