In this paper, we have considered the dynamic bipartite graph drawing problem, also called incremental Bipartite Drawing Problem in the literature. We propose new heuristic methods based on the tabu search methodology. Our extensive computation shows that the proposed method is able to outperform the previous heuristic for this problem. It is worth mentioning an implementation detail of our method that makes it especially fast. In particular, the update of the objective function when a move is performed is computed by means of two matrices, which store the number of crossings for each pair of vertices. The tabu search method efficiently updates these matrices after each move. On the other hand, we adapted the mathematical programming formulation originally proposed for the Bipartite Drawing Problem to the dynamic case. Our experiments with Gurobi show that it is able to solve small and medium size instances to optimality.
An interesting point when designing a tabu search method is the memory contribution. We can say in plain words that a short term tabu search is simply a local search method in which we added a memory structure (the so-called tabu list). Therefore, one could ask what is the incremental contribution obtained with this addition. Our preliminary experimentation confirms that the tabu search clearly performs better than the simple local search which it is based on. Thus, the hybridization of a constructive GRASP method with a tabu search turns out to be a very effective method to target this problem. Additionally, we learnt that using a combination method such as path relinking for creating paths between two high quality drawings is a good technique to generate new and better solutions. We believe that this approach can be tested in other graph drawing problems.
In this paper we have formulated the stability across a sequence of graph drawings in terms of the relative ordering of their vertices, in line with some previous papers. However, alternative ways to approach stability would be also of interest. We are indeed starting to work on a formulation based on the absolute ordering of the original nodes. Another extensions and future lines of research include dynamic drawings in hierarchies with more than 2 layers, as well as a comparison of the different variants of path relinking for the DBDP.
