This article has advanced two key arguments: First, humanoid robots will have important implications for society, retailers and marketers; especially when they develop human-like self-awareness. Second, the article argues that once robots reach such human like self-awareness capabilities, the notion of the consumer should be extended beyond humans as robots may use brands as a means of self-expression. These arguments were established by combining insights from the psychology and consumer behavior domain with recent developments in human-robot interaction.
First, the article has started with a discussion on the notion of self-awareness and self-expression in a human and robot context. Second, the article has addressed potential societal implications of three key sectors that will be impacted by robots. These areas are the (a) healthcare, (b) education and (c) relationship sector. The development of such robots may allow them to operate with minimal human intervention, while potentially making them active members of society. In the healthcare sector, there is an eminent need to include humanoid robots as part of the workforce due to the rise of an aging population and increasing healthcare cost. Robots such as the Care-O-bot are already playing a supporting role in the care of the elderly or handicapped. In the educational sector first strides are being made to include robots as educational assistants in the classroom and through the web. With regard to relationships, the humanoid robots represent a shift in the relationship sector offering single individuals an artificial partner to interact with. While such a relationship is yet not comparable with human to human relationships, improvements in the design and interactive behavior of these robots is making the relationship experience more human-like as time progresses. Third, the article has also provided an overview of potential applications of self-aware robots in the retail sector, which shows great promise for the inclusion of such robots (Grewal et al., 2017). Lastly, the article offers a futuristic account on potential avenues for marketers. Should robots develop human like self-awareness and self-expression, akin to humans, such robots may also become consumers that seek products as a means of self-expression.
Humans need to be prepared for these upcoming changes. Once robots with AI reach humanlike self-awareness, the interactions between humans and robots are likely to become more natural, interactive and human like, even leading to rapport between the two parties (Nomura & Kanda, 2016). Arguably, the level of integration of robots in daily life will increase gradually, but individuals may differ in how open they will be towards self-aware robots. Particularly, children and young adults have matured in parallel with modern technologies over the last decade, thus potentially embracing the use of robots in daily life without much hesitation. However, older members of society, as well as individuals in geographic areas that have been less exposed to technological advancements, may react less positively towards the integration of robots as this may challenge their status quo. Consequently, policy makers and educational institutions need to put the right mechanisms in place to deal with the upcoming changes. First, at the global level, there should be governing bodies that establish international regulations and guidelines to manage the integration of self-aware robots in society. Such governing bodies should be composed of engineers, computer scientists, law professionals, psychologists, policy and ethics experts, as well as management scholars. It is crucial that such a group is composed of interdisciplinary professionals in order to design regulations that address the upcoming challenges in a variety of domains (e.g., employment, psychological well-being). Second, at a local level, educational programmes should be implemented at schools as well as public centers, to offer citizens a platform to learn more about the consequences of such a societal shift. These programmes should be designed to show citizens how the co-existence with self-aware robots can benefit humans, but also offer forums where citizens can voice and get treated for the potential anxieties that may arise.
Overall, the arguments presented here offer a vision of how interactions with humanoid robots could look like in a not-so-distant future. As noted above, the predictions of when AI may reach human like self-awareness differ and are still subject to debate. However, as technology evolves, the role of self-aware humanoid robots in society is likely to take a more prominent role. Humanity needs to be prepared; as achievements such as the moon landing or the flying of a plane have shown that the fiction part of science fiction in fact ceases to exist in the modern world, and actually becomes reality over time.
