This study investigated whether using game mechanics and a student-generated questions strategy in an online puzzle-based game learning system can promote algorithmic thinking skills. For that, an online puzzle-based game learning system, TGTS, which can integrate game mechanics and embed a student-generated questions strategy beyond using puzzle-based game learning as its basic strategy, was developed. The results of assessing algorithmic thinking skills indicated that the PGM group, using puzzle-based game learning with game mechanics only, and the PGS group, using puzzle-based game learning with game mechanics plus the student-generated questions strategy, both of which participated in the learning activities with game mechanics, were more effective than the PBL group, which participated in the learning activities without game mechanics. Furthermore, the PGS group was significantly more effective than the PGM. The results of comparing puzzle-solving performances indicate that using game mechanics in an online puzzle-based game learning system can enhance all four types of performances: the number of puzzles attempted, the number of puzzles solved, the number of times students attempted to solve puzzles and the number of times students solved puzzles completely. Thus, using game mechanics in an online puzzle-based game learning system can positively influence the behaviors of students participating in learning activities. The results of comparing attitudes toward learning activities indicate that using game mechanics plus a student-generated questions strategy in an online puzzle-based game learning system can enhance engagement experiences and willingness to participate. In conclusion, the results revealed that in an online puzzle-based game learning system, using game mechanics can enhance algorithmic thinking skills and performance in solving puzzles. Furthermore, although in terms of puzzle-solving performance, using game mechanics plus a student-generated questions strategy is less effective than using only game mechanics, the former may nevertheless enhance algorithmic thinking skills more than the latter. Additionally, using game mechanics plus a student-generated questions strategy can enhance students’ engagement experiences and willingness to participate in the learning activities of an online puzzle-based game learning system.
The results of this study can be a reference for developing online puzzle-based game learning systems to promote algorithmic thinking skills. Although some issues, such as selecting easy puzzles to gain more points and learning for a short period of time, must be addressed in further studies, the positive effects of using game mechanics and a student-generated questions strategy can be used as a reference in developing an online game learning system or designing learning activities to help students learn algorithmic thinking skills more effectively.
