The study showed a broad spectrum of forensic research outputs were submitted to RAE 2008 and REF 2014, incorporating the traditional forensic sciences and relevant work in complementary disciplines. These findings further confirm the observations in the Silverman Review and Walport Report that identify the range of relevant research as a strength.
While outputs are skewed to non-traditional forensic subjects, the life sciences, engineering and computing disciplines are well represented. Whereas declining disciplines, such as archaeology in total, fell in volume, specifically ‘forensic’ outputs submitted in computer sciences grew by 740%. Forensic submissions in chemistry were poor, an observation that is particularly disappointing given the role forensic science plays in supporting chemistry programmes that have recruited many ex-practitioners in recent years.
Due to the structure of these audits, however, all forensic outputs were returned as part of larger submissions, making it very difficult to associate the research quality ratings assigned to forensic outputs specifically. This was less so the case with Impact Case Studies, were submissions are fewer and it was possible to demonstrate highly rated socio-economic impact of clearly forensically relevant research. There were a large number of Impact Case Studies claiming forensic impact, however, and it is not clear whether the assessment panels of REF 2014 were sufficiently equipped to reliably assess these claims.
A study of UK affiliated journal articles published in leading forensic science periodicals over the duration of the two audits showed that the outputs submitted to RAE 2008 and REF 2014 were only a small proportion of the overall total produced. One reason for the disparity is that a substantial proportion of UK affiliated published research in forensic science is not produced by the Universities. This proportion was about 43% during the period of RAE 2008, falling to 27% during REF 2014. The amount of University-based research doubled between the two periods, whereas the proportion produced by the private sector and by the Forensic Science Service—which closed in 2012—fell noticeably. Publication volume grew in University departments of forensic science, in chemistry—particularly in geosciences and toxicology, and in forensic archaeology and anthropology (Table 13).
While the number of outputs submitted in digital forensics grew substantially between RAE 2008 and REF 2014, these figures are not reflected in the forensic science journals, suggesting these periodicals are not capturing the growth of output in this area.
This study offers evidence that forensic science does have ‘sufficient volume of activity to merit a Unit of Assessment of its own’ relative to other disciplines, including those that also comprise research ‘across a wide disciplinary spectrum’. This is one of the strengths of forensic science, as it aims ultimately to contribute to public health and safety via crime reduction and prevention.
Without a UOA, specific assessment of the quality of forensic outputs is not possible. Even more seriously, there is no incentive for Universities to invest in research or research active staff in forensic science. Research Councils could offer funding programmes in forensic science, but without a research base to service these calls there will be limited demand—as reflected in two previous Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council programmes, and few academic forensic scientists available to peer review grant applications and deliverables. It is difficult to see how research dealing with pattern analysis or crime science activity-level evidence alluded to by Margot could be meaningfully submitted and reliably assessed. This is a ‘vicious circle’.
The Silverman Review rightly states “The importance of the REF in driving and motivating the research of individual academics and groups, and in setting the agendas of universities, cannot be overestimated”. Having a forensic science explicitly incorporated in a UOA would encourage Universities to invest in specifically forensic research, supported by strong academic forensic science programmes and quality research active staff. These staff would be well placed to respond to Research Council funding calls in forensic science and to contribute to meaningful peer review of funding applications and deliverables. Direct assessment of forensic science research quality would provide a ‘reality check’ of the quality of research in comparison to the mainstream sciences and foster the development of academic work in the specifically-forensic sub-disciplines such as pattern and mark comparison, and analysis of activity level events at the crime scene. It would encourage theoretical and socio-economic studies of forensic science itself. It would also allow forensic science to make an explicit claim for a share of the large ‘QR’ funding pot. Overall, this would create a ‘virtuous circle’, which would substantially assist in the development of a forensic science research culture and compensate for the contraction in research produced by private providers, without placing ‘all the eggs in one basket’.
Whilst this study focuses on the UK, the implications may be relevant to other jurisdictions where governmental audits of University research quality are undertaken and, ultimately, to the need for forensic science to establish and maintain itself as a peer science in the academy and beyond.
