In this paper, a non-linear 3D simulation of hyperthermia using magnetic nanoparticles in a heterogeneous living tissue based on Pennes' bioheat equation has been investigated. The finite volume method was applied using OcTree meshes. The OcTree finite volume technique for spatial discretization has some advantages in comparison to schemes using regular grid and unstructured mesh. The OcTree mesh is relatively easy to generate in comparison to unstructured meshes and, at the same time, allows local refinement. The OcTree mesh is a good compromise between precision and CPU time, avoiding the complexity of completely unstructured mesh algorithms. The local refinement is important for good geometrical representation of the tumor and tissues, as well as for capturing more precisely the temperature variations due to high gradients as, for instance, those around concentrated sources. In addition, the nonconforming mesh is readily incorporated into the FVM through the flux balance on the faces; a characteristic not encountered in other numerical methods such as the finite element method in which a more complex formulation (discontinuous finite element approaches) needs to be taken into account.
The technique presented in this work leads to a great reduction in the number of degrees of freedom in comparison to regular grids.
In fact, comparing the use of an OcTree mesh with a regular grid, a speedup of 20 was achieved without degrading the accuracy. The obtained sparse matrices were handled using Cusp, a library that internally uses CUDA for performing efficiently the many sparse matrix and vector multiplications.
It was shown that the implicit Euler time-marching scheme with the Picard method and the biconjugate gradient stabilized solver was 30% faster than the explicit one for similar accuracy. Hence, the use of OcTree meshes in conjunction with the implicit time-marching scheme can be applied to efficiently solve hyperthermia problems. The use of resources of parallel processing in addition can allow the analysis of the influence of the model parameters in real time.
