The results of this study provide an insight into practitioner attribute preferences in an attack graph. The results show that the winning configuration is tre. The event flow in the winning configuration is top-down and consistent with the representation of models such as flow charts and state diagrams. The bottom-up design popular with fault trees and attack trees was strongly rejected and in fact graph configurations which involved a bottom-up design scored the lowest in all groups except cybprc who scored ber higher than tep. However, that was the only exception.
The score for top-down based configurations is notable and might explain why the attack graph proposed by Lallie et al. (2018) proved to be more effective than the fault tree method. Furthermore, the selection of a top-down design is particularly notable given the popularity of attack trees which utilise a bottom-up design.
It is useful to discuss the selection of the preferred configuration (tre) within the context of the attribute importance values. Section 3.4 outlined that although an attribute might be identified as important, it might not necessarily have a determining effect on the winning configurations. This was generally the case in the present study. The attribute importance values for the all group outlined in Table 7 highlighted the precondition attribute as having most importance (aiv = 38.5) and the exploit attribute as having the least importance (aiv = 28.8). Although the top five preferred configurations presented event flow as top-down, this shouldn’t be taken to mean that event flow was the most important attribute. The attribute importance value outlines individual attribute preferences.
The selection of a rectangle for an exploit is consistent with the use of rectangles in fault trees to represent events and data flow diagrams to represent a process, and with Specification and Description Language Diagrams to represent tasks. Knowledge and experience with these modelling systems - particularly data flow diagrams may have influenced participants in their selection.
An ellipse is not used for similar purposes in many other modelling systems that the participants may have been aware of. Although the precondition was considered to have the highest importance in selection decisions, there was less certainty about which shape (ellipse or rectangle) should represent preconditions.
The study aimed to discover whether preferences would change between scenarios. Although there were small changes in preference, these were not considered significant enough to be notable. Furthermore, the study aimed to discover whether preferences would alter between groups. Here again, although there were some changes between scenarios, overall the selection of tre and the rejection of brp held well across all the groups.
5.1. Limitations and future workIt is notable that the configuration selected for the attack graph in Lallie et al. (2018) was ter – which was the second most preferred configuration in the present study. There may be value in performing a similar study to Lallie et al. (2018) to consider the effectiveness of tre against ter – particularly because of what Caire et al. (2013) refer to as the preference performance paradox where the preferred system is not necessarily the most effective one.Although it would be useful to understand perceptual preferences relating to visual syntax such as colour, tone, line width/density/structure, and further attributes such as attacker capability and attack goals, adding further attributes complicated the study in terms of the factorial design and would render an overly complex experimental design comprising of too many factors. Now that the preferences for attributes the attributes highlighted herein have been found, a further study might consider the impact that adding further attributes has on preference.The results were gathered from a wide base of students, lecturers and practitioners in both cyber-security and general computing. The study investigated preferences for experts/practitioners but not non-experts. The study by Lallie et al. (2018) outlined that attack graphs might be an effective method of presenting cyber-attacks to non-experts. If attack graphs are to be used for this purpose, it would be useful to understand attack graph preferences amongst non-experts.Finally, more work should be done to understand the impact of attack graph complexity on practitioner preferences. Although the present study considered preference decisions over three scenarios – each of which presented increasing levels of complexity, the changes in complexity were quite small.
