The Soviet case study advanced here provides insight into a hitherto little studied aspect of the evolving climate change debate during the Cold War period, one which was nevertheless influential in helping to advance a natural science understanding of the phenomenon at the international level. Indeed, shaped by a handful of highly visible climatologists and geophysicists, it is evident that Soviet science was a significant presence with respect to the strengthening international consensus around anthropogenic climate change. Allied to this, the scientific record is suggestive of a distinctive Soviet engagement with the issue, grounded on a long tradition of interest in the role of climate in the functioning of complex physical and biological systems. This tradition was further characterised by a general emphasis on what might be termed an holistic approach towards understanding climate change, one that emphasised the complex character of the climate system, as well as the potential of humankind to use its understanding of the climate system for the wider benefit of society. Elements of this particular feature of Soviet climate science remain relatively underdeveloped in Western accounts of the climate change debate.
Soviet climate science appears to have been held in high regard by Western scientists throughout much of the Cold War period. For example, the Soviet Union's work concerning physical climatology, led by Budyko and his colleagues at the GGO, was well received, and Soviet work on climatic analogues proved significant within the work of bodies such as the WMO. At the same time, there was a growing sense that Soviet developments in climate science, and particularly climate modelling, lagged behind achievements in the West as the 1970s and 1980s unfolded, linked to the slowdown in the Soviet economy and associated technological inadequacies rather than any fundamental scientific shortcomings. While Soviet scientists certainly made progress in the formulation of climate models, the purported limitations in computing power are likely to have been a key factor behind the increased emphasis placed on palaeoclimatic analogues by the Soviets on the international stage; an emphasis which contrasted with the growing Western interest in statistical modelling. Budyko's evident support of this approach, as a key player internationally, was undoubtedly a further reason for Soviet prominence in this area. Importantly, both sides recognised the value of the two approaches for advancing the climate change issue. However, there was growing debate at the international level as to their relative value and this was framed by a complex mix of scientific coalitions and high politics. It also seems likely that the dominance of the Soviet Union's international agenda by a relatively small group of ageing scientists resulted in the gradual ossification of their collective input and an increasingly dogmatic approach to their own work, thereby helping to undermine relationships with Western colleagues and disguise more varied domestic debates. Ultimately, the marked shift towards the use of GCMs as the key science of climate change forecasting during the late 1980s, allied to scientific uncertainties over aspects of the analogue approach as well as personality clashes, appears to have resulted in the relative marginalisation of Soviet scientific input during the formative stages of the first IPCC report. Thus, Soviet contributions to the scientific debate around climate change at the international level moved from a position of significance during the 1960s-1980s to a position of relative isolation by the start of the 1990s. A state of affairs amplified by a tendency for the climate debate to revolve around the science of future predictions and the growing significance of advanced climate modelling activity.
