We have shown that it is possible to tune the electrostatic interactions to obtain a transition from a repulsive to an attractive system for Na-mmt via the solvent properties, i.e. by decreasing in the relative permittivity. From the SAXS data, Bragg peaks were found at 60, and 95 wt% EtOH, corresponding to a d-spacing of ∼2.18, and 1.70 nm, respectively. The Bragg peaks are an indication of tactoid formation, and the decrease in d-spacing concludes that the interaction between the platelets are dominated by attractive ion-ion correlation forces, which are enhanced as the concentration of EtOH increases. From the experimentally osmotic pressure measurements reversibility of the Na-mmt system was obtained. Our hypothesis is that the transition from 95 to 0 wt% EtOH occurs via a successively replacement of intercalated EtOH molecules with water molecules (future work). The results from the theoretical models are in qualitative agreement with the experimental data, giving a further indication of that the given models can explain the underlying physics in the system containing monovalent ions. This is illustrated in Fig. 11a, where the transition between weak and strong coupling regime is visible.Download : Download high-res image (355KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 11. (a) The osmotic pressure response of Na+-montmorillonite, with illustrative configurations corresponding to 95 (left), and 0 (right) wt% EtOH. (b) The osmotic pressure response of Ca2+-montmorillonite, where the black box represents the limitation regime of the continuum model, and the illustrative configurations correspond to 0 (left), 20 (middle), and 95 (right) wt% EtOH.
Moreover, a non-monotonic behavior of the intracrystalline swelling of Ca-mmt as a function of EtOH concentration was captured experimentally. It was found that the osmotic pressure increased until 20 wt% EtOH was reached in the sample, whereas the d-spacing obtained from SAXS in the 20 wt% EtOH sample increased in comparison with 0 wt% EtOH. Hence, this indicates that there are stronger repulsive forces in the Ca-mmt systems at lower concentrations of EtOH. At 60 wt% EtOH the scattering pattern from the SAXS data was found to be a superposition of two Bragg peaks, and the osmotic pressure is in same regime as at 0 wt% EtOH, indicating that there is a competition between two different separations, either for the intercalated EtOH and water, or for two EtOH concentrations. At 95 wt% EtOH the d-spacing was decreased to ∼1.70 nm, and the osmotic pressure was markedly reduced, due to the enhanced ion-ion correlation forces. The non-monotonic behavior found experimentally could not be captured utilizing the continuum model, probably due to the lack of partitioning of the solvent molecules. This is illustrated in Fig. 11b, where the limitation regime of the model is highlighted by the black box, i.e. the increase in osmotic pressure, and the representative configurations of the Ca-mmt systems at 0, 20, and 95 wt% EtOH, show that the separation between the platelets decreases with an increase in EtOH concentration. Thus, in the continuum model a monotonic behavior is found for the intracrystalline swelling of Ca-mmt as a function of EtOH concentration, where the enhanced attractive ion-ion correlation forces increase with a decrease in relative permittivity. To be able to capture this effect theoretically, a model considering the interactions between the solvent molecules and the clay platelets is needed. For example, a model where the solvent is treated explicitly is a good candidate.
