In this paper, we have studied the correlations between CT and several non-cognitive variables, such as self-efficacy and personality. We have found a moderate positive correlation between CT and the specific self-efficacy perception of the students relative to their performance in CT tasks, in which a medium size difference in favor of males is found. We have also provided empirical evidence of the correlations between CT and the five factors of personality from the ‘Big Five’ model. We have found expected positive correlations with Openness and Conscientiousness, and unexpected positive correlation with Extraversion. Both results have led us to affirm that it is essential to assure a diversity of computing contexts so that every student, especially adolescent girls, can enjoy meaningful and self-reinforcing experiences. Moreover, our findings have led us to argue that extraversion might be an emerging and specific personality trait of present top computational thinkers in middle and high school, coinciding with the popularization of the social and collaborative coding platforms.
In addition, we have provided a regression model of CT build onto the personality factors of the Big Five model. We have found that 24% of CT can be explained through personality factors. This result complements the 27% of CT that was explained through the primary mental abilities in our previous work (Román-González, Pérez-González, et al., 2017). Overall, our findings corroborate the idea that, although CT is mainly a cognitive psychological construct close to problem-solving ability, there is also a complementary non-cognitive side of CT. Subsequently, both sides should be taken into account by educational policies and interventions aimed at fostering CT. As a final contribution, we depict the extended nomological network of CT integrating cognitive and non-cognitive variables (Fig. 10). We hope that this extension of the nomological network of CT will contribute to consolidate it as a solid psychological construct.
From this point, further research can be conducted in the following directions:
•Longitudinal studies aimed at studying if reinforcement of self-efficacy can actually improve CT performance.•Analogously, longitudinal studies aimed at studying if reinforcement of behaviors related to Openness, Conscientiousness, and Extraversion, can actually foster CT learning and development in educational settings.•Moreover, it is necessary to extend the repertoire of CT assessment tools, so the growing diversity of the field is reflected in the corresponding measurement instruments. Thus, we intend to enlarge the CTt to a ‘multiple CT battery’, in which CT will be assessed in different modalities (not only visuospatial, but also verbal, musical, kinesthetic, or ethical).•Finally, case studies on the effect of computer programming tasks over students with externalizing problems (e.g., hyperactivity, disruptive conduct, inattentiveness) may be conducted.
