This research study found that an electronic concept-mapping tool had significant advantages in supporting the construction of concept maps representing causal relationships in a dynamic system. In particular, it was noted that providing a set of pre-defined factors scaffolded student teams to consider more factors and to make more connections, leading to deeper learning about the complex causality of the ecosystem. The electronic tool also meant that the concept maps were more consistent in structure and names of nodes.
As a design-based research study, the primary outcome was to inform the design of new versions of the software tool. Based on this study, a new version of the concept map tool was developed and is now integrated with the rest of the EcoXPT virtual world (Fig. 8). The user interface has been improved: icons have been redesigned, the text is more legible, the controls for adding and deleting arrows are easier to use. Most importantly, the tool is now part of the world instead of a separate application. Students can easily go from collecting data, to analyzing relationships, to adding or editing connections in their concept map without losing immersion.Download : Download high-res image (87KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 8. Concept map tool redesign after this study.
In reflecting on the findings from this study, while the set of pre-defined factors had the advantage of prompting students to consider more factors, we also note that Treatment P students created a broad range of factors with more freedom to express their ideas. Rather than completely restrict students to using the pre-defined factors, therefore, an option was added to the electronic tool to give students the ability to add new factors.
Additionally, the new design provides more structure to externalize the complex processes in which students engage as they develop their evidence-based hypotheses. Now students can click on relationship arrows to open a dialog box in which they can fill in the evidence and reasoning for each claim (McNeill & Krajcik, 2011). They can link to evidence from a new Notebook tool that has also been developed to structure students in gathering and organizing multiple forms of evidence (Fig. 9). Integrating the concept map tool with the rest of EcoXPT allows students to build and edit their concept map more easily throughout the unit – students may conduct an experiment that shows a causal connection between two factors, save the experiment in their notebook, and click over to the concept map to construct a relationship and link to the evidence from the experiment.Download : Download high-res image (127KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 9. Adding evidence and reasoning to claims in the EcoXPT concept map.
This study also influenced the design of the overall EcoXPT curriculum. The electronic modeling tool is now introduced earlier in the curriculum, so that students can more easily transition and engage in generating and reflecting on their hypotheses as they collect and analyze data and conduct experiments. In assessing the concept maps, it was noted that the least understood relationships by both treatments were related to bacteria, which, as a decomposer, increases when the algae bloom dies and there is more dead matter in the pond, and thereby decreases the dissolved oxygen, which is taken up as part of the decomposition process. To better support this understanding, experiments were designed for EcoXPT to help students understand these relationships, and a node named “dead matter” was added to the concept map.
Another important issue to consider is that in EcoMUVE, concept maps were constructed by teams of 3–5 students. Past EcoMUVE research that included analysis of video of student groups working on their concept maps revealed productive debate and scientific argumentation regarding what to include or not include in final concept maps (Kamarainen, Metcalf, Grotzer, & Dede, 2015). A drawback of the electronic tool is that it does not lend itself as well to collaborative work. Only one student can edit a concept map at a time, on a single computer. With 3–5 members in a group, students would sometimes work on multiple different versions of a concept map, and then attempt to merge them into one that could represent the group's work. One possibility suggested by this study is to consider reduced group size to give a finer grain-size for assessment that might reveal more misconceptions and conceptual changes that were lost in the aggregation of four students' ideas. In EcoXPT, therefore, students now work in pairs on a single computer, collaboratively engaging in their inquiry and concept mapping activities.
Future research goals include the development of automated processes for evaluation of student activities that may discern relationships between concept mapping and other actions in the virtual world. Automated tools might be able to analyze student concept maps and provide feedback, e.g., to call students' attention to targeted resources, address misconceptions, or suggest strategies and approaches to guide students in collecting or analyzing evidence.
One question to consider for future research is the question of transfer – the findings of this study indicated that students who were cued to consider more factors made more connections, but is that a skill that they would then be able to carry over in later inquiry-based activities that were less structured? And how would their performance compare with students who were given the more open-ended task to begin with? There are likely to be such trade-offs in providing prompts in the form of pre-defined nodes, compared with more open-ended means of expression.
The survey to be used with the final version of EcoXPT includes questions requiring students to carry out both near and far transfer of ideas learned in the curriculum. This will allow researchers to gain a better understanding of how well our intervention in general supports teaching for transfer. Performance on the concept map can be correlated with students' ability to transfer ecosystem science knowledge to assess how well the concept map supports deeper learning.
As inquiry-based learning is increasingly present in K-12 science education, it is an important area of research to consider how best to support students in constructing representations of their understanding of scientific phenomena. The EcoXPT project continues to explore ways to use concept maps specifically to represent causal connections between variables.
