In this paper we have presented the results from the analysis of 49 empirical studies (60 papers) published from 2003 to 2016 that focused on investigating mathematics or science learning and teaching with mobile apps and technologies in secondary school education. The SLR was conducted with the aim of providing insights into the nature of recent research that has been implemented using mobile learning in secondary school science and mathematics. Such insights are valuable in suggesting new directions for research studies and in providing a coherent and larger-scale understanding of contemporary research trends. This broader investigation is in contrast to most educational research studies, which tend to be small-scale in nature (see Fig. 9).
Insights gained from this SLR concerned the foci of studies, the pedagogical approaches and the context in which the studies took place. The most stated foci in our included studies were: Effectiveness of Using Apps; Design of the Apps; and Technology Implementation. Most of the identified pedagogical approaches fitted into three overarching themes which could be characterised as emphasising authenticity and social learning: Inquiry-based Learning, Collaboration and Realistic Learning. Few approaches were characterised as instructionist. This could suggest that educators' and researchers' interest in progressive pedagogies are now driving app design, development and use, after decades of behaviourist traditions dominating these endeavours.
Future research needs to include longer-term studies and more varied mixed methods approaches, and focus on more diverse mathematics and science learning contexts across a variety of formal and informal spaces. An interesting observation that we draw from this SLR relates not to what is reported in the studies but to what is almost absent from the studies. Many of the studies in this SLR do not appear to consider one of the defining features of mobile learning: the ability to learn across contexts using the device. Most of the studies were located in formal learning contexts where the mobile learning did not exhibit the flexibility possible in the Third Space, highlighting the fact that seamless learning needs to be further scrutinized in studies of secondary school mathematics and science.
