This paper describes a new strategy of urban design with the purpose to overcome the technological perspective of current urban planning methods towards a participatory planning approach. The drawbacks of the participatory planning that we focus on are low representation and the cost-intensive process of face-to-face workshops. This work also addresses the missing option for creativity of many participation tools.
Online participation tools create the opportunity for a large number of people to simultaneously provide direct feedback without high expenditure. Active design in workshops with residents is the most common approach to overcome the limited creativity of participatory planning tools. Methods which combine these two solutions is what we designate as Citizen Design Science.
Harnessing the knowledge of the crowd is a typical Citizen Science method. The active designing in the co-design approach is what we call Citizen Design. The combination of these two fields require techniques from a third research area, namely Design Science. Since the direct communication with the designers is replaced by anonymous submissions of design proposals, it is necessary to access the tacit knowledge of people in a different way. Design Science is therefore obligatory to identify design criteria which are essential for designers in the specific use case.
Qua-kit is presented as an ICT tool which can be used for Citizen Design Science experiments. The tool allows crowd-creative participation on different urban scales, by arranging geometries in given scenarios.
The upcoming challenges in this research area refer to various disciplines. To build realistic case studies for research, it is important to promote the opportunities of Citizen Design Science to planners and authorities. Directly linked to this issue is the question of how the output of the design exercises can be used and communicated for other stakeholders and how useful design proposals from citizens are. Next to these challenges in urban governance, a sociological interesting question is in what age the dominant part of the participants is. If younger people are overrepresented, it can be discussed how ideas of online design tools can be combined with conventional participation methods which are usually used by elderly and non-technophiles.
Future research publications will also refer to the question of an appropriate formulation of the design exercises that is given to non-experts. This is related to local design aspects as well as knowledge management. It will also be on the agenda to have an overview of existing online design tools and describe which of them are the most appropriate for which design question and where the limits of these tools and Citizen Design Science in general are.
