In this paper, we proposed a novel deep learning approach to identifying the individual cattle using muzzle point image pattern. The deep learning approach is applied to learn a discriminatory feature representation of muzzle images with limited training dataset. With the proposed deep learning approaches, such as CNN, SDA and DBN yield 75.98%, 88.46%, and 95.99% identification accuracy, respectively.
The handcrafted texture features based representation algorithms are utilized for evaluations of experimental results. The Local Binary Pattern (LBP) and Circular-LBP (Circular-LBP) feature descriptor based technique provide the rank-1 identification accuracy of 16.80 ± 0.80% to and 26.97 ± 1.2%, respectively with four muzzle point images as gallery image per subject (cattle). In the case of appearance based feature extraction and representation approaches, such as principal components analysis is used to perform dimensionality reduction on the feature space.
The identification of cattle based on their muzzle point images is performed using Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) with One-Shot Similarity (OSS) technique. It is used to match a pair of samples and generate the match scores. The identification accuracies are shown in Table 5, respectively. It can be observed that Direct-Kernel-LDA provides the 15.89 ± 1.7% to 29.97 ± 1.13% identification accuracy.
The learnt feature descriptor techniques, such as VLAD+LDA+OSS and VLAD+LDA+SVM techniques yield 45.98 ± 1.5% to 59.64 ± 1.12% and 50.76 ± 1.6 to 67.98 ± 1.17 identification accuracy, respectively. Based on observation, we conclude that deep belief network deep learning approach provides better identification accuracy for recognition of individual cattle. Hence it can be concluded that the DBN based framework is the right choice for recognition purpose.
For further improvisation of deep learning based recognition framework, the proposed framework can be implemented on the android platform that can easily available for smart or android devices for verification and identification and verification of false insurance claims in real time scenario.
We postulate that the traditional animal recognition methodologies and automatic animal recognition algorithms that are tailored specifically for identification of cattle, via unambiguous training. It can be able to perform the recognition of cattle more efficiently. The proposed deep learning based recognition of cattle caters a friendly, non-invasive, robust as well as cost-effective solution using smart devices or low-cost camera for the identification of species or individual animals.
In future, we plan to extend the proposed cattle recognition system for the identification of different animals in the real time. We would like to include the following points as part of our future work:
•We would like to design multi-modal cattle recognition system using muzzle point image and face image of cattle for accurate identification and verification in real-time.•We would like to increase the performance of the proposed cattle recognition system using multi-modal system and feature fusion techniques. The fusion technique can be fused the discriminatory set of texture features of the muzzle point images with facial images of individual cattle.•We postulate that it can be more helpful even depth level analysis of experimental results of proposed multi-model based cattle recognition system.•Finally, we would like to increase the size of cattle database for validation of experimental results with benchmark existing handcrafted texture descriptor techniques and deep learning based feature learning and representation techniques in the computer vision.
