SBD is oriented to all members of society from all walks of life with high involvement. Unfortunately, the theory, thinking and technology of traditional safety statistics are not well suitable for complex safety giant system sometimes, but luckily big data opens the way of new applications by processing large volumes of safety data. Under the development strategy of big data, discussing how big data applies in the field of safety science is of great significance. As an innovative approach which aims for creating data driven processes, SBD and its leveraging advancements in data analysis offer some promises to reduce the accident and create a harmonious social environment. In conclusion, SBD has more than enough substance there for it to deserve our attention.
However, it is not enough for big data to be viewed as a strong enabler for safety science applications, the most significant aspect of which is lack of universal supporting theory that guides big data application in safety science field.
This presented paper aimed at providing the theory foundation of big data application in safety science field. Based on literature review and comparative method, we mainly raveled out four hazes as followed:
(1)What the differences are between SBD and SSD. To gain a preliminary cognitive, we discussed it from four perspectives including theory, research method, specific analysis method and processing mode.(2)What SBD is. Seen from safety science, we concluded SBD has further cognitions and comprehensions thoroughly explaining the new connotations of SBD from the perspective of concept, attribute and type.(3)By what means SBD application can achieve. In order to clarify this grand topic, firstly we put forward five universal interoperable methods of SBD and SSD, subsequently summarized and refined nine basic SBD principles, Finally, built theory architecture and working framework in data processing flow as two examples to clarify the scientificity and practicability of application principles.(4)What researchers majoring in safety science and engineering can do to develop and popularize safety knowledge in the era of big data. This part mainly shed light on the prospects and challenges big data brought to safety science researches to improve and perfect the cognition of SBD application, which involved in work safety, accident investigation, safety economy, safety ergonomics, safety systematic, safety sociology, safety statistics, safety information and information security, etc.
It is clear that big data plays an important role in the field of safety science, and conclusion has been reached in this paper that SBD application, as an innovative approach, has a solid theoretical basis for safety science research, and deserves more attention in the future.
