Land suitability assessment for soybean crops in Kebumen District has been successfully established by integrating GIS, Fuzzy sets and AHP methods. This method is applied to be able to replace manual scoring methods that are still applied in several studies. The standardization of the sub-criteria is performed by integrating the fuzzy membership function (Mfs (xi)) aimed at converting numerical values to various magnitudes on the sub-criteria to the level of membership function in the range 0–1. In this study, fuzzy membership function calculations on fuzzy sets have a systematic and appropriate mechanism to determine the standardization value of sub-criteria. Meanwhile, AHP is integrated into the process of determining the weight of each sub criteria used. AHP weighting process is effective for determining the weighting value of the sub-criteria in a systematic way and the consistency of ratios can be measured. Therefore, the weighting of experts can be accepted on the basis of a good calculation process. The standardization value of the calculation of Mfs(xi) and the weight of AHP (Wi) is calculated to produce a Land Suitability Index (Si). The results showed that from 132,872.9 ha the land in Kebumen Regency has 81.42% is appropriate, 11.25% is marginal and 7.33% is not suitable. From the appraisal process has been tested the correlation level of conformity with soybean productivity and yield at the correlation level at 92.30%. The correlation result is better than correlation level obtained from land suitability map for soybean from BPTP which only 88,46%. Thus, it can be argued that the application of the Fuzzy set and AHP method in assessing the suitability of soil for soybean crops has better accuracy. The integration of fuzzy sets and AHP is a good and powerful combination of techniques to be recommended replacing conventional land suitability assessment methods. As well, from the correlation of accuracy indicates that the proposed tool based on Fuzzy sets and AHP techniques can be used as a basis for agricultural planning to optimize soybean production.
