The present study mainly contributes to the field by: (1) offering a conceptual framework regarding the influence of ICT factors from national-, school-, and student-levels on student learning outcomes based on the previous literature; (2) examining the relationship between the proposed ICT factors and student mathematics, reading, and scientific literacy using the latest PISA data across 44 nations; and (3) reflecting the design of the PISA ICT Familiarity Questionnaire and the secondary analysis using the questionnaire. The results indicated that most ICT-related factors significantly influenced student learning outcomes, and some of them were negative influences. Therefore, on the one hand, ICT needs to be integrated into education since it may be a possible solution to some puzzling educational problems; on the other hand, ICT should be employed carefully in educational settings, and further action to improve the quality of ICT integration into education (e.g. the application of effective educational technology like technology-based curricula, computer-assisted instruction, and integrated learning systems) is essential.
The study has a few limitations. Firstly, more sophisticated factors with respect to student ICT use should be used to explore their effects on student learning since the student ICT use factors included in the present study did not perform well in predicting student academic performance. As Lei and Zhao (2007) argued, the quantity of ICT use can advance student learning only when the quality of ICT use is ensured. Therefore, more factors related to the quality of student ICT use should be considered in order to determine their influences on student learning outcomes and their interaction with the quantity of student ICT use. Secondly, teacher ICT-related factors should be considered in order to examine their impact on student learning outcomes. Because PISA did not include teacher ICT factors in the contextual questionnaire, their influences on student learning achievement could not be examined in the present study. However, based on previous studies (Bingimlas, 2009; Pelgrum, 2001), teachers did play an important role in the successful integration of ICT in teaching and learning. Therefore, further research can examine the effects of teachers’ ICT-related factors on student academic performance. Thirdly, sample bias may have existed in the present study since the PISA data consisted primarily of student data from the more developed countries, and less developing countries (especially African countries) were included. Therefore, the findings need to be treated with caution in explaining the situation in countries excluded from this study. Last but not the least, student learning takes place in the organic interaction among the various components of the holistic learning environment, where ICT is a critical but one piece of the puzzle (Johnson et al., 2014). Thus, ICT interacts with other aspects of learning environment to influence student learning by affecting almost all the aspects of learning environment (Brečko et al., 2014; Law, Yuen, & Fox, 2011; OECD, 2017b). The present study singled out the ICT factors without considering those intricate interactions. This approach allowed a large-scale statistical modelling and testing of how ICT factors at multiple levels interact with one another to influence student learning in different subject domains. However, the complexity of the interaction of ICT factors and other learning factors were left unaccounted for. Thus, more fine-tuned research is needed to consider the role of ICT in the wide context of learning environment, that is, to explore how ICT might interact with other aspects of learning environment (e.g., content & curricula, teaching practices, or assessment; Bocconi et al., 2012) to finally impact student learning attainment.
