As health and life sciences become more data intensive and cross-disciplinary, the concept of knowledge networking is rapidly emerging to support contemporary data-intensive research. Although, online knowledge networking has hoped to facilitate scientific collaboration and innovation, current knowledge sharing practices have shown limited effectiveness to date. As such, there is still lack of consideration of ethical issues (e.g., free riders) as well as user expectations when engaging in knowledge sharing. Conversely, there are significant opportunities or researchers to make improvements to knowledge networking platforms from a human-centered design perspective.
To our knowledge, this study is the first study to empirically address user experiences with current knowledge networking platforms and motivational determinants affecting implicit and explicit knowledge sharing intentions in health and life sciences research communities. We demonstrate that knowledge networking among health and life scientists is strongly influenced by short- and long-term rewards such as reciprocal benefits, anticipated relationships, and reputation within professional networks. Also, we identify the impacts of type of knowledge (explicit and implicit) on the scientists' intention to contribute knowledge. Specifically suggesting that reciprocal benefit and fear of being scooped are critical to sharing both explicit and implicit knowledge, whereas altruism is not an influential factor of intention to share most kinds of knowledge. In addition, the influence of anticipated relationship and reputation on the scientists' intention to share depends on the type of knowledge to be shared. These asymmetric influences of knowledge types on the scientists’ motivation to contribute knowledge have not been empirically examined before.
Given the importance of knowledge networking in today's knowledge-based society, our findings further support user experience professionals who seek to uncover unmet user needs and expectations in complex scientific domains. This study, and many others like it aim to facilitate the emerging paradigm of Science 2.0, supporting the “free and widespread availability of data, the sharing and reuse of methods and tools and the collaborative pursuit of common goals and objectives” (Romano et al., 2011).
Several issues should be considered for future research in this area. First, the results of this study do not explain differences across scientists in specialized areas within health and life sciences such as bench scientists (those mainly conducting experiments in a laboratory) and application scientists (those developing methods for storing, retrieving, and analyzing data with a domain knowledge in health and life sciences). Thus, it can be further expended to examine the acceptance of knowledge networking in cross-disciplinary research communities by further consideration of a broad spectrum of user classes.
In addition, this study considers factors that affect only “knowledge sharing” intentions and not specifically knowledge-reuse. Ideally, knowledge networking should not be unilateral. Interactions between knowledge-sharing and seeking will help us have a better understanding of scientists' intentions toward knowledge networking in computer-mediated environments. A possible venue for future research is to examine motivational factors affecting both knowledge sharing and reuse intentions in a comprehensive manner.
Furthermore, the current study highlights which factors must be considered using empirical evidence gathered via self-reported survey data. However, survey instruments alone may not fully elicit implicit attitudes, beliefs, and values that guide behavior in knowledge networking platforms. Hence, a mixed methods approach should be considered to offset the potential methodological shortcomings associated with surveys and self-reporting behavior.
Finally, our study is limited to motivational factors affecting knowledge sharing behavior. A further study could assess the effects of how technical infrastructures, organizational policies, and legal & ethical norms (e.g. copyright, confidentiality) influence motivational factors in knowledge sharing.
