In this paper has introduced idea on “hypothetical” computer swarm virus to discuss its structure, behavior visualization, capabilities, and capacity. The aim was to point to the fact that such virus will be developed in the near future as the logical continuation of botnets, C&C viruses Stuxnet amongst the others. The very basic possibility to visualize, measure and analyze its behavior-dynamics has been proposed. The core of swarm virus dynamics has been based on ACO algorithm and its modifications and visualized as the complex graphs. For the basic evaluation of such networks has been used selected network centralities. The fitness function has simply reflected the size of an infected file. The bigger file, the better attraction for virus instance. It is clear that fitness can be more complex and can contain more criteria.
Our prototype has been inspired by above-mentioned malware technologies as well as by swarm intelligence and systems as a logical consequence of modern malware development and technology to initiate-inspire modern antimalware technologies for a new generation of malware threads. Our experiments were many times repeated; data has been stored, visualized and analyzed in a basic way in the scope of this paper. All those facts and results were reported in the form of tables and graphs.
Research and its experimental results reported in this paper demonstrate how can swarm virus structure and dynamics be visualized and analyzed. This shall be useful in the understanding of the behavior of a new generation computer malware and computer technology protection. The experiment reported here is very basic and are opening new research in the field of bio-inspired algorithms and malware technologies.
The definition, programming, simulations, and visualizations of swarm virus prototype, reported in this paper, has open a lot of new research ideas and suggestions, that are briefly outlined here.
7.1. Swarm engineACO and its slight modification are used in this paper. It is clear that also other swarm intelligence based techniques as the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [18,36], Self Organizing Migration Algorithm (SOMA) [37,38], Firefly Algorithm [39,40], Cuckoo Search [33], Grey Wolf Optimizer [41] can be used. Important is to realize that swarm virus movement and also internal communication shall less-more follow the complex network topology (to be robust and without central communication unit) and thus any swarm algorithm, that allows to search over the graph, can be used. Creativity is not limited here. Future research shall also be focused on such communication, that no common file storing information is used, but whole progress about instance and all of them are shared, updated and used by all instances directly (everyone informs everyone, or subgroups inform subgroups). In this way, such swarm strongly remind neural network (more natural than artificial) whose topology communication can change in the course of the time. Such version of the virus will exhibit extremely high robustness of information preservation against swarm network damage.
7.2. Swarm virus versus another malwareIn this paper, we have demonstrated the use of the simple appending virus as the swarm one so that all virus instances (mutually identical) were communicated amongst themselves as swarm less-more do. In ACO with the cast, see section 6.2, more hierarchical system has been introduced. This, also as another possible modification, open possibility to apply our idea to another malware like worms, trojans or ransomware so that their activities can be more distributed and stealth amongst the virus instances and its hierarchical subsystem. And of course, its environment then can be not only PC but also computer network or Internet (or its subsystems). Again, creativity is not limited.
7.3. Swarm virus and Darwinian evolutionAny version of the swarm virus can be easily joined with Darwinian evolution, as reported in pioneering work [49]. The virus instance is, in fact, the set of subprograms, i.e., elementary building blocks, that can be replaced by its different versions and combined in a limited way. This opens a way to apply Darwinian evolution (for example genetic programming) on those elementary building blocks and synthesizes the new version of virus instances. Thus swarm virus can evolve independently from the creator. That move swarm virus to the higher level of virus categorization than metamorphic viruses are. They are using just combinatorial way to change themselves.
7.4. Antimalware systems and identification of the swarm virusIn this paper, a very basic principle of swarm virus has been introduced. The experimental version has been programmed and observed in the controlled environment. Thus to get data and process them was quite easy. The major question, in the real swarm thread, is how it can be identified in reality. As our experiments show, the most visible attribute of such virus is 1) it's jumping over the hosts (i.e., population size is not changing) and 2) communication among them. This two facts shall serve as the starting point of the identification and localization of the swarm virus. Our suggestion is that antimalware systems shall not destroy them immediately (at least not all of them) but observe them and/or analyze malware activities data worldwide in order to analyze over those data whether some subset of malware activities create structures (movement, communication,…) that can be expected from the swarm virus. In fact is it similar to espionage game when espionage network is going to be uncovered. In principles, it is the same. As we suggested, complex network visualization and analysis can help a lot.
7.5. TheoryAs has been reported in Ref. [1] and related works, many computer virus attributes (e.g., polymorphism,…) has been theoretically predicted many years before it has been developed in reality. We believe that our experiments, that demonstrated the viable fusion of computer virus and swarm technology, can be used as an inspiration for computer theory researchers, that can be based on [1], open new theoretical research on swarm virus capabilities. Capabilities and possibilities that can be now only estimated by experimentally oriented computer scientists. This way of swarm virus research seems to be very fruitful and promising as an expansion of the theoretical research on the computer virus, i.e., on the population of Turing self-replicating machines that communicate among themselves.This and more general questions like how shall be organized the antimalware actions to eliminate swarm virus activity? It is obvious that classical approach will not be likely sufficient. To eliminate a few instances will not be enough as well as the impossibility to localize central communication point and eliminate it. Disabling of such virus will need an approach that reminds more strategical game rather a classical simple erasing of one instance. Antimalware shall work more globally over many systems and on different levels of its functionality to cover swarm virus completely. At the giant octopus.To be successful, another question must also be answered. Can be used different ways of communication between swarm virus instances? Can other swarm intelligence based technologies be used? What impact will have Darwinian evolution [49] on swarm virus development when used? Can swarm virus, as a digital flock of viruses, learn from the success of its instances and incorporate this knowledge into its strategies as a neural network do (neuron = swarm instance)? And more interesting questions. All those principles and answered questions could be used to create swarm antimalware, that will be very different from classical antimalware systems because swarm virus need not be only on one PC and also its payload, i.e., encryption, armored, stealth or ransomware functionality (amongst the others) [2] can be spread over the whole swarm and need not be in each instance as a full copy. The very first example of such technologies can be immune system use as reported in Refs. [30,31].The prototype of the swarm virus described in this paper could utilize much more features than it is reported here. One of them could be adding more subspecies of virus instances. The virus already contains those that explore file system and transform it to network with some information. Some virus instances could explore, some of them can execute only a part of the payload, some could do a different part of the payload, and another instance could even explore with different behavior.On the other side, swarm virus can be easily enriched by algorithms based on Darwinian evolution that use mutation and cross-breeding, etc. Some of these algorithms are Differential Evolution (DE) [60], Evolution Strategy (ES) [61], Genetic algorithms (GA) [62]. Those algorithms can enrich, in contrary to the classical swarm reported here, evolutionary development of the viral code, as described in pioneering work [49].
