The underlying topical structures or the focusing high-level topics of ICCS are Modelling, High-Performance Computing (HPC), eScience, Machine Learning, Optimization, Numerical, Programming, Networks, Data, Visualization, Simulation, Security, and Education, with different proportion. In particular, Modelling (Data-driven modelling, Environmental modelling, Agent-Based Modelling (ABM), Biomedicine modelling and Physics modelling) and High-Performance Computing (Parallel computing, Cloud computing, GPU computing, Power consumption and Fault-tolerant) are the most interesting talking points of ICCS participants. However, topicality of these topics changes over time due to many factors. Based on CPA analysis, high-level topics might be classified into three groups. The first group of topics (Programming, Machine Learning, Visualization, and Networking) exhibited an above average prevalence during the 17 years. The second group of topics (HPC, Optimization, Numerical and Modelling) illustrated a lower than average prevalence during the 17 years. The last group which includes Education, Simulation, Security, Data, and eScience exhibited stability, their frequency is near average during all 17 years of ICCS. As a result, the last group of topics could be considered as the common high-level topics of ICCS. In addition to this, one of the interesting things is most of the topics demonstrated change, either increment or reduction, during 2007–2009. In particular, 2008 were a turning point for most of the topics. For instance, Modelling and Numerical become common discussion topics for ICCS participants after 2008. Over the years of ICCS some topics such as networking, grid computing, encryption, cellular automata and programming methods have been decreasing in popularity and some topics such as cloud computing, GPU computing, workflows and scheduling, modelling health and healthcare, optimization application and metaheuristics have been attracting attention of ICCS participants and gaining popularity.
There are two groups of author's keywords. (i) permanently presented keywords (e.g. ‘modelling and simulation’, ‘parallel computing’), and (ii) temporary keywords showing sharp growth or decline. For instance; ‘data mining’ had the highest rank in 2007; but after that it disappears from the observation while ‘big data’ demonstrates sharp rise in 2014–2016; ‘DDDAS’ and ‘genetic algorithm’ reached their peaks in 2012–2013; finally; ‘gpu’ had constant growth from 2009 to 2013; and then consistently high values (together with ‘high-performance computing’) in 2015–2017.
Simulation Modelling and High-Performance Computing, particularly Parallel Computing, have been playing an important role by erasing boundaries between different disciplines and facilitating multidisciplinary research. On top of this, without these topics, ICCS would be two or more separate conferences. The hidden patterns of collaboration development in each field are highly complex and virtually unique, determining causal relationships is a challenging task. However, the results we were able to obtain via analysis of collaboration networks and topic modelling hint that ICCS might be a platform for collaborating with researchers, specialising in a large number of fields.
Finally, even though ICCS is an A-ranked conference in CORE classification and one of the most cited events and publications in computational science (according to Google Scholar), it is not the only conference on computational science. Therefore, to make a bold and concrete conclusion on the questions this study raised with respect to computational science at large, we need to also see the big picture by considering papers from other conferences and journals on computational science which will also give us a chance to assess the influence of other conferences on ICCS and vice versa.
