This paper shows that there are opportunities for additional research on the design and evaluation of ITSs integrated into AR training systems. However, implementation of such systems is challenging, in part, due to the lack of standardised APIs and schemas. To help overcome these challenges, we presented a series of design guidelines and recommendations for implementing these systems. These include: (1) A generalised, modular architecture to support a variety of domains and pedagogical approaches; (2) Improved authoring capabilities for authoring AR courses; (3) Sparingly use of annotations to avoid overwhelming the learner; (4) computer networking support and an abstraction library for sharing data between the ITS and AR.
We proposed two possible methods for implementation: The Non-Intelligent Client-Based ARAT and the Intelligent Client-Based ARAT. The Non-Intelligent Client-Based ARAT offloads most of the spatial processing to a third-party server or the ITS, whereas the Intelligent Client-Based ARAT undertakes some spatial processing. It is evident that both designs are less than ideal because the spatial schema needs to be designed on a per-course basis and this is not feasible without an authoring system, but currently, only Generalized Intelligent Framework for Tutoring (GIFT) provides some authoring support. We described existing ARAT systems using each of these methods. We also described possible areas for future research. Currently, user interface design of AR training systems in an ITS context is not well understood and additional work is needed in this space. Current user interface paradigms are designed around a desktop UI, which has limited usability in an AR context. Additional development of tracking algorithms and education theories are also advised to improve ITS practicality and deployment with AR training systems.
This paper aimed to show that combining AR with ITSs has the potential to create cognitive support tools that are better suited for the nature of psychomotor training than desktop-based ITSs. Currently, only few niche systems are known to exist and their design and implementation is far from consistent. Within the last few years, more standardised architectures such as GIFT have begun to emerge, which has the potential to improve research and development of ARATs systems.
