The attention of professional researchers, policymakers, environmental regulators and funding agencies towards technology-mediated citizen science projects is rising due to the benefits they can offer to scientific progress, support for the environment, and public literacy (Bonney et al., 2009, Cappa et al., 2016, Cronje et al., 2011, Follett and Strezov, 2015, Franzoni and Sauermann, 2014, Haklay, 2013, Morais et al., 2015, Nov et al., 2014). In addition, in USA, the National Science Foundation and, in Great Britain, the Natural Environmental Research Council are increasingly seeking efforts from the scientific community to undertake project-related science outreach. In this context, sustained citizen science participation represents a promising means for massively involving the general public and for improving the appreciation of scientific research.
However, as many crowd-based projects fail over time, research in citizen science has focused on how to stimulate user participation and motivations (Butler, 2001, Langner and Seidel, 2014, Laut et al., 2017, Nov et al., 2014, Tinati et al., 2017, Wald et al., 2016). Therefore, the outcomes of this study contribute to this field of research, as it shows how to positively influence citizen scientists' participation (i.e., quantity of contributions and engagement), enjoyment, and referral intention through a proper use of rewards. In greater detail, this research demonstrated that both monetary and public online acknowledgement rewards are effective in citizen science. They can be used to sustain participation and motivations and, more in general, to create the conditions for improving the public value of science (McNie, Parris, & Sarewitz, 2016).
In addition, we also contribute to the scientific debate on the effect of monetary rewards in volunteering activities such as citizen science, as intrinsic motivations can be harmed and lead to a crowd-out effect (Fiorillo, 2011, Lepper and Greene, 1978, Ryan and Deci, 2000, Titmuss, 1998). We support the claim that this negative effect does not occur in all circumstances (Cameron et al., 2001, Krishnamurthy et al., 2014, Mellström and Johannesson, 2008, Ostrom, 2000), by evidencing that monetary rewards, used under the conditions outlined in this study, can be beneficial in citizen science. In so doing we provide citizen science organizers, and more broadly to volunteer activities organizers, an additional means to nurture contributors' participation and motivations.
There are several future developments that can stem from this research. Future studies should identify for which individual a particular type of reward is more valuable in order to maximize their effect. This study was performed among students to provide a homogeneous group and mitigate the role of unobserved variables; however, moderating effects brought about by age, previous knowledge, and heterogeneity in work experience, which are present in real citizen science instances, should be investigated in future research. The effects of sanctions for poor performance should also be investigated, as a means to penalize rather than reward participants on the basis of their contribution to the project (Festré, 2010). An additional step that should be undertaken is to understand the long term effects of the rewards tested in this research on the extent of contribution and the motivations level, building on previous work which has shown that he effectiveness of reward mechanisms may decrease over time (Moller & Deci, 2014). This aspect is crucial in citizen science as after motivating people to participate, it is important to keep them contributing over longer periods of time and to have them return for multiple sessions. Additional rewards may be investigated, especially those that do not impose monetary costs for citizen science project organizers, such as social media rewards that can remunerate participants with increased influence over social media by establishing new network interactions (Smailovic & Podobnik, 2016). In addition, future research should address experiments “in the wild”, to evidence how online participation in citizen science may be affected by other phenomena, beyond those explored in the controlled conditions of this empirical, hypothesis-driven study.
To conclude, in the context of open source projects, the use of monetary rewards to crowd-in participants for innovation purposes has been considered, leading to the assessment of a model based on a mix of private and collective gains to nurture participation, known as the private-collective innovation model (Hippel, 2006, von Hippel and von Krogh, 2003). In citizen science, efforts are focused on collecting and analyzing more data for a social purpose, such as environmental monitoring, rather than directly contributing to innovation as in open source communities, implying different motivations underpinning participation. Therefore, we sought to lay the foundation for a private-collective research model, focused on the intensification of citizen participation in technology-mediated citizen science projects based on monetary and public acknowledgement rewards, whose outcome is scientific research of the public interest. In fact, as the outcomes of this research are drawn by experiments conducted in a relevant case study context, i.e., an active citizen science project, the results can be extended to similar projects to nurture participation.
