In summary, we not only enumerate some available and valuable network-operation, and then many network models will be set up by one or more ones of them, and also introduce a convenient computation method. Hereafter, we apply this method to calculate the exact solutions of spanning trees in some special graphs. Our results can confirm both the usefulness of the concise spectral methods described in [42], [43], [44] and this iterative algorithm proposed here. We hope that our work can provide a new viewpoint for exploring spanning trees of general graphs (models). Particularly, recent studies of complex networks shows that counting the number of spanning trees of a real-world network is more attractive than for graph models. Here, we only apply our iterative method described to some simple graph families. As a direction for our research, we will improve our method to capture some better results for real-life network models and look for much available and convenient algorithms for difficult issues. From the point of our statements on the number of spanning trees of some graphs, ones can see that our computing methods may also be applied in various models, in particular, in subdivide-line graphs. As we know, such works have be studied by the Laplacian eigenvalues of graphs [42], [43]. On the other hand, in some recent researches, another parameter, the Laplacian Estarda index, has been taken much attention to subdivide-line graphs [45]. In [45], they establish upper and lower bounds for the Laplacian Estarda index of subdivide-line graphs which can be related to the number of spanning trees of the corresponding graphs. In a word, we make a brief discussion to report that the relationships among three mentioned above invariants on subdivide-line graphs can be referred to as a new direction on studies of graphs in the following future. Finally, we can propose a problem: How to obtain the relative solution of maximal planar graph based on the formula of the number of spanning trees of a (r−1−n)-regular wheel-graph W(1,1,n). We will be delighted to see our methods applied to a variety of disciplines.
