In this paper, a quadruped robot is designed that can be controlled by an Android operating system. The custom-made three-dimensional software simulates the 2DOF leg of the robot. The movement of the leg on simulation software is performed using the Inverse Kinematics Solutions that are obtained using the Denavit-Hartenberg convention. The simulation demonstrates that the expected results of the movement and these equations could be used to control the movement of the robot's limbs. This robot can move in any of the four directions almost instantly without full body rotation, which makes the robot more dynamic. It can move at a speed of approximately 15.5 cm/s. It can successfully detect obstacles within 300 cm and will avoid them if they are closer than 20 cm. The robot will be able to move on a guided path sensing the obstacles previously placed to create the path. Remote controlling from the Android operating system along with its automatic obstacle avoiding feature makes the robot efficient to reach any destination as desired. The robot faces some difficulty walking through slippery surfaces. The endpoint of the leg of the robot needs to be mechanically improved so that it would be able to create enough friction even on slippery surfaces. Current structure cannot walk on very rough terrain and walk on such surface can be implemented if the robot is designed in 3DOF limb structure instead of 2DOF limbs. Designing the structure with more degrees of freedom can give the robot more advantages like climbing stairs [32, 33] or complex balancing [34] in difficult situations. Additionally, this robot can be constructed with a low budget and hence const effective.
The future plan is to develop an efficient path planning algorithm and apply the algorithm using this robot. It can be employed to perform a task, such as carrying objects autonomously to remote places. An improved design of this quadruped robot (designed with 3DOF leg structure instead of 2DOF structure used in its current design) will provide more versatility on movement. Also, the Android software will be developed to be more dynamic and will show more real-time information and feedbacks from different sensing devices attached to the robot. Other sensors like GPS, accelerometer and gyro meter can be added to provide more features and also will provide a more dynamic control over the robot.
