Environmental processes exhibit several intrinsic complexities that make data analysis difficult, and in these cases classical data analysis methods often do not perform well. DS is a promising approach to analyze environmental data. DS defines a new paradigm where, apart from the DM step itself, raw data preprocessing and outcome post-processing are included in the methodology. Additionally, prior expert knowledge may be used to boost the discovery of new useful results. In Gibert (2016b) a survey on preprocessing is provided. In this paper, DM is fully considered. Post-processing, which is method-specific, tries to bridge the gap between DM results and effective knowledge production. Post-processing remains an area for future research.
The main contributions of this paper include the following. First, a conceptualization of DM for environmental systems is approached. This conceptualization is intended to provide a general overview of the DM techniques regarding its use in environmental problems.
A second contribution focusses on the difficulty of choosing the right DM technique to perform genuine DS over real-world datasets. We identify the main decision elements that a data scientist has to face to make that choice, and organize them in a simple set of questions that can orient the decision from the environmental scientist point of view. This does not necessarily mean that DS must be performed autonomously by the own environmental scientist, but can enormously help him or her to find the proper expert to analyze his or her data. The guidelines are formalized under an easy-to-read conceptual map, and provides a decision support tool for the non-expert user, with a global overview of possible useful methods. This tool intends to contribute to correctly exploit data by using DM while considering the problem goals and the structure of the available data, while reducing the use of inappropriate tools in real applications. Our overview does not attempt to be exhaustive. Also, the proposal is currently limited to methods analyzing classical data matrices. When sensor data or images are the original source of information, feature extraction or signal processing operations are required to obtain descriptors of the images or signals that can be used as ordinary variables in the data matrix. Current work is in progress to explore the extension of the DMMCM to wider scenarios including other types of input data.
A third contribution includes generic synthetic templates describing the main families of DM methods trying to provide the relevant information from the point of view of the environmental scientist. Regarding this third contribution, a structured and synthetic description of the main families of methods presented in the conceptual map is provided. A major effort has been done to present the methods from the point of view of the kind of problem to be solved, and not from the classical methodological point of view, certainly interesting for data scientists and researchers, but less interesting from a practical real use of the methods point of view. The structure of the template has been carefully designed to be useful for environmental scientists who want to exploit their available data in front of a specific problem. The templates try to offer decision elements on: how to use methods correctly, which is the structure of the data that every method can properly analyze and, most importantly, how to validate and interpret the results. A specific section in the template, named Principles, tries to offer a high level idea of the technical principles guiding the various algorithms. These principles need not be used, but can help provide a coherent context for interested readers. Technical details on specific DM techniques are out of the scope of this paper, although a rich set of references for in-depth coverage is provided. Again, we do not attempt to be exhaustive, but to provide a global insight for the non-expert user to better select what to do in real applications.
A powerfull contribution of the paper is also the proposal of a methodology to help a non-expert data scientist or an environmental practitioner to choose the most suitable DM method for getting appropriate answers to a certain environmental problem. The proposal is based on a two-step use of the DMMCM map and DMMTs presented along the paper.
On top of this, illustration, through several case studies about the use of the proposed methodology to choose the DM technique, will certainly ease the understanding of the paper, and must be considered a valuable contribution.
This work responds to one of the main research challenge announced in the paper Gibert et al. (2014). The DMMCM and the DMMTs also provide background knowledge to input in an intelligent data mining technique recommender (InDaMiTe-R), contributing to the construction of integral DS systems, as stated in Gibert et al. (2012).
