This paper attempts to show how grounded analysis can be used as a method to elicit and analyze requirements information leading to user space-covering personas as a grounded theory that describes the categories of users in the user space of a CBS. The method was validated by its use to arrive at a set of personas that cover the user space of PAS tools.
6.1. Personas in REBased on the case study reported in this paper, with appeal to our past experience in RE, we are able to position persona creation and exploitation in RE. Personas can play a variety of roles to improve requirements elicitation, requirements analysis, and requirements validation. A complete set of personas for a CBS, such as what we have developed for PAS tools, has been used to help elicit a complete set of scenarios or a complete set of requirements for a variety of CBSs [8], [87], [9], [79], [49]. Interestingly, each of the last two references describe at least one application of personas to the security domain. In addition, we believe that a complete set of personas established for a CBS can be used•to provide perspectives for perspective-based inspections of specifications [113],•to serve as viewpoints in viewpoints-oriented RE [101] and in EPMcreate [78], and•to serve as roles in a JAD session [111], assuming a person can be found to play each persona.From the RE viewpoint, the interviews that Weber conducted during persona creation are akin to the kinds of interviews of users recommended in RE [69] and the grounded analysis process by which the five personas were identified from the interview data is akin to a serious in-depth analysis of elicited material obtained from users of a CBS to be built. The interviews and grounded analysis that Weber carried out might be considered rather costly for use in normal RE. However, when there are fine distinctions among users that are hard to discover but have large implications on the functions of the CBS to be built, the extra costs are justified.
6.2. Grounded analysis in REGrounded analysis can and should be used during the RE for a CBS to do any RE process that1.is based on real-life observations of future users of the CBS, and even other stakeholders,2.there is no certainty in advance what the real-life observations will say or even of the questions the observations will answer, and3.the next version of the CBS will be a test of the validity of what was learned from the real-life observations.
6.3. Future workThe RE method described in this paper has been validated in only one case study. Additional case studies are needed not only to strengthen the validation, but also to learn more about the method, its variations, and its applicability. These additional case studies should involve other kinds of CBS, particularly those for which users have multiple roles.
