The intention of this article was to extend the analysis performed by Olabarriaga and Smeulders (2001) on more philosophically rigorous grounds. We have done so by advocating for the use of conceptual tools in semiotics to examine both the seminal and the state-of-the-art in medical image segmentation. Thus, we initially motivate segmentation as a process of sign exchange in which to frame a semiotic approach, illustrate the use of sign classification in Peircean semiotics to classify simple signs and derive complex sign graphs which can aid the process of interactive segmentation design.
By considering segmentation as sign exchange between a human user and the segmentation interface, the automaticity spectrum can be readily reconstructed, emphasizing manual and fully-automatic segmentation as the edge-cases of a continuous framework. Viewing segmentation as a form of sign exchange, similar to current semiotic trends in human computer interaction, places an emphasis on understanding the structure and meaning of the communication between the user and the computer. This communication includes input signs, provided by the user in order to convey information or to edit the segmentation, and output signs, provided by the computer to convey the current segmentation or facets of the segmentation process.
The trichotomous nature of Peircean semiotics, dividing into the iconic, indexical, and symbolic, and the older semiotic notion of the partial furnish this perspective with a taxonomy applicable to both simple input signs and output signs. More nuanced meanings can be attributed to particular input and output mechanisms by considering them as a complex of simple signs that defines their interpretation from both a user and computer perspective. In addition, interpreting these signs as analogies leads to three lenses for evaluating their quality, through structural consistency, semantic similarity, and pragmatic centrality (Holyoak and Thagard, 1989). These lenses can be used as heuristic guides for segmentation process design at a more abstract level than traditional human-computer interaction.
With this semiotic tool set, clinicians and medical image processing researchers can expand their understanding of medical image segmentation. This semiotic approach uses well established analysis techniques in philosophy and human-computer interaction to expose paradigmatic undercurrents in how medical image segmentation is used and understood. Using this approach, segmentation interfaces can be understood in terms of the structured dialogue between a user and the segmentation interface that characterizes the segmentation process. Our hope is that similar investigations into the philosophy of medical image processing are conducted, yielding insights into how the ways we interact with medical images can move forward in fundamentally new and more effective directions.
