Technophobia is a phenomenon that is intertwined with technologies and as long as there are new technologies there will always be a specific technophobia associated with it. The study showed that technophobia is independent of computer anxiety and it has multiple hidden factors that are distinct from each other. Finally, technophobia was defined independently from other technologies which might provide it with the needed distinction from computerphobia.
The research has several contributions. First, the findings of this research suggest that technophobia and computer anxiety are independent of each other. This is supported by the fact that computer-focused items did not reach statistical significance and the items that are statistically significant did not ask about computer specific technology. This suggests that individuals are more specific in their technophobia, in other words, they are not fearful of computers per say, instead, they might be fearful of software's or applications used in computers. In other cases, they might be fearful of technologies that are not computer based, at least on the surface. Second, technophobia did not fade away with time. In fact, new technologies bring new and unique facets of technophobia which is supported by identifying five distinct hidden factors within the scale items as well as the increasing research on technologies such as neophobia, robotics, A.I., cellphones, etc.
Third, this study proposes a new scale to measure technophobia and its sub-dimensions. The scale proposed five subdimension of technophobia and it uses 16 items. In the literature review done for this paper, there was no other paper that examined the subdimensions of technophobia. This work will help rejuvenate research in areas like technophobia and its impact on technology adoption since it shows that technologies cause psychological reactions that impact its users.
The new scale has practical implication as well. Companies or government agencies can use the scale to assess their employees' attitude toward new technologies. Doing that will help companies and government agencies to develop training programs if needed, that addresses a specific area within technophobia since failure to manage individuals' technophobia might impact their productivity. In addition, companies might want to use the scale to assess their customers' technophobia level which might impact their approach to the customer or the product itself; using a short scale might increase the response rate. On a broader perspective, governments can use this assessment to measure large populations perception of technology and whether the introduction of a new technology might impact their wellbeing. Another practical implication might influence the health industry where health providers can assess their patients level of technophobia especially if the patient needs to use technologies such as hearing aids or diabetes monitor devises. Finally, the study provides a new definition of technophobia that distinguishes it from computer anxiety.
