5.1. Summary of findingsIn this study, we analyzed the effect of several factors on promoting innovation in a science park setting. We compared established and emerging economies to derive the characteristics of science parks. We then proposed a CAER theoretical framework and performed a case study of Wuhan Donghu High-Tech Zone, a famous science park in China. We conducted a simulation study to assess the five effects identified by the model.Government and market mechanisms play an important role in science parks. Through a promotion of incubators, accelerators, and other entrepreneurial platform, science parks can provide strong support to technology entrepreneurs. There is a strong interaction effect that science parks can leverage in promoting innovation. Government policies on innovation constantly guide the direction of development and powerfully stimulate the interaction of technological enterprises in the whole science park. As a result, the agglomerations of resources, technology, talents, and enterprises will form an organic ecosystem for innovation and technological entrepreneurship.
5.2. Policy recommendationsGiven the simulation results, we have some policy recommendations that will help promote the development of technological entrepreneurship in a science park. First, it is vital to set up carriers for innovation-driven development. Carries should be set up around existing key industries, strategic emerging industries, and future industries. These carriers should be in the forefront of industries with a vision of innovative environment, mature business services, and convenient life. An all-directional system is required to offer services of innovation chain and resources aggregation. Then a significant amount of innovation enterprises will be cultivated to support a sustained high-tech zone.Policy support is crucial to technological entrepreneurship. The policy systems of “talent+,” composed of talent policies and supporting implementations such as technology finance, mediation services, education spending, can intensify the innovation-driven development in a high-tech zone. It is necessary to have a collaborative mechanism involving government, financial institutions, and high-tech zone management committee to establish technology financial service organizations, such as intellectual property mortgage platforms, or stock deal platforms. In addition, Donghu High-Tech Zone should increase subsidies that contribute to innovation activities in enterprises and innovation-driven development of the high-tech zone.We also recommend to strengthen a cooperation with international partners. Donghu High-Tech Zone may consider introducing well-known international R&D centers to zone residents. It is a good idea to provide facilities for the settlement and development of such centers.
