The paper presents the Open Energy Modelling Framework (oemof) as a contribution to the scientific modelling community. With a collaborative and open development process, it is designed for transparency and participation. Complementary to its technical features, the project constitutes a novelty in energy system modelling and aims to facilitate open science in this research field.
One central feature of oemof is the generic graph-based foundation which has been implemented using an object-oriented programming methods in the high-level language Python. The cross-institutional collaborative development of the framework has started a process towards this common and generic structure. This concept highlights the distinction between the description of an energy system with its components and subsequent computations based on combining an intuitive description with a specific mathematical approach. It lays the foundation for a universal representation of multi-sectoral energy systems at different scales. Another important feature is its strict open-source and non-proprietary philosophy. This philosophy, the underlying concept and the extensive documentation allow new developers to adapt or extend the framework easily and leverage features of other scientific Python libraries. With these properties, the project is suitable for new developers and users and thereby supports a continuous development process.
The framework has been successfully applied in different research projects at several institutions. Existing oemof applications include electricity market models, detailed technical unit commitment models for district heating systems and sector coupled regional energy system models. Energy systems ranging from distributed or urban ones up to a national scale may be modelled, making the framework a multi-purpose modelling environment for strategic energy analysis and planning.
Although it takes effort for new users to learn to build an oemof-based application, we think there are good reasons to choose oemof. Firstly, the flexibility in application development allows adjustments along with changing research objectives and may thus avoid lock-in effects. This seems to be particularly relevant for project-based research. Secondly, the community character of the oemof-project is another important factor. The possibility for active participation in development and decision processes allows users to be part of a community. We argue that this can create a sense of belonging, a value that goes beyond the technical features of the software.
