This research develops a network centralized solution for Canberra LABKIT gamma-rays energy spectrum acquisition. The described configuration and setup may be applied to other acquisition software as well, and it is ideal for modernize the teaching laboratory. In this work, Windows Server 2016 is installed on a desktop PC, and it is configured to provide the Active Directory Domain Services and the Remote Desktop Services. The data acquisition software ProSpect is installed and published as a RemoteApp application. The server and the detectors are connected via campus internet or can be connected by the user’s private network with a router. The Osprey MCA is switched to network mode and powered by PoE injector. The host server accepts connections from various operating systems through the Microsoft Remote Desktop gateway. Windows operating systems requires no additional software to connect to the server as an RDP client, and the connection can be initialized from Internet Explorer. Apple (macOS and iOS) and Android OS could install Microsoft Remote Desktop application to connect to the server, while the LINUX systems rely on third-party software like FreeRDP to establish the connection.
The described experiment configuration eliminates the client computers from the equipment inventory. This could reduce the cost, save lab storage space, and lower the workload of maintenance. The client devices can be shared with a general purpose lab computer or a user provided device. The client computers do not need to have the data acquisition software installed. Meanwhile, the network solution enables remote data acquisition as the communications among server, detector, and client devices are carried over wired or wireless internet. In addition, any systems supporting RD protocol including low performance handheld devices could serve as the client to control the detector, allowing the ProSpect to run on systems that are not natively supported. It should be noted that the deployment of this work replies on campus network infrastructure or a router, and ones should consult the IT department to ensure all institutional regulations and policies are strictly followed.
