As we move closer to the Square Kilometre Array’s (SKA) exabyte-data era, it will be increasingly impractical to visualise data products on a local desktop with a standard display device (Hassan and Fluke, 2011). Not only will the data vastly exceed the local storage, memory and computation capabilities of desktop computers, but the image resolution and graphics capabilities required will force astronomers to consider large-format displays and specialised graphics processing hardware.
Today, many instruments already produce datasets that are too big to be downloaded to a local computer, so it stays in the data centre. The compute power also sits in the data centre, close to the data. Astronomers are happy to use remote computing as part of their workflow, but prefer to continue use desktop applications for some tasks, such as visualisation. However, this typically means transferring data to the local computer. As this becomes harder to do, having windowed applications forwarded to the local desktop is one solution, but the performance is limited.
Cloud services with GPU hardware allow GPU-enabled applications to be used in a VHD environment on a remote computation platform, with just the screen updates transmitted to the local computer.
By combining benchmarks with user experience testing, we found that VHDs provide a viable, cost-effective desktop alternative for typical astronomy applications, particularly for graphics-intensive tasks.
While benchmarking may approximate the intended workload, only direct testing with astronomy workflows operating under load will really determine the adequacy of a compute resource. Standard benchmarking applications, Unigine Heaven and Valley, indicated that a new laptop computer was more performant than a cloud-based VHD, but user experience testing revealed that for some tasks, a VHD can provide a better solution.
Through our combined use of benchmarking and user experience testing we compared two laptops, one four years old and one new, with two cloud-based desktop environments (AWS and the NeCTAR Research Cloud). We have shown that:


1.For the 2D and 3D tasks, the environments were equally simple to use. During the investigation, it was apparent that the cloud environments operated as hoped for the tasks presented, easily matching the local computers. As many astronomers use standard applications, and these applications function the same way across the available environments, the only differences are the environments themselves.2.The cloud environments provided an equally smooth experience for the required tasks as the local computers. Fig. 10 shows that other than minor latency caused by the distance to a data centre (in the case of AWS virtual machine located in Sydney, Australia), the cloud environments matched or bettered the local computers. In fact, one of the likely reasons for the positive responses to the cloud environments was due to the more consistent performance shown by the cloud environments when compared to the more erratic performance (in terms of frame rate) shown by the local computers as the workload increased. High frame rates do not necessarily correspond to a better user experience, and for many participants, the more consistent the frame rate, the better the experience, depending on their expectations and needs.3.Table 4 shows that other than the maximum use case, where an environment is used continuously for four years, the cloud environments provide competitive alternatives when compared to purchasing mid-to-high end laptops and workstations. They also offer a degree of flexibility that increases their financial suitability.4.Being powerful enough for the task required does not only mean achieving the maximum, but also achieving a suitable minimum. A local computer chosen for its suitability in a high compute demand scenario, will be greatly overpowered for standard office operations, such as checking email or editing LATEX documents. This investigation has shown that cloud environments may be better suited to the tasks, as presented, than the local computers.5.High availability is critical to the business practices of cloud providers, and research network infrastructure is just as critical to research institutions. Networking performance during the tasks showed that a reasonably stable network with moderate bandwidth is sufficient to use a VHD. This type of networking is available at most research institutions in Australia, where our user experience testing was conducted, and much of the world.
