As the era of personalized medicine continues to evolve and rich individual data sets become increasingly accessible, development of cloud-based repositories that collaboratively aggregate data will rapidly advance basic, translational, and clinical science. Creating dedicated BMIs applications with advanced analytic capability designed identify subtle patterns within those data will bring targeted interventions for NDD based on individually determined risk profiles within reach. Fig. 1 presents a high-level overview, tying these concepts together to show how data from population studies can be aggregated and used to develop clinical decision support tools, which can then be deployed in clinical settings, using individual patient data to guide clinical decision-making. The clinical outcomes resulting from these decisions are then returned to the data set, which are used to refine and improve treatment models and decision support tools, completing the learning health environment. Ultimately, developing comprehensive and integrated data environments will lead to improved patient outcomes and facilitate knowledge discovery, including disease mechanisms, causal factors, and novel therapeutics.Research in Context1.Systematic review: Modern medicine is in the midst of a revolution driven by “big data,” rapidly advancing computing power, and broader integration of technology into healthcare. Highly detailed and individualized profiles of both health and disease states are now possible, including biomarkers, genomic profiles, cognitive and behavioral phenotypes, high-frequency assessments, and medical imaging.2.Interpretation: These individual profiles can be used to understand multi-determinant causal relationships, elucidate modifiable factors, and ultimately customize treatments based on individual parameters, which is especially important for neurodegenerative diseases, where an effective therapeutic agent has yet to be discovered.3.Future directions: By collaboratively aggregating these data in structured repositories, biomedical informatics can be used to develop clinical applications and decision support tools to derive new knowledge from the wealth of available data to advance clinical care and scientific research of neurodegenerative disease in the era of precision medicine.Download : Download high-res image (384KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Precision diagnosis and management of neurodegenerative disease relies on integration of population-level data and individual data derived from multiple sources. Effective utilization will require informatics applications to aggregate and filter data, which can drive development of clinical decision support tools for deployment in clinical settings. Developing tools to systematically capture clinical outcomes at the point of service delivery will facilitate refinement of the clinical decision support tools, creating a learning healthcare system and closing the loop in evidence-based care.
