While developing a simulation model of the building, it should always be taken into consideration how accurate and detailed should the model of the real building be and what discrepancies will follow from individual simplifications that are adopted. The adoption of a very detailed model involves a significant increase in the time required for the development and carrying out simulations, which translates into decidedly higher costs. The article presents a selected range of applicable simplifications of the model. Attention was focused exclusively on the construction of the building. The smallest differences in heat demand between the reference Vsc model and the simplified model were obtained when the effect of shading exerted by the building’s own elements (e.g. balconies) was excluded. In the event such shading occurs on the north-facing side, its exclusion will not have a significant impact on heat demand. In the event of shading on the south-facing side, considerable glazing of the building and in the calculations of cooling demand, it must definitely be considered whether or not shading should be included in the model. Such an inclusion will unfortunately increase the time required for entering data into the simulation programme. In the event, not individual spaces of the building, but the building as a whole is analysed, it is worth considering a simplification of the construction by excluding the division into simulation zones. Such a solution reduces significantly the time needed for the development of the model and does not bring about significant changes in the heat demand calculation results. When an analysis of individual spaces (e.g. for the purpose of selecting individual heating and ventilation solutions) is made, such a simplification is inadmissible. However, a possibility of combining several zones of similar internal temperatures should always be considered as it will simplify the model considerably and reduce the time required for its development. An introduction of too many zones may hinder simulation of such a model or, in an extreme case, it may necessitate running the simulation with the division into two or three periods.
