CAPTCHAs are mainly used to prevent fraudsters from conducting automated actions at a large scale and abuse of mobile cloud services; however, the discerning factor adopted (i.e., a cognitive task) makes CAPTCHAs very often inconvenient and hard to solve even for human subjects. In this paper, we proposed Invisible CAPPCHA, a new transparent version of CAPPCHA that leverages the physical nature of humans instead of hard cognitive tasks. Unlike the original CAPPCHA, the novel version presented in this paper does not require any additional step or task; in fact, it uses the micro-movements generated naturally during the user’s input in webpages to prove that the user is human. The experimental results on five smartphones from different generations and equipped with diverse hardware show that the acceleration changes during a tap event follows certain pattern that programs cannot mimic through vibration. This way, we demonstrated that the micro-movement caused by user’s tap captured by a trusted sensor can be used to tell computers and humans apart. It is important to notice that when the smartphone is sitting on a hard surface such as a table, Invisible CAPPCHA has a low level of accuracy in the detection of the tap event. For this reason, when the test starts, Invisible CAPPCHA checks if the smartphone is in the user’s hand. Furthermore, as the main purpose of Invisible CAPPCHA is to prove that the current action is requested by a human user, to impose that the user holds the smartphone in his hand does not represent a strong limitation; in fact, users usually leave their smartphone on tables or other surfaces only when they do not need it. In future work, we plan to develop an advanced tap detection algorithm capable of being effective in all common conditions of smartphone’s use and test it with a higher number of participants. In addition, we plan to test the effectiveness of Invisible CAPPCHA with different form factors such as tablets and smart watches. Finally, the feasibility to leverage Invisible CAPPCHA failures to detect the presence of malware on the device and notify the user of such a problem will be studied.
