I have tried to present the case for a new science of the technosphere, which pulls together many contributions across different disciplines, reaching from the sciences to the humanities. The rationale for this endeavour is that the technosphere as the defining feature of the Anthropocene is, in the famous expression by F.A. von Hayek when referring to the economy, a product of ‘human action, but not of human design’. This requires the resolute rejection of any form of anthropocentric reasoning in analysing the technosphere. Yet, understanding human action remains a central task of technosphere science. This requires a radical rethinking of fundamental notions of human agency that have dominated humanities and social sciences since the enlightenment. The ground has been prepared by the recent surge of ‘new materialism’ in the humanities (e.g. Bennett, 2010). These suggest a non-anthropocentric view of agency which no longer conceives agency as being inextricably tied up with human bodies, but as emerging in complex networks in which these bodies are physically connected with other entities, especially artefacts created by human action.
However, this view can also avoid the pitfalls of technological determinism: The mirror image of anthropocentrism is the idea that technology is a system that is ontologically separate from humans, thus falling into the same ontological misconception as when dealing with ‘nature’ as being the opposite and independent pole of ‘culture’ (this is the famous ‘dialectics of enlightenment’, see Horkheimer and Adorno, 1947). My view follows recent interactionist ontologies (such as Barad's, 2007) in arguing that agency is always and necessarily emerging from interactions between different constituents of the technosphere, including the biosphere. This has far-reaching implications for approaching the economy as a centrepiece of the technosphere: The economy is the domain where functions of the technosphere are realized via human action. The economy is not seen as being subordinate to human design and human needs and wants, but is the evolved medium which ties up the biosphere and technology. In sharp contrast to the self-image of economics, I argue that economics should not be based on the ontological assumption of individualism, but that the economy is the domain where distributed agency in the technosphere is mediated (for a comprehensive account see Herrmann-Pillath, 2013).
Peter Haff (2014a) suggested six rules that aptly summarize the relationship between humans and the technosphere and show the way how we can develop approaches to responsible and enlightened human action in the technosphere. These rules are based on what we currently know about the technosphere, follow from general principles of systems theory and correspond to the argument that I unfolded in this paper. In a nutshell, these rules state that in approaching the technosphere we need to acknowledge the multi-level complexity of the Earth system, which implies that humans cannot fully access and manipulate other levels (‘rule of impotence’), also systematically lacking the necessary knowledge and sufficiently large scope of actions (‘rule of control’), and vice versa, that higher levels leave degrees of freedom to lower levels (‘rule of inaccessability’). At the same time, the different levels stay in a symbiotic relationship with each other: Humans fulfil functions in technosphere evolution (‘rule of performance’), but this requires that the technosphere also fulfils human needs (‘rule of provision’).
Accepting these rules as beacons for reflecting upon the potential of human autonomy, we ask where we human beings stand in terms of our conceptions of ourselves. In the current discussion about the technosphere and Haff's approach specifically (Donges et al., 2017), contributors often question the apparent conclusion that human action becomes powerless, and that technosphere determinism reigns. I think that this is a serious misunderstanding of Haff's rules and reflects the pitfalls of arguing on a high level of aggregation and abstraction, such as relating ‘humankind’ with the ‘Earth system’ in developing the notion of the Anthropocene. An adequate empirical approach to the technosphere would dissect these conceptual black boxes and clearly realize that human action is crucial in co-determining developments in the technosphere, as Donges et al. (2017) indeed demand. A full picture of this fact is provided by thick historical analyses of recent economic growth and the ‘Great acceleration’, such as Bonneuil and Fressoz (2017). Technosphere science must adopt a strongly contextualized, multi-level, multi-scalar view of the Earth system, empirically disentangling the role of individual and collective human agents (Biermann et al., 2016). But just concluding that this analysis reinstates human autonomy und independence from the technosphere would also be a serious error: We need to understand the principles of technosphere evolution in order to understand our own role in it, and in order to identify ways of action, individual and collective, that eventually allow for establishing our human autonomy and values. This requires a very broad and inclusive multi-disciplinary approach (aptly overviewed by Malhi, 2017).
I think that refuting the anthropocentric view of the technosphere does not imply that we lose our dignity and autonomy as human beings. In fact, we could even argue that the idea of freedom and morality is a necessary component of technosphere evolution, and hence is fulfilling a central function in the technosphere (this argument is anticipated by Sommers, 2007). In this view, human intentionality would be conceived as an evolutionary innovation by which evolution could overcome the short-sightedness of biological mechanisms of endogenous goal-formation (building on an argument suggested by Dennett, 1995). The central phenomenon is reflexivity in information processing. There is large group of phenomena, such as anticipating long-term effects of actions in complex systems of interaction among biological entities, where reflexivity and consciousness create distinct advantages for enhancing adaptive performance and evolutionary potential. Today, this is the accepted evolutionary explanation of the emergence of human forms of thinking, and, more specifically, human language and symbol processing (Tomasello, 2008).
Therefore, my hunch is that we can combine the emphasis on a distinct humanity with a non-anthropocentric conception of the technosphere (as has been also suggested by Haff, 2017). In a nutshell, this would go back to the Kantian argument on freedom and rationality: Our human autonomy can only be constituted by setting the law which governs ourselves in a rational and responsible way (Kant, 1788). It is straightforward to extend Kant's Categorical Imperative here: We only need to extend the reach of its application, hence the scope of the universal laws, beyond the boundaries of humans and human society (this partly follows Latour, 2015). In other words, whereas Kant was thinking about human agents only, we would start to think about agents as ontologically diverse assemblages (such as of plants and humans, Myers, 2017). In simplest terms, we discard the anthropocentric conception of the Categorical Imperative.
This has been even anticipated in one formulation of the Imperative as coined by Kant himself: “Act as if the maxims of your action were to become through your will a universal law of nature.” That means, we can extend beyond humanity in referring the Imperative to a general idea of ecological community, and even Earth system community of entities, in the sense of assuming planetary stewardship (Steffen et al., 2011; compare Brown, 2016). This is of highest significance for designing the economy: By means of institutional design of the economy, we can indeed set up ‘laws of nature’, that is, regularities which govern complex agency in the technosphere. In more practical sense, this means that we would subject the economy to an Earth system ethics, by which we check every institutional design by the Categorical Imperative. For example, current economic thinking is based on unlimited growth of wants, reflecting common conceptions of human freedom and imagination. In terms of the Categorical Imperative, unlimited growth of wants cannot become a universal law of the technosphere which includes all living beings, or, for all agents qua assemblages.
That raises an intriguing thought: As I have argued, technosphere evolution is governed by the Maximum Power Principle: In this perspective, unlimited growth of human wants has a function in realizing this law of nature. But the Categorical Imperative would stay in conflict with this law of nature. This is where another famous principle established by a German Idealist comes into play, namely the notion of ‘Second Nature’ by Hegel (for an extensive treatment, see Herrmann-Pillath and Boldyrev, 2014). We could conceive of the technosphere as our Second Nature, in which human autonomy is essential to establish new Laws of Nature, in our example the ethical prescription to contain the growth of human wants, and hence contain the workings of Maximum Power, which is not just in our own interest, but a necessary condition for sustainability of the Earth System and the biosphere. Exploring the possibility of this transition, may seem mission impossible. Unless we know more about the technosphere, we cannot find the solution. This is the task of technosphere science.
