The amount of data is growing further in size and complexity. The recent advances in collecting data have triggered an extreme need for novel data analysis methods to decipher the complexity of these data. Undoubtedly, parallelization frameworks and distributed computation will play a primary role in the future of interpreting big data in general and biological data in particular. For example, the cloud computing will help to scale up the analysis of epigenetics profiles to larger samples of individuals, providing a more detailed characterization of epigenetic mechanisms in fast and cost-efficient ways.
In this paper, we deal with the issue of clustering big sets of data. Data clustering itself is an NP-hard problem, and it becomes more challenging when the clustered data is large. Moreover, we present MRC-GIM, which is a scalable, time-efficient, and robust clustering approach to group very large datasets on a different commodity of computer architectures. The proposed method aggregates three swarm intelligence strategies. Using different strategies that exhibit different dynamics has the potential to foster the exploration and exploitation capabilities of the search process. MRC-GIM is designed and implemented with Hadoop MapReduce, which makes MRC-GIM auto-scalability and fault-tolerance. The comparative study reveals that MRC-GIM outperforms novel developed big-scale clustering in a reasonable time. Although Hadoop exists for a half decade, a noticeable shortage of tools dealing with big data analysis has been witnessed.
We extended our parallelization strategy to the study of DNA methylation in pro-inflammatory mediators from a population of normal individuals ranging in age from 27 to 50 years. Exploiting the high decomposability of the dataset, we were able to analyze simultaneously millions of nucleotides, retrieve methylated cytosines, and cluster genes according to methylation features in CpG islands, gene body, and gene promoter. We found a global low level of methylation in CpG islands and gene body, and a nearly unmethylated status in promoter regions for each, suggesting that the epigenetic landscape in normal condition should not change aberrantly with aging.
