In this study, we evaluate a 3-D virtual talking head on non-native Mandarin speaker pronunciation learning under three language presentation conditions – audio only (AU), human face video (HF) and audio-visual animation of a three-dimensional talking head (3-D). An auto language tutor (ALT) configured with AU, HF and 3-D is developed as the computer-aided pronunciation training system. We apply both subjective and objective methods to study language learners’ acceptance of the 3-D talking head, their comparative impressions of the three presentation conditions, and their pronunciation performance under the three presentation conditions.
Experiment 1 studied language learners’ acceptance of the 3-D talking head and their comparative impressions of AU, HF and 3-D. Results show that the ALT system is easy to use. Two factors termed ‘appearance” and “articulatory movements” significantly influence learners’ acceptance of the 3-D talking head and both the two factors achieved a high level of learners’ acceptance. Results also show that participants preferred 3-D and HF to AU with respect to learners’ interest, functionality and future use.
Experiment 2 compared learners’ pronunciation learning improvements in AU, HF and 3-D. We found that learning with 3-D was better than learning with AU with respect to blade-alveolar, blade-palatal, lingua-palatal, open-mouth, open-mouth(-i) and round-mouth. Learning with 3-D was better than learning with HF with respect to blade-alveolar, lingua-palatal, round-mouth, and the tones of falling-rising and falling. Learning with AU was better than learning with HF with respect to the falling-rising tone. Neither HF nor AU was superior to 3-D with respect to all of the initials, finals and tones.
We analyzed the results in low-level classifications of Mandarin initials, finals and tones. We conclude that it is valuable to provide instructions on internal articulatory movements for non-native adult learners to learn new pronunciations. The proper design of the 3-D talking head, with a highly acceptable appearance and precise articulatory movements, could have contributed to the better performance of the participants in 3-D than those in HF and AU. Participants’ good performance with respect to the initials and finals that dominated by internal articulator movements were acquired probably by observing or imitating the additional information presented by the 3-D talking head. The participants in HF did not achieve any better performance than did those in 3-D and AU, which may be because HF conveyed some irrelevant details that may easily distract participants’ attention. In general, we suggest that any talking head used for pronunciation training should be designed with a natural but not overly realistic face, clear and acceptable articulator movements, and little vivid information that is slightly related to the functionality.
Limitations of the study include the reliance on only one single talking head and a single female native language teacher in the HF videos. The number of sample tones (except the level tone) was small. Only 3 rising tones, 2 falling-rising tones and 2 falling tones were included. Most of the recruited Ph.D. students are male. A wide range of participants from other backgrounds should also be recruited to evaluate the validity of the 3-D talking head. According to the findings in our study, we are not sure whether a 3-D talking head with only a good appearance or only precise articulatory movements might also obtain similar results. In future evaluations of a 3-D talking head, more conditions should be included, and users’ learning behaviors can be recorded to provide a deeper investigation. More language materials such as phrases and sentences should also be presented by the 3-D talking head to conduct extended evaluation on language learning.
