This paper has presented a study of uncertainty associated with a complex computer model used for the projection of wholesale electricity prices. Three sources of uncertainty were considered. The first was parametric uncertainty, namely uncertainty in four model inputs (gas price, demand, EU ETS price and offshore wind deployment). The second source of uncertainty considered was structural discrepancy, arising because the model used is an approximation of the real-world and so even at some best set of inputs, there will still be some discrepancy between the model and the real-world. Specifically, structural discrepancy arising from the use of smoothed gas price projections (which in reality are volatile) and from treating coal prices as known was studied. The third source of uncertainty considered was uncertainty as to the value of the model output at untested model inputs. As the model takes one hour to run, assessing parametric uncertainty necessarily requires an approximation of the model output at a large collection of model inputs. A model for the error associated with the approximation is required to fully account for the extra uncertainty this approximation introduces.
An emulator, fitted to 210 model evaluations, was used to model uncertainty in model outputs at inputs that had not been tested. This emulator was shown to have a good fit to the model when validated using a test set. A small number of model evaluations were used to assess the size of the structural discrepancy relating to the use of smoothed gas price projections and from fixing the coal price input assumptions. It was found that introducing volatility into the gas price input assumptions has a larger effect on wholesale electricity price projections than varying the fixed time series of coal price assumptions. The emulator was then combined with a probability distribution over the model inputs and a model for structural discrepancy to investigate the impact that these uncertainties have on wholesale electricity price projections.
The quantification of uncertainty associated with the output of a complex computer model is a critical step that needs to be taken when real-world decisions are being made based on this output. Without having a full picture of the uncertainties associated with a model output, it is not possible to relate this output to the real-world, and hence to make decisions which are relevant for the real-world. This paper has provided a case study for the quantification of uncertainty in projections of wholesale electricity prices, demonstrating steps that can be taken to quantify uncertainties logically and consistently, even when time constraints restrict the number of available model runs.
