HEMC is a specific form of extended cognition that is applicable to the realm of AI. In particular, the HEMC thesis states that machine-based cognitive states and processes may, on occasion, be realized by a nexus of material elements that includes one or more human agents. Cast in this light, the HEMC concept enables us to extend the reach of conventional active externalist theorizing to the realm of AI systems and machine intelligence. Beyond this, however, the concept of HEMC enables us to entertain the possibility that human agents could form part of the physical machinery that realizes the cognitive capabilities of certain kinds of machine. The idea, in essence, is that certain forms of machine intelligence could be grounded in a mechanistic substrate that includes human agents as constituent elements. This is an idea that dovetails with the focus of recent work in computer science, especially that concerning hybrid systems (Demartini, 2015), human computation (Law and von Ahn, 2011, Michelucci, 2013), heterotic computing (Kendon et al., 2015), crowd computing (Murray, Yoneki, Crowcroft, & Hand, 2010), and collective intelligence (Bigham et al., 2015, Weld et al., 2015).
In the present paper, I have attempted to provide an initial defense of the HEMC thesis, arguing that we should accept the idea that human agents can, on occasion, form part of the physical machinery that realizes the cognitive states and processes of machine-based systems. I have, moreover, sought to identify the conditions under which we should recognize the existence of HEMC (see Section 5), and I have subsequently applied these conditions to evaluate a specific real-world system (see Section 7). As a result of this analysis, I suggested that the HEMC concept is more than just a matter of theoretical interest and speculation for the philosophy community, it is also concept that is potentially applicable to an ever-expanding array of socio-computational and socio-technical systems.
The HEMC concept has implications that are spread across a number of disciplines. Firstly, the concept is of interest and value to the philosophy of mind community, especially for those who embrace active externalist approaches to the mind. Here, the HEMC thesis promises to progress (or at least stimulate) philosophical debates regarding the notion of extended cognition. We saw, for example, that the HEMC thesis poses a challenge to the HOC (see Section 4), and we saw how it expands our understanding of the kinds of resources that can be incorporated into extended cognitive routines (see Section 6). The HEMC thesis also supports the effort to develop a conceptual taxonomy of extended cognitive systems (see Wilson & Clark, 2009). Thus, in addition to conventional forms of extended cognition (i.e., those centered on a single human individual), we are now in a position to consider a separate class of systems, viz., those centered on some form of technological agent. Finally, the HEMC concept enables us to revisit (and perhaps reinvigorate) philosophical debates regarding the notion of socially-extended cognition; for cognitive extension of the HEMC variety is easily construed as a specific form of socially-extended cognition (see Section 6).14
The HEMC concept is also important in the sense that it helps to reveal points of contact between otherwise disparate areas of research. With the concept of HEMC to hand, we are thus able to appreciate the philosophical significance and relevance of work relating to (e.g.) human computation (Law and von Ahn, 2011, Michelucci, 2013) and the human cloud (Miller et al., 2010). We are also able to gain a better understanding of the cognitive significance of the Internet and Web. For example, the cognitive significance of the Internet has typically been judged relative to its actual or potential effects on human cognition (Carr, 2010, Smart et al., 2017, Staley, 2014). However, when we look at the Internet through the conceptual lens of HEMC, we are afforded a rather different (and novel) perspective. In particular, we can see the Internet as providing an unprecedented form of access to the human social environment, profoundly altering the opportunities that are available for cognitively-potent forms of techno-biological bonding. Inasmuch as we link human intelligence to an ability to exploit the features of the environment in which humans are materially embedded (Clark, 2003), then perhaps the advent of the Internet should be seen as marking an important milestone in the development of AI systems. For if it is indeed the case that intelligence is as much about the environment in which an agent is embedded as it is the properties of the agent itself (see Simon, 1996), then perhaps there is no better way to advance the cause of AI than to embed our future machines in an environment that provides ever-more intimate forms of cognitive contact with a significant proportion of humanity.
