Ubiquitous systems are capable of monitoring users, their activities and their environment with the purpose of providing relevant services, without the user noticing their interaction with a computing infrastructure. Thus, the interaction becomes more invisible or causes a minimum amount of distraction for users. The differences to traditional systems (e.g., context-awareness, implicit interaction) indicate the need for adjustment in quality evaluation of these systems, including the quality of human-computer interaction.
This paper presented a suite called AQUArIUM with five quality characteristics (context-awareness, transparency, mobility, attention and calmness) and measures for the evaluation of these characteristics in ubiquitous applications. These measures were applied in three ubiquitous applications for mobile devices. As a result of these case studies, the measures indicate that these applications need to be improved in order to obtain a good level of HCI quality for a ubiquitous system. Thus, these applications are not ready to be used in a satisfactory way by the users. This reveals an indication that the measures proposed are feasible to assess the quality characteristics because they revealed important interaction problems regarding specific characteristics for ubiquitous systems. They also gave useful insights to improve them, for example, GREatPrint can be improved in context-awareness, mobility, attention and calmness. GREatMute in context-awareness, mobility and calmness, and GREat Tour in mobility, transparency, attention and calmness characteristics. Moreover, this suite could be used to select/compare applications, despite this was not our goal during the case studies.
Since this is a research area with many gaps to be filled, it is expected that this work is one of many contributions towards a measurement approach to evaluate HCI in ubiquitous systems. This work opens several research perspectives, as follows:

•Performing measurement with several other ubiquitous applications for mobile devices (for different domains, e.g. e-health) in order to construct a repository with results from the proposed measures. Once this historical repository has been developed, it can be used to facilitate the interpretation of results by the software quality assurance teamwork. We are aware that this activity may be very difficult given the spectrum of ubiquitous applications, however this can be possible when ubiquitous application will be developed at large (that means, being a common developed system).12•With the historical repository, we can work on the definition of marks or points for each software measure. The definition of them cannot be defined arbitrary because they depend of the context of use where the application was evaluated. Then, we should use this historical data to create suitable and reliable marks/points.•Defining other software measures to other characteristics found in our systematic mapping, for example, measures for privacy and security. We have been working in this direction for trust characteristic (Ferreira et al., 2016);•Verifying how the measurement results of a characteristic can impact on the results of another characteristic, thereby indicating a dependency between them (e.g., how context-awareness degree can impact on calmness degree);•Measurement is an expensive activity, then not all measures can always be collected. Therefore, a possible future work is the prioritization of the software measures for each characteristic; and•Defining a testing process for ubiquitous systems based on both quality characteristics and software measures presented in this paper, which is the main goal of the Context-Awareness Testing for Ubiquitous Systems (CAcTUS) project.13•Finally, apply these measures for different environments, for example, Internet of Things (IoT), which we have been working (Andrade et al., 2017, Carvalho et al., 2017), or Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) or for different types of ubiquitous applications (e.g., smart TVs).
