This paper has presented a study of the Capability Maturity Model Integration for Development (CMMI-DEV) that aims to identify which HCI approaches could support engineering practices in the development of interactive systems. We have analyzed five process areas (Requirements Development, Technical Solution, Product Integration, Verification, and Validation) of the engineering category from this model. To answer our research question, “what are the approaches that could concretely integrate CMMI-DEV process areas in interactive system development?” we proposed a set of 14 HCI categories with a total of 77 HCI approaches. The HCI categories were associated with 26 engineering practices of the CMMI-DEV model, resulting in 39 propositions to support the users of this model.
Our on-going work is the definition of a methodological guide to support the users of CMMI-DEV to apply our proposition. This guide will present for each of the 26 specific practices how we should use the identified HCI approaches integrated to conventional approaches of software engineering in the development of interactive systems. These software engineering approaches are usually applied in a software process based on CMMI-DEV that indicates only what to do but not how to do it. As a consequence, the purpose of the methodological guide is to show how to do it for the development of interactive systems considering the HCI approaches investigated in this study.
This methodological guide will consider generic recommendations, defined by the experts and the literature, for any interactive system, such as the participation of the end user (participatory design) in the system design (Technical Solution process area) and the use of user-centered design approaches (Requirements Development and Technical Solution process area) that include the end user as part of the development team. In addition, it will also include:
•Specific recommendations for specific types of interactive systems (for instance, in the case of a critical system, the use of techniques such as FRAM [130];•specific suggestions for the integration of HCI with specific methodologies (e.g. agile methodologies [8], [9], [103];•suggestions for identifying organizational context issues as suggested by an expert with 30 years of experience;•the suggestion of more new techniques proposed by the research studies (for instance, the use of Worth Mapping [14] to design interactive systems with the finality to deliver worth in the real world and decrease the gap between the user and product, as suggested by an expert with 30 years of experience); and•details of how to apply some of techniques or methods like the suggested HCI partners and standards.
Furthermore, we plan to perform a survey with users of the CMMI-DEV in industry using the HCI engineering approaches defined in this study. Our goal is to identify if the CMMI-DEV users know and use the HCI engineering approaches in practice, as they use software engineering approaches. The result of this survey could help to identify HCI engineering approaches that are not or are insufficiently used in industry. In this case, these approaches can be the object of future technology transfer from the academy to the industry.
Finally, considering that the CMMI-DEV is usually used for the definition of a software process for the development of an application, we plan to define a specific software process using our HCI categories (and approaches) for a specific kind of interactive system: interactive tabletop applications with tangible objects. Thus, we plan to use this software process in the development of an interactive tabletop application to collect evidence about the effective use of our HCI categories in practice.
