In this work, a novel anomaly detection based NADS using Genetic Algorithm and a Fuzzy Logic scheme is proposed and evaluated. The approach is divided into two phases: DSNSF generation using Genetic Algorithm and anomaly detection using a Gaussian Membership function. The analysis requires six attributes, which can be extracted from network flows: bits per second, packets per second, source IP entropy, destination IP entropy, source Port entropy and destination Port entropy. The network traffic flows of the four previous weeks is used to learn the network’s behavior using the proposed Genetic Algorithm. Based on the input and the DSNSF, the thresholds are calculated using the Exponentially Weighted Moving Average for each attribute. The Gaussian Membership function takes three parameters: network prediction, threshold and the value to be evaluated. Based on the total score of the membership degrees, an alarm can be issued, indicating that a problem may be present in the network traffic.
The method presented was applied in network flows collected from a real network scenario. To evaluate and validate the system proposed, two analysis were executed. A general analysis using Normalized Mean Square Error, Precision–Recall curve and a Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve. This analysis tested our system for an entire month, presenting the obtained results. The Precision–Recall curve was also used to define the cutoff point to issue an alarm based on the sum of the membership degrees. Furthermore, the ROC curve includes the performance of rigid thresholds. Based on the general analysis, our approach fares better than rigid thresholds.
The second analysis is of a single weekday with network anomalies injected using the Scorpius tool. Three anomalies were injected in different time periods: Denial of Service, Distributed Denial of Service and Flash Crowd. The performance of detecting these anomalies using the proposed Fuzzy Logic scheme is presented along with the rigid thresholds, outlier detection, CkNN, SVM and the ACODS approaches. Our method achieves far better results than rigid thresholds, outlier detection, CkNN and SVM, with a high accuracy rate of 96.53% and low false positive rate of 0.56%. Also, when compared to the ACODS approach, our system obtained a better result overall.
It is also worth noting, that our approach works autonomously. It uses network data collected using a standardized method and does not need labeled data, which implies an unsupervised training technique. The most beneficial property of unsupervised training techniques is that it does not require a labeled dataset and is easier to operate autonomously. However, the high false positive rate associated with such approach makes it impractical. Nonetheless, our proposed approach achieved satisfactory results rivaling recent state of the art methods used in the literature. Therefore, the system proposed in this work may be applied to current computer networks and render high quality results regarding anomaly detection rate and false positive alarms.
For future works, our system is going to be evaluated in different network scenarios and validated by comparing to different state of the art approaches in the literature. Moreover, a study comprising network traffic attributes will be performed, in order to assess if more traffic features can be incorporated into the analysis, providing a more accurate and complete anomaly detection system. In addition, we intend to evaluate our system in an adversarial environment to understand the impact of the network’s condition in the performance of our network anomaly detection approach.
