Several probabilistic versions of IBE have been compared through the use of computer simulations. In particular, explanatory approaches based on the product coherence measure (PCM), the overlap coherence measure (OCM), maximum likelihood (ML) and the likelihood ratio (LR) have been evaluated to see how well they compare with the most probable explanation (MPE) approach that simply selects the hypothesis that has the greatest posterior probability. The results show that PCM performs much better than ML and LR in almost all cases and better than OCM for larger sample sizes. PCM also tracks the accuracy of the MPE very well in all cases that have been considered and actually performs better for high levels of uncertainty in the priors. Hence, if PCM is considered to be a viable approach to IBE, then IBE is a successful mode of inference.
The results also show that IBE, at least when implemented using PCM, still performs well when there is ignorance about one of the hypotheses as represented by the catch-all hypothesis. It might have been expected that the performance of IBE would diminish considerably when there is a preliminary selection of plausible hypotheses. When the agent's prior probabilities are used to achieve this, the performance is remarkably robust (and improves for ML and LR) even when just two hypotheses are selected and the others discarded. The results do tail off somewhat for larger sample sizes, but the surprising nature of this result for low sample sizes could have implications for abductive inference and inference more generally since it suggests preliminary selection of hypotheses, which could be significant in computational terms, could be carried out with little effect on accuracy when the sample size is small.
Future directions for research include investigating IBE in contexts where there is uncertainty in the likelihoods as well as the priors and where the hypotheses are not assumed to be mutually exclusive. It would also be interesting to explore how these approaches compare to other probabilistic approaches to IBE that involve alternatives to Bayesian updating by giving a boost to hypotheses that provide better explanations [8], [27], including how such approaches can be applied in a social network of interacting agents [28] and extended to handle uncertain evidence [29]. As in the current work, these alternative approaches have presented different computational results concerning IBE and have highlighted various complementary merits to IBE as a mode of inference.
