This paper has presented the new concept of “neutralizing time” for investigating the various real life systems course of life. The new concept is defined as time is not considered during the system stack-based change pathway calculations, but it will only be sensed in the sequence order. By adopting this concept, the formulations cleverly avoided falling in the trap of the long dilemma of “the problem of time” when handling the system change pathways. This is equivalent for the two-level (time and event) system configuration that the basic physical system level is considered as temporal, while the upper event level is regarded as non-temporal.
Two illustrative examples of non-temporal system change pathway have been presented to successfully demonstrate the applicability of the new concept. The first example has concerned with the analysis of trolley car of inverted pendulum subject to collisions and breaks during its course of life under two different sequences of affecting events. The second example has dealt with the sequential formation of human bladder spherical crystalline stones under selected change pathway formulas and subjected to different affecting excessive salt/mineral concentrations influences. For these illustrative examples and within the new introduced framework of the “neutralized time concept”, the duration of each event is considered to be augmented within the event’s overall or effective strength, while the intervals between them are disregarded as they are silent periods free of incidents. Furthermore, applications of the new concept to some real life single stacking and multi-stacking examples are discussed.
It has been demonstrated that the infinite interacted non-temporal family (or groups) of change relations could constitute the necessary mathematical platform for analyzing the natural or intentionally induced “synchronicity”, “meaningful coincidences” or the “acausal parallelism” concept. Such equations have been expressed for each stack point at every subsequent event state while maintaining as a whole the laws of preservation of matter and energy. This step could encourage conducting research work for handling real life global multi-stacking applications within the framework of the presented synchronicity principle. This is a new advancement that could pave the way toward full understanding of such important synchronicity concept.
Future research might now be directed toward strengthening the foundation of the “Fractals-General Science” by expanding the development of multi-disciplinary parameters relations and multi-stacking system change platforms with neutralized time effect. The same concept can be extended in retrospective or backward stacking way, such as for analyzing the past sequential (evolutionary) formation of matter/substances and uncovering the origins of many versatile systems. In addition, due to the general fractals nature of the stack layering formations, the exchange of knowledge and experiences between various disciplines gained during the development of the change relationships could appear now to be highly beneficial. Finally, more intensive efforts should be carried out for the real life experimentation and implementation of the new concepts of formulations and analysis.
