Since shortly after the discovery of the double helix structure of DNA, the idea of using DNA molecules to process information has been a dream, one that originated from Feynman’s concept of constructing submicroscopic computers [1]. This dream was ultimately fulfilled by Adleman in 1994, when he established a DNA computing model for a Hamiltonian graph with seven vertices. These works greatly contributed to the development of DNA computing.
The success of our DNA computing model not only demonstrates its huge computational capability, but also provides a seemingly feasible method to solve the exponential explosion problem, which may be the biggest bottleneck preventing DNA computing from solving larger-scale NP problems. In this paper, a graph vertex coloring problem with a computing complexity of O(359) is solved by using the advantages of the DNA computing model: the construction of an un-enumerating initial solution space, the division and combination of subgraphs, and parallel bio-operation.
By dividing subgraphs, reducing the vertex colors without losing solutions, and ordering the vertices in subgraphs, the exponential explosion problem is effectively avoided. According to Lemma 5.1, the initial solution space of each subgraph is 89, 81, 412, and 151, respectively, all of which are much lower than 316 (the worst complexity). Therefore, the values of DNA sequences in the un-enumerating initial solution space are 99.9998%, 99.9998%, 99.999%, and 99.9997% lower than those in an enumerating initial solution space.
In this model, we also improve the computing efficiency by dividing the graph into four subgraphs and simultaneously deleting the false solutions of these subgraphs. After obtaining the solutions of each subgraph, the true solutions are found by combining the subgraphs. It is possible that the ability of this model to solve the graph vertex coloring problem will reach 100 vertices.
In this model, false solutions are deleted according to the path rather than the edge. Thus, all edges in one path are dealt with at the same time. In this way, the number of PCR operation required decreases. The efficiency of this DNA computing model is greatly improved by a significant innovation: the “parallel deleting method.”
In general, many researchers use PCR for amplification with only two primers and one template, because they think that PCR is not very reliable with many templates. However, in this model, we use PCR to amplify all templates in a test-tube. In order to obtain reliable results, the primer pairs are strictly designed according to the constraints of PCR, and the reaction conditions and the concentration of the components are optimized for each PCR. Only the bands representing the specific amplification are cut and purified for the next operation. In addition, contrast tests are implemented to avoid false positives and false negatives in the experiments. The sequencing shows that the results of the experiments are reliable. Because of its reliability and its ability to reduce the solution space, we assert that this DNA computing model can be used to solve larger-size problems, and that DNA molecular tools can be used to carry out larger-scale NP problems. In future, it may be possible to use DNA computing for certain practical engineering problems.
