This paper presents a parallel metaheuristic data clustering framework (PMDCF) for applying metaheuristic algorithms to data clustering problems on cloud computing platform because parallel computing on cloud has been a promising solution to reduce the running time of data clustering algorithms in recent years. Also, because most studies claimed that cloud computing can provide an efficient way for data clustering, we attempted to apply two data clustering algorithms (i.e., k-means and genetic k-means) to Spark using two different programming languages (i.e., Java and Python) for eleven data clustering problems to better understand the performance of data clustering algorithms for different situations. Therefore, the simulations contain twelve combinations, as shown in Table 3. The results of data clustering on standalone and Spark for the same dataset, of course, are very similar to each other. But the running times of the same data clustering problem performed on different machine (standalone vs. Spark) or written in different programming language (Python vs. Java) are, as expected, very different. The simulation results show that data clustering algorithms running on Spark are much faster than running on standalone machine for most data clustering problems no matter which language we use, be it Python or Java. An interesting result found in these simulations is that parallel computing on cloud is not always useful for every data clustering problem; rather, it is useful only for clustering problems the datasets of which are large or for data clustering algorithms which take a long computation time. In summary, the proposed framework shows the possibilities of cloud computing for data clustering algorithms for solving large-scale and complex clustering problems. In the future, we will attempt to apply the proposed framework to other metaheuristic-based mining algorithms to analyze the internet of things data. We will also try to develop useful mechanisms to accelerate the data mining procedure.
