In this paper, we have proposed a cloud computing-based face identification and resolution scheme for IoT applications to implement high-security identification, identity authentication, personal information management, and data access control about human. Face in physical-space is converted into face identifier in cyber-space, which is used as a reliable identification technology for human. The constituent parts and workflow of face identification and resolution system model have been presented to realize face identifier generation and matching. The cloud computing-based face resolution framework has been designed. It makes full use of the advantages of cloud computing to effectively meet the growing demands of computation power and storage capacity in current big data era. Meanwhile, the parallel resolution mechanism has been presented to improve the efficiency of face resolution. In our scheme, the face identifier generation model and matching algorithm and service interface are unified. So it can provide a unified face identification and resolution service platform for cross-industry and cross-platform IoT applications. The experimental results of prototype system indicate that the proposed scheme is practically feasible and able to meet the requirements for computation and storage capacity.
Although the proposed scheme has many advantages, there are still some works which need to be explored in the future research. For example, (1) Privacy and security issues: biometric information is usually related to personal privacy, so the identification and resolution system should provide secure and reliable privacy protection mechanism. Especially in cloud computing environment, this issue should be paid more attention because face feature data is stored in third-party data centers; (2) Update mechanism of face identifier templates: although the face features have strong stability, some factors can still cause the changes of feature in practical applications, e.g., disease, aging, injury, weight increase or decrease. The performance of face identification will fall, if the face identifier templates are not updated periodically; (3) The power consumption problem: In the field of IoT and cloud computing, the power consumption is a significant performance index. Our scheme should reduce energy consumption as much as possible while providing efficient service. Research on face identification and resolution has important academic and practical value, and needs further in-depth study.
