This paper presents a novel method for the accurate geometry modeling of vasculatures based on geometric centreline descriptions. Generally, the proposed method has two ingredients to achieve accurate vascular models. Firstly, compared to other methods based on regular spline interpolation, the proposed method is an implicit modeling technique, which is easy to perform blending for different geometric objects in various ways and has the intrinsic attribute of representing volumetric objects. In addition, the proposed technique is based on 2D radial basis functions with ellipse constraint, which can accurately specify the vessel cross-section profiles even with sparse control points. The other ingredient is the distance mapping method for extruding the implicit surface along the centreline. In the proposed method, we remap the 3D points into the distance field along the centreline, which enables to extrude the implicit surface continuously along highly curved centreline and achieve cylindrical model with excellent smoothness. The proposed distance mapping method can be extended to construct generalized cylinders along any given curved centreline with high-smoothness quality. Qualitative validations have illustrated that the proposed technique can construct more precise vascular models than the MPUI based method and the PAS based method.
The proposed method is based on the extracted centreline of the vascular tree. However, the centreline extraction of vasculatures is not an easy task, and may involve certain manual interventions. One of our future work is to develop more automatic and robust method for extracting the centreline of vascular structures. The design and evaluation of the possible modification of personalized vascular model is helpful to choose the optimal interventional procedures for treating vascular diseases. Another area of our future work is on developing implicit geometry-editing technique to support direct interactive modification of patient-specific vascular models, and to conduct the computational simulation of the blood flow within the constructed and modified vascular models to demonstrate effectiveness of planned treatments of the diseased vascular structure.
