A new method for the analysis of design variables in waste landfills, as well as the techniques and tools to be used, is proposed. It is applicable to the optimization of different solid waste management areas and other complex systems with an impact on the environment. The method is based on computer simulations of a large number of models which represent all the possible combinations of values for the variables to be studied. Conclusions which allow the optimization of those design and/or operation variables can be drawn from systematic processing of the resultant data.
This paper shows the results obtained concerning the impact of the chosen design variables on the volume of leachate generated throughout the operation and post-closure periods in four different scenarios. According to these results, the most effective practice to reduce the volume of leachate is the use of a temporary surface lining during operation. Other elements such as the use of intermediate covers or the final impermeable cover also exert an influence, but to a lesser extent. The height of the layer of waste and the compaction density have hardly any influence on the volume of leachate generated.
Furthermore, the variables that can have more influence on the amount of water present in the landfill have been studied. The presence of intermediate covers significantly increases the amount of water retained by the landfill. A low level of compaction also favours greater water retention, albeit to a lesser extent. Moreover, although waste with less organic content initially provides less moisture, it reaches a higher maximum level of moisture throughout the operation period. Another relevant conclusion is the small influence of temporary surface lining during operation on the maximum level of moisture reached. This moisture depends more on the internal structure of the landfill than on the volume of precipitation infiltrated. Therefore, the intermediate covers significantly reduce the amount of leachate emitted but can be detrimental to the geotechnical stability of the landfill.
The proposed method allows for the qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the relative effect of each design variable on each of the impacts. In this way, if the impacts are weighted by level of importance, the optimum for each of the design variables can be established. By so doing, it becomes possible to create an intelligent system to assist in the making of design decisions based on pre-established objectives.
It has also been shown that the different scenarios are important for the impact of the design variables. The influence of the temporary intermediate cover on the variability of the leachate generated with a Cantabrian climate has been presented as an example. Whereas the intermediate cover decreases variability with European waste, in the case of non-European waste this variability is increased. These results reveal the need to analyse different scenarios so as to be able to generalize conclusions.
It has been demonstrated that the proposed method for the analysis of some of the design and operation variables of a waste landfill is a useful tool. The method could be the basis for the construction of decision support systems, as well as for the identification of best practices.
This innovative approach goes beyond traditional methods of experimentation in the laboratory or the creation of scale models in the field. It also improves on the simulations carried out in specific cases. Based on the latest computing technologies and the theoretical advances in the modelling of landfill processes, it proposes a new way of optimizing their operation. This methodology allows knowledge to be extracted in a faster, safer and cheaper way than with the methods used to date.
