We presented a general calibration method for calibrating a computer code to experimental data. In this paper, we demonstrated how to use the probabilistic calibration technique, executed with GPM/SA, with a FDEM code (HOSS) calibrated to a SHPB experiment. The calibration approach was Bayesian, allowing us to account for uncertainty in the calibration parameters, the emulator, and the uncertainty in the experiment. This approach resulted in simultaneous and automatic input calibration as well as uncertainty quantification on both the calibration inputs (Fig. 9) and the calibrated model fit to the SHPB experiment (Fig. 10).
We found that the maximum shear strength σtmax, the maximum tensile strength σnmax, and the specific energy in shear Et all play significant roles in the material response curve modeled by HOSS, with σnmax and σtmax having more prominence at times before and around the peak and Et having more prominence for post-peak behavior (Fig. 7). By the time the stress-time curve reaches the peak the sample is well in the process of being split in half, i.e., there is a continuous region inside the sample, connecting the two sample-bar contact points, where it is observed that the interfaces between the finite elements have started to go down the strain softening part of the curve shown in Fig. 4. From Fig. 6, Fig. 7 it can be observed that the response of the sample is strongly dependent on both σnmax and σtmax; the correlation with the latter being stronger that the correlation with the former. This is evidence of the biaxial state of stress (tension in the vertical direction and compression in the horizontal or axial direction) at the micro-mechanical level.45 It has been pointed out that, for the same strain rate, there are discrepancies between the dynamic tensile strength calculated via the SHPB experiment and the one obtained from direct tension experiments,45 i.e., the SHPB tensile strength is consistently higher than the one obtained from the direct tension experiments. The discrepancy has been attributed to an additional frictional resistance to the tensile failure of the sample.45 However, based on the analysis presented here, we hypothesize that the discrepancy can be traced back to a combined failure mode where tension and shear damage occur concurrently. A more in depth analysis of these discrepancies is left for future work.
Inputs a, b, c, and En appear to play secondary roles in the calibration of HOSS with respect to the considered SHPB experiment, accounting for smaller effects in the shape of the stress-time curve. The explanation for this is that, in the case of the parameters defining the shape of the strain softening curve, the incidence of the change on the results is dampened by the overwhelming incidence of σtmax, Et and σnmax. A similar effect is observed for the influence of parameter En, in this case due to the predominant shear failure processes taking place due to the wedge in effect described before.
Our immediate objective in this study was to probabilistically calibrate HOSS to a SHPB experiment and investigate possible discrepancies between the stress-time curve and the calibrated FDEM, of which none were found. In this effort, we have made a connection between the HOSS micro-mechanics model parameters and the high strain rate macro-scale response of the sample. This allowed us to identify the main driving parameters for this particular case. Ultimately, we would like to use HOSS to predict new experiments, i.e., to obtain micro-mechanics parameter sets that provide good estimates for different conditions. In order to do that, the next step will be to calibrate HOSS to a collection of experiments at different design inputs, (i.e., different values of x such as different pulse shapers, strike velocities, sample compositions, etc.), simultaneously. In addition to resulting in a more accurate predictive code, the efforts of this study are aimed at providing a formal mathematical framework for informing on key numerical model parameters needed to describe failure when not enough experimentally observed data are available.
It is worth noting that the work presented here does not only apply to problems involving the combined finite-discrete element method or software tools similar to HOSS (i.e., other FDEM implementations). In fact, there is an ongoing interest within the research community to push the boundaries of development of improved continuum-based fracture and damage models based on innovative tensorial representations of the material deformation46, 47 and the numerical tools presented in this paper are valuable to help researchers obtain better informed parameter sets for these types of models as well. It is known that failure characteristics in rock materials are affected by a number of factors such as rock type,48 anisotropy, confining pressure,49 saturation levels,50 strain rate,51 sample size,52 grain size,53 pre-existing damage features,54 etc. On top of this, a significant amount of uncertainty is introduced when trying to model processes occurring at depth (e.g., hydrofracture), where the characteristics of the system being modeled can only be inferred crudely. All these factors come into play when researchers are faced with the challenge of developing new material models. The numerical modeler needs to take into account as much experimental data as possible to describe such processes. However, often times only macroscopic responses of the system are provided and the experimental data needed for populating the models (either at the micro-mechanical level or by using “effective” properties describing smaller scale responses) is not always readily available; either because it is too expensive to procure the samples/conduct the experiments or because it is difficult or even impossible to obtain the required model parameters from experiments. In these situations, having a systematic approach to explore the parameter space based on a technique more rigorous than the technical intuition of the modeler is very relevant.
