This paper introduces the use of the Stochastic Fractal Search (SFS) algorithm to the multilevel thresholding problem applied to histological imagery. Given a large number of nonparametric criteria available in the literature designed to perform thresholding, the three most representative entropy-based criteria are considered, instead of focusing the paper on a single criterion. Thus, the combination of the SFS algorithm with each of three entropies (Kapur´s entropy, Minimum Cross Entropy, and Tsali's entropy) generates three implementations to be analyzed. To compare the performance of SFS on image thresholding, two more EAs are incorporated being the Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) and the Differential Evolution (DE). Both EAs were selected as they have already proven to be suitable for the general problem of image thresholding. Hence, the combination of three EAs and three entropies generate nine implementations for the analysis (ABC-Kapur, ABC-MCE, ABC-Tsallis, De-Kapur, DE-MCE, DE-Tsallis, SFS-Kapur, SFS-MCE, and SFS-Tsallis). All nine methods were applied to a set of 10 images from histological samples of breast tissue to perform segmentation. The experiments were analyzed quantitatively using image similarity metrics such as PSNR, SSIM, and FSIM.
Results indicate that the best method is the one generated by the combination of SFS and MCE as it can score the best results for the three metrics evaluated. Besides, the data generated by the experiments made possible the following observation; the Minimum Cross Entropy outperforms Kapur and Tsallis independently of the choice of EA, at least for breast histological images. According to these observations, the correct selection of objective function has more impact on the outcome than the optimizer by itself. This phenomenon might be produced as the three analyzed EAs perform similarly. However, SFS managed to score better results. Visually, the qualitative analysis indicates better performance on the images processed with MCE, and the pictures segmented with SFS seem to be sharper with better-defined borders. Since all nine methods are closely related as they share either EA or entropy, the nonparametric significance test of Kruskal–Wallis was evaluated to identify which methods are closely related and if there is any method that can be considered truly independent from the rest. Table 4 provided a visualization of the results of the Kruskal–Wallis test where on each cell the methods that have failed to prove a statistically significant difference from the others are listed. This test showed how most implementation sharing objective function failed to be considered independent. The method that showed more independence is the DE-Tsallis, but its quality results are not as good as the ones provided from other approaches. This might indicate that the DE-Tsallis stagnates away from the optimal solution. The underlying relationships between segmentation methods observed through the Kruskal–Wallis might encourage future lines of work where they could be analyzed over general images rather than imagery from a specific application. Besides, it should be investigated if such differences hold on higher dimensional spaces by increasing the number of thresholds. As a result, this paper encourages the use of MCE for the segmentation of images from histological breast samples, specifically with the use of SFS. In this sense, SFS has proven to be a competitive alternative for image thresholding.
