After surveying the current status of surveillance systems, both from the algorithmic and the systemic / infrastructure point of view, several conclusions can be drawn regarding the available technology nowadays, the technological limitations and the future challenges of the area.
Video surveillance systems have been introduced almost fifty years ago, through CCTV systems, requiring a substantial number of manpower, analog to the number of the installed video sensors, leading to high operational costs. The majority of the research studies on surveillance systems the last five decades are trying, to substitute the operator with a video processing algorithm which will be able to perform certain tasks. While all of the effort put on this non-trivial mission has produced some really innovative and brilliant algorithms, these are only limited to a small set of tasks, like face recognition and object detection and tracking. The accuracy of these algorithms is usually far from satisfying when the scene conditions are not perfect.
Research developments during the last decade have revitalized the expectations for automatic surveillance systems. These developments mainly involve machine-learning, deep-learning algorithms and distributed computational infrastructures, like cloud, Fog and Edge Computing. These methodologies, combined together, are expected to improve the accuracy of surveillance algorithms, proposed new smart analytics and reduce the response time of the systems, in order to produce meaningful alerts.
As already discussed, there are a lot of research challenges that need to be addressed. Among these, special attention needs to be placed on optimization techniques that will automatically redistribute the computational power among edge, fog and cloud agents, based on specific performance, cost and privacy criteria. Such optimization techniques will boost the performance of the surveillance systems, enabling at the same time a new paradigm, Video Surveillance as a Service (VSaaA).
