A commercial 4H-SiC p-n photodiode with an active area of 0.06 mm2 was investigated as current mode and pulse mode detector of β− particles over the temperature range 100 °C to 20 °C.
The leakage currents as functions of applied reverse bias for the device was studied at different temperatures, and the results showed the leakage currents of the device decreased with decreasing temperature. At the highest investigated temperature (100 °C), the leakage current of this device was found to be < 45 pA (corresponding to leakage current density of 75 nA/cm2) at 100 V reverse bias. The performance of the device as temperature tolerant electron detector was investigated by measuring the β− generated current whilst the device was illuminated by a 63Ni radioisotope β− particle source. At the highest investigated reverse bias (100 V), the apparent β− particle generated current in the 0.06 mm2 photodiode was found to be 92 pA ± 1 pA at a temperature of 20 °C. However, doubt exists whether the extra current measured with the photodiode illuminated can be entirely attributed to the β− particles, or if there was some increase in the leakage current component as well.
The photodiode was connected to a custom-made low-noise charge-sensitive preamplifier and found to function as electron spectrometer under the illumination of a 63Ni radioisotope β− particle source across the temperature range of 100 °C to 20 °C. The CASINO computer program was used to calculate the quantum efficiency of the photodiode assuming three different active region thicknesses (5.15μm, 2.37μm, and 34.5μm). CASINO was also used to simulate the β− particle spectra incident upon, and detected by, the photodiode. Agreement was found between the experimentally measured and simulated  63Ni β− particle spectra when a detector active region thickness of 5.15μm was simulated. This suggests that the entire 5.15μm thick epilayer is sensitive to β− particles, but that β− particles absorbed in the substrate are lost.
The results demonstrate that this type of low-cost COTS SiC photodiode can be coupled to a low-noise charge-sensitive preamplifier and standard signal processing electronics (a shaping amplifier and an MCA), to produce spectrometer which can detect electrons of energy up to 57 keV. This lays the foundations for university groups and other cost-sensitive organisations to use such devices as detectors for CubeSat space plasma physics missions, or for commercial organisations to use such detectors for industrial electron spectroscopy.
Authors’ data statement
Data underlying this work are subject to commercially confidentiality. The Authors regret that they cannot grant public requests for further access to any data produced during the study.
