The findings above are the broadest conclusions generated from an analysis that systematically assesses 35 years of published articles on NGOs. As expected, scholars draw from a wide range of fields to cover the activities of NGOs in the largest countries and the most prioritized development sectors. Furthermore, we know what we know because of very particular sets of methodologies and analytic approaches, namely qualitative historical and case study approaches, which are becoming increasingly refined over time. And, while not conclusive, our findings suggest that NGOs are likely to be associated with positive intended outcomes.
So where do we go from here? Our attempt to systematically review a mammoth corpus of academic literature yields insights that, to some, may come across as obvious. Still, we contend that in revealing the obvious, new research directions reveal themselves. Indeed, we know much more about particular sectors (governance, health, gender) and particular places (India, Bangladesh) than we do about others. Thus, this review (and the broader NGO Knowledge Collective project) can serve as an intellectual map of sorts to help scholars identify new geographies, topics, and sectors to investigate. Much of what is unknown lies at the unexplored intersections of these axes.
We also think there is a larger implication of this project. Development scholars are quick to point out that development interventions rarely scale well from one context to another. We should assume the same about the role of NGOs in development given that our own NGO scholarship clusters in particular research questions, development sectors, geographies, and methodologies at the expense of others. This is incredibly important for scholars interested in examining whether NGOs truly advance development. We call for carefully crafted future research that more systematically develops an understanding of the conditions under which these organizations can be effective instruments for improving economic, political and social development outcomes.
