This paper has argued for the integration of approaches from the arts, humanities and sciences in the context of the planning and management of the marine environment. It has illustrated through the Barra case that such innovative approaches are needed to fully engage with the complexities of socio-ecological systems and to manage disputes in ways that incorporate an understanding of local socio-cultural contexts. The sharing of the material generated by the related Connecting Coastal Communities and Sea Stories art-science-community collaborations reflected back not only the characteristics of a place, but also the complexity that exists in how different people may use, understand and interact with their surrounding sea. This form of creative socio-cultural engagement functions as a bridge, or meeting point, between different (and sometimes polarised) communities of interest. It helps make visible different forms of knowledge that are often invisible within the policy environment, and has the potential to aid dialogue around marine environments and related spatial planning. A particular feature of this art-science collaboration was that the crossovers in the socially-engaged practices of the art-science team transcended the boundaries between art and science and crossed over into the realm of policy-makers. It opened up new spaces in which both art and science could become active by participating in addressing concrete policy issues in a practical manner (as well as analytically). It also contributed to opening up new spaces for more constructive dialogue between members of the local community and the policy environment, demonstrating how the arts and social sciences can have social and political impact on the ground. This, in turn, highlighted how “participation in the environmental policy context is intensely political and always linked to power relationships and deeply felt values” (Peterson and Feldpausch-Parker, 2013, 527). This paper has also contributed to the literature documenting different cultural constructions of the marine and coastal environment, and the implications for its management (e.g. Stocker and Kennedy, 2009, Voyer et al., 2015).
Representations of the marine environment for the purposes of marine planning would, in practice, ideally reflect a plurality of value systems and thereby help make more explicit the trade-offs which are required as part of the planning process. It would also facilitate different forms of knowledge to become visible within a mainstream conservation discourse that privileges natural scientific or ‘expert’ knowledge. This undoubtedly makes for a messier, more complicated and more time-consuming planning process. Guidance on how to implement this in practice can, however, be found in an emerging body of literature. For example, Voyer et al. (2015, 101) suggest that insights gained by planners from a greater understanding of the dominant ‘cultural models’ influencing social responses to marine protected areas could be used “to identify and nurture areas of common ground within contested planning processes whilst building respect for alternative values and points of view in areas of conflict.” The UK's National Ecosystem Assessment Follow-On has developed a handbook for decision-makers which provides suggestions on when and how shared, plural and cultural values can be taken into account in their decision-making (see Kenter et al., 2014). This work recognises that people's shared, plural and cultural values inform and shape a concept of the common good and should be taken into account by decision-makers in order to better represent the values of those affected by decisions taken (Kenter and Reed, 2014). Kenter et al. (2015) use a variety of participatory and deliberative methods (such as citizens' juries, multi-criteria analysis, participatory mapping and subjective well-being indicators) to capture the diversity of ways in which people relate to nature.
Voyer et al. (2015, 93) have noted that “new and innovative approaches to participation and management” are needed for planning processes to incorporate a plurality of value systems, worldviews and different ‘cultural models’ in addition to the predominant ecological cultural model that values ‘expert’ evaluations and practices. This supports the argument in this paper that current approaches to environmental planning, management and conflict are underpinned by the dominant assumptions and frames of natural scientific knowledge. It also supports the argument made in this paper that alternative frames of understanding are necessary to move intractable conflicts to a space where the parties can develop different narratives so that imaginative ways forward can emerge. This paper has responded to the call for such new and innovative approaches by testing a creatively combined art and social science approach to articulate a plurality of narratives that exist around management of the marine environment, including the marine policy conservation-driven narrative. It is not suggested that interactive cultural maps of the sea are a panacea and should be created as a matter of course. Rather, the Sea Stories map is presented as one outcome of an imaginative combination of art and social science approaches that makes visible different representations and perceptions of the marine environment. The Barra case illustrates that it is important that these pluralistic narratives are articulated and acknowledged. Doing so enables governance of the marine environment to be shaped and guided by the local socio-cultural context by recognising the social relations which form part of the relevant socio-ecological system. This is a necessary precursor to harnessing and/or inspiring a sense of stewardship towards the marine environment. On Barra, this sense of stewardship is encapsulated in the Gaelic concept of dùthchas, described by the Scottish Gaelic scholar John MacInnes (2006) as a form of ‘emotional energy’ of belonging to a homeplace (MacKinnon and Brennan, 2012). Art-science approaches that speak to the heart as well as to the mind, and that can translate into the policy arena in practical ways, are needed to bring this ‘emotional energy’ to planning and conservation processes for the marine environment.
