This study attempted to design a computer-mediated learning environment that facilitates student regulation and its improvement. It confirmed the effectiveness of the developed environment, in which first-year university students had diverse experiences that led them to augment regulation scripts. Through diversity of experiences and their prior internal scripts, students augmented their regulation scripts in a variety of ways. In addition, perceptions of experiences and challenges in collaboration influenced how they augmented their scripts. When students perceived socio-emotional challenges, they were more likely to augment SRL or CoRL scripts. When they perceived socio-cognitive challenges, they were more inclined to augment SSRL scripts.
We attempted to make further contributions to research on regulation of collaboration in several ways. Frist, we designed a learning environment that facilitates student regulation in the form of computer-mediated learning. This perspective is considered a crucial topic in CSCL studies (Dillenbourg et al., 2009), but nonetheless receives insufficient attention. Second, we proposed a methodology for examining progress in student regulation by relying on the script theory of guidance (Fischer et al., 2013). There are few studies that focus on improving student regulation itself, despite there being many studies of student regulation and its influence on learning outcomes. Third, we examined student scripts for regulating collaboration as comprising three layers (SRL, CoRL, and SSRL) based on the framework by Hadwin et al. (2011) and Miller and Hadwin (2015). While previous studies focused on SSRL (Malmberg et al., 2015) or CoRL (Lajoie et al., 2015), this study focused on all three layers.
There were some limitations to this study. First, we did not collect student interactions in their group activities, although we had field notes by mentors as well as students' reflection notes. To test our discussion more rigorously, we need to collect behavioral engagements in group activities using audio or video recorders. Second, our participants were university students, so our findings are not directly comparable with other age groups. Third, we should further investigate student advancement of regulation scripts in relation to metacognitive prompts by analyzing weekly KF notes. We expect that such analyses would theoretically contribute to establishing further generalizable findings to design a learning environment that facilitates student regulation and its improvement. Finally, since the present study has not examined the quality of student-produced ideas and task responses, we should further analyze student ideas in relation to regulation. It is important to develop learning environments that facilitate both the construction and innovation of knowledge and the development of general knowledge and skills such as regulatory skills (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2014; Paavola et al., 2004).
