We have presented a method to obtain measures from a single image of a garment for size checking. Its main advantage is that, differently from past works, it is not highly dependent on the garment shape and the good localization of key points from which the measures are defined. Instead, it is able to understand the garment contour, that is, it classifies its segments into a set of meaningful contour parts from which a set of regressors estimate the measures. The parameters of both processes, contour segment labeling and regression, are learned from training samples and thus the method is directly extensible to new shapes other than jackets and pants. The only thing it needs is a partition of the contour into classes and groundtruth in the form of segment class annotations and values for the new measures.
We have analyzed the contribution on the result of the structured prediction through a CRF and the Lasso regression, and compared it to non-structured prediction with SVM and other types of non-sparse regressors in order to justify our method. The results show a high accuracy for all measures for the two types of garment considered, with a mean absolute error of 1.17 and 1.22 cm for jackets and pants, respectively.
The present success of deep learning for structured prediction may rise the question of what would be the performance with such types of architectures. We believe that graphical models are better suited to our problem that deep neural networks (DNN), at least for the segment labeling part. DNNs typically have a large number of parameters and part of their success relies on the availability of large datasets to learn them well. Ours is not that large, in the order of thousands of segments that means only hundreds of samples. Another reason for their success is that they learn good representations for the data and the task at hand. However, we show here that just five very simple and sensible features —segment endpoint coordinates and angle— lead to a very high labeling accuracy. Hence, as future work we do not envisage learning better representations but to apply the present method on new types of garments common in the apparel industry like shirts, skirts, coats etc. and also to other kinds of objects, like human profiles.
