A disparity often exists between actual and predicted building performance, for a wide variety of reasons. In order to better understand this gap, consideration should be given to processes around the gathering, assessment and interpretation of building performance data.
Bespoke modern buildings contain several contextual data silos, often disconnected from each other. In many cases the data in these silos is not aggregated and interpreted in a structured manner for the purposes of performance assessment. Significant technical challenges exist around the automated integration of diverse building data sources in a reliable and repeatable manner. The challenge is further compounded across building stock as the same type of information is often represented differently over different systems implementations.
This paper presents a pathway to the comprehensive assessment of building performance, using rule-based performance metrics and available contextual data silos. The research leverages OpenMath and semantic web techniques to provide a robust approach for the automated collection and structured assessment of building performance data from heterogeneous sources. This approach surpasses the analysis functionalities of existing building automation systems (BAS) as it can seamlessly link with valuable information from other sources.
Two new algorithms automatically evaluate a series of building specific performance metrics, based on available and relevant data. The multi-silo querying algorithm prepares datum streams for assessment through a combination of SPARQL and SQL queries. The computing algorithm then transforms relevant performance assessment metrics into mathematical formulae. These formulae are evaluated using building performance data. A case study illustrated how rule-based performance metrics and contextual data silos can be integrated for enhanced building performance assessment.
Based on the approach, building performance can be comprehensively assessed using existing performance metrics and data silos, without significant reinterpretation and conversion by building managers, saving considerable amounts of time and resources. In practice, building managers (and engineers) can now simultaneously analyse measured and simulated building performance at a range of levels, without much reinterpretation and conversion compared with traditional solutions. The approach offers higher flexibility and a finer spectral granularity for building performance assessments. The approach is automatable, with the potential to be applied in a range of application cases, but is most powerful in situations where significant volumes of structured time-series data are present. Using the results of these assessments, building managers can communicate with other stakeholders at the tactical and strategic levels of organisations, and enabling more informed energy optimisation strategies by upper management.
Furthermore, the developed approach can act as a life-cycle tool through which performance predictions can be evaluated using the outputs from a variety of modelling tools. Building managers now have an engaging opportunity to interact earlier in the design/build/operate process and benefit from a more transparent communication of design intent that is carried through for use in operation.
Future work will focus on extending the type of data silos this approach can leverage, and investigate, the integration of multi-criteria decision making theory with the scenario modelling method for enhanced building performance evaluation. The approach could also be extended to neighbourhood and district scale.
