The current study has extracted, analyzed, and evaluated a pedagogically useful list of p-frames from a corpus of social science research article introductions. Focusing on six social science disciplines, this study sits somewhere in the middle in the discipline specificity continuum. While we did not focus on inter-disciplinary variation, the identification of p-frames that are uniquely useful in specific disciplines would certainly constitute a productive avenue of future research (e.g. Cunningham, 2017). Additionally, although the p-frames identified in our study all occur in at least two disciplines, the p-frame variants may be analyzed in terms of their specificity to individual disciplines (e.g. Fuster-Márquez, 2014, Grabowski, 2015).
The focus on the specific part-genre of RA introductions may be both a limitation and strength. On the one hand, it limits the pedagogical value of the list compiled primarily to this part-genre. On the other hand, awareness of linguistic variation across genres and part-genres is critical to the development of EAP learners’ genre competence, and resources targeting high-stake genres and part-genres such as RA introductions will prove valuable for pedagogy aimed at promoting that awareness (Cortes, 2013, Hyland, 2007). The research outcome generated in this study also paves the way for our ongoing research on aligning p-frames with rhetorical moves and steps in RA introductions, and on identifying p-frames for other RA part-genres.
The pedagogical applications of the p-frame list compiled need to be carefully considered. For EAP courses that take a genre approach to teaching academic writing, the p-frame list can serve as a useful resource for assisting students' analysis of language features that characterize RAs. However, in our view lists of different types of academic expressions should best be used in an integrative way to maximize their potential for promoting students’ genre competence. For example, as students identify important collocations in RAs, the p-frame list can be a handy tool to help them see the range of contexts or syntactic environments in which they occur in RAs. Similarly, as students notice formulas that are frequently used in RAs, the p-frame list can help them see patterns that such formulas fit in as well as related variants that they could use. We also expect the list to serve as one of many useful reference tools to novice social science scholars as they engage in RA writing. Our future research will investigate the pedagogical uses of this list in genre-based academic writing classrooms and actual RA writing contexts. We also call for more empirical research examining the feasibility and effectiveness of integrative pedagogical applications of the different types of academic formulaic expression lists to validate existing lists, identify best practices in using them, and inform future efforts in compiling new lists.
