The findings of this study provide support for some of the relationships described in Desimone's (2009) framework across multiple science disciplines and across different years of the science reform implementation. The main two contributions and their implications are as follows:
First and foremost, this study validates some relationships described in Desimone's (2009) framework for studying the effects of PD. Teachers' PD participation is positively associated with teachers' classroom practice. However, the observed measures portraying elements of instructional practice only have a very small influence on students' performance in the expected direction. This implies that PD participation can make a difference for teachers to change their classroom teaching. This supports perspectives that PD can help teachers to align their instruction with curriculum reforms (e.g., Correnti, 2007; Garet et al., 2001; Penuel et al., 2007). The weak link of instructional elements to student achievement, which corresponds with previous research that found positive but very small effects of reform-oriented instructional elements on student achievement (e.g., Hamilton et al., 2003), could also in part serve as an alternative explanation why several recent PD effectiveness studies did not find considerable direct effects of teachers' PD participation on student achievement (e.g., Arens et al., 2012; Bos et al., 2012; Garet et al., 2011, 2008; Jacob & McGovern, 2015). While PD participation might have produced growth in teachers' knowledge and skills that fostered changes in classroom teaching, instructional changes might not translate to large increases of student learning.
Second, classroom instruction and student learning are situated in their local contexts. On the teacher- and school-level, contextual features such as SES and teachers' years of teaching experience substantially influence teachers' classroom instruction. This mirrors previous studies that emphasize the importance of teacher knowledge, teaching experience, and other teacher-level influences, as well as local context characteristics such as school affluence for shaping classroom instruction (e.g., Garet et al., 2008; Ingvarson, Meiers, & Beavis, 2005; Kennedy, 2010; Supovitz & Turner, 2000). Similarly, contextual features on the student-level such as students' prior mathematics and reading achievement levels and parental educational attainment substantially influence student learning. These findings are in accordance with previous research that detected relationships of students' prior mathematics and reading achievement levels (i.e., PSAT scores) with students' current knowledge (i.e., AP scores) (e.g., Ewing et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2014), as well as research that relates students' family background with student achievement (Davis-Kean, 2005; Desforges & Abouchaar, 2003; Woessmann, 2004). Thus, this study implies that the mission of advancing teachers’ instruction and fostering student learning is multi-faceted and should be approached from several perspectives.
Overall, this study reinforces calls to provide teachers with high-quality professional learning opportunities, to retain experienced teachers in schools, and to guide teachers toward classroom practices that enhance student learning. Furthermore, this study also motivates and illustrates the importance for advancing research in at least two directions. The first set of future studies relates to Opfer and Pedder (2011) conceptualization that teacher professional learning is embedded in the complex system of schooling with its numerous dynamic, interdependent relationships. Motivated by the multitude of detected relationships on teachers' instruction and student learning, future research could go beyond what Opfer and Pedder (2011) describe as “process-product logic” (p. 384) and apply a complexity theory lens (Byrne & Callaghan, 2014; Cochran-Smith et al., 2014; Opfer & Pedder, 2011). The second set of studies is motivated by the detected weak relationship of instructional practices with students’ AP scores, which suggests to further analyze immediate influences of specific teaching practices on student learning in more depth. In particular, further research should attempt to identify sets of instructional practices that relate to increased student learning, which in turn should inform future teacher PD activities.
