There are still many unknowns surrounding the nature and origin of the moons of Mars, and further robotic missions are required to characterize these bodies. These missions may also reveal to what extent Phobos and Deimos can enhance the martian exploration program. Here we have developed an architecture for what must be assessed before we can send humans to the surface of these moons. Programmatic logic may dictate sending humans to Phobos or Deimos, in which case this mission framework is critical when structuring a human precursor mission. We believe that sending humans will always be beneficial based on the scientific output they can accomplish.
Phobos and Deimos are positioned to support Mars surface operations. A Phobos mission establishes early leadership by sending humans to the martian system to explore, conduct resource surveys, and establish a scientific station that builds upon martian assets and can allow for sample return of both martian and Phobos regolith to Earth for detailed analysis (Aaron, 1988). If the moons contain hydrated minerals, mining may be a key strategy for affordable Mars campaigns. While both moons are interesting exploration destinations, we conclude that Phobos is a safer target due to higher surface gravity, greater escape velocity, and more potential radiation shielding. Furthermore, Phobos may provide a suitable location for astronauts to maintain a telecommunications network. ISRU operations may include the production of heat shields and 3D-printing spare parts. The exploration of Phobos is potentially an affordable and productive first-step toward surface operations on Mars. Overall, Phobos is a scientifically interesting destination that offers engineering, operational, and public engagement benefits that most importantly would allow for the continuation and development of the Mars exploration campaign in the upcoming decade.
The exploration framework laid out here seeks to address how Phobos and Deimos can aid in the future exploration of Mars. Phobos and Deimos are potentially valuable commodities, providing a wealth of science return, as well as telecommunications capabilities, resource utilization, radiation protection, transportation and operations infrastructure, and the continuity of the martian exploration program.
