Research productivity and development are critical for developing and improving rankings of universities. Research productivity is one of the primary indicators for measuring the performance of academic staff at educational institutions. It is highly important to develop indicators, such as key performance indicators, for monitoring the research productivity at universities. The results of this study indicate that scholarly publication is the most important indicator for measuring the level of research productivity in Saudi universities. Moreover, it is essential to find factors that enhance scholarly publication in Saudi universities. This study finds that knowledge sharing is one of the most important factors in enhancing communication and sharing knowledge between academic staff at Saudi universities. In addition, computer-mediated communication has a positive effect on scholarly publication performance. Moreover, from the results of this study, the nature of knowledge and computer-mediated communication (CMC) play important roles in enhancing knowledge sharing among academic staff at Saudi universities.
This study makes a valuable contribution, since there are few studies of this nature that focus on Saudi Arabia. Moreover, this study is first study to be conducted at Saudi universities that examines the relationship between knowledge sharing and scholarly publication. This research identifies factors that enhance knowledge sharing and the relation between CMC and scholarly publication. Moreover, this study has 374 participants, which is more than other studies in Saudi Arabia for same scope. This study considers research productivity and how information and communication technologies can enhance research productivity. In future research, factors that can improve the performance of administration staff in using IT can be studied. Additionally, the awareness level of academic staff regarding the use of information and communication technologies in teaching warrants further investigation.
