An understanding of the interplay between virus epidemics and honeynet potency is of great importance for effectively containing the spread of virus or for designing an improved honeynet. Aiming at this, a compartmental model is formulated and theoretically analyzed. Theoretical analysis of the virus spreading dynamics of the model has obtained the conditions under which the minimum amount and best location in deploying honeynets are determined. In particular,

(1)An epidemic threshold value is calculated. This value is related to the model parameters which determine the full dynamics of the model. The analysis results indicate that the feedback rate have no effect on this threshold value, yet it can reduces the virus epidemics and that the conditions under which the amount of deployed honeypots within a honeynet is minimal to ensure that the honeynet potency is maximally exploited. The results answer the question of how many honeypots are financially deployed per unit time for constructing a honeynet.(2)A virus-free equilibrium is acquired, and its local and global asymptotic stabilities associated with the epidemic threshold value are proven by applying Routh–Hurwitz criterion and by comparison method. These results can provide an explicit direction on how to drive the virus to become extinct in a heterogeneous honeynet.(3)A virus-equilibrium is obtained, and the analysis shows that a higher-degree honeypot can better attract the virus into a trap than a lower-degree one. This result answers the question of how to effectively deploy honeypot framework within a heterogeneous honeynet.(4)It has been demonstrated that the honeypot with more system vulnerabilities is beneficial for mitigating the virus epidemic to a lower level, and that the honeynet with a lower power law index would better serve the purpose of acquiring the virus samples.
These results may reveal the influence relations between virus epidemics and honeynet potency. Based on the analysis results, a collection of practical suggestions for containing the virus spreading or for designing an improved honeynet is put forward.
