One of the aims of this work was to confirm the observations of several studies that have questioned the six original factors of the User Engagement Scale (UES) (O’Brien, 2008, O’Brien, Toms, 2008), pointing instead to a four-factor structure (Banhawi, Ali, 2011, O’Brien, Cairns, 2015, O’Brien, Toms, 2013, Wiebe, Lamb, Hardy, Sharek, 2014). We re-analyzed data collected in the development of the original UES (O’Brien, 2008, O’Brien, Toms, 2008) using state-of-the-art statistical techniques that were previously not widely accessible. Although the original six factors had some explanatory power, we confirmed a four-factor model. We proposed a revised UES where the items did not change, but how they were grouped as subscales was altered. The new dimensions of the UES are now aesthetic appeal, focused attention, perceived usability, and reward.
A second aim was to devise a short form of the UES (UES-SF), which we accomplished. This twelve item measure still captures the core concepts represented in the full form. Both the revised full-form and UES-SF were validated with novel data from the SBS project. In future, this work could be extended through experimental work that is tailored to manipulations of specific components of engagement; for instance, only aesthetics or only the reward component. While this may be slightly removed from the engineering of information systems, it would be a means to establish the value of the UES as a measure with wide applicability and relevance.
The final aim of this research was to guide researchers in the effective administration and scoring of the UES and UES-SF. We raised general considerations around the adoption of these measures in different research settings or with different populations, and discussed scoring and reporting procedures. It is our hope that the brevity of the UES-SF will encourage uptake of the entire questionnaire, and that this paper sheds light on the importance of considering reliability and validity in the use of self-report questionnaires to strengthen the overall findings of individual studies, and comparability across different studies.
