We have shown that the consideration of games can give inspiration for new loopless algorithms for electronic computers. Our approach of modeling the Gray code in terms of a motion-planning game has lead to loopless algorithms for Gray codes in a rather straightforward way. We did not have to go through “contortions” (cf. the quote in the end of Section 2, p. 4).
Loopless algorithms for enumerating Gray codes were already known, cf. [2, 7.2.1.1.H], and thus we did not achieve new results in terms of improved asymptotic running time. In particular, we do not claim superiority of these algorithms over the existing algorithms. Such a comparison would depend on the hardware and on other factors. All we can say is that these algorithms enrich the arsenal of available algorithms for loopless generation. Still, it might be an interesting exercise to program these algorithms for Knuth's model computer MMIX6 and analyze their performance.
The approach of Section 10 was very different. It used a de-amortizing technique for data structures, and applied it to loopless generation algorithms. The amortized analysis that goes with this technique was straightforward (inequality (4)), and the resulting algorithms are simple. The analysis of the required buffer size was, however, more intricate.
11.1. Open questionsWith our approach, we were able to get a mixed-radix Gray code only when all radixes mi are odd. It remains to find a model that would work for different even radixes or even for radixes of mixed parity.Another motion-planning game which is related to the binary Gray code is the Chinese rings puzzle, see Gardner [4], Knuth [2, pp. 285–286], or Scorer, Grundy, and Smith [3, Section 1]. Knuth [2, Solution to Ex. 7.2.1.1–(10), p. 679] gives a brief survey of the early literature, mentioning references that date back as far as the 16th century. The goal is to detach a series of interlocked rings from a bar. Like the Towers of Bucharest, the Chinese rings allow at most two possible moves in every state. Each move removes or replaces a single ring. By simulating the Chinese rings directly, one can therefore obtain another loopless algorithm for the binary Gray code, see Misra [24], Knuth [2, Solution to Ex. 7.2.1.1–(12b), p. 680]. However, this algorithm does not seem to extend to other radixes. Scorer et al. [3, Section 5] analyzed a generalization of the Chinese rings. We did not investigate whether it leads to interesting Gray codes.
