In this paper, we proposed an ARAP approach for the real-time simulation of physics-based deformation with oriented particles. The proposed method can deal with one-, two-, and three-dimensional deformable models robustly even with a small number of particles by extending the deformation graph [27] with oriented particles [3] and by formulating the corresponding ARAP deformation energy. Our method employs an implicit Euler integration scheme formulated as an energy minimization problem [4]  where it seeks the optimal positions and orientations of the particles using an alternating local/global optimization solver, which is easy to implement and computationally efficient. The material stiffness is largely independent of the iteration count and the time step size, in contrast to shape matching with oriented particles [3]. Our experimental results demonstrate that hundreds of deformable models with an extremely large number of polygons can be simulated robustly in real time using thousands of particles.
Minimizing the ARAP deformation energy is analogous to enforcing the shape matching constraint for the local rigidity. Our method is not intended for physically correct simulations but instead it is a practical approach for obtaining visually plausible real-time deformations. Our formulation utilizes integration over ellipsoids but the ellipsoids are discrete approximations of a deformable body. Hence, the physical behavior depends on the discretization, which is an inherent limitation of approaches based on oriented particles. Our formulation also inherits the slow convergence problem from projective dynamics, although this can be circumvented to a certain extent by using a Chebyshev semi-iterative approach [23] or a quasi-Newton method [25]. Another shortcoming is that the global optimization solver exploits pre-factorization of the system matrix, which must be re-factored to deal with run-time tearing or fracturing. Fortunately, we developed our formulation by considering a moderate number of particles. Building and factoring 300 particles requires less than 2 ms. Hence, we plan to incorporate plasticity and fracturing as described by Choi [31]. Currently, collision detection is the performance bottleneck in a large scene because we employ a naive parallelization of spatial hashing. We plan to exploit more elaborate parallelizations in the CPU/GPU. The ARAP deformation energy only supports isotropic materials, but we aim to consider anisotropic materials by introducing additional deformation energies in future research.
