In this paper, we determine existing substitution potentials; i.e., we calculate the share of routine tasks for each occupation that could potentially be substituted by computers or computer-controlled machines in 2013. Thus, we do not estimate future substitution potentials but refer to current technological possibilities to calculate existing substitution potentials. We use rich occupational data from BERUFENET, an expert database similar to the US O*NET, and determine substitution potentials for each of the 3900 occupations.
The most important assumption is that only tasks can be substituted by computers, not entire occupations, as in the study of Frey and Osborne (2017). Unlike Arntz et al. (2017) who only link the automation probabilities of Frey and Osborne (2017) to task data, we start directly with the tasks and classify them into routine versus non-routine tasks. This paper is the first to analyse the substitution potentials of occupations directly calculated for Germany. Thus, we can directly consider the specifics of the German labour market and are not confronted with transfer errors between the different occupational classifications (Bowles, 2014; Bonin et al., 2015; Brzeski and Burk, 2015; Arntz et al., 2016).
We also avoid overestimation of substitution potentials since it is not computer and technology experts who provide the estimations for future substitution potentials as in the study of Frey and Osborne (2017) but occupational experts who assess the tasks typically demanded for certain occupations in Germany. We consider the substitution potentials of occupations and not jobs. Thus, we cannot account for the fact that jobs in the same occupation have different requirement profiles within Germany (Autor and Handel, 2013). However, we are able to calculate the substitution potentials on a very detailed level for each occupation.
We find that the impacts of the digital transformation vary across occupations. Almost any occupation includes tasks that cannot be performed by computers or computer-controlled machines. In particular, unskilled/semiskilled occupations and specialist occupations reveal a high substitution potential, whereas complex specialist and highly complex occupations show a low substitution potential.
Furthermore, we can demonstrate for Germany that when assuming that entire occupations are replaceable by computers or computer-controlled machines (occupation-level approach), we obtain the same value as Frey and Osborne (2017): approximately 47% of the German employees work in a substitutable occupation in 2013. When applying a direct assessment of whether tasks can be replaced by computers or computer-controlled machines according to programmable rules (task-based approach), we find that only 15% of the German employees are at risk of being replaced by automation in 2013. This result nearly equals the calculations of Arntz et al. (2016), who estimated based on a task-based approach that 12% of employees are affected by a high automation probability in Germany.
However, 15% of jobs do not have to be eliminated due to the digital transformation. Automation probabilities consider only the technical feasibility. Thus, it is not clear whether there is any relationship between the potential automation probabilities and actual employment growth. We are the first to show that employment is growing less rapidly with increasing substitution potentials by regressing the substitution potentials of occupations for 2013 on employment growth between 2013 and 2016. This relationship is quite large. However, it is important to note that this analysis does not allow any causal interpretation.
On the one hand, the share of tasks that could be substituted by computers emphasises (future) employment risks in the different occupations. On the other hand, it also shows to what degree these occupations will – most likely – change over the next years. From a historic point of view, it can be observed that occupations have rarely disappeared but have adapted to new circumstances in the past centuries. For instance, the skills and know-how of cartwrights (or wainwrights), who originally made wooden cartwheels or carriages, were in high demand as railway carriage builders upon the emergence of the railway or later as coachbuilders in the automotive industry. Against this backdrop, we assume that occupations will disappear entirely only in rare cases. Mainly, occupations will change. The present analyses cannot assess how occupations will change; however, we can say that occupations differ in how strongly they will change in the next years through the introduction of digital technologies. Whether the work of the employees will become more interesting and demanding or more monotonous and primitive – when tasks are performed by computer-controlled machines – is a question of organisation. The new digital technologies only set the scene by also offering new freedoms for the design of jobs and occupations.
This paper has shed some light on the debates about the occupations already affected by the digital transformation. However, more research is required in particular to make points regarding the future employment development and to be able to develop appropriate policy measures to support the adjustment to the technological changes. In particular, it would be worthwhile for future research to estimate the causal effects of digital transformation on the employment growth. Furthermore, special attention should be paid to the fact that task structures also adapt within occupations and that companies decide about capital versus employment of labour.
