The importance of dealing with cognitive differences of students by applying differentiation practices which are knowledge- and learner centered (Tomlinson et al., 2003), is currently greatly emphasized by educationalists. Partly due to the fuzziness of the construct, the effectiveness of differentiation is unclear. Previous (meta-)meta-analyses on differentiation practices were mainly focused on different forms of grouping: between-class or within-class, full-time or only for specific subjects, whole group or small group, homogeneous or heterogeneous. The overall conclusion that can be drawn from these previous studies is that grouping can create a context for differentiated instruction, but that it should be ensured that this differentiated instruction is indeed offered. Although this precondition has been emphasized by previous (e.g. Kulik, 1992; Lou et al., 1996; Slavin, 1987a) and current researchers (e.g. Roy et al., 2012), apparently it is still a relevant point to make. A second important conclusion that can be drawn from the precious studies is that the differential effects of differentiation are still inconclusive. The aim of the current review was to extend knowledge of the effects of differentiation practices in primary education.
The 21 studies included in this review can be divided into four types: (a) studies on the effects of between-class homogeneous ability grouping, (b) studies on the effects of within-class ability grouping, (c) studies on differentiation practices supported by computer systems, and (d) studies in which differentiation was part of a broader program or school reform.
In general, we found that differentiation had a small overall positive effect on students’ academic performance (d = +0.146), especially when the practice was embedded in a supportive context: either a computer-assisted environment (d = +0.290) or a broader school reform (d = +0.296). We did not find a significant overall effect for between- or within-class homogeneous grouping. This supports the conclusion of the prior reviews that grouping alone is not enough and should be accompanied by differentiated teaching practices. However, the overall positive effect does not necessarily mean that students of all ability levels benefit from differentiation practices. Differential effects could only be calculated for between- and within-class homogeneous grouping. These types of differentiation practices appeared to have a small negative effect for low-achieving students (d = −0.195) and no significant effects for average- and high-ability students. This discouraging result is not in line with the meta-meta-analysis of Steenbergen-Hu et al. (2016), although comparability is limited, because this study takes into account secondary education as well.
A possible reason for the absence of significant effects of between- and within-class homogeneous ability grouping is that although the teachers in these studies reported to use grouping, they may not have used grouping to provide differentiated instruction. Because detailed procedural information was not given, how the instruction was tailored to students’ needs remained unclear in most of the studies. This may also indicate that teachers were not supported in effectively using their grouping to improve differentiated instruction. The findings that differentiation was more effective when it was embedded in a broader context, like a computerized environment or a school reform, supports this suggestion. These computerized environments or more general reforms are more likely to include teacher professional development, which help to ensure implementation and to improve quality of teaching (Timperley, Wilson, Barrar, & Fung, 2007).
The contribution of the current review to existing knowledge of the effects of differentiation in primary education on students’ performance is twofold. It gives an updated overview of the overall effects of all experimental and correlational studies conducted in this area since 1995, including information on the possibilities of computer technology as a tool for differentiation, which is an interesting addition to the previous literature syntheses. Furthermore, in the current review we examined the characteristics of effective differentiation practices by conducting a moderator analysis, in order to see how different contexts for differentiation render different effects.
4.1. LimitationsSystematic reviewing is a technique to thoroughly examine all empirical evidence on a certain topic. The operationalization of the topic of interest in a set of search terms is therefore essential. We decided to define two sets of search terms. The first set comprised general ways of describing differentiation. In order to capture studies that described differentiation practices under a different name, we selected an additional set of terms with more specific terms for differentiation practices or contexts for differentiated instruction. These terms were selected on the basis of previous research, but the list is not exhaustive. Our decision to add this second set of search terms enriched the search, but also directed it in a specific way, leading to the inclusion of studies on for example grouping, while studies in which differentiation contexts or practices went under yet a different name possibly remained undetected.One of the main critiques of review studies and meta-analyses is that they try to compare incomparable elements. A solution to this problem is to try to capture differences between studies as variables and to control for them, but this requires a large number of individual studies: approximately ten studies per variable (Borenstein et al., 2009). Even when some variables are controlled for, studies need to be combined in order to perform a meta-analysis, and this inevitably leads to some loss of detail in individual studies and forces researchers to make relatively rough categorizations. This happened, for example, in the current review study when we described the category of studies on between-class homogeneous grouping: studies on tracking and setting were taken together, even though these are very different types of grouping. Similarly, in our analysis of the studies on within-class homogeneous ability grouping, studies comparing homogeneous grouping with heterogeneous grouping and studies comparing homogeneous grouping with whole-class teaching were combined into one category and taken together in one meta-analysis, even though it was known from earlier studies that this type of comparison is likely to influence the findings (Lou et al., 1996). Meta-analyses are thus inherently less fine-grained than is desirable. Combining a meta-analysis with relatively extended descriptions of the included studies is a way to mitigate this drawback. For this reason, we have provided summaries of all 21 studies included in this review in the results section.Another drawback of the current review is the limited number of studies included. The very strict inclusion criteria meant that only very few were considered eligible: this also limited the statistical possibilities. Approximately 1430 studies on differentiation were found in the initial literature search, but only1.5% of these met the final inclusion criteria used. The rigorous inclusion criteria follow directly from the decision to focus on the effects of differentiation practices on the cognitive outcomes of students, and not on other student or teacher outcomes. Studies on differentiation that were focused on different types of outcomes and used different research designs may have offered interesting insights into differentiation as an educational practice. Future reviews which include these types of studies would, therefore, be valuable.Furthermore, the inclusion criteria ensured that studies met certain methodological requirements. This enabled us to avoid the “garbage-in-garbage-out” effect and to only synthesize the best evidence available (Slavin, 1995). Because of our methodological requirements we decided to only search for research described in peer-reviewed journals, although this meant that possibly relevant research from dissertations, technical reports, conference proceedings and unpublished monographs remained undetected. These decisions may have led to bias, but the relation between the effect sizes and the statistical power of the included studies did not show any indication of this.Another limitation is related to the category of studies in which differentiation practices were part of a broader reform. Analysis of the results of this type of study complex because effects cannot be attributed solely to one specific element. However, excluding such studies might lead to an underestimation of possible effects of differentiation practices. Furthermore, by excluding these studies an important message for educational practice would be lost, namely, the importance of creating an extensive supportive context when implementing an educational innovation. Therefore, despite the difficulties of assigning possible effects of a broader program specifically to differentiation practices as one of its components, we considered it important to include this type of study in the review.It would also be useful to investigate the influence of the theoretical goal of differentiation. Differentiation practices can have different goals (Bosker, 2005; Denessen, 2017). At least theoretically, differentiation is focused either on keeping the lower-performing students on track and reducing the variation in performance within the classroom (a convergent aim), or on helping all students to proceed as well and as fast as they can, thereby increasing the differences between low- and high-performing students (a divergent aim). Taking into account the aim of differentiation in every study when analyzing its effects would have been interesting. However, many studies do not mention whether the differentiation practice described had a convergent or a divergent aim, and inferring this is often hard because of a lack of detail in the description of the intervention. Furthermore, the theoretical distinction between convergent and divergent aims might be diffuse in practice (Denessen, 2017). Another solution for taking into account the fundamental difference between convergent and divergent differentiation is to analyze the effect sizes of the differential results. When d is largest for the high-performing students, the differentiation practice resulted in divergence. When d is largest for the low-performing students, the differentiation practice resulted in convergence. However, differential effects could be calculated for only two of the four contexts for differentiation. Therefore, the question how the aim of differentiation influences student performance cannot be answered based on the current systematic review study.Yet another important aspect of differentiation which was not covered systematically in the current review is the amount of instruction that students receive. The more ability groups a teacher creates, the less time there is for each group, and the more time students have to spend working independently. The formation of small groups in combination with adapted instruction may thus be effective, but it is likely that there is an optimum number of groups or amount of time spent in groups, and an optimum amount of instruction time that should be provided. Hong and colleagues support this suggestion. They report that “intensive grouping” in combination with low instruction time has negative effects, especially for low-performing students (Hong & Hong, 2009; Hong, Corter, Hong, & Pelletier, 2012; also see Van de Pol, Volman, Oort, & Beishuizen, 2015). The use of three ability groups in combination with some whole-class instruction seems to be most common in everyday practice in primary education, but whether this is more effective than, for example, having two or four ability groups remains unclear. Although this is a very relevant question for practitioners, the current review does not shed light on this matter.
4.2. Recommendations for future research and practiceTo understand the effects of differentiation, it is important to use an ecologically valid operationalization, which is inherently somewhat fuzzy, because differentiation is an educational approach in which multiple practices are combined. As has been made clear in prior reviews and is confirmed by the current one, differentiation is more than ability grouping, and ability grouping should be more than physically placing students together at a table for a certain amount of time. The real question is how teachers take into account differences between students in daily classroom practice and how they can be supported in doing so (Tomlinson, 2014). Successful application of differentiation practices assumes two things: (a) teachers need to have an accurate view of students’ level of understanding, informed by data, and (b) teachers need to know which instruction and learning activities are appropriate for students of different ability levels, given their goals. However, the decision on how to adapt instruction might also be influenced by external factors like the amount of preparation it requires (Roy et al., 2012; Tomlinson et al., 2003). Therefore, differentiation is best applied within a supportive environment for teachers. In general, such a supportive environment could be created by organizing teacher collaboration in which experiences and expertise can be shared (Vangrieken, Dochy, Raes, & Kyndt, 2015), facilitated by a school leader with a strong focus on educational leadership (Hubbard, Datnow, & Pruyn, 2014; Leithwood, Harris, & Hopkins, 2008). Furthermore, the current findings suggest that the formation of such supportive environments can be stimulated by implementing adaptive computer programs or broader comprehensive programs.Software can be used to take care of some of the assessment and diagnosing, and may provide suggestions for tailored instruction, content, or materials. However, it is still the teacher who implements the differentiation practices. As with homogeneous ability grouping, using differentiation software is not a guarantee for actual differentiation in the classroom. Coaching and support is needed to help teachers implement differentiation and to ensure differentiation goes beyond grouping. Research on how computerized systems influence teaching practices may further our understanding of how to use software as an effective teaching tool.Another promising route for differentiation is to embed it in a broader structure, in which educational practices like cooperative learning, regular assessment, remedial instruction, and flexible grouping are combined. As noted above, investigating the effects of differentiation within such a broader structure is complicated, because the components intertwine. Nevertheless, it is important to further investigate the effects of differentiation practices when they are combined with other support systems in order to determine how differentiation practices can be embedded within the classroom and the school.Finally, referring back to the claim that it is important to use an ecologically valid operationalization of differentiation, future researchers who conduct effect studies on differentiation should make sure to include enough information on the actual differentiation practices used (Janssen, Westbroek, & Doyle, 2015). Information on implementation fidelity is crucial, as well as information on the intervention itself: it should not only be clear whether teachers implemented differentiation as intended, but also what the (intended) differentiation practices exactly entailed. When it is unclear how differentiation took form within the classroom and what teachers actually did in order to differentiate, its effects in terms of higher test performance are difficult to interpret and of less theoretical and practical value. The findings of such studies are therefore of less relevance to the applied goal of the educational sciences of making sure that all students receive a suitable education in order to fulfill their full potential.
