7.1. Obtained resultsCSR is extensively discussed in the literature and it is supported by many standards and regulations, but it is still an abstract issue and companies apply heterogeneous processes and different internal policies to implement its management.There are well accepted regulations and recommendations on CSR that can guide enterprises in the management and communication of their policies, plans and results in this subject. However, companies find it difficult to manage the information, plans and policies needed as well as to disseminate their results in CSR. Enterprises need not only a guide to implement CSR plans and policies, but also a computer system aligned with other information systems that addresses the CSR processes, data and information dissemination.CSR must be considered from the technological, human and organisational point of view in order to develop computer systems that take into account specific CSR processes and reporting of information. In this sense, one of the benefits of the CSR Metamodel is that it proposes a non-abstract set of elements to represent how CSR can efficiently be managed. Moreover, we observed during the development of the research project that people responsible for managing CSR are usually not engineers and have few modelling skills. Therefore we need to provide them a tool easy to use and a friendly design environment.To achieve this goal, we chose a UML profile to implement the modelling tool and we defined icons closer to real objects for representing the artifacts. Adopting this solution, first, we did not need to develop the whole metamodel, but only the package corresponding to the specific elements related to CSR. And second, we can use a representation closer to people responsible of CSR management that will feel more comfortable representing CSR Models.The CSR Metamodel and the ‘UML profile for CSR’ presented in this paper are the result of various iterations performed in the tasks of the aforementioned project focused on developing a CSR Framework. In particular, the CSR Metamodel has been obtained after several revisions: beginning with the first version obtained from the domain analysis until the last one, which includes improvements and gradual changes.The DSML4CSR can be used as an Enterprise Modelling Language to obtain enterprise models focused on the CSR dimension. The models subsequently obtained could be used, among many other applications:•To make the knowledge about CSR explicit both inside and outside the enterprise. This issue is very important especially in CSR domain since social dimension and communication are actual needs implicit in good CSR practices.•To improve CSR knowledge and management. This modelling language benefits CSR process management since the CSR Models make visible the AS-IS situation and facilitate the analysis of which should be the TO-BE scenario.•To apply MDA on specific CSR Models with the aim of obtaining more maintainable CSR Computer Systems that allows to record, validate, consult, evaluate and analyse results on CSR.
7.2. Limitations of the work and future researchWe can declare that the proposed CSR Metamodel meets many of the needs a company has to manage CSR, although we will develop new case studies to improve aspects regarding other domains. Moreover, more experiences related to the transformation from CIM to PIM are needed in order to improve the quality of CSR Computer Systems.The model can have some limitations as well as many other models. Business people used to be reluctant to this kind of models. If we propose and use models easy to understand, close to their concerns they will realise that the gap between research and real-word is getting smaller.The work described in this paper stops at the creation of the computer model, but we proposed this approach because it is useful when requirements can change and the users include new needs. The MDA approach and the use of CIM Models have the advantage that issues related to CSR are modelled at conceptual level and quickly technology changes do not affect these models.Our future research work is focused on the use of the DSML4CSR in some other representative case studies to improve and provide new versions of the CSR Metamodel and the ‘CSR UML profile’. These results will also complete the Agile Model-Driven Methodology and the whole project we develop to define a Model-Driven CSR Framework. Moreover, the method and the obtained results could be adapted to be applied to other domains, in particular to health-care. Beyond existing HL7 efforts, similar work could be done in the field of development of software based on Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG), in which models developed using Domain-Specific Modelling Languages are used.Regarding the method of work included in this paper we will review the steps and include a Action Design Research Approach [83]. This approach takes into account that the IT artifacts can emerge from the interaction with organisational context. This situation can provide new and good inputs to the metamodel and the proposed DSML4CSR. Actually we think that the stages that this methodology sets up can improve some of the steps and the results of the methodology we used.The company feedback was also important to improve the proposal. We consider that it is necessary to review new assets, policies and approaches that should require new artifacts in the metamodel design. Furthermore, as new technology products arise in the management of strategic activities, the managers involved realise that they can obtain more information to improve their decisions and results and identify new requirements. Therefore, these models and the computer systems must continuously evolve. This is one of the reasons that justifies the use of MDA.
