Since Wood, Bruner, and Ross’s landmark article ushering in the metaphor of scaffolding, the range and forms of scaffolds have expanded and multiplied as researchers have explored this construct in increasingly complex instructional contexts and with increasingly sophisticated instructional tools, such as digital devices. We suspect that we have contributed to this phenomenon. While expansion of a construct can sometimes lead to dilution, we believe that this case study of a sixth-grade teacher and her class navigating a conceptually challenging curriculum adds to the literature revealing the complexity of classroom teaching and supports the accruing evidence regarding the multiple roles that scaffolds can assume in instructional contexts.
The three lessons described in this case incorporated a number of scaffolding strategies that were embedded in the applications, including: (a) communicating just-in-time information, as well as procedural supports, (b) prompts to engage learners to articulate, reflect on, and compare their sense making, and (c) multiple means of representing their ideas (i.e., drawing, writing, narrating, and the use of simulations). Despite the richness of these supports, our descriptive study suggests that these scaffolds would not have achieved their potential in the absence of teacher mediation and peer interaction and without being embedded in a conceptually rich and coherent curriculum. In this respect, our findings are consistent with those of Pea (2004), McNeil et al. (2006), and Reiser (2004), all of whom have argued for the importance of attending to the ways in which contextual features mediate the use and uptake of scaffolds.
In this issue, we celebrate not only the anniversary of the birth of the metaphor of scaffolding, but we also honor the memory of one of its authors, Jerome Bruner. In Toward a Theory of Instruction, Bruner (1966) noted, “A theory of instruction is in effect a theory of how growth and development are assisted by diverse means” (p. 1). We hope that our research is consistent with this call.
