General Morphological Analysis is a dynamic “conceptual” (non-quantified, non-causal) modelling method which can be employed for structuring and investigating the total set of relationships contained in multi-dimensional, non-quantifiable, problem complexes. It is a basic scientific modelling method, developed along the same lines as other scientific models: i.e. through the identification of variables and variable links, and through iterative cycles of analysis and synthesis.
We have shown that the technical properties of scientific models in general can be treated as variables in a morphospace of modelling methods. Such a meta-model identifies 44 different modelling types, including morphological models themselves. These modelling types can be ranked and compared on the basis of different relative levels of information which they require in order to be successfully applied to a given modelling target.
GMA is shown to be a suitable method for structuring and modelling those types of social/organisational structures and processes which, by their very nature, are not applicable to formal mathematical (causal deterministic) or probabilistic (stochastic) methods. This includes complex policy-driven processes (a.k.a. wicked problems, see Rittel and Webber, 1973, Ritchey, 2011a, Ritchey, 2013) in which one must work with modal categories and normative constraints rather than deterministic and probabilistic constraints.
Fritz Zwicky, the method's modern pioneer, called morphological modelling “totality research” which, in an "unbiased way attempts to derive all the solutions of any given problem". It may help us to discover new relationships or configurations, which may not be so evident and which we might have overlooked by less systematic methods. Importantly, it encourages the identification and investigation of boundary conditions, i.e. the limits and extremes of different contexts and factors.
GMA also has definite advantages for scientific communication and for group work. As a process, the method demands that parameters, conditions and the issues underlying these be clearly defined. Poorly defined parameters become immediately evident when they are cross-referenced and assessed for internal consistency. Such assessments simply cannot be made until the morphospace is well defined and the working group is in agreement about what these definitions mean. This is a form of “garbage detection” that is especially important for policy analysis, futures studies and social/cultural modelling.
