In this paper, we proposed a fast and robust local feature extraction method for 3D reconstruction based on structure from motion, which includes both a keypoint detector and a keypoint descriptor. In the proposed keypoint detector, the accelerated segment test technique is used to locate the position for the candidate keypoint. The difference of Gaussian image is used to create a descriptor for improving robustness. Then, the hamming distance is used to measure the similarity of two keypoint descriptors in order to save on computational cost. Owing to the techniques mentioned before, the proposed local feature extraction method has the best performance regarding both computational cost and speed. Moreover, to fairly evaluate the performance of local binary features, we have proposed a novel 3D reconstruction system based on structure from motion in which many novel algorithms are used to improve the quality of the resulting 3D models. We believe that this could promote significant progress in the fields of local feature extraction and 3D reconstruction.
In addition to our promising local feature extraction and 3D reconstruction system, our experiments have indicated some other valuable findings: (1) local binary feature is better than scale invariant feature transform and improves robust feature selection in terms of both precision and speed, (2) The rotational invariance of descriptors is very important to 3D reconstruction based on structure from motion (3) Descriptors with a large amount of representative information are better suitable for 3D reconstruction than binary descriptors like binary robust invariant scalable keypoint. In summary, we proposed a promising local feature extraction method for 3D reconstruction based on structure from motion in which the quality of the resulting 3D models is improved significantly. In the future, we will try to develop a novel local binary feature extraction method based on the proposed local feature method for very-large-scale 3D reconstruction based on structure from motion, simultaneous localization and mapping in outdoor settings with many repeating features.
