A careful analysis of the transient permeation curves obtained by computer simulation has shown that in most cases the approximate expressions based on the constancy of concentration over the entire thickness of the membrane, are valid with a sufficient accuracy and allow one to determine the sticking coefficient and the desorption rate constant if conditions of the SLR implementation are met. Experimental criteria of the SLR implementation are: i/an increase in the time of a steady-state flux onset with decreasing of the inlet pressure; ii/a linear dependence of the steady-state flux on the pressure for non hydride-forming metals.
However, in the very beginning of the transient permeation curves the assumption of uniformity of the hydrogen concentration inside the membrane is invalid, and the replacement of the outlet concentration with an average value results in a huge error in the determining the parameters of hydrogen interactions with metal. For non hydride-forming metals the very initial part of permeation curve should simply be excluded from consideration.
As for hydride-forming metals, SLR of permeation allows, in addition to the rates of surface processes, to determine TSSp and the hydrogen concentration at which the initial trapping begins. Revealing the initial stages of hydrogen trapping will lead to a better understanding of the processes of hydrogen accumulation and hydride formation, that is of practical importance for the development of model concepts and for the prediction of operational characteristics. Moreover, application of SLR allows to perform experiments under isothermal conditions, eliminating the effect of the rate of temperature change on the results obtained [38].
The only criterion of the SLR implementation for hydride-forming metals is the linear dependence of the hydrogen flux on the squared average concentration for the middle part of transient permeation curves. If this dependence is poorly satisfied, the attempts to obtain a desorption rate constant will give erroneous results, and hence the correct value of TSSp can not be obtained. The advantages and limitations of SLR in application to hydride-forming metals are shown on the example of titanium and zirconium alloys.
