This article investigates the effects of a social robot's motivational behaviour prior to (AR) vs. after (CS) several exercises in learning Spanish based on the ARCS model. A learning environment has accordingly been implemented that integrates a social robot with a visual interface that displays learning tasks.
The results do not show significant differences between the conditions, in terms of participants’ motivation and learning success. The manipulation of the four motivational dimensions attention, relevance, confidence and satisfaction did not work as intended, although the groups ranked slightly higher on their respective scales. Furthermore, above-average means on the scales measuring motivation and learning success suggest that both conditions had a positive effect. Learning success in the CS group tended to be higher, which implies that motivational feedback after an exercise offers great potential. Therefore, we think our results encourage the view that motivational robot behaviour can improve learning outcomes in an educational context. Follow-up studies could clarify how to achieve the maximum benefit for learners using our learning environment.
We plan to extend our learning environment using the following aspects: the robot should refer to each task more individually and, particularly if the given answer was wrong, explain the mistake made by the user. Utilizing informative feedback of this kind, learners would have the chance to analyse the subject in more depth and learn from their mistakes.
Moreover, a comparison between a control group that interacts with the learning environment without a motivational robot, and a condition in which the robot motivates the learners prior to as well as after the exercise would allow evaluation of the general effect of the robot on motivation and learning outcome. Furthermore, a long-term investigation of this study would be highly beneficial, where learners would interact with the robot during multiple, time-intensive sessions. This could eliminate the assumption that positive learning effects have been triggered solely by the novelty effect (Kerres, 2001).
