In this work, a computer simulation is presented for the investigation of microstructure evolution, heat and mass transport properties of hydrating cement paste. Through the computer-based simulation, the microstructure of cement paste can be simulated as a function of kh, w/c ratio and α. The formation and distribution of hydrated products are simulated based on some reasonable assumptions, which show a great coincidence with experimental findings. Simulation results associated with pore structure features are comprehensively analyzed. The presented simulation exhibits good computational efficiency and provides persuasive simulation results.
Based on the simulated microstructure, fractal models are efficiently applied to investigate transport properties (permeability, diffusivity and thermal conductivity) of cement paste. The evolution of permeability and diffusivity shows similar decreasing tendency with the process of hydration. Additionally, the development of thermal conductivity is primarily associated with the formation of hydrated products, and moisture status plays an important role in the thermal conductivity of cement paste, which is in accordance with experimental findings.
It is well-known that the hydration of cement paste is a complex process that involves a variety of complex chemical and physical behaviors. There are still some drawbacks in the presented simulation. Firstly, the hydration kinetics is not taken into consideration for the sake of computational efficiency. Physical interactions among particles are ignored in this simulation. Secondly, cement particles in this simulation are simplified to be spherical, and hydration rates of particles with different sizes are considered to be the same, which may not accord with experimental findings. Thirdly, the mineral components of cement particle are not distinguished and frequently-used admixtures for improving the performance of cement paste are not considered here. The work will be polished in the future.
