The particular political and institutional histories of academia, government, and industry have led to the current state of affairs in which cultural sociology is not the lingua franca of the social and behavioral sciences. Cultural sociologists often remain isolated within the broader landscape of the study of choices and decisions, even though they have important contributions to make to theories about judgment and decision-making. This isolation, we have argued, is largely self-imposed. Cultural sociologists have shied away from the now-robust interdisciplinary conversation about judgment and decision-making because they tend to have a few key misconceptions about JDM: that it assumes people have complete information, that it assumes people have unlimited computational ability, that it assumes people only care about money, that it is fundamentally individualistic, and that sees judgment and decision-making cognition as always conscious and deliberative.
Many of these critiques are long outdated and do not reflect the significant empirical and theoretical development of JDM since its earliest incarnation as “rational choice theory” in the mid-20th century. Moreover, sociologists have important contributions to make in further correcting some of these shortcomings (i.e. the kinds of nonpecuniary preferences people have, the influences of social context on the judgment and decision-making process). However, their absence from the JDM conversation has prevented the integration of important cultural sociological insights into the development and refinement of theories of judgment and decision-making.
Cultural sociologists can strategically assimilate their work into JDM by translating some of our key terms into the lingua franca. We have shown that the concepts of “beliefs,” “preferences,” and “endowments” can convey to the JDM community much of what cultural sociologists mean when they use terms like “values,” “frames,” “repertoires,” “narratives,” “symbolic boundaries,” “cultural capital,” and “institutions.” Moreover, this translation process revealed some key areas in which cultural sociologists have important – and uniquely sociological – contributions to make to JDM. For instance, cultural sociology has convincingly and repeatedly established the existence of an endowment effect for skills (what we refer to as the “repertoire/toolkit corollary”).
Perhaps not every phenomenon in cultural sociology could be recast solely into beliefs, preferences, and endowments. Our overall recommendation does not stand or fall on all of cultural sociology needing to fit into just those three terms. (In fact, JDM has a lot more terms, including, among others, heuristics, biases, and satisficing.) We have emphasized these three because they are the simplest terms and they can do a lot more than we sociologists typically give them credit for.
Adopting a more broadly understood language would allow cultural sociology to plug directly into discussions in the interdisciplinary literature on learning environments, preference formation, naturalistic decision making, and many other topics. Instead of criticizing economics, psychology, and other disciplines in our own private language behind the closed doors of our colloquia and seminars, we could take our objections and put them right out in public and see if we can do better. We believe that cultural sociology has a lot to offer to the other social and behavioral sciences. But to get our point across we first need to learn to speak the lingua franca.
