Cyber security is currently a rapidly growing field due to the increasing number of cyber incidents to which companies are subject. In most cases the best security strategy is to prevent and investigate possible scenarios that an attack could cause. Companies and incident response teams need a system to provide training courses built on top of real-like challenges and to perform security assessment and penetration tests without compromising the production systems. Researchers working in cybersecurity field, and not only, need a great amount of real-like system logs, security environments to test new algorithms or to study malware propagation.
We argue that the flexibility of virtual environments will play a critical role in many cybersecurity related aspects. Problems like the assessment of newly devised intrusion detection techniques, the evaluation of skills of cyber defense team members, the evaluation of the disruptive effects caused by the diffusion of new malware, are just few examples of issues that cannot be directly addressed in production systems even though they require realistic operating environments in order to be suitably performed.

SmallWorld has been designed as a modular, scalable and evolvable platform able to address the above mentioned needs. It has a great improvement potential over time because its features may increase and evolve as the result of real case-study applications. For example, because of their pervasiveness in the everyday life of people, very important issues are those related to the security of mobile devices and applications. In the near future, SmallWorld could be extended to accommodate suitable features, e.g. like those reported in [35], for coping with mobile devices.

SmallWorld has been devised to be a highly configurable system which, thanks to its suite of graphic tools and the possible verticalization of its API on more simple virtualization systems, it is suitable for an easy and rapid use also for small groups with few specific skills of the field.

SmallWorld is able to exploit all the advantages induced by the available hypervisor technology in terms of: scalability, availability, elasticity, performance and so on.
Business intelligence is a very innovative feature in this field, given that other solutions often require the use of an external tool in order to perform post analysis. This is one of the key aspects we plan to further develop in the near future.
The effective reproduction of complex realistic IoT scenarios, wherein the deployment of a considerable number of devices is required, may lead to some issues. Indeed, there would be the need to include firmware of embedded devices in the virtual environment which, in some cases, is very hard to do. In effect, the support for the emulation of specific hardware should be made available by the underlying hypervisor. This problem might be (partially) overcome by resorting to technologies like QEMU,1 which are able to perform hardware virtualization for many computing architectures. For this reason, QEMU allows to run various types of IoT firmware binaries [36]. The current prototype of SmallWorld, being based on Openstack as the hypervisor layer, is able to fully exploit the power of QEMU and hence its emulation capabilities would be only limited by the support offered by QEMU.
