In this paper, a fast and economical solver implemented on an easily-accessible desktop computer with a single GPU graphics card was developed for stirred tanks. The solver integrated the advantage of LBM, coherent LES and IBM for parallel computation. Compared to the traditional CFD simulations, the GPU-accelerated LBM simulation on such a simple desktop computer proves to be more practical and efficient for stirred tank simulations. Even with the grid resolution 8.8 times of smallest Kolmogorov length scale, the simulation can still be 1500 folds faster than the CFD simulation with 16 CPU cores. Superlinear acceleration was achieved and the speed-up ratio was more than 60 as compared to the LBM simulation using an Intel E5520 CPU core. It only took about two minutes to update one revolution simulation with this GPU-accelerated desktop computation. This enables the study of the macro-instability in stirred tanks, which needs the simulation of several thousands of revolutions. We found that at least 4000 impeller revolutions calculation was needed to achieve a time-independent prediction of macro instability frequency. The requirement of high grid resolution for LES conflicts with the limited GPU memory capacity for a desktop PC, and may hinder their application in modeling industrial-scale problems. We demonstrate that with the coherent LES and reasonable grid resolution, the fast solver was able to resolve more than 95% of total turbulent kinetic energy for high turbulent region, and reproduced the monotonic decrease of TKE along the radial direction, much better than the Smagorinsky model. The average velocity and TKE predicted by the fast solver was in better agreement with the experimental data in the literature. Furthermore, this solver can be extended to solve the hydrodynamics of complex fluids such as non-Newtonian flow (Xiao et al., 2014) as well. The solver is therefore more suitable for the fast simulation of stirred tanks on a desktop computer without the need of much finer grid resolution and supercomputers.
