There has been long-standing interest in the possible positive effects of all-girls schools for improving girls’ education in general and in STEM specializations in particular. But the positive associations presented in the previous literature do not permit identifying the effects of selection into all-girls schools versus the effects of the gender composition of those schools per se. Using the unique experience of random assignment of students into high schools in Seoul, we have assessed the causal effects of single-sex schools for girls and boys, separately, without confounding due to selection of schools by students or their families. Our comparison of students’ socioeconomic backgrounds demonstrates balance between students attending single-sex and coeducational high schools, increasing the credibility that student assignment in Seoul high schools is random.
In estimating causal effects of single-sex schools, we use both cross-sectional and longitudinal data to examine various STEM outcomes including high school seniors’ math test scores, choice of the science-math test (over the general-math test), and students’ actual attendance at university with a STEM college major within two years of graduating from high school. The previous literature has mostly focused on the potential of all-girls schools for girls’ STEM outcomes. In this study we also investigate the possibility that all-boys schools may enhance boys’ STEM outcomes, which is of increasing interest given the rising trend of female advantage in education (Buchmann & DiPrete, 2013). As girls now excel boys even in math test scores in Korea as well as in the United States, it is reasonable to ask if all-boys schools can improve boys’ educational outcomes.
Our investigation of students’ math test scores, their choice of the science-math test, and the actual STEM university major consistently shows that all-girls schools do not make significant differences in those STEM outcomes. This contrasts with some previous studies that showed some positive effects of single-sex schooling on girls’ STEM outcomes. However, our findings of insignificant effects for girls are not contaminated by upward bias caused by positive selection into single-sex schools, which many previous studies based on observational data may have suffered. Moreover, overall performance of girls in math has improved over time in Korea and currently girls do better in math than boys overall and particularly within coeducational schools, which suggests that girls nowadays may be less affected by different types of schools than in the past.
In contrast to the insignificant effects of all-girls schools, our results suggest generally positive significant effects of all-boys schools for several STEM outcomes. All-boys schools in Seoul are associated with better scores on the general-math test, although the effect is definitely weaker for the science-math test score. Boys in all-boys schools are also more likely to choose the science-math test, which is required to apply for a STEM college major. Importantly, boys who graduated from all-boys schools actually have higher odds of attending university with a STEM major (relative to attending no university) by two years after high school. The consistently positive effect of all-boys schools across different STEM outcomes and also from two different datasets increases our confidence in these findings.
What are the mechanisms through which these positive effects of all-boys schools are generated? Although we fully acknowledge that limitations of our data considerably constrain our tests of the suggested mechanisms, within our limitations we have attempted to address plausible channels. First, our comparison of the effects of single-sex schools across STEM and non-STEM (i.e., Korean and English test scores) shows that the positive effect of all-boys schools is found for both STEM and non-STEM outcomes, suggesting that possibly the effect of all-boys schools is general due to separating boys and girls. However, our mediation analysis controlling for schools' proportions of male math teachers reduces the positive effect of all-boys schools on the general-math test score and choice of the science-math test. The proportions of math male teachers are also significantly related to increased general-math test scores and choices of the science-math test for boys. Notably the proportions of male teachers in Korean and English, respectively, do not show significant relationships with Korean and English test scores. The significant associations of the shares of math male teachers with two STEM outcomes – general-math test scores and choice of the science-math test suggest possibly STEM-specific effects of all-boys schools. In comparison to all-boys schools, controlling for male math teachers produces little change in the estimated coefficients of all-girls schools. Interestingly, increases in the proportions of male teachers in math reduce test scores in math and probability of choosing science-math test for girls, although not significantly. These findings suggest that student-teacher gender matching could play a role in determining students’ STEM outcomes.
Although students were randomly assigned to schools within districts during our study periods, not being able to address teacher sorting can be a major limitation, which is an important factor that determines school quality. However, as demonstrated in Park et al. (2013), all-girls and all-boys schools are disadvantaged, not advantaged, with respect to observable teacher characteristics such as teaching experiences and average years of schooling, which implies that if there can be any bias due to the teacher sorting, the positive impacts of single-sex schools would be downward biased. We are also aware of the difficulty of estimating the effect of a mediating variable even when the outcome is manipulated randomly but not the mediating variable itself, proportions of male teachers in our study context (Bullock, 2010, Green, 2010). Therefore, our mediation analysis should be interpreted with caution. However, our findings suggest that gender matching between students and teachers, facilitated by single-sex schools (especially, all-boys schools), could be a good candidate for a potential mechanism through which single-sex schools affect students’ STEM outcomes.
Lastly, we do find that male high school seniors attending all-boys schools show higher levels of science interests and self-efficacy and higher odds of expecting university with STEM college majors than their counterparts attending coeducational schools. Similar to math test scores and choice of the science-math test, we consider the positive effect of all boys’ schools on these additional STEM outcomes likely to reflect peer group interactions and teacher-student interactions within all-boys schools conducive to enhancing male students’ STEM outcomes. Along with the finding that the shares of male math teachers are significantly related with the general-math test scores and choice of the science-math test but the shares of male teachers in Korean or English are not related to test scores, the significant effects of all-boys schools on a variety of STEM outcomes provides evidence suggesting STEM-specific effects of all-boys schools besides the general effect across subjects. Future research with better data is warranted to better understand the processes through which single-sex school environment has caused positive impacts on STEM outcomes for boys and the reasons why the impacts are weaker for girls.
