In this paper, we have presented an energy-aware scheduling system for task-based applications. The scheduler aims at minimizing a normalized bi-objective function which combines the energy consumption and the makespan (total execution time). Those metrics are combined by an importance factor which enables users and service providers to indicate which is more important for their purposes: save energy or performance.
We have proposed a model for estimating the energy consumed by the execution of a given application in a set of resources. This model estimates the application energy consumption by aggregating the consumption of the different elements of the application tasks execution, data transfers, VM management and the node background services. In addition to this model, we have proposed a methodology to automatically extract the resource power profile required to calculate the energy estimations.
The scheduler has been designed to be part of the COMP Superscalar (COMPSs) runtime scheduler. Due to this constraint, we have proposed a Multi-heuristic Resource Allocation (MHRA) algorithm to get the best scheduling solution in polynomial time. Applications in COMPSs are represented as Directed-Acyclic-Graph (DAG) of tasks dependencies which will be the input of the MHRA algorithm. For the different tasks graph are ranked by a set of heuristic rules (such as SPT, LPT, LNS and LSTF) which decides the order in which the resource allocation algorithm is going to schedule them by selecting the resource which minimize the cost function.
We have implemented a prototype of this scheduler and we have evaluated with different types of DAGs such as EP, MT, ST and GT. We have seen how the scheduler behaves depending on the selected importance factor and its relationship with the makespan and energy consumption. The outcomes of the algorithm show that a considerable energy amount can be saved, depending on the size of the instance and type of DAG. For instance in the case of an energy importance configuration, it allows to save an average of −22.44%, −33.17%, −27.08% and −31.50% for EP, MT and WP, SG respectively, with respect to the makespan importance configuration.
With regards the resource usage, when a makespan importance configuration is set, the scheduler decides to use the maximum number of VMs that the infrastructure can provide, having an aggressive VM creation response. In contrast, when a high energy importance factor is set, the algorithm tries to use the least number of nodes as possible, and a maximum number of VMs per node in order to save energy which leads to increasing execution times.
Future work associated with the integration of the energetic model proposed with COMPSs, also the addition of formulation to calculate the monetary cost associated with the use of VMs and delivery times, with the aim of increasing the rates of return and profits for service providers.
