This manuscript discusses the role of International Standards to validate an artefact in a real-life DSR project. The demonstration of this DSR project mapping research activities with International Standards indicates its appropriateness to validate artefacts and demonstrate research relevance to practice. Artefacts validated using universally-acceptable frameworks such as International Standards can also potentially improve the way DSR projects are conducted. Current literature review suggests limited use of International Standards in DSR studies and a lack of discussion on research relevance to practice that is justified by International Standards. Future research can investigate how International Standards have been or could be applied in other DSR projects in different contexts and whether this can promote validity in the way DSR outcomes are presented. Likewise, another example of future study could involve a comparison between the results of the SMPA method and results from the conventional process assessments based on ISO/IEC 15504-3300xx standards series.
This manuscript also makes a contribution to the IS researchers who engage in DSR because prior work has not adequately addressed the role of International Standards to demonstrate validity of DSR outcomes. We have made a contribution to the growing body of guidelines for DSR with a practical example that demonstrates how International Standards can promote research relevance to practice. The validation of carefully designed research artefacts has great potential to produce stronger design theories that may be valuable to both researchers and practitioners within and beyond the IS discipline.
We admit our DSR project demonstrates limited evidence of use of International Standards since it only reports one artefact validated using three International Standards at three case study organizations. However it may be plausible for a DSR project that needs to validate its artefact to apply relevant International Standards where available so that practical implications can be demonstrated. Our intention in this manuscript is to present future researchers with an example of how a DSR project can demonstrate validity of the artefact to prove it may work in practice. The design knowledge developed in this research forms a base for subsequent research, implementation and evaluation that may contribute to efforts such as trials for new and upcoming International Standards for ITSM and process assessment. By trialing International Standards in industry, this research also confirms that the standards are useful and supports the transition of new standards for effective industry use.
Note. ITIL® is a Registered Trade Mark of AXELOS Limited.
