Data visualization plays a prominent role in data exploration and has only increased its importance with the advent of Big Data. This paper has studied the performance of a framework based on Apache Spark and GraphX for visualization of large-scale knowledge graphs. We have seen that large graphs with millions of vertices and edges can be processed at a low cost with state-of-the-art Big Data technologies to generate compelling visualizations. The results are consistent through several experiments over real-world and synthetic datasets with heterogeneous graph topologies.
Our proposal addresses the performance problems of large graph data exploration. Therefore, it is not intended for visualizing complex semantics, for which existing ontology development environments like TopBraid or Protégé are more suited. In contrast, it significantly improves the current state of the art of non-distributed exploration tools such as Gephi and Cytoscape. In the last two years, other proposals aimed at large graph visualization have been presented, such as graphvizDB and GiLA. Although these works focus on interactive and multi-granular visualizations, and in principle present worse performance numbers, it would be interesting to perform a more detailed comparison of the advantages and the drawbacks of each approach, in order to identify the cases in which spatial partitions and levels are necessary and to evaluate further improvements (shared variables, message-passing, heuristic edge and vertex sets cuts, etc.). To do so, specific-purpose profiling tools such as GiViP could be used [77]. New graph management libraries for Spark, such as GraphFrames, should also be considered, as well are more specific and diverse topologies [76].
We plan to continue our research work by studying the usability of the resulting graph visualizations (cf. Fig. 13 (d)). To do so, we will leverage the capabilities of the Data Observatory (DO),10 a large-scale visualization environment built at the Data Science Institute at Imperial College London. The DO features a distributed data processing and rendering cluster connected to 64 46” high definition screens that enable a 313° immersive space with a total resolution of 132 M pixels across 37.31 m2. The DO will help us to investigate how people work and interact with large graph visualizations, how they can be improved for visual analytics, and which capabilities should be optimized in the graph-processing software. We will also further develop the GraphDL ontology and the associated toolbox, since they offer a useful framework to describe, produce and transform graphs in a flexible way by using a common format.
