This paper has identified a trend in the development of electronic ink-based interfaces that, when extrapolated, predicts a novel concept of interactive devices: the Personal Digital Bodyguard (PDB). Such a device will rely on basic human motor control performances, putting the lognormality principle and its corollaries into practice. It will be citizen oriented, providing e-security for his/her databases and personal information, monitoring his/her fine motor control for e-health and e-learning purposes. How realistic such a vision is mainly held back by the manufacturers’ commitments to improve the basic tablet and mobile phone performances and for research groups to focus on the many remaining open problems described in this prospective survey. Some theories, methodologies and architectures have been developed as shown in the paper, but there is even more to develop, enhance and enrich if the PDB ideation become an integrating goal. This survey paper aggregates these under the concept of PDB to point out some future research and development directions to which the pattern recognition community, researchers and engineers, can largely contribute. Judging by the enthusiasm of the customers of pen driven tablets as illustrated by sales volumes doubling every 6 to 8 months, we might expect that the PDB is not any longer a theoretical possibility but that its realization is imminent. The invasions of electronic ink-based interfaces have been predicted in the past: First in the beginning of the 90s, and again in 2005 when numerous futurists predicted the revival of handwriting as one of the main modalities to interact with a computer. Those predictions turned out to be still ahead of their time because recording and processing systems with sufficient power were not yet readily available for mass produced mobile hardware. But for 2020, it makes sense to predict handheld computing power, pen-movement recording precision, and display resolution of mass produced handheld electronic devices to be amply sufficient to make PDBs as realistic and indispensable as the internet, PC, digital camera, and mobile phone today. Otherwise the electronic ink revolution, which is bound to happen, will have to wait for another generation of mobile electronic hardware to win its letters of nobility.
