Recent research related to online security has shown that despite intelligent anti-phishing solutions providing promising results with respect to predictive accuracy, there still needs to be user involvement to better understand the phishing problem and reduce its consequences. The intelligent solutions may be able to block certain phishing activities by classifying websites using data mining techniques, yet they are unable to offer novice users a straightforward solution so they can themselves be able to develop a sense of what causes phishing or indicates a phishing activity. Therefore, it is imperative to not only block phishing activities but also to provide useful information on why they have been blocked. One way to accomplish this is by developing a visualization technique that enables novice users to visually examine phishing features online while browsing the Internet.
This article proposes a visualization anti-phishing technique that identifies the non-redundant features and then uses some of them as an alerting mechanism for novice users. The features have been chosen based on thorough experimental analyses using a range of feature selection and classification algorithms against a real phishing website dataset. The proposed technique offers automated phishing detection systems based on the fuzzy induction approach to educate novice users about phishing attacks. Empirical analysis using five data mining algorithms was conducted to evaluate the selection of the features using Minimum Redundancy Maximum Relevancy measurement. The results showed that there are six influential features from the complete features set that when processed derive highly accurate phishing detection systems, i.e. 93% classification accuracy. Moreover, an in-depth analysis of the classifiers produced from the distinctive feature sets showed the superiority of the fuzzy induction approach (Furia) since it consistently generated high predictive classifiers. The number of rules derived by Furia was smaller than the number needed using decision trees (C4.5). This makes the resulting rules easier for novice users to manage and understand.
The proposed visualization technique can be adopted by organizations to minimize the risk of phishing, especially by lower-level employees. Moreover, the automated knowledge base of the proposed technique can be exploited as a source of useful knowledge, forming part of the Information Security policy. Novice users can be equipped with useful intelligence about phishing attacks by just observing security cues, which represent influential features, and they can then communicate this knowledge with security administrators.
In near future, we intend to conduct a simulated training to measure the effectiveness of the proposed technique on large numbers of employees in the public sector.
