While trying to extend our research about opinions of genders regarding their studies into the research considering differences between countries, some rather interesting results emerged.
As presented in this article, on several very important questions, students from Novi Sad had quite different opinions than students from other considered countries. With these questions, differences between genders were relatively trivial. Yet, the story does not end here. There is also a considerable number of questions, where yet another issue appears. Not only that Novi Sad students have different opinion than students from other countries, but also there exists a difference between genders in Novi Sad. While females fit into the opinion of others, male students from Novi Sad have sometimes very unique and distinctive attitudes.
The most characteristic differences are:
•the male students from Novi Sad, think that their studies did not positively influence their intellectual development;•they are also of the opinion, that mathematical courses presented to them during their studies, are not worthy of their attention, did not help them in their studies, and will not help them in their professional lives;•while students from other countries same as females from Novi Sad rated their communication with teaching personnel and with e-Learning facilities relatively positive, males from Novi Sad again are negative about it;•for both genders in Novi Sad, it stands that they are quite secure about their future careers, compared to students from other countries, being more concerned about their prospect, and•Yet, both genders from Novi Sad are more pessimistic than students from other countries, about “how well their studies prepared them for the career in computer science”.
In order not to bother and bore readers with too many numerical results, out of around 130 questions/options offered to students within a survey, let there be mentioned that there is a vast number of not mentioned opinions that are in accordance with those presented here. The results given are the most characteristic ones, and therefore are presented here. Reasons behind this behaviour of students are not quite clear, and require additional investigation which will be carried out in the future.
