This paper studied the evaluation of an internship training program for information technology and computer science students during the 2014/2015, and 2015/2016 academic years. Although the overall results and findings have shown positive student feedback, the faculty should be aware of the need to effect continuous improvement of certain aspects as mentioned by the students in order to ensure effective planning and implementation of internship programs among undergraduate students.
More structured and intensified internship programs should be continuously made compulsory at the undergraduate level. This endeavor aims at providing more work exposure to undergraduates and better bridging of classroom learning to workplace practice. Employers can do their part by engaging the interns in problem-solving and decision-making processes, under staff mentoring. Performance of interns should be solely based on employer assessments.
The objective of the paper was to identify the student satisfaction levels about the internship program and; to explore student comments and suggestions with regards to improving internship program. A sample of 60 students responded to a scale consisting of 23 factor items developed to assess the experience and the benefits students receive from participating in internships. Factor analysis identified six factors that have been observed to be significantly correlated with student satisfaction levels. Correlational analysis also indicated positive relationships between student satisfaction levels and their confidence in their ability to obtain a full-time position and the perceived importance of internships for future career success. A marginally significant relationship was observed for the likelihood of obtaining a position with the interning company.
The study faces several limitations which may constrict the generalizability of the results such as the small sample size, and the lack of an attempt to control differences in the type of internships. Future research should extend the analysis to include universities of different characteristics, and control the various types of internship experiences. Furthermore, the analysis can be expanded to examine other disciplines, such as education and arts.
