In this paper, for the first time a pictorial conceptual model has been presented in order to describe all the main concepts that are involved at some point in the activities that are undertaken by CS researchers in an information-seeking process. Two qualitative studies involving this kind of researchers with different levels of expertise have been performed in order to understand the aforementioned activities. Conceptual models, illustrated through a standard notation — UML — have been chosen, as they facilitate the understanding of the concepts and their relations, and they provide an unambiguous and graphical way to represent all the acquired knowledge.
Even if the information-seeking behavior has been extensively studied by other authors, all of them have adopted a narrowed approach leading to only understand the psychological aspect of the process, or its procedural steps. This results in studies focusing on some of the aspects intervening in the process, but leaving outside some others. Our proposal covers and defines every relevant aspect that may affect the seeking of information in the CS field for research purposes. To achieve this purpose, we propose to conceptually describe the information-seeking activities through a high level model — see Fig. 2 —, whose main components are later decomposed into more detailed conceptual sub-models:

•Sub-model 1: characteristics of the documents used as source of information during an information-seeking activity, both individually and as a collection;•Sub-model 2: features of the tasks that can be performed in an information-seeking activity and how they are carried out;•Sub-model 3: characteristics and specificities of CS researchers when seeking information;•Sub-model 4: context in which an information-seeking activity takes place.
Using conceptual models and representing them through a visual notation has allowed us to make the difference with previous works, where models have been presented mainly in a written form or through very abstract and generic non-standard notations. Our model, on the contrary, describes for the first time information-seeking through a standard notation that ensures the understandability, transferability and unambiguity of the results. Apart from this, many authors have not to explained in detail the knowledge obtained during their analysis studies, and only provide some of the tips or guidelines they have obtained from them, directed to the design of software systems supporting information-seeking purposes. Due to the complexity and variability of the process, we consider that it is better to clearly reflect all the acquired knowledge as a framework instead of a list of recommendations. In this regard, our model has been conceived as a flexible, adaptable and extensible tool allowing to ignore, modify or incorporate new or field-dependent knowledge.
In summary, in this paper we propose an information-seeking model with the following features:

•Illustrated through a pictorial representation;•Developed using a holistic approach that takes into consideration all the concepts and relationships intervening in information-seeking activities;•Provides a general but comprehensive overview of the process•Implemented using a standard, well-defined and non-ambiguous modeling language;•Flexible enough to allow adapting it to concrete needs, like including new concepts that may appear in the future in order to reflect new realities, or to delete or modify existing concepts that may have become obsolete over time.
Further research would also be needed to extend the qualitative studies by interviewing a higher number of researchers as participants. This will allow us to validate the model, or to improve it by reflecting the new acquired knowledge. This, thus, would reduce the possible influence that individual biases may have introduced in the proposed model.
On the other side, due to the flexibility of the model and the number of similarities found with other models derived in different contexts of use, we believe that our model, even if stemming from a study focused on computer scientists, can be of great utility in other domains. However, we aim at verifying this hypothesis by using the obtained models as a framework to perform new studies. This will allow us to evaluate their validity and usefulness when modeling information-seeking activities in other research fields, or even in a general context.
Our long-term objective is to design and implement a software system based on the knowledge expressed by means of the proposed conceptual model, in order to provide full support to the research-oriented information-seeking activities, through the use of adaptive and customizable user interfaces, providing a high degree of usability, and generating very good user experiences. The model is going to be essential in the design process, as we need to identify not only the user's personal profile, but also his/her professional profile, that is, which is the information contained in the documents he/she usually manipulates, and how, when and for what purpose, what tasks he/she perform to fulfill each of these purposes, and in which context he/she usually seeks information. Having all this information updated dynamically and automatically will allow our system to “know” the user, and to anticipate to his/her needs and desires. In fact, nowadays, the model is being used as a scheme to implement an ontology capable to store all the concepts and relationships that have been identified. Then, this conceptual model may be used to design the storage system containing all the information related to the information-seeking activities, as the entity-relationship model is used to describe a given domain and guide the design of a classical relational database.
