We have identified some common themes in the researchers’ construal of “good” writing within the two disciplines across three institutional contexts, which support the findings of previous research into disciplinary writing practices (e.g. Hyland, 2000). At the same time, we have detected the tension between the ideals and realities of research writing in English as L2. This tension can be connected to the local versus global dimensions of research communication in the examined disciplinary communities. It appears that the ideals of writing in English are sometimes associated with the “local” dimension of writing within the Anglophone context, i.e. by L1 writers of English for L1 readers of English, whereas the realities of research writing reflect the needs of the “global” dimension of research communication. It appears that, for both the historians and computer scientists in our study, this global dimension of research communication is associated with an increased need for clarity, understandability, and the use of some form of standard language in research writing. The participants in our study reinforce these needs when they refer to writing in English for international publication in their fields.
It is noteworthy that when our study participants talk about English and English-language requirements, the native versus non-native distinction is being reproduced and thus seems to matter for L2 writers even if they admit that a “basic expository text” is enough. We have also shown that the L2 (and some L1) writers in our study may have somewhat different perceptions of “good” writing in their field depending on whether they talk from the position of the author, the reviewer, or the proofreader. Contrary to the suggestions that L2 users of English are likely to accept non-standard forms, our study participants clearly attach high value to linguistic correctness in research writing. The fact that these L2 writers seem to be upholding correctness norms complicates the debate on “linguistic injustice” (Hyland, 2016), which is perceived as being caused primarily by L1-English-speaking journal editors and reviewers.
By analysing the interviews with researchers, we have been able to identify possible directions that writing for publication in English in the two selected fields may be taking in terms of language requirements. Our analysis of researcher perceptions about language use is relevant because researchers are the ones who also act as reviewers and editors in gatekeeping positions. An attitudinal change towards the use of standard language in academic writing would be necessary if some visible change in the use of English was expected. Further research on “text histories” (Lillis and Curry, 2010, Lillis and Curry, 2015) in the two fields would be important to explore the issue further. The findings of this study can be used as a starting point for such an analysis. We also expect that, while our study is limited to two disciplines and three institutions in two countries, the findings may have bearing on, and be transferable to, other non-Anglophone academic contexts.
Our study sheds new light on the implications of the increasing L2 use of English in writing for publication. The findings suggest the importance of understanding disciplinary-specific requirements for English – and that the teaching of academic writing should draw attention to the different means through which writers can achieve clarity and understandability on a “global” scale.
