We presented the design, implementation and evaluation of the SeeMore kinetic parallel cluster. Our primary objectives were to entertain and educate broad audiences to improve the PDC pipeline, convince people of the importance of parallel computing to their everyday lives, and inspire participants to learn more. At both the IMF and SEF conferences, all of these objectives were met overwhelmingly based upon survey data from over 150 participants from approximately 15,000–20,000 people that experienced these SeeMore exhibitions.
While previous work indicates that the use of kinetic art and visualizations for teaching has limits, our work demonstrates that kinetic visualizations of parallel algorithms can impart a basic understanding of the beauty, complexity, and importance of parallel computation to very broad audiences. Limitations of these studies include the size of the sample survey data set relative to the number of attendees and the demographics of the sample pool that consists primarily of individuals with at least a passing interest in science and technology. These limitations are somewhat alleviated by the combination of quantitative analyses via surveys and qualitative analyses via interviews and videos. Furthermore, the survey results for many questions were overwhelmingly favorable for key findings such as the percentage of survey respondents that enjoyed their interaction with SeeMore (63% at IMF, 84% at SEF) and the percentage that believe SeeMore has educational value (69% at IMF, 87% at SEF). The almost 20% difference between respondents at IMF and SEF for these questions may indicate SeeMore was found particularly entertaining and valuable to the younger SEF audience or that the revised SEF demo was more effective than the previous version. Moreover, this would indicate SeeMore is an excellent tool to improve youth interest in parallel and distributed computing (PDC).
The SeeMore project has been a fantastic experiment to excite people of all ages and backgrounds about parallel computing. From this perspective, SeeMore has been a tremendous success and we hope this success will encourage others to consider creative ways of exciting the public about computer science topics. In the future, we would like to integrate SeeMore with modules being taught in schools so that teachers could prepare the students for their interactions to potentially increase absorption of the key concepts. We would also like to explore other ways of creating computer artifacts that combine parallel computing technologies with art for the purpose of education. Until everyone understands the importance of parallel computing to our every day lives our work will not be complete.
