In this paper, we have presented a possible solution to use Computer Vision in the Internet of Things. This could allow using IP cameras and pictures as sensors. Besides, this could open the door to other similar applications like automating things using Optical Character Recognition (OCR), face detection, or gestures.
In this way, we have presented a possible architecture to integrate Computer Vision in an IoT platform, in our case Midgar. This Computer Vision module, analyses the picture, or, in our case, picture sequences, and returns to the IoT platform a Boolean result as if it was a button sensor. However, we have shown that if you have a weak model, the Computer Vision module could have a low accuracy. To deduce this, we tested our module using three different models for detecting upper bodies, heads and shoulders, and frontal faces. After evaluating our module with the three models, we obtained that the model for detecting head and shoulders is the best in the first phase, in which we analysed isolated pictures, with an accuracy of 100.00% for True Negatives but a 34.38% of accuracy for True Positives. Nevertheless, we proposed to analyse whole sequences of pictures, and we obtained much better results: the model for detecting upper bodies achieved an accuracy of 100% for True Positives and 100.00% for True Negatives. This was possible because we centred our module in the analysis of all the sequence of movement. Thus, the best model to analyse sequences is the model for detecting upper bodies. Moreover, we saw that the number of picture sequences does not affect the result because some cases with many pictures have the less detection percent. In the case of ‘C2’ with 229 picture, our module only obtained percentages below 5% of identified pictures. The contrary case was ‘D3’ with 54 pictures because our module obtained a 35.19% of accuracy with the model for detecting upper bodies. In this case, the important thing is the quality of the pictures. This is why, it is probably better to analyse sequences instead of isolated pictures, which is the thing that we do.
According to this article, we can say that it is possible the use of Computer Vision in the IoT. Besides, with a very interesting application. In addition, we have shown that we can use pictures as sensors using not a perfect or weak model because if we analyse all the sequence that we need, we can improve the results. However, it is better and more recommendable the use of a good model with the sequences because we could improve the accuracy.
Automating is one of the ways of the Internet of Things. In this way, if we could improve and add new functionalities with Computer Vision, we could facilitate the use of the Internet of Things in our daily life and we could create new ways to communicate us with our environment. In this case, we can use our research to automate and improve the security of our homes, towns, cities, industries, and the Earth.
