In the light of the study results, we consider that the tool behavior is very appropriate in most of the cases presented, showing several recommendations when there is a known reason for it (e.g. it is necessary to make additional tests or there is lack of relevant data). Furthermore, we observed that the tool overcome the agreement with experts in comparison with a previous study where residents used a paper algorithm. While a wider validation would be needed, we think that the methodology we applied during modeling is very promising and could be useful to other research teams.
Building a multidisciplinary team that works coordinately with shared goals is key to achieving success in a project like the one presented. We consider that using an issue tracking system as a communication channel and follow-up tool was very useful. Above all factors, we think that the presence of specialists in preventive medicine in the team could be key to reach the goals in this kind of projects. Due to the profile and experience of their career, they can very well actuate as mediator and translator between the needs and requirements of the clinical professionals, that barely have the time required to participate, and the knowledge engineers, that lack medical knowledge.
Although it is soon to say that our policy to assign weights to arguments in the absence of GRADE evidence criteria could be valid in any scope and for any ECD/CPG, we consider it very promising, especially for diagnosis. It is also very relevant to highlight the possibility to adapt or modify the guidelines or protocols and to include specific considerations of each institution by introducing concrete expert criteria.
Finally, this kind of tools can be of great utility in the clinical environment, not only as decision support tools, but as training tools or even to drive new research directions through the analysis of patient cases. For example, during our validation, and on the lights of the recommendations provided, the endocrinologists detected some criteria (as the ones related to TTKG) that were not behaving as expected and that would need further research.Summary pointsWhat was already known on the topic•Experiments had been carried out to find out between agreement of non-experts physicians using a paper algorithm and senior endocrinologists in hyponatremia. Experiments had been carried out to find out agreement between non-experts physicians using a paper algorithm and senior endocrinologists experts in hyponatremia.•No CIG model exists to help on diagnosis of hyponatremia.•CIG-based decision support systems have been designed to put into practice clinical practice guidelines at the point of care (e.g. MobiGuide Project).What this study added to our knowledge•Our Computer-interpretable Guideline (CIG) decision support systems improved agreement with expert consensus in our settings with respect to the previous study.•We created a PROForma CIG model for diagnosis of thirteen subtypes of hyponatremia.•The development of CIGs can also be helpful for medical training and to support directions of new research in pathologies where lack of evidence still exists.
