Diagnosis of AML and ALL in children and additionally grown-ups is a standout amongst the most essential hematopathology issues. Early screening of lymphoblast and myeloblast cell is essential and can conclusively tweak the treatment plan of suspected leukemia patients. Manual microscopic analysis is always time-consuming, subjective, and inconsistent while computer-aided diagnosis of AML and ALL from images requires specific image processing and pattern recognition tools for precise screening. This work developed a computer-assisted classification framework that improves screening accuracy of AML and ALL blast cell with utilizing a quantitative methodology and the machine learning approach in view of the diverse kernel function of SVM with a rich set of color, shape and texture features with genetic algorithm for the classification of acute lymphoblast, acute myeloblast cell, and their blast subtypes. All the features are extracted from the nucleus of leukocyte cell and some informative features are chosen to utilize a genetic algorithm for the classification purpose. The maximum accuracy obtained for the classification of healthy, acute lymphoblast and acute myeloblast cell is 99.5% using a genetic algorithm with Gaussian radial basis kernel on selected 67 prominent features, highest accuracy for the FAB subtypes of acute lymphoblast is 97.1% is achieved using a genetic algorithm with multilayer perceptron kernel (MLP) function on selected 91 informative features, likewise, the maximum accuracy achieved for the FAB subtypes of acute myeloblast is 98.5% is gained using genetic phenomena with Gaussian radial basis kernel function on selected 102 informative features.
In the past methods, various studies related to the classification of acute lymphoblast cell from healthy leukocytes already tested, however, there is no such study present in which leukocytes were classified into various classes of AMC, ALC, and their FAB subtypes. Moreover, a few methods which were based on the AMC and ALC classification have utilized the proprietary database from the different localize hospitals or pathology labs, so the authenticity of the test and the correlations with the other schemes was not feasible.
The primary commitment of this work is the utilization of the kernelized methods for the recognition of FAB subtypes of AMC, i.e., M2, M3, and M5 as well as ALC, i.e., L1, L2, and L3, using a prominent set of features accompanied with a genetic algorithm which has not been done before. This fact can be measured as the implication and novelty of the present work. As results demonstrate that the proposed framework can be employ as a diagnostic tool for hematologist to assist them for atypical cases of acute leukemia.
Despite the extraordinary results obtained with present approach, further expansions could upgrade quality and precision of the classification task, which is an incredulous issue especially for microscopic images. Moreover, there is an intension to apply those suggested algorithm with respect to a large database.
