Being literate today involves knowing how to read, write, and communicate with others using digital technologies (Leu, 2002, Warschauer, 1998). Thus it is important to explore the potential affordances of new technologies for facilitating L2 writing. This special issue represents a combination of theoretical discussion and empirical exploration of approaches to researching computer-mediated L2 writing. Elola and Oskoz bring a social-semiotic perspective to the idea of new literacies. The three empirical articles by Smith et al., Cho, and Vandommele et al. bridge the gap between literacy practices in- and out-of-classrooms. Smith et al.’s study examining adolescents’ meaning-making process during a school-based multimodal composition project and Cho’s study of university students collaboratively writing using Google Docs and interacting through text- and voice-chat both involve authentic and motivating topics, either with great learner autonomy and opportunity for students to bring in their everyday experience (Smith et al.) or in an informal learning context (a debate club in Cho’s study). In contrast, Vandommele et al.’s study is designed to compare the different effects of the contextual factor (in-school versus out-of-school) on the impact of multimodal composition on students’ L2 language skills.
Each of the special issue articles enriches current literacy studies on L2 writing and offers theoretical and methodological innovations that new literacy researchers can adopt to better examine the dynamics of L2 writing processes and development. The instructional implementations described in the studies shed light on appropriate pedagogical designs for bringing students’ everyday literacy practices into classroom teaching. To further this area of research, studies in L2 writing in the CMC context could examine learners’ writing practices from different social, cultural, and cognitive perspectives, as well as multiple contextual factors facilitating the social interaction/collaboration and meaning-making process. Studies could also focus on various stages from planning, drafting, to revising, editing, and publishing, to explore the affordances CMC could provide for different stages of writing. We further recommend that text- and data-mining techniques be used to thoroughly explore the patterns and trends of L2 writing in digital environments. We also call for a more accurate measurement and better evaluation of the knowledge and skills students gain from new literacy practices.
