In conclusion, a number of visualization methods have been presented for comparing cartridge case firearms evidence. Using videos that show a transition from one image to another aligned image, it is possible to display the qualitative similarity that firearms examiners are using to make determinations of similarity. This method can be extended to similar visualizations using measured topographical surface maps such that a qualitative comparison is also possible with 3D measurement tools. Using these aligned surface maps, it was possible to relate qualitative similarity to a quantifiable similarity metric (the ACCF) using a similarity map. Such maps may be useful in practice by highlighting regions of interest for further analysis by examiners, or by numerically supporting conclusions made independently by examiners. Additionally, the visualization methods can add to the crime laboratory’s quality program when examination files are subjected to peer and administrative review. These maps were then used as a tool for relating visual comparisons to the results obtained by the CMC method. While the comparisons methods are based on fundamentally different algorithms, it is possible to explain certain conclusions made by the CMC method in a more intuitive fashion. Finally, the variability in a firearms proficiency test was examined by using the CMC method to compare a collection of samples used to generate the CTS 15-526 firearms test. These comparisons proved challenging for the algorithm but ultimately a correct set of conclusions was reached by considering both firing pin and breech face impressions jointly. This demonstrates the potential utility of considering more than one tool mark on a cartridge case when making conclusions using automated algorithms.
The further analysis of low performing samples, such as the damaged area shown in Fig. 7, suggests a need for knowledgeable operators to interpret anomalous results. These results also indicate the strength of the CMC algorithm at identification of well-marked samples which generate high CMC scores. Since the known non-matching scores are consistently very low, a comparison with a high CMC score can be expected to indicate a high degree of similarity with low uncertainty, whereas Fig. 6 shows that non-matches and poorly marked samples produce overlapping score distributions, so low scoring comparisons have a higher degree of uncertainty in the resulting conclusions. To quantify these uncertainties, larger and more inclusive data sets must be studied but the initial findings fit well into the framework of an adversarial judicial system where false positive conclusions should be minimized. Although further validation and testing is necessary before implementing these comparison methodologies, the ability to relate visual comparisons to quantifiable metrics will help to support firearms examiners in their current procedures, ease the transition into new comparison technologies, and provide juries with easy to interpret comparison results backed by repeatable and systematic analysis.
