Health and medical sector is having a large volume of heterogeneous data and hence powerful data mining techniques are needed for predictions and decision making. Liver transplantation is the challenging area in the field of organ transplantation. In this study, the Liver transplantation dataset from UNOS, which is an authenticated and promising dataset is used. Before doing an operation, formatting the dataset is very important. Extracting the relevant attributes from the huge dataset, data mining techniques need to be employed. Careful attention is needed to mine the relevant attributes from a medical dataset. We got 256 attributes of liver transplantation from 383 attributes of the multi organ dataset. With manual preprocessing, 59 attributes were extracted and PCA was applied in the remaining 197 attributes for the dimensionality reduction. 27 attributes were remained after ranking the attributes. By generating rules using association rule mining algorithms, we could prove that our extracted 27 attributes are more suitable for survival prediction in Liver transplantation. Three association rule mining algorithms like Apriori, Tertius and Treap were used for comparing the accuracy of the resulted attributes. Experiments using association rule mining algorithms in 197 attributes and 27 attributes were separately conducted. Thorough analysis of each and every attribute in the UNOS liver transplantation dataset could be made. Thus successfully extracting the most relevant top ranked attributes from the dataset using PCA, ranking and association rule mining algorithms. The co-occurring attributes from the association rules was selected to build a prediction model. We introduced two ANN models for the survival prediction of patients after Liver transplantation. Among them, MLP model shows better performance than the RBF model in terms of various performance measures and performance error measures. Thus we could successfully predict the thirteen years of survival of liver patients after Liver transplantation with a high accuracy ANN model. Higher accuracy of survival prediction after liver transplantation was obtained with the appropriate selection of model and attributes. Hence it is concluded that the attributes mined were the most accurate ones which helped the medical surgeons for the survival prediction of patients after Liver transplantation.
