Many fields of science and engineering are evolving through the contribution of complementary fields. This implies that project teams in companies and research centers have significant interdisciplinary components. It is necessary for people from different fields to be able to establish a common ground and understand the requirements and the effects of the problems and solutions for all members of the team. In this sense, it is worth mentioning the performance effects of application design decisions, which, many times, invalidate otherwise valid ideas.
High Performance Computing (HPC), including parallel and distributed programming, becomes a central factor that is applied to many fields from science and engineering. So, it is necessary for students from various fields to receive significant training in HPC. In this way, they will be able to design and develop their own applications and, even more importantly, they will understand the decisions needed to get the most from a given computational platform, such as which is the most suitable programming paradigm, which are the most relevant performance metrics and how to measure them. In this way, they can establish a common language with computer scientists and work together in the development of more powerful and successful applications.
In this interdisciplinary context, we show our experience of teaching parallel programming in interdisciplinary studies at a graduate level. We present a methodological background with the main principles and activities applied to the subject development. We have used a balanced perspective in which teachers first use direct methodologies to establish the background of the subject; then, students are progressively presented with more interactive, practical activities, and have to understand the problems and propose their own solutions.
The main conclusion is that the experience has been very successful and most students enjoy developing parallel programs, analyzing their behavior and trying to improve their performance. After this experience, it would be very interesting to introduce similar subjects at the undergraduate level, so that students from different fields are able to apply High Performance Computing techniques to their computational problems from the very beginning.
