PSICO-A is a computer system designed for the Psychology educational unit teaching to students from secondary education and perhaps for first degree courses at University. It is a system influenced by agent-based systems, like MetaTutor, Betty's Brain, and REAL, and it is a modular design that is inspired by the “representational theory” of Black's knowledge. Its originality is that it combines pedagogical tools that are usually applied to students in an isolated way without being accompanied by an experimental support. Among them, we emphasize the free memory recovery, the use of concept maps, a mechanism of “feedback” that combines the advantages of immediate and delayed response, the importance given to Metacognition, and an active vision of teaching, its own constructivist learning paradigm.
In terms of computational design, PSICO-A also introduces interesting contributions. First, its architecture is modular, with modes that interact and serve to sequence the tasks to be performed by the student. Secondly, the teacher's possibilities to collect and analyze data from pupils are very large, due to having a “back-end” which can store and analyze the information of all the tests. Apart from the desktop version, PSICO-A has been implemented on the Internet, with all the advantages that this entails: increased visibility, greater maneuverability avoiding memory capacity problems and easier to redesign, by using a specific programming language for network design, as PHP5 language (Lerdorf, Tatroe, & MacIntyre, 2006).
We have conducted an internal evaluation of our system, comparing the learning performance of three groups of high school students: one control group received a traditional class and the other two experimental groups handled PSICO-A (subdivided, in turn, in a group that interacted with the system game and one that could only have access to the simulation). PSICO-A proved to be a learning tool that seems to overcome the traditional method of teaching and learning based on the conventional type of class exposing and resolving doubts.
In the immediate future, PSICO-A must be able to improve its interface with the student and has to host a proper monitoring to enhance the metacognitive ability of students. It has to become part of the avant-garde in the current educational design lead by technology platforms, learning communities, or the challenges brought about by the Semantic Web.
