Our interactions with the increasingly technologized environments we inhabit have over time been enabled by ever thickening layers of technological complexity. For many decades we have been driving cars, most of us without knowing how engines work; more recently we have learnt to move and socialise within the virtual realities which exist in our computers, most of us blissfully oblivious to the stratifications of code powering these machines; as we go about our daily business, our spontaneous gestures and movements within cybertectural spaces trigger all kinds of environmental changes without us even realising; our activity patterns are recorded by the many ubiquitous computing devices we interact with during most of our day, and our data put to uses we are not aware of. With the inner workings of everyday technology obscured behind seamless interfaces, our ability to make sense of what technology does beneath the surface of our immediate experience can be severely limited; and so can our understanding of the implications of our increasingly implicit technologically-mediated interactions (Ju and Leifer, 2008). In this respect, the position of a dog who interacts with a computing interface with a limited understanding of the situation beyond ‘their own here and now’ is not dissimilar to that of a human seamlessly interacting with much contemporary computing technology. Indeed, with all its complexities, technology is beginning to blur the boundaries between human and animal agency, just as it is blurring the boundaries between users and interactors (North, 2016). Within this landscape, ACI has the potential to significantly contribute to the re-assessment of anthropocentric interpretations of concepts such as ‘use’ and ‘participation’, both in interaction design as a discipline and in the design of future smart environments.
So far the design of technological interactions has taken place in a socio-economic anthropocentric space, and has been driven by anthropocentric agendas (Mancini, 2013). But this does not mean that, afforded adequate access, animals would not be able to join the design table. Unlike human researchers, animal participants may not be able to comprehend the wider implications of the research processes they are involved in; and they may not share with designers the same understanding of the technological interactions they are exposed to. Nevertheless, animals are able to interact with and make sense of their immediate surroundings, at least in relation to the needs and wants evolution has endowed them with, and whatever they have learnt to do in order to fulfil those. If ACI is to afford animals the role of design contributors, it is essential that ACI researchers enable animals׳ needs and wants to emerge during the design process, and prioritise them over other extrinsic interests. As we have seen, existing regulatory frameworks for the involvement of animals in research essentially regard them as instruments in an experimental apparatus, while recognising their need for protection on the grounds of their inability to consent to their involvement and the potential harm that can ensue. In these frameworks such protection depends on criteria that don’t necessarily reflect the needs and wants of the individuals involved and that ultimately prioritise other interests. Such anthropocentric ethical perspective may be appropriate for human-centred research, but if ACI is to truly lead to animal-centred research, its ethical perspective needs to go beyond existing regulatory frameworks and guidelines. ACI needs an animal-centred ethics that can foster a culture of respect and sensitivity towards the requirements of animal research participants within the research community; an ethics that can inform the appropriate methodological conditions for enabling animals to express their requirements, thus allowing their requirements to shape the design process and mould the building blocks of a multispecies society.
PART 2
