In this study the proteins adsorption on HA (001), (100), (110) and (010) surfaces with Ca, P ions in solution were investigated by the method of MD simulation. The interaction energy between proteins and HA surfaces/Ca, P ions, the adsorption sites and water behaviors were analyzed. The results revealed that basic LSZ was more favorable to be adsorbed on HA surface than acidic HSA, which is adsorbed to HA (010) and (110) surface preferentially. However, the selective adsorption of LSZ is not obvious, which is consistent with the literature reports [51], [52]. Basic residues play a more important role in the adsorption process than acidic residues; basic residues were more likely to adsorb on HA surfaces than bind P ions in solution. Most of the active sites of protein, especially for acidic residues, are prefer to interact with HA surface through water molecules. Basic residues are more likely to adsorb onto HA surfaces directly. The Neutral residues which have CONH2 group exposed also have chance to adsorb on the Ca-P surfaces.
The presence of Ca, P ions in solution can influence the adsorption behaviors of protein. (i) The Ca, P ions clusters formed on residues in solution can lead to desorption of proteins by moving to the opposite direction of adsorption. But it is possible that Ca, P ions clusters co-precipitate with proteins on HA surfaces when the clusters reach its critical nuclei size. (ii) The Ca, P ions can compete with water molecules to bond to HA surfaces, and acting as a bridge of protein interacting with HA surfaces instead of water-bridge. The Ca, P ions interact with water molecules or hydroxyl ions of HA to form CaOH and POH groups, therefore change the charge distribution of water layer which could influence the adsorption energy of proteins. It’s also another reason for protein desorption.
The results of this study provided new atomic level information to further interpret the mechanism of protein adsorption on calcium phosphate surfaces, especially considering the effect of Ca, P ions. This information would be helpful for designing new calcium phosphate biomaterials with specific surface properties to adsorb target proteins, to further enhance its osteoinductivity or osteo-regeneration ability.
