LINDA has been designed and developed as a user-friendly, interactive tool for automated detection of linear features, analyses, and visualization using multiple sources of grid data. The software has been used successfully in mapping local and regional lineaments and characterizing fracture and fault systems in many case studies in Egypt and Japan. This paper presented an implementation of a suite of tools programmed in VB and Fortran 90 for automation of these tasks. There is no software dedicated to lineament analysis using tools similar to the present study. VB and Fortran 90 provide suitable development environments for this type of software for the following reasons. Spatial analyses can be carried out using the Windows operating system, with which the majority of researchers are familiar. The use of LINDA does not require learning a programming environment. Embedding the analysis routines in Fortran 90 speeds execution. The relative simplicity of the VB language facilitates the development and version update of user-friendly graphical interfaces.
LINDA is automated in a one-step process that can execute all analyses with one mouse click and save time and effort. The detected lineaments are not biased in direction by the adaptive shading of grid data from multiple illumination directions. That bias has traditionally arisen from interactive setting of the azimuth and altitude of a one-directional illumination source. The strong capability for detecting segments satisfying the criteria of straight linearity along valley features, irrespective of shade intensities, was demonstrated using ATMDS shaded grid data and STA. Then, long lineaments were represented by concatenating short segments and smoothing their connection into a gentle curve, using the BSP technique. LINDA proved promising in discriminating between dykes and valley features. Features from the DEM were more frequent and longer than those detected using the remote sensing data, in particular, band 1. Linear features from both sources can highlight, either individually or combined, the geodynamic framework in the region. Reference field-measured structural features clarified the applicability of LINDA for estimating the dip angle and detecting different fault types.
Future research will focus on enhancing the detection accuracy of linear features related to true fractures and faults using the grid data, by improving the detection criterion described in Section 2. Criteria in addition to the secondary differentiation must be defined, depending on fault topographies. Furthermore, application of the developed techniques to fine-scale and various types of potential field data (e.g., gravity and magnetic) using detailed structural information would be possible for localized areas. This can maximize reliability of the results, in particular for fault-type modeling, and make the validation process much easier.
LINDA is available at http://alaamasoud.tripod.com/id2.html or by contacting the corresponding author at alaa_masoud@science.tanta.edu.eg.
