Social media has become an indispensable component of individual, corporate and organisational communications. In the field of space science, Facebook and Twitter have been enthusiastically embraced by space agencies and astronomers alike to communicate and engage with the public. However, research into the processes and outcomes of these communication efforts are lacking. Without a deeper understanding of the factors that influence audience engagement, social media communication cannot be effective. Our study is an initial step toward filling this gap.
We applied supervised learning algorithms on Facebook and Twitter messages from the field of space science and three other fields (politics, business and non-profit) to predict highly engaging posts and investigated the features that make these posts engaging. We used LIWC, a widely used text analysis program based on psychometrics, to examine the psychological aspects of word use. We hypothesised that (1) highly engaging space science-related social media messages can be predicted using only content-based features, and (2) engaging space science-related social media messages contain certain psycholinguistic features that are unique to space science. Both hypotheses were rigorously tested and confirmed. We achieved prediction accuracies in the ranges of 90% using four feature sets that explored different content aspects, providing evidence for the ingredients of social media engagement. The top features for engaging messages in space science are photos, anger, visual description, positivity and anxiety for Facebook. For Twitter the top features are visual elements (photos, GIFs, videos), hashtags and certainty. Our uniqueness test uncovered several features that are exclusive to space science: photos, anger, visual description and authenticity for Facebook, and photos, hashtags, visual description and nonfluency for Twitter.
Based on these results, we conclude that there are significant and quantifiable differences between engaging and non-engaging space science-related social media messages. The unique psycholinguistic features that make space science captivating are anger, authenticity, visual descriptions and a tentative tone. Future research should consider a more refined definition of engagement by for example taking into account deeper forms of interaction (e.g. click through rates), and examining data from alternative time periods and science disciplines to validate this paper's findings.
