Due to the different characteristics of mobile devices from those of PCs, it cannot be directly assumed that traditional usability guidelines are valid for mobile devices. This paper shows a complete process for checking and adapting usability guidelines of hyperlinks for PCs to mobile devices. Fifteen guidelines have been stated for hyperlinks in mobile devices, from which ten are new because they did not exist in mobile standards or recommendations and one is completely new because it has not been stated in any standard or recommendation.
We conclude that most of current mobile devices are able to manage multiple browser windows. This contrasts with W3C indications [34] stated several years ago (in 2008), and is probably because mobile devices have evolved in recent years by adding new functionalities, and these advances in mobile technology have not been considered in any new standard. The guidelines proposed in this paper are expected to be valid for most of touchscreen mobile devices. Furthermore, we also conclude that it is preferable to inform the user when the target of a link opens in a new window in mobile web sites, since it is more effective and efficient, and users prefer to be always previously informed in those cases. It was also found that icons instead of text should be used in mobile devices to notify it, and they should be easy to understand.
Results also suggest that mobile web users prefer links as short as possible. They also understand better the target of links the shorter they are. The efficiency was also better the shorter the links, so it is recommended to use links as short as possible to be understood in mobile web sites, in order to achieve the best efficiency and users’ satisfaction.
The guidelines proposed in this paper are up to date for designing hyperlinks in touchscreen mobile devices (smartphones), so they will be very helpful for web designers, who will improve the usability of their designed websites by applying these guidelines.
