One of the first attempts to bring Semantic Technologies into the geosciences was the 2008 AAAI Symposium titled Semantic Scientific Knowledge Integration.9 Since that time, several workshops have appeared at geoscience conferences (Ma et al., 2015) as well as at Semantic Web conferences.10 Progress and advances have been made in semantic e-science; yet, there has been little to no attempts to quantify this progress. Our analysis extends the reach of scientometrics and allows us, for the first time, to begin to quantify the progress of semantic e-science. Our analysis confirms observations and anecdotal evidence from the community.
•There are strong indications that semantic geoscience research is still in the technical development and evaluation phase with limited production usage in domain science•Overlap between AGU (geoscience) and ISWC (broader Semantic Web community) is minimal; yet, an upward trend is evident•The semantic geoscience community is currently focused on lightweight semantics and integration of scientific datasets. Few advanced topics in Semantic Web research (i.e. logics and rules) have yet to make their way to the geosciences supporting the notion that Semantic Web research results often take a long time before they are taken up by domain-specific researchers, leading to a noteworthy drag and the adoption of outdated (or even failed) methods and paradigms,•Linked Data reuse and quality issues are prevalent leading to challenges in integrating datasets for analysis. For example, people and organizations are modeled differently between AGU and ISWC causing mapping and reuse challenges. Reusable patterns (Ontology Design Patterns (Blomqvist et al., 2016)) would be beneficial.
Linked Data scientometrics can ultimately enable a complete picture of semantic e-science. Yet, the geoscience community must first coalesce around standards in data publishing and quality. Unique and persistent digital identifiers, such as Orcid,11 are needed for people, organizations, and datasets and must transition into the Linked Data world. Using Linked Data, ontologies, and basic reasoning capabilities, allows us to rapidly deploy scientometrics installations. Getting data published as Linked Data is becoming a trivial task. Yet, our analysis provides some quantitative confirmation that the results of Semantic Web research often take a long time before they are taken up by geoscience researchers. To avoid this leading to the adoption of outdated (or even failed) methods and paradigms the Semantic Web and geoscience communities need to work more closely.
