Viewing online learning materials is the most frequently performed online learning activities. Therefore, understanding how students view different learning materials and how their viewing behaviors affect their learning has been an important issue. This study analyzed the system logs of 59 students who viewed online learning materials in a programming course. The results of the analysis revealed several significant findings. First, the students viewed the learning materials related to their classroom lectures (i.e., lecture slides and video lectures) for longer and more often than other learning materials (i.e., shared assignments and posted messages). Second, students' viewing behaviors showed great variety and were clustered into three behavior patterns: “consistent use students” who intensively used all of the learning materials, “slide intensive use students” who intensively used the lecture slides, and “less use students” who infrequently used any learning material. Third, students' viewing behaviors were associated with their learning performance. In particular, the “less use students” had lower learning performance. Finally, the students’ behavior patterns were associated with their motivation. In particular, “consistent use students” had higher motivation in terms of intrinsic goal orientations and self-efficacy.
Although this study has demonstrated these significant findings, several issues still exist, which should be further examined in the future. First, one third of the students were still “less use students” in this study. They had lower learning performance than other students did. Therefore, future study can examine why “less use students” demonstrated relatively low learning performance and which approaches can improve their low performance. Second, “consistent use students” and “slide intensive use students” demonstrated different behavior patterns but have the same examination scores. These results should be further investigated. Third, although students' motivation can partly explain why their behavior patterns were different, this is still not the complete answer. For example, why did the “slide intensive students” and “less use students” demonstrate different behavior patterns when their motivation did not show statistical significance? Are the different behavior patterns associated with individual characteristics, students' tasks, system features, or teachers' instructional approaches? We suggest that future research examine which factors can determine students’ behavior patterns when accessing learning materials and incorporate other data, such as interviewing or behavioral sequential patterns, to provide more evidence for answering these questions.
Although this study made a number of significant findings, several limitations should be mentioned. First, the sample size was small (N = 59). Second, the course did not use a textbook, so most of the students learned from the learning materials published on the LMS. The results are therefore not suitable to be inferred to other courses which use a textbook. Further research can compare the online viewing behaviors of courses with and without a textbook. Third, although we used the difference between mouse focusing in a page and mouse focusing out of the page to represent the time a student spent viewing learning material, this measurement is not entirely accurate because the student may leave the computer. In order to more accurately detect students' focus, future research can periodically detect the movement of mouse focus. If the distance between the mouse foci in a pre-determined time interval (e.g., five minutes) is zero, it may represent that the student left his/her seat. Fourth, this study used time of accessing online learning materials to classify the students into three behavior pattern groups, and examined the effects of the patterns on learning performance and motivation. The results revealed that the learning performance of the three groups demonstrated significant differences. However, students' learning performance is determined not only by the time they spent viewing the materials, but also by how they viewed the materials. It cannot be determined if a student is actively and effectively learning from a material once he or she has accessed it. Students who access a learning material for the same amount of time may have different levels of behavioral, cognitive and emotional engagement (Henrie et al., 2015). Time spent accessing a specific learning material can measure the levels of behavioral engagement. However, system logs do not easily measure the levels of cognitive and emotional engagements. Future research can explore what log data can represent students’ cognitive and emotional engagement. For example, Sinha, Jermann, Li, and Dillenbourg (2014) used a sequence of click actions on a video player to represent a cognitive strategy. Finally, the students could access the internet in the classroom. They could also access the online learning materials published on 21CS LMS in the classroom and after class. Therefore, the results are not suitable to be inferred to whole online courses. Future research can distinguish between the system logs recorded in the classroom or after class, and can analyze the differences in the in-class and after-class behaviors.
