This paper presented an efficient procedure of generating a dataset of human body depth images with part labels, which is suitable for training convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in a depth image-based human pose estimation scenario. To generate data for various body shapes and poses, we first generate a variety of body shape models and then add two types information: skeleton and part labels. The former is to easily generate arbitrary model poses using the joint angle data obtained by a motion capture system. The latter is to render body depth images with part label annotations. A dataset is generated and evaluated for a sitting scenario. A fully-convolutional network (FCN) was trained using the dataset and applied to part labeling tasks for both synthetic and real data. Another dataset was generated for recumbent poses, as examples of unusual poses, and evaluated using the same FCN. Evaluation results show the effectiveness of the datasets.
We are interested in developing a human support robot that can recognize a human state and perform appropriate assistive actions. Pose recognition is one of the necessary functions of such a robot and must be able to handle a large variety of poses including unusual ones such as falling and crouching. We are now extending the dataset to include various possible poses. Moreover, since a part of the body region may be missing in a depth image due to self-occlusion and occlusion by other objects, adding data for such cases is also planned.
Evaluation of the dataset is done by the recognition performance of an FCN trained using the dataset. Although the FCN has been shown to be very effective in part labeling tasks for both color and depth images, we need to seek other network architectures which could achieve a better performance.
We are now working on making the results of the research be publicly available as follows. One is the dataset itself [32]. The datasets described in the paper is already available at this website, and we are planning to add more datasets as they are generated. These datasets can be used for train any network architectures for the part labeling task. The other type of data we are planning to make available is a set of human models with skeleton and part label information. This makes it possible for the users to generate a new dataset with poses they want to deal with.
