In this paper, we proposed a new algorithm and two new kernel functions to solve activity-prediction problems. The two kernel functions are based on the paths of stars. To reduce the time that is needed to find the relationship between paths, we proposed a coding system that maps each path to a unique number. This number can be used to find common subgraphs between paths.
The algorithm was applied on MAO, which is a chemical dataset with 68 chemical compounds. The results of our experiments show that the proposed algorithm with kernel function Kdis has a prediction accuracy of 94%, and when we used BS for feature vectors, the prediction accuracy improved to 96%. Hence, it is clear that feature selection reduces the data over-fitting problem and improves prediction accuracy. Our results also show that the proposed algorithm with kernel function Ksim has a prediction accuracy of 93%, and when we used BS for feature vectors, the prediction accuracy improved to 96%. We applied the proposed algorithm with two kernel functions to the AIDS dataset with 2000 chemical compounds. The results of our experiments show that the proposed algorithm with kernel function Kdis has a prediction accuracy of 99.5%, and the proposed algorithm with kernel function Ksim has approximately the same prediction accuracy of 99.4%. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm has an advantage in terms of accuracy and a comparable prediction accuracy with all tested methods.
The proposed algorithm can be further upgraded to improve its performance and accuracy. This modification can be done by using additional types of features in the paths rather than star-type features only. These features can be chosen to be three-dimensional (3D) instead of two-dimensional (2D), which may improve the performance of the algorithm and enable it to deal with stereoisomers of molecules. Stereo isomers appear in the 3D representation of molecules when two molecules have the same 2D structure but have a different 3D structure.
