The analyses in this paper are all based on the 1309 geo-ontology-related articles collected from the WOS from 1999 to 2014. The article is the main document type of current geo-ontology research. Most papers have been published in the International Journal of Geographical Information Science, Progress in Human Geography, and Computers & Geosciences.
The number of institutions and spatial distribution of article numbers were visualized. The results show that the number of institutions is proportional to the number of published papers; moreover, this data corresponds with regions with a GDP of over USD 2000 billion. The USA has the largest numbers of published papers, single-country published papers, and international collaborations, followed by China and the UK. A chord diagram analysis of the 20 most productive countries suggested that the USA was in a core position in global geo-ontology research. The research heat map of institution region distribution shows that the USA, Western Europe, and Eastern Asia are regions with the highest interest in geo-ontology research. Wuhan University has contributed the most papers, followed by the University of Munster and Chinese Academy of Sciences. In addition, articles from international and inter-institutional cooperation have a higher average cited rate.
A popularity analysis shows that “GIS,” “Semantic Web,” “space,” and “model” are the most popular research topics of 1999–2014. More importantly, the core technologies of geo-ontology, Semantic Web related research (interoperability) and research in geo-ontology applications (GIS and Web) all continue to increase. Further, “semantic granularity in ontology-driven geographic information systems”, “Ontologies in support of activities in geographical space”, “A translation approach to portable ontology specifications” are important references. Geographical space research, computer-human interaction, and ontology cognition are the three main research areas of geo-ontology. At present, the semantic mismatch among the producers of ontology data (or between the producers and users this data) and error propagation in interdisciplinary and cross-linguistic data discovery and reuse remain to be solved. In the future, geo-ontology should follow the Semantic Web specifications so that it can be reused, which calls for new geo-ontology modeling primitives based on OWL and new methods to automatically or semi-automatically rework data in the Semantic Web. The explicit processing and description of topological relations and directional relations between geographical entities still requires further study.
