This study contributes to the extant literature on e-Government adoption. An extended UTAUT2/GAM model was used to investigate antecedents of behavioural intention in a small island developing state. The results show that performance expectancy and facilitating conditions are positively related to behavioural intention. We further investigate resistance to change in a pre-adoption stage and show that resistance to change and computer self-efficacy have a negative significant relationship with intention to use eGov services. We also demonstrate that trustworthiness is accounting for the variance explained by resistance to change as the relationship becomes non-significant with the addition of trust. Future research could further explore the antecedents of resistance to change in pre-adoption phase. Resistance to change has mainly been employed in the continuance literature in order understand the factors that would lead users to continue using a system. Resistance to change in the pre-adoption phase deals with factors that would inhibit users from switching to a computerised system or adopt an innovation. Future research could also further extend the model with the addition of perceived awareness and trust in Internet and trust in government as independent predictors. Trust in government has been argued to be an important component in the adoption literature as demonstrated by numerous articles (Carter and Bélanger, 2005, Beldad et al., 2012, Bélanger and Carter, 2008). Constructs such as information quality, websites quality which were not tested in this research could be included as well as moderating effects. Linking those constructs in the adoption nomology may further sheds light on how to improve government services to facilitate the life of citizens. Further, the model in this research could be validated in other small island developing states or developing countries. Moreover, citizens’ perceptions of government credibility and integrity on eGov services adoption decision could be further explored. The model used in this research could be further extended to explore factors that would lead to eGov adoption in a dynamic context where eGov services are fully interactive.
