Biomedical Big Data Science is a thriving and an exponentially growing community. Scientists need a quick-access gateway to high-quality knowledge content on topics that interest them. BBDTC is a community-oriented platform with an aim to promote knowledge sharing and accelerate information transfer rate from the field experts to an inquisitive learner. Smooth information dissemination will encourage new approaches and enable community members to combine tools from diverse domains to solve critical problems.
The collaborative provides essential tools to facilitate content development and deployment of biomedical big data training and education. The simple and intuitive platform enables the community to contribute at many different levels such as by adding course modules and playlists, adding new tools or working with the development team to introduce customized VM packages. BBDTC’s fact based progress tracking dashboard and statistical reports enable content creators to understand learners and to provide a learning experience that goes beyond their expectations.
There are several areas in which we plan to expand our current work. To give an experiential view of a scientific facility, we plan to add Virtual Field Trips to BBDTC. Using this feature, community members can gain fundamental understanding of each other's strengths to better collaborate. This feature will enable labs to achieve higher visibility among their target community members.
To further facilitate easy dissemination of read-to-use tools, we plan to automate the VM toolbox generation process. In addition, we will enhance BBDTC's integration with Amazon AWS, by launching virtual machines using AMI id information from the BBDTC website.
For fast exchange of MOOC course structure, we plan to extend the ability to import and export feature to additional platforms that are gaining traction in the community. A user-interface to allow educators to individually import and export data will also be explored in the future. In the playlist interface, we plan to include access to course repository and resources from the same interface.
Finally, a tool is only as good as its utility to the stakeholders. We will build incentive based feedback mechanisms for biomedical researchers to accelerate knowledge sharing. We will aggressively increase community engagement with the key stockholders, such as, R25 awardees, BD2 K Centers of Excellence, NIH P41 BTRRs by serving their training and educational material through BBDTC, and acting on feedback at every step.
