Whilst there is an increasing recognition that social science must be incorporated into energy related research so that social scientists are no longer ‘social outcasts’ [42], there are still few energy demand research papers and projects led by social scientists [50]. Opportunities for cross-disciplinary research are emerging but there remains a lack of understanding as to how to integrate social science and social scientists in practice or the consequences of this integration (or lack thereof). This is key from the perspective of ECRs, who are the doing the research ‘on the ground’ and interacting on a daily basis with colleagues of different disciplines. This paper suggests that there is a need to recognise the challenges ECRs face, in order to achieve full integration of disciplines, whereas other studies have focused more on more senior and experienced academics.
By sharing experiences of social science ECRs working on cross-disciplinary energy projects, this paper highlights the challenges they face and suggests ways of negotiating them. A report written from a senior researcher perspective mentions communication and difficulty in bridging between disciplines as the most prevalent challenge [12], whereas the findings reported here highlight the differing expectations of the role of social scientists in cross-disciplinary teams as the most frequently suggested challenge. As well as effective management and planning (voted as the most important suggestion for successful cross-disciplinary projects), participants discussed the usefulness of sharing their experience within and between project teams. Whilst this is likely to be more beneficial for ECRs, it is suggested that sharing between more senior project members, which may be facilitated through networks like TEDDINET, would also be beneficial.
This paper also offers a definition of what success looks like on an external, internal and personal basis, from an ECR perspective, taking into account an individual's perceptions and experiences within the project, rather than merely the project’s and wider University’s research agenda. It is clear from the experience of participants represented in this paper that projects can have external success, without internal or personal success, but this is likely to be to the detriment of the ECR. Additionally, research projects are not conducted in a vacuum and institutional and financial support are also key to successful cross-disciplinary research.
Although differing funding and policy environments create country-specific contexts for cross-disciplinary energy working [23], the findings presented here have significance for all those engaged in cross-disciplinary energy research, both in the UK and beyond. Future work would benefit from discussion with career interdisciplinarians who may offer other productive ways of bridging the gap between researchers who use different methodologies, as well as with social scientists working outside of the UK, to identify similarities and differences in their experiences. The preliminary stage of this research was to focus purely on the views of social scientists, however, further study could also ascertain the views of other disciplines who work with social scientists. Opportunities also exist to explore the consequences of cross-disciplinary work which is deemed successful (or not), and how to assess that success.
Whilst current academic working practices will no doubt remain a significant barrier to effective cross-disciplinarity in the future, there is much that can be done now to build relational capital amongst team members and thus increase the possibility of a shared and holistic understanding emerging from cross-disciplinary energy research.
