Despite the increasing diffusion of IT since the 1990s, Brazilian agriculture is still characterized by low adoption of computers and decision-making support systems (IBGE, 2006, Mendes et al., 2014). Greater diffusion of these technologies is important for generating production efficiency gains and improving the income of farmers (Souza Filho et al., 2011, Carrer et al., 2015). The objective of the present study was to examine the determinants of adoption of computers and FMIS by Brazilian citrus farms. It was found that education and production revenue had a positive effect on the adoption of computers, whereas production experience of farmer adversely affected adoption. In the case of FMIS adoption and intensity of use, the significant variables and their respective effects were: experience (−), overconfidence in management (+), production revenue (+), technical assistance (+) and contractual adjustments (−). Based on these results, the following suggestions can increase the diffusion of these management technologies in Brazilian citrus industry:
(I)Training of farmers and rural extension agents and dissemination of information about technologies
In the short term, it is not possible to increase the educational level of farmers so that they can adequately understand the benefits and use different technologies. However, it is possible to increase the availability of courses and short-term training and encourage the dissemination of these courses and training programs through agricultural extension policies. It is also important that these courses reach more experienced farmers (those less likely to adopt technologies), training them in their use and changing their perceptions of the benefits resulting from the adoption of management technologies. Technology diffusion agents also need to be better trained and motivated to further spread technology in Brazilian agriculture. In other words, it is necessary to train human resources in Brazilian agribusiness.
(II)Incentive to use private and/or government technical assistance
The transfer of information about new technologies and assistance in the use of the technologies after adoption is critical for farmers who do not have proper training. In such cases, farm visits by production and management specialists are very important for providing information and helping farmers and their employees. Technical assistance can be obtained through self-employed specialists and specialized firms (private) or rural organizations and agricultural extension departments (public). There are also cases of farmers using the technical assistance offered by their cooperatives and pools at a lower cost than the assistance provided by specialized firms.
(III)Better coordination in commercial relationships between farmers and juice processing companies
Fewer contractual adjustments are important for reducing transaction costs and increasing incentives and expectations for citrus farmers. In this case, given the asymmetrical bargaining power within the citrus chain, it is important to develop new forms of governance that can create an offsetting power for farmers, to rebalance commercial transactions. The creation of a council to establish prices and other negotiation conditions for the sale of oranges could potentially reduce commercial conflicts and enhance the expectations of citrus farmers. In the mid-term, this improvement has the potential to increase technology diffusion and productivity gains in citrus farms.
(IV)Incentives to adopt management technologies on small and medium-sized farms
Although less complicated in terms of production process coordination, small and medium-sized farms can also take advantage of the benefits associated with the use of computers and FMIS. The continuation of these farms in citrus production depends on production efficiency gains that can stem from the adoption of these technologies. Some technologies with high fixed costs could be jointly adopted among small farmers from the same region, lowering the average cost per farmer. For example, the necessary machinery for adopting certain precision agriculture technologies could be jointly purchased by farmers through cooperatives or pools, with the initial investment and fixed costs divided among the members. For use of the equipment, farmers could establish formal or informal rules and organize training in the cooperatives, thereby increasing the probability that it will be used properly. Joint adoption additionally enables the exchange of information and experiences about the technology among the group of farmers.
It should also be noted that the present study was innovative in testing the effect of personal, social, behavioral, structural and institutional variables on the likelihood of FMIS adoption. The results for the overconfidence in management and occurrence of contractual adjustments variables are interesting and rarely studied in other analyses on the adoption of technologies in agriculture. It can be seen that the behavior of farmers and the institutional environment in which they operate their farms are important for determining the decision-making process and consequently the adoption of technologies. In the first case, it is important to incorporate new behavioral finance theory models to measure the behavior of individuals and test the effect of these aspects on decision-making. In the second case, commercial relationships and the regulatory environment in which they occur have an important impact on the decisions of economic agents.
The main limitation of the study is the use of cross-section data for the 2013/14 crop. In addition, the sample is restricted to the traditional citrus belt of the state of São Paulo - Brazil's largest orange producer. Data from farms of other regions, as well as from other harvest years, could broaden the scope of analysis. The adoption of FMIS over time could be investigate by using panel data. Thus, the role of variables that change over time, such as prices of output and inputs, would be revealed. Lack of data collected systematically and the high cost of a survey with personal interviews prevented this analysis.
There is room for further studies on the adoption of management technologies in Brazilian agriculture. Future studies may be able to use panel data and incorporate new variables and econometric models to identify the determinants of adoption of these technologies by farmers in different rural activities.
