Synthetic biology scientific community has devoted large attention towards the implementation of robust and scalable biological memory structures in recent years. The design of edge-triggered synchronous sequential structures, which are vital for the implementation of complex information processing systems, however, has not been performed yet. We described a computational design of an edge-triggered D flip-flop based on transcriptional logic. Edge-triggered flip-flop was designed upon a master–slave configuration of the basic clocked D flip-flop. Furthermore, we applied GA to tune the response of the topology with the calibration of kinetic parameter values. Values used in the optimisation process were derived from the literature and correspond to biological relevant data, which means that the parts used in the topology, i.e. promoters, protein coding sequences, etc., could be constructed in the near future, which would bring the design to its in vivo implementation. We additionally confirmed the robustness of the topology using a global sensitivity analysis framework developed specifically to cope with high-dimensional and poorly connected parameter spaces as is the case in the proposed system. We analysed the relations between selected parameters that need to be fulfilled for the system to work correctly using PSA.
The proposed flip-flop was used in the design of a Johnson counter, which is able to count up to 2n events using n flip-flops. The complexity of the proposed counting scheme is comparable to the complexity of a ripple counter with counting module 2n (see Fig. 9), which however requires relatively small delays of the signal propagation through logic gates in comparison to clock signal periods. While this does not hold for transcriptional logic circuits, the described ripple counter proves to be unsuitable to be used in biological systems. Johnson counter on the other hand reflects appropriate dynamics even in the case of large gate propagation delays. This is achieved with the use of shared clock signal among all flip-flops in the topology. Moreover, all segments in the counter are composed of the same number of logic layers, which provides an equal delay for all parts of the circuit that need to be stable at the same time.Download : Download high-res image (45KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 9. Three-bit ripple counter using a sequence of D flip-flops. The output q of each flip-flop is fed to the clock input (represented by a triangle) of the next flip-flop in the sequence. The complementary output qc of each flip-flop is fed to the data input d of the same flip-flop.
