In this paper, an automatic computer aided detection system (CADe) has been developed to assist radiologists for finding cancers in automated 3D breast ultrasound (ABUS) images. The proposed system consists of two main steps: (1) mass candidate region extraction (2) false positive reduction using a classifier. Based on our experiments, it was found that at one false positive per image the region-based sensitivity and case-based sensitivity were 68% and 76%, respectively. Moreover, this system achieved case-based sensitivity of 90% at 9 false positive detected regions per image that proves this system is promising for radiologists who intend to have a practical system with high sensitivity.
In the initial detection stage of our method, we proposed a new hypothesis based on isocontours to find candidate regions. Based on this hypothesis, an isocontour usually exists around some subsequent slices of the mass in which contour's pixels have similar intensity values. According to this, we developed a new algorithm to detect mass like structures in ABUS images.
The sensitivity of the initial stage determines the maximum sensitivity of the detection system. If a cancer is missed in this step, it cannot be retrieved by the next step. Therefore, the aim of the initial stage is to reach as high sensitivity as possible at a manageable false positive rate. In our experiments it is found that four percent of cancerous masses were missed in the initial stage. Fig. 14 illustrates two examples of such missed masses. These two types of masses are problematic for our detection method. Fig. 14(a) shows a big mass connected to the breast border. In this case, our system cannot find any closed iso-contour near the boundary of that mass because the mass boundary in not closed. Although this type of connectivity is rarely happened, it is not impossible and a solution for finding this type of masses is left for the future work. In addition to this type of masses, very small masses that are not circular and homogeneous, as shown in Fig. 14(b), may be missed by the initial filtering using domain specific knowledge. It is notable that there is a tradeoff between sensitivity and false positive rate even in the initial stage because if false positive rate is very high then in the next step our classifier cannot manage the imbalancity of the constructed dataset. To manage this tradeoff, it is inevitable to miss such small masses. In our future works, we will extend our system to detect such small and inhomogeneous lesions by combing it with another detection method that is dedicated to find only small masses.Download : Download high-res image (104KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 14. Two types of masses which were missed by the initial stage; (a) a big mass near the breast border, (b) a very small mass.
After initial mass candidate detection, the proportion of true positive samples against false positives is 1–66. Hence, we used Random Under-Sampling Boosting (RUSBoost) to handle the imbalancity of training sets. For classification, four groups of features are extracted for each candidate. To increase the performance of the detector, we organized four RUSBoost classifiers in a cascade structure, each trained on a group of features.
It is notable that we assign likelihoods for all samples rather than make an absolute binary classification for the CADe system. Based on thresholding on these likelihoods, we obtain FROC curve and the related operating points. Therefore, we can report classification performance measures for operating points only and not for the whole CADe system. The classifier performance is summarized for some operating points in Table 4. As shown in the table, when the sensitivity (recall) is increased the precision is dramatically degraded. For example, when the recall of the system grows 5% (from 0.68 to 0.73) the number of false positives is doubled. This is a challenge for all CADe systems for detecting cancers in medical images because we deal with imbalanced datasets which bias the classifier in favor of the major class. The major class samples dominate the feature space such that increasing the recall drastically increases the number of false positives. But it is noteworthy to put into account that recall is more important than precision since cancer detection is naturally a cost sensitive problem (i.e. miss classification costs are not the same in this type of problems). That is, if a real cancer is classified as a FP, the cost is much higher than when a normal region is classified as a cancer. In the first condition, the patient would not undergo treatment and the lesion will gradually grow and spread. In the second one, the patient would be referred to pathology and the suspicious region would be diagnosed as a FP after biopsy. For this reason, FROC curves and operating points are used for the final evaluation of CADe systems. Moreover, we cannot deterministically decide which sensitivity-FP pair is better. Some radiologists may prefer CADe systems with high sensitivity (which has high FP as a disadvantage) and the others may prefer a system with lower false positive rate (which has lower sensitivity as a disadvantage). The selection of the threshold to reach the desired pair depends on the radiologist's point of view.Table 4. performance of the proposed classifier in terms of sensitivity, specificity, F-measure and MCC.Sensitivity (Recall)PrecisionSpecificityf-measureMatthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC)0.680.410.980.510.520.730.280.970.400.440.860.050.760.090.180.900.030.630.070.14
According to the obtained FROC curve, our proposed system can be promising to assist radiologists as a second interpreter. Future research should improve the performance of this CADe system in terms of increasing sensitivity and reducing false positive rate. Moreover, the detection system can be combined by a CADx to classify malignant masses from benign masses.
