This study investigated the beliefs, attitudes, and concerns of Iranian medical field specialists conducting CE for their peers. Through semi-structured interviews, we have tried to unravel a diverse range of value-expressive attitudes of medical doctors toward CE responsibilities. To address the research questions, the participants' value-laden comments were qualitatively described and discussed under five umbrella attitudinal categories of language, editing task, occupational and technology issues, publication in English, and co-convenience editing. The interview excerpts provide a vivid snapshot of how these scholars view the provision of CE to their colleagues and struggle, often grudgingly, to integrate CE into their busy professional lives. A good number of the interviewees reported feeling overtaxed, but perhaps obliged when asked to do CE. A few convenience editors talked about a trade-off relationship between conducting research studies in medical sciences and writing and/or editing in English. Among the attitudinal categories, co-convenience editing was observed to be the most dominant theme. Almost one-third of the participants underscored the need for collaboration between medical professionals and EFL instructors.
The main issue, which remains unaddressed, is the nature and form of CCE that would be successful. In our view, reciprocal scaffolding between the two groups of convenience editors seems to be a viable option for this purpose. In this regard, Cargill, O'Connor, and Li (2012) proposed an approach called Collaborative Interdisciplinary Publication Skills Education (CIPSE). CIPSE tries to encourage collaboration among experienced editors, authors of scientific articles in English, and English teachers. Through such collaboration, as Basturkmen (2006) suggests, EFL teachers can play the role of a mediator between language and field knowledge by providing essential language to convey the message. Collaboration is also supported by Benfield and Feak (2006), who found differences between editing done by a language specialist and a medical professional and concluded that teachers tend to focus on form and field specialists on content. From this, one can envisage complementary editing roles for field specialist and EFL teacher convenience editors in online or offline modes.
Fortunately, with the advent and widespread use of synchronous (e.g. Skype) and asynchronous (e.g. wikis) virtual platforms, time and distance hurdles concomitant with joint editing can easily be overcome. Practically speaking, joint editing can take the following format: a manuscript can undergo a first round of editing by field specialists catering more to genre and content-oriented deficiencies of a manuscript. Then, an EFL teacher with some basic disciplinary knowledge can do the second round of editing, mostly attending to language-oriented issues of the manuscript.
Alternatively, professional advisory bodies in editorial mentoring, such as the AuthorAid program (Shashok, 2009, Shashok, 2010, Shashok and Handjani, 2010), can be more widely introduced and promoted among researchers, such as medical scientists, in countries like Iran. By facilitating contacts between volunteer advisors (authors' editors, professional language editors, journal gatekeepers, and scientific experts) and researchers, AuthorAID projects aim to reduce inequalities in access to publication assistance. These advisors assist researchers to produce high standard manuscripts based on linguistic and editorial criteria.
As a final remark, the scale of this study was limited in that it surveyed only 16 Iranian field specialist editors' attitudes toward CE in the medical sciences. To arrive at a broader picture, further research is warranted to investigate similar convenience editors' attitudes in medical sciences as well as other disciplines across different nationalities in light of the identified attitudinal categories or possibly new constructs. Comparing the attitudes of academic professional convenience editors with those of EFL teachers offering similar services seems a promising line of research too. There is also a need for further exploration and promotion of viable options to realize reciprocal scaffolding and co-convenience editing.
