Although humans have triggered the current conservation and environmental crises, we also possess the capacity to discover, innovate, and act for a more sustainable future. Engaging greater numbers of people in science can increase our understanding of Earth's systems and find culturally and politically feasible solutions to problems. Citizen science is not a panacea, and further research is needed to better understand how citizen science can build understanding and deliver positive outcomes. However, citizen science does represent a promising option for tackling serious challenges in the fields of conservation biology, natural resource management, and environmental protection. Citizen science is already contributing to science and natural resource and environmental management and policymaking. Every year, tens of thousands of volunteers take to the forests, grasslands, wetlands, coasts, lakes, streams, and even their own backyards to provide high-quality, usable scientific information. Many large and longstanding projects would not be possible without volunteers who produce long-term datasets, collect data over large geographic areas, detect rare events and species, and address areas of research that would otherwise be neglected. Citizen science has made clear contributions to science, contributing to many peer-reviewed publications and extensive datasets that natural resource and environmental managers need. Citizen science increases the potential for serendipitous knowledge discovery and creates information that goes into policy formulation, planning, and management activities at various levels of government.
Citizen science also provides benefits beyond science, offering the opportunity for an open discourse based on scientific knowledge that more people can access, understand, and trust. Through citizen science, conservation efforts benefit from partnerships and from broad public perspectives, including local and traditional knowledge. Citizen science can increase scientific and environmental literacy and extend public involvement in decisionmaking by natural resource and environmental managers and other decisionmakers. Citizen science can help identify patterns and gaps and help set priorities and allocate resources. By spreading scientific knowledge and engaging more people in policy formulation, citizen science can help reach solutions that lead to better environmental and social outcomes and avoid unnecessary conflict.
