At the core of this study is the engagement and behaviour of members participating in citizen science communities. The paper compares general levels of engagement from two previous studies, for the Milky Way and Galaxy Zoo projects, with engagement for Weather-it, a citizen inquiry project where participants formed and facilitated their own investigations supported by researchers and experts. The engagement metrics combined with findings from a participant survey have produced useful evidence about the overall engagement and the individual engagement profiles.
As the findings of this study showed, not all of the engagement profiles found in Ponciano and Brasileiro (2015) were identified within Weather-it. Instead, some new engagement profiles have emerged from the data analysis to describe the behaviour of citizen inquiry participants. This variation highlights the importance of different design approaches based not only on the engagement profiles but also on the type of citizen participation community. For example, in citizen inquiry communities, the ‘loyal’ category represents a desirable combination of long and active participation, so the software platform might be enhanced to recognise such people and support them in facilitating investigations and mentoring newcomers.
A limitation encountered while replicating the method developed by Ponciano and Brasileiro (2015) was the absence of data for calculating daily devoted time. Instead, the current study calculated the lurking ratio, as lurking is considered to be a puzzle in online communities where citizens voluntarily participate and contribute (Curtis, 2015, Eveleigh et al., 2014). In response to lurking, commitment to the community has been identified as key leverage for sustaining a community (Bateman, Gray, & Butler, 2010). Similarly, previous research has shown that having a sense of belonging to the community is associated with remaining in the community (Aristeidou et al., 2015b). To this end, this research considers the sense of belonging as an important engagement factor that affects members' behaviour and therefore, design should focus towards committing members to one another and to the community.
Studies that investigate citizen participation communities through user behaviour (e.g., Eveleigh et al., 2014) propose a number of design considerations based on the behaviour of the entire population. The significant difference from the behaviour patterns identified in this study is that one size does not fit all, and similar to research on online communities (Ren & Kraut, 2013) this suggests a more personalised moderation according to the behaviour. For instance, the sceptical behaviour by hesitant visitors has to be examined further to form the basis of enhancing the supporting mechanism within the community, so that ‘fear’ will not exist anymore in their attitude list. Also, the design should be aiming at improving software usability by engaging usability experts or by maintaining ongoing feedback, as lack of it forms one of the reasons for visitors not to return to the community.
An overall conclusion drawn from the engagement profiles of this study is that extrinsic engagement factors, such as software and community aspects, attract and activate members; and intrinsic factors, such as interest in the topic, are the main reasons that sustain members in the community for longer periods. A design example that takes into account the balance between extrinsic and intrinsic factors, is the development of a recruitment strategy by which entertaining software and community life will be promoted in places where people may be interested in the topic.
The findings and recommendations of this research contribute to general design considerations and practices, and facilitate both recruitment and sustainability of citizen participation communities, where personalisation is difficult due to large numbers of members and limitation in resources. Future research exploring engagement and behaviour in communities of different levels of citizen participation could improve theory and practice, help generalise the results of this study or facilitate the development of an engagement evaluation framework. Finally, while surveys provide sufficient information on the psychological factors, clearly, more experimentation needs to be done concerning specific design aspects that engage and disengage members from citizen participation communities.
