In this paper, a novel method for print design on garments has been proposed. The design process is started from 3D garments and ended with 2D pattern pieces with matched prints. It is a reverse process of the traditional garment-making process. Two techniques including 3D painting and texture projection have been introduced to help design the prints. The proposed method provides a tool with which to design continuous prints on both garment and pattern pieces. Moreover, it is a useful tool for making a one-of-a-kind garment by designing personalised prints.
                     The two techniques have been demonstrated to create interesting prints on four garments, comprising a simple top, a blouse, a dress and a skirt. It is important to note that the prints on other garment styles can also be designed by the proposed method. In the future, we will improve the 3D painting tool by developing more flexible functions like symmetry painting to make the task easier. Moreover, since the garment varies from style to style, we will explore in the future other modes of projection, for instance by dividing the garment model into several parts, each applied with a suitable projection mode.Download : Download high-res image (220KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Fashion and textile supply chain.Download : Download high-res image (2MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Recent catwalk examples with matched prints [45].Download : Download high-res image (167KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Fashion product development and garment manufacturing processes.Download : Download high-res image (798KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. (a) Fashion sketches; (b) clothing pattern pieces; (c) zoomed details of pattern (d) a marker example.Download : Download high-res image (561KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 5. From 3D garments to 2D texture patterns - a system overview.Download : Download high-res image (143KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 6. Pyramid coordinates of vertex v3d, where vi3d is one of its neighbouring vertices.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 7. (a) 2D clothing pattern pieces, (b) initial form of garment by pattern-to-model parameterisation (front view), and (c) (d) the desired shape of garment after hybrid pop-up (front and back view). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Download : Download high-res image (471KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 8. Two categories of vertices. (a) A 2D pattern piece and (b) the corresponding 3D patch of the garment. The interior vertices (grey) belong to the first category; the vertices on the seams (red) are the second category. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Download : Download high-res image (153KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 9. Texture coordinates for seam vertices (shown in red dots). (a) 3D garment surface. Triangles in grey are mapped to pattern P1 shown in (b) and triangles in blue are mapped to pattern P2 shown in (c). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Download : Download high-res image (233KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 10. (a) 3D surface with two triangles painted green, (b–c) texture on pattern pieces is not consistent if the texture coordinates are not set properly, and (d) texture is consistent on the pattern pieces after the improvement. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 11. Seam allowance calculation. (a) Sample pattern piece with seam allowance; (b) seam generated by joining two or more different pieces; (c) seam generated by flipping section of the same piece, (d) and (e) are the zoom results of (b) and (c) respectively.Download : Download high-res image (769KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 12. 3D painting result for the simple top model. (a) 3D painting result, and (b) the resulting pattern pieces.Download : Download high-res image (410KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 13. 3D painting result for the blouse model. (a–c) Front, side, back views of the blouse, and (d) the resulting pattern pieces.Download : Download high-res image (534KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 14. 3D painting result for the dress model. (a–c) Front, side–back view of the dress, and (d) the resulting pattern pieces.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 15. The cylindrical texture projection result on the dress model and its comparison with texture mapping technique. (a–b) Front and side views of texture projection result of a dress model, and (c) the resulting pattern pieces; (d–e) front and side views of texture mapping result, and the (f) corresponding pattern pieces.Download : Download high-res image (658KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 16. The cylindrical texture projection result of the blouse model. (a) Original texture, (b) front view of the blouse, and (c) the resulting pattern pieces.Download : Download high-res image (498KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 17. The cylindrical texture projection result of the 8-panel skirt model. (a) Original marbling texture, (b–c) front and top views of the skirt, and (d) the resulting pattern pieces.Download : Download high-res image (1003KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 18. More results of texture projection.Download : Download high-res image (762KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 19. Result of generating seam allowance texture (a–b) patterns without seam allowances; (c–d) seam allowance with texture of the pattern in (a–b).Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 20. Comparison of real garments a 3D garments with texture design.Download : Download high-res image (519KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 21. Virtual drape simulation.Download : Download high-res image (117KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 22. Illustration of curve offset.
