Table 1 below summarizes the results of the evaluation in terms of raw logs generated by sensors and provided to the SIEM, alarms generated by the SIEM, and the number of normalized events contained within resultant alarms. The modified framework successfully detected 25 out of 26 test cases (96% detection rate) compared to seven out of 26 test cases (26.9% detection rate) with the default SIEM framework. It is worth noting that when both configurations detected an activity, the modified framework typically produced fewer alarms while simultaneously presenting analysts with data aggregated from a higher number of events, as was depicted in Fig. 5.
SIEM correlation rule construction with the new model was assessed to be an improvement over the default SEIM data model. The primary advantage of the new model was the ability to align log data or SIEM events with more descriptive event categories populated with real world indicators of compromise discovered by analysts using the same framework for investigations as the SIEM was leveraging for correlation and alarm generation. This alignment enabled alarm segregation into meaningful categories that analysts had become familiar with during postmortem data evaluation.
A secondary benefit of SIEM data alignment with the new classification model was the ability for analysts to forecast attacker actions along a spectrum of expected events. This provided context for future events the analysts expected to see following alarms, or potential areas to investigate that would have occurred prior to an alarm in order to identify root cause of the incident. Analyst feedback on SIEM alarm performance was easily communicated to SIEM engineers via the Bryant Kill-Chain as both analysts and engineers had become familiar with the same model. This provided an efficient mechanism for analysts to identify shortcomings in correlation rules when alarms were expected but not generated and communicate candidate indicators of compromise to SIEM engineers for incorporation as alarm criteria.
The Bryant Kill-Chain is assessed to be an improvement over the Lockheed Martin Kill-Chain in respect to suitability for incorporation into a SIEM system. Expanding the Lockheed Martin Kill-Chain into additional phases based on both attacker action and data similarity provided an elegant mechanism for aggregating related events into robust alarms assessed to be more valuable to security analysts.
The resultant aggregate alarms enabled analysts to perform analysis of alarm metadata without requiring post alarm queries to explain security incidents. Reducing the number of post alarm queries reduced the amount of time required for analysts to identify whether an event warranted escalation to additional security personnel. The improved detection rate, decreased overall alarm volume and additional metadata found in aggregate alarms were assessed to be improvements to the existing SIEM system and instrumental in detecting security threats in a more expeditious manner.
The improved alarm rates in both the number of detected test cases and decreased number of redundant alarms generated per test case is assessed to have improved the value of the modified SIEM system to analysts performing continuous security monitoring. Analyst response times were assessed to have been improved due to the increased visibility resulting from these improvements in alarm quantity and quality. Metadata nesting within aggregated alarms was also assessed to improve analyst work flow due to the elimination of manual tasks associated with copying and pasting data from multiple alarms into investigation reports when escalating incidents to stakeholders.
