There are many opportunities and challenges for the field of paleoradiology. The primary stage of data collection requires that considerations regarding personnel, context of the study, issues of image quality, skillful target imaging, and triage decisions regarding the necessity for advanced imaging must meet common standards. The interpretational stage must consider who is doing the interpreting, what is their experience level, what has been their training, and what bias (if any) they bring to the interpretation. Diagnosis by consensus must be informed by bioarchaeologists and radiologists who are knowledgeable of the various contextually based differentials. Archiving systems can serve to provide access to digital data, provide potential for hypothesis driven research, employ the database as a training tool, and for cross-referencing imaging data with current and future related data bases.
The future directions of digital data recording in mummy science are many. Newer technologies for both field and advanced imaging must be evaluated for their potential contribution to a given bioarchaeological study. Newer does not always mean better. A clear advance in digital data interpretation would be the establishment of a panel of interpreters across the globe who would respond to real-time field imaging efforts. Data acquisition standards are evolving and must be considered as the field continues to establish itself in bioarchaeological research. We must recognize the need to establish training programs for both acquisition and interpretation at the curricular level. We must always strive to expand accessible digital data banking and sharing in order to better serve the community of associated scholars and students.
Through rigorous, standardized digitized data collection and interpretations, we can broaden the construct of ‘diagnosis’ from one of unilateral clinical interpretation to a more informed interpretation that considers bioarchaeological contexts. Standardizing imaging efforts serves to move the science forward in terms of reproducible studies, reliable and accurate results, reduced logical fallacies and inter- and intra observer errors. It is important to consider imaging sciences as a facet of the broader bioarchaeological framework rather than an outside entity. Paleoradiographic data are powerful tools that allow researchers to obtain volumes of data without having to disassemble the subject. Digital data have encouraged hypothesis-driven research. In order to advance imaging sciences and its application within the bioarchaeological construct, we must conduct continual quality improvement of digital data acquisition and interpretation through critical evaluation of current practices. We must always question our assumptions about what it is the image offers us through its many shadows, shades, and hues.
