We have presented a large crater clustering tool that seeks to quantitatively support the identification of primary impact craters utilizing digitized secondary impacts. The LCC tool set provides a quantitative, reproducible tool set for the approximation of the secondary-to-primary impact crater relationship. The LCC tool set has been designed to straddle the accuracy-computational complexity divide (with runtimes a function of data set size, offering the ability to work in less accurate planar, or more accurate geodesic space. We anticipate broad use of this tool within the planetary geological mapping community not only where stratigraphic interpretation is essential to augment other cross-cutting relationships in determining the sequencing of geologic units but also where impact flight dynamics need to be investigated. The intended audience has driven the decision to release the tool for the ArcMap platform as an easily installed plugin.
Future work will continue to draw from the secondary impact emplacement literature (e.g. Bierhaus et al., 2001, Bierhaus et al., 2005, Popova et al., 2003, Popova et al., 2007) and will focus on four improvements. First, the qualitative primary impact approximation mirrors the physical width emplacement constraints proposed by Popova et al. (2007) better than the 2-dimensional line geometries used by the quantitative approach. Modification of the quantitative approach to support cones of dispersion for intersection is warranted. Second, additional constraints on ejection dynamics will be added if appropriate a priori information is available. This includes attribution of crater shape that may be indicative of emplacement direction. Third, support of individual craters, digitized as polygons, with rich attribution (e.g., crater characteristics or used defined per geometry weights) can be added. This additional information allows the addition of size constraints (Popova et al., 2007) on primary and secondary impacts, with the goal of avoiding mis-identifying a secondary as a primary. Finally, computational efficiency will be improved by replacing the brute force distance computation methods with a KD-Tree.
The LCC tool set described herein is a first cut approach to quantitatively linking large-scale secondary impact crater landforms to potential source craters. As discussed herein, the utility of this approach is rooted in the potential to assist assignment of ages of geologic terrains across a wide spatial area, particularly for units occurring in non-contiguous regions and/or in areas where geologic contacts are sparse. However, we identify several areas where the LCC tool set can be used in whole or in part for other planetary investigations, including assessment of parameters that contribute to the impact and ejection process. For example, the tool set could be used to identify the rate of break-up and dispersion of blocks along the flight path, potentially informing target material strength, ejection speed, and atmospheric conditions at the time of emplacement. The LCC tool set could also be used to approximate the orientation and extent of global-scale fractures that occur on icy satellites such as Ganymede and Europa. Deviation from predicted great circles could implicate lateral variations in the fractured crust of these icy bodies. The full utility of the LCC tool set has not yet been fully realized.
