While acknowledging the diversity of Indigenous communities, the XCF offers an important starting place for understanding how some Indigenous communities like Xáxli’p are engaging in environmental policy negotiations by linking TEK and western science on their own terms (see Table 1). Aligning with Jasanoff’s (2004) co-production of social order, this analysis demonstrates that Indigenous knowledge linkages cannot be understood separately from their political context—a finding that applies broadly to environmental knowledge production processes that involve Indigenous communities. As illustrated by the XCF case, Xáxli’p knowledge of the land has shaped B.C. forest policy, just as the politics forestry and aboriginal title and rights in B.C. have shaped Xáxli’p knowledge production strategies. This work has broader implications for understanding co-production processes involving Indigenous knowledge—how Indigenous knowledge is shaping science-policy negotiations, and vice versa (see Table 2).Table 1. Indigenous knowledge production strategies used in environmental policy negotiations.The XCF case shows how Indigenous communities are effectively engaging in environmental policy-making by:•building internal consensus through community-driven planning processes.•identifying strategic knowledge convergences between western science and TEK.•developing scientific knowledge representations that align with Indigenous community values.•leveraging the political power of TEK through oral testimony by elders and cultural practitioners.•identifying pivot points within existing (but imperfect) policy as a starting point for negotiations.•inserting Indigenous knowledge into government policy through community planning documents.•engaging with government interests in community advocacy strategies.Table 2. Broader implications: A framework for understanding the co-production of Indigenous knowledge and environmental politics.How is Indigenous knowledge shaping environmental science-policy negotiations?The XCF demonstrates shows how Indigenous communities are using Indigenous knowledge to:•improve agency understanding of core community interests.•justify policy adjustments that accommodate community needs within existing legal frameworks.•redefine the problem space in environmental policy negotiations to include social justice issues.•legitimize and operationalize Indigenous land-use values through legally binding agreements.•identify and mobilize champions within government agencies.•encourage greater creativity in developing sustainable land management policies.•compel agencies to acknowledge differences in cultures and worldviews, thereby unsettling dominant value structures.How are environmental science-policy negotiations shaping Indigenous knowledge?In response to ongoing science-policy negotiations, XCF leaders adopted strategic knowledge production strategies to:•document and quantify specific components of Indigenous knowledge.•bring diverse community members together with respected elders to develop a collective vision.•generate strategic knowledge linkages between TEK and western science.•determine how and when to privilege TEK over dominant scientific formats.•train community members in scientific methods and technologies (alongside cultural training).•develop conservative information-sharing policies to help protect Indigenous knowledge.•establish community-driven planning processes, which enabled Indigenous self-determination of community identities and interests.
To forward our understanding of TEK and western science linkages, I argue that Xáxli’p plans were not intended to build a permanent bridge between knowledge systems, or to achieve “knowledge integration.” Rather, community leaders emphasize that the XCF agreement was the best they could do at the time, given political and technical constraints, and existing community capacity. Thus, I suggest that such linkages are better viewed through the conceptual framework of “Indigenous articulations” (Clifford, 2001), where Indigenous peoples self-determine representations of their identities and interests in a contemporary socio-political context. Linkages involving Indigenous knowledge need to be flexible—responsive to ongoing political changes, as well as changes with Indigenous cultural practices. The articulation concept envisions an articulated lorry with a trailer hitch, which allows the option of hooking or unhooking a trailer to one’s vehicle. The two parts are connected to each other, but through a specific linkage that can be broken (Hall et al., 1996). In this way, Indigenous communities may frame and reframe their knowledge representations, hitching together (or unhitching) ideas coming from TEK, western science, or other forms of knowledge. As Clifford suggests, there is no single “authentic” way for Indigenous peoples to express their identity. Rather, “communities can and must reconfigure themselves, drawing selectively on remembered pasts.” In this way, the articulation concept “offers a nonreductive way to think about cultural transformation” (Clifford, 2001; p478,479).
The XCF case exemplifies how Indigenous communities are engaging with science to create new kinds of knowledge constructions. As TallBear (2013) points out, the decisions that Indigenous peoples make in using dominant scientific frameworks are “political acts” forwarding Indigenous self-determination. For this reason, Indigenous articulations cannot be taken as static or disembodied representations of Indigenous knowledge, and cannot be exported to government agencies as a finished, “integrated” product. Rather, community needs are evolving in the power-laden landscapes of natural resource management. More inclusive policy-making requires resources for Indigenous communities to represent themselves in environmental decision-making processes and to develop their own environmental plans. By doing so, we may better include the situated knowledge of Indigenous peoples within dominant knowledge production forums and gain additional perspectives on establishing more sustainable human-environment relations.
