This article introduced metaknowledge, a Python package for computational research in information science, network analysis, and science of science. metaknowledge is primarily designed to simplify the ∼80% effort (Light et al., 2014) that goes into creating and preparing datasets for modeling and other analysis. Although metaknowledge appears to have a higher barrier to entry than most other existing software, it is designed so that researchers have to know very little Python to do most of what they would want to do. At the same time, even researchers with very little Python knowledge will find that they are limited only by their data, not their software.
Currently, metaknowledge accepts raw data from the Web of Science, PubMed, Scopus, ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, and administrative data from some granting agencies. The most important functions parse these raw data files to construct RecordCollections and GrantCollections, which can be processed and used to create tidy datasets for time series plots and longitudinal analysis, Reference Publication Year Spectroscopy for historical bibliometrics, text datasets for computational analysis using methods like topic modeling and burst analysis, and network datasets for a wide variety of networks, including multi-mode, multi-level, and longitudinal. metaknowledge is designed to output this data in ways that integrate seamlessly with other data analysis software. Our primary emphasis is on integration with other Python packages and R, where innovative new methods are being implemented at a pace that exceeds that of specialized scientometric research software. metaknowledge will also output datasets that can be easily analyzed with popular GUI software like Pajek, Gephi, and VOSViewer, and a new Javascript library (mkD3) for producing interactive D3.js graphs. metaknowledge is optimized to scale well to very large datasets. It has custom data structures and can cache datasets, making computing much faster and more efficient on both small and large datasets.
Finally, and most importantly, metaknowledge is open source and is fully compatible with open and reproducible computing workflows. As an open source package, researchers are free to make changes to source code or extend core functionality. For example, researchers can add parsers to read administrative data from their own national granting agencies, and because metaknowledge is scriptable, it is better suited to open science practices and reproducible analyses than other scientometric software. We hope that it can facilitate the broader movement towards open science practices, which information science, science of science, and networks researchers are well-positioned to contribute to.
