With economic development, the size of the service sector tends to increase in relation to the other sectors. With its increasing relevance, the impact of innovation in this sector deserves careful investigation. However, innovation in the service sector is usually difficult to evidence directly due to the labor-intensive characteristics. Thus, to show innovations in the service production process, we looked at indirect evidence of this phenomenon.
Our investigation focused on changes in the tasks performed by workers as a consequence of the more intensive use of informatics technology in the service sector. To answer our main question, we used a Brazilian data set with information on tasks carried out by workers in all sectors of the economy. First, we focused on data relative to the service sector. We evidenced that in general the use of informatics technology has had a positive effect on non-routine analytical tasks, such as planning, researching and budgeting, among others. This result shows that the use of informatics technology contributes to innovation in the service production process, expanding the performance of non-routine tasks in the service sector.
Comparing the effect on the service sector with the effect on the non-service sector provided a broader view of the changes from the use of informatics technology. As a result, we concluded that automation is less present in the service sector than in the non-service sector, as stated by Elche and González (2008). Also, according to Collier (1983), the use of informatics technology is more evident in the non-service sector. Thus, we determined that the use of informatics technology in the service sector does not destroy jobs, as observed in the non-service sectors, but instead complements the use of human capital. Thus, it improves the service provided by firms, resulting in innovation. This result is aligned with Pianta (2005) and Sirilli and Evangelista (1998).
Finally, we analyzed the heterogeneous effect of the use of informatics technology on different activities in the service sector. We can conclude that all the activities that compose the service sector are affected by the use of informatics technology but in different ways, explained by their peculiarities.
In terms of policy it is a very relevant instrument. It can orient government strategies to subsidize and invest in the labor market to facilitate the flow of workers between jobs that entail different types of tasks. It can also orient companies’ strategies for training people for specific tasks as a complementary effort to informatics technology implementation.
Therefore, we contribute to the empirical literature by evidencing the innovation aspects of the production of services, something that is rare in the service literature. However, we should mention some limitations. First, our experiment was restricted to a single setting, Brazil. Second, our information on workers’ occupation concerned only two points in time (1994 and 2002) and came from codes that are not perfectly matched. Finally, our database is quite old, due to the time that has passed since the change in policy. Still, we believe that the general patterns observed in the period before and after this change in Brazil hold true today.
For future studies, we suggest conducting the same analysis but considering exclusively KIBSs (knowledge-intensive business services) and a comparison of this segment with other traditional service sectors, like transportation, retail, wholesale and others.
