The purpose of this article is to contribute to our understanding of students’ digital writing in learning and education. In contemporary curricular texts and policy documents, the use of digital resources is often linked to improving teaching and instruction, but it remains understudied in relation to learning (Skolverket, 2016, Statens Medieråd, 2015). As I present in the Literature review, there are a large number of theoretical studies on written communication, but the problems of the formulation phase are under-researched at the upper secondary school level. The Writing roles model provides an ethnographical understanding of digital writing in the multimodal classroom with its challenges and opportunities in the space, movement and disposition of teaching (Kress et al., 2005) in relation to roles in the environment (Smidt, 2002).
5.1. Importance of writer identity, social positioning and networking in the complexity of digital writingThe Writing roles model explains the highly complex digital writing and how close learning and social interaction are interwoven in text making. Writing roles illustrates the importance of understanding identity, social positioning and networking in writing pedagogy. The model highlights learning potentials and knowledge of writing as well as conflict perspectives on social interaction and shared learning. James Paul Gee (2004/2007) is interested in the social and learning aspects of writing but is critical of traditional schooling: “Too often in school knowledge is not shared across the students, is not distributed so that different students, adults, and technologies offer different bits and pieces of it as needed and is not garnered from dispersed sites outside the classroom” (Gee, 2004/2007, p. 73). In contrast, this article shows that students in different writing roles want to share knowledge, to provide and to obtain help with digital writing, even by involving adults outside school via social media. For students, the physical space is less important than the use of digital tools, regardless of whether the writing takes place before, during or after class. The Writing roles model emphasises that digital writing creates both a sense of togetherness and contradictions between the participants in their composition of digital texts. Furthermore, school is also understood as a working place for both teachers and students, which makes school an important part of everyday life and learning. Writing roles in fields of tension contributes by showing the complexity of digital writing at different levels and showing that school and school writing are linked rather than divided both in and out of school.
5.2. Impact on pedagogy and implications for future researchThe Writing roles model illustrates that digital writing is often oriented towards collective rather than individual writing processes. The use of computers challenges the traditional writing process (with pen and paper) to the extent that more socially inclined students immediately begin to compose their texts together with others to deliver an assignment, even if it is to be completed individually. Furthermore, the use of computers for composing texts results in students’ asking others for help with their writing so that they can deliver the text. In further research, collective writing could be examined as a means of improving process-oriented writing pedagogy.Adopting different writing roles determines the extent of other people’s participation in composition. Students who adopt various writing roles and who are more socially inclined are able to improve their development potential by means of the learning support that is available inside or outside the classroom. In contrast, students with less social interplay often have to compose their texts on their own in school. A less experienced and less social writer can easily become blocked to the extent that some are unable to write at all in the classroom and have to write at home. Thus, the Writing roles model links the development of composition with values, knowledge and understandings in and out of school and has an impact on what, why, where and how students write. This has a great impact on the disposition of teaching and the use of the teacher as an important expert in the pedagogical discourse.The model illustrates that the education domain must place more emphasis on teaching formulation skills in the digital writing process, suggesting a shift in teaching from product to process. An educational implication is that students need to create different writing strategies for different tasks and environments. School writing could be constructed similar to labs in which students meet with the teacher’s guidance, in semi classes or in practical learning activities. In future research, Writing roles can be used to develop an inclusive writing pedagogy in which students are also involved with the teacher in the ecology of digital writing, in which the writing interplays with talking, reading and listening.
