This paper draws its motivation by observing that exam security has a major role in the widespread acceptance of exams, especially when they are assisted by computers. It has been found that it is possible to provide a secure exam protocol with the design principle of minimising the reliance on the trusted parties. Notably, the protocol guarantees some form of accountability without relying on a TTP. The underlying idea of the protocol is to combine oblivious transfer and visual cryptography to generate a pseudonym that anonymises the tests while they are marked. This protocol is more detailed than the previous one and meets a larger set of security requirements with only minimal assumptions; this was confirmed using a formal approach whereby the security of the protocol was analysed extensively.
Future work can be envisaged over various directions. One is to analyse the protocol in the computational model to achieve finer security guarantees, perhaps using computer-assisted tools like CryptoVerif (Blanchet, 2008) or EasyCrypt (Barthe et al., 2009). It should be possible to study compositional proofs that integrate computational proofs of the cryptographic primitives used in our protocol with the symbolic ones obtained in ProVerif. Another direction is to complement the protocol with techniques to detect plagiarism and candidate cheating at testing. This is important when testing is done via computers. For example, techniques similar to those described by Pieczul and Foley (2014) could be useful for this purpose. Another extension may be the support for collaborative marking, in which the questions are categorised by subject, and examiners evaluate only the answers that pertain to the examiner subject area.
We believe that the idea behind the protocol may be useful for the design of similar systems, such as for public tenders, project reviews, and conference management systems. We feel that, by promoting a fairer assessment of knowledge and skills through the many application scenarios that award a qualification or a post to people, this line of research can significantly contribute to advancing modern meritocracy.
