The scientists belonging to fields where the practice of alphabetically ordering the publication authors is still more or less occurring, have almost certainly been afflicted by misgivings that an early surname initial enhances citability. It is no accident that some have resorted to altering their surname, to move towards the front of the byline (Kadel and Walter, 2015, Efthyvoulou, 2008). This is especially natural where evaluation processes based on citations support decisions fundamental to academic research (funding) and career progress (recruitment and advancement). Any natural doubts may have been fed by the results of some empirical investigations, such as those reported in the introduction. Apart from the “line academics”, the evaluators and decision-makers would also be well-advised to pay attention to such doubts, whether their evaluations are being used in competitions for academic positions and research funds, or for broadly purposed national assessment exercises.
The few prior investigations on the subject analyzed the surname effect at publication level. What we investigate instead is the effect of surname initial on the citability of individual authors.In the sciences, findings show that researchers with the alphabetically higher surnames do not result as gathering more citations. This is true without exception across scientific communities, regardless of how diffuse is the practice of alphabetically ordering the authors’ list; and independently of the number of publications that the scientist produces (the higher the number of publications by the scientists, the more evident the surname effect should be).
The restriction of the analysis to Italy, while making it possible and more precise, thanks to an authors’ name disambiguation algorithm developed by the authors, should not jeopardize, all others equal, the generalization of results, as Italian articles are cited from all over the world and not just by Italian scholars. Of course, results need to be interpreted accounting for the extent to which alphabetical order is practiced: even in the disciplines that we have considered, a rather significant share of the publications do not adopt alphabetical authorship.
