Smart specialization is a recent innovation policy that has rapidly gained traction in the European space as the avenue to increase competitiveness of European countries and regions. The concept comes with a significantly different approach (i.e., regional orientation, bottom-up focus, entrepreneurial discovery) than previous waves of innovation policies. Yet, these very elements are also some its most notable weaknesses, especially in less-developed countries and regions. These environments provide a far-less-than-ideal setting for implementing SS by suffering from low entrepreneurship rates (Carree and Thurik, 2008), weak systems of innovation (Krammer, 2009), limited technological opportunities (Krammer, 2016), significant institutional heterogeneity (Krammer, 2015a), lack of significant regional autonomy (Charles et al., 2012) and market-driven clusters (Brochler and Kalentzis, 2017). Together, all these issues raise significant concerns regarding the successful implementation of SS strategies for such “laggard” regions or countries, particularly when targeting techno-economic development (Phillips et al., 2016).
Focusing on these limitations, this study starts with the idea that, although SS remains a regional, bottom-up approach, the national contexts remains equally important in the context of less-developed countries. As such, combining elements from several literatures (innovation systems, evolutionary economics, export-led growth), I discuss a conceptual approach that distills the role of SS in the greater innovation-growth nexus, as a mechanism to better translate competitive advantage from the STI domain to the economic one. Subsequently, I propose an analytical tool for policy makers to identify fruitful areas for SS, which can be easily implemented as a first-stage diagnostic of the SS process, following the steps described in Table 1. Finally, I exemplify the use of this diagnostic tool in the case of Bulgaria, a laggard in economic and innovative terms within the EU, and a country with significant regional disparities. The results of these analyses may serve as inputs for policy corrections, which target region-sector issues in the spirit of the SS concept, as well as systemic STI and economic problems.
Overall, the Bulgarian case fit well with some of the SS fallacies foreseen by prior work in the innovation literature. Specifically, the driving forces of SS (i.e., entrepreneurial activities and regional strength) are not sufficiently developed in Bulgaria. Thus, most entrepreneurial endeavors are driven by necessity rather than business opportunities, face significant institutional barriers, and are highly skewed towards domestic activities (e.g., financial intermediation, real estate, wholesale and retail) with limited potential to contribute to the international competitiveness of the country. Moreover, Bulgaria exhibits several important regional STI and industrial disparities (e.g., the highest concentration is in the Southern regions, which include the capital, Sofia) and suffers from systemic deficiencies that impede its overall development. With few exceptions, the contribution of domestic knowledge base to economic outcomes has been consistently decreasing, and access to external knowledge has been rather limited. In turn, this triggered a prolonged decay of international competitiveness.
Using the proposed diagnostic tool, I identify and analyze five candidate areas for SS (Copper and Iron, Food, Machinery, Electrical Equipment and Vehicles, Pharmaceuticals and ICT) that show potential for benefitting from STI links and align well with the smart, sustainable and inclusive growth principles of the SS. Interestingly, all these priority areas (except one) are also found in the recent S3 agenda for Bulgaria (http://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/regions/BG) finalized in 2015,14 which supports the feasibility of the proposed SS diagnostics tool. Finally, both theoretical and empirical considerations recommend a multi-level mix of SS (region-sector) and systemic (national) instruments as best for dealing with Bulgaria's complex challenges in the economic and STI domain (Krammer, 2015b).
While this study proposes several contributions to the literature on national and regional innovation policy, it is not exempt from limitations. First, it focuses only on exports as a valid representation of international competitiveness, while in reality the competitive landscape can encompasses other different factors, such as human capital, investment climate, institutions, productivity, foreign investments, etc. On the other hand, incorporating too many dimensions (e.g. employing aggregated competitiveness indexes a la IMD, WEF) can diminish dramatically the effectiveness of policy prescriptions for an SS exercise. Second, due to limitations of export data in the UN Comtrade database, the analysis does not include a similar in-depth examination of the service sectors. To overcome this issue in the Bulgarian example, I have examined its service exports from available national statistics. However, availability of this data is rather limited. Third, the assessment of STI competitiveness relies heavily on patent and bibliometric indicators. While these metrics are widely employed in the literature, they also suffer from well-known limitations that have been discussed by the extant literature. Finally, past lessons in terms of innovation policy suggest that there is a complex trade-off between diversification (traditional) and specialization (cluster-based) strategies (Phillips et al., 2016). As a result, even when applied properly, SS can only offer transitory advantages to a region in terms of competitiveness. Maintaining and expanding these advantages would require an increasing reliance on entrepreneurial discovery, complemented by significant policy flexibility at the regional level. Thus, current efforts in less developed countries to spur SS strategies should account for more long-term dynamic objectives in terms of creating such capabilities.
Given these caveats, future extensions may want to consider different or additional economic objectives (e.g., productivity or FDI) as basis for selection of SS candidates, testing empirically these assertions. Moreover, it would be equally interesting to apply this diagnostic tool to a developed economy with strong STI and economic clusters, and assess its potential to contribute to the SS debate in the context of developed, well-functioning economies with strong regions. Another interesting addendum, if data permits, would employ detailed service export data and develop concordance tables with contribution of different scientific fields to the productivity of these service sectors. This would greatly enhance our understanding of knowledge-driven service economies, and provide additional avenues for spurring SS (e.g., Bulgarian firms specializing in ICT technical service to German customers by combining strong linguistic and ICT skills in tailored educational programs).
