The present study demonstrates that a lot of information about the PD patient's condition can be extracted from his or her spirographic data. The main conclusion is that it is feasible to apply ParkinsonCheck's features and pre-processing methodology to a substantially different set of spirographic data and obtain a comprehensible model with good predictive accuracy. The features can thus be thought of as quite general for the description of spiral drawings.
In the long term this result suggests that spirography could be used as a valid method for objective monitoring of PD patients, especially combined with other tests that could detect those conditions that were currently misclassified. The latter could be improved with new features as well, however, we suspect that tests complementary to spirography will have an even more significant impact.
The obvious future work is to look into the misclassified cases and try to either improve the model or get an understanding of why the misclassifications occurred. It would be interesting for a clinician to review the misclassified cases, perhaps changing his opinion or pointing the reasons for the misclassification. This could lead to potential new features for describing the spirals. Or it could hint at the lack of information in the spirals for this particular problem. On this topic, there were a few comments from the clinicians in the second experiment describing some cases as difficult or expressing surprise with the lack of some feature being highlighted. Interestingly in all those cases, they made a classification error. However, these are exactly the cases that are most fruitful for further analysis.
In the future, the plan is to collect more ratings on animated spirals from more clinicians, but also to collect more spiral drawings in a controlled environment. This would allow us to investigate the feasibility of time-space reconstruction of the spirals to clinicians and to investigate how the machine learning approach would work when the ground truth is more reliable. The long-term plan is also to include multiple objective motor function measurements with different sensors including wearable sensors, eye tracking and upper limb touch screen tests (tapping and spirography) as well as video recording the patients while performing the tests and executing standardised motor tasks. This would allow us to investigate the relationship of the objective measures and blinded video ratings as well as their relationship to plasma levodopa concentration.
