ESL is a major retail innovation, but in the stores where this innovation has been introduced, paper price representations have not disappeared. This study has identified three approaches to price representations: prices represented by paper only, prices represented by ESL only, and prices represented by both paper and ESLs. By considering these approaches within the theoretical frameworks with which we began, we can perceive that these different alternatives convey at least three lessons.
The first lesson, as we just saw, is that price technologies should be considered not in isolation, but as part of a complex web of practices and market agencements. What matters is not the property of the technology itself, but the performance of the overall system to which it belongs. When considered alone, ESL technology appears to be a rational novelty with superior features that should drive old-fashioned paper competitors out of the market. However, when considered within the wider price agencement, ESL appears to be one element among many; it offers several benefits, but also suffers weaknesses. Thus, ESLs must “co-operate” with other elements, each with advantages and drawbacks, to improve overall performance. What matters in this case is not the features of any given component, but the quality of their combination.
A second lesson is that prices should not be seen as the results of abstract encounters of mysterious global entities like supply and demand, but as the outcomes of complex market infrastructures. For instance, by easing price changes and giving managers full control over such changes, ESLs help to introduce an asymmetrical pricing strategy that produces fast changes when supply prices go up and slow changes when they go down.
The third lesson is that ESLs support a new conception of prices based on the idea of greater price flexibility and transparency. According to Austin (1970), performative utterances are “acts of language” that have the ability to simultaneously describe and enact a state of the world. One such statement is “I promise that my pricing system will improve your business.” Callon (1998) showed that market theories are performative and that they are performed through ad hoc market devices. However, the same author stressed that the performances of economic conceptions are often subject to “misfires” (Callon, 2010). This means that performative statements often fail due to their intricacies and sociotechnical agencements, which hamper, bias, and distort their messages. As we have seen, ESLs do not escape this rule: for instance, their claims are frequently challenged by both their inner limitations (e.g. small size, sad color…) and the properties of the other elements with which they work (e.g. more colorful and talkative paper, traditional products, and so on.). In sum, we now understand that the performance of ESLs depends not only on the promises of the devices themselves, but also on their ability to properly fit with all of the actors, tools, discourses, objectives, and expectancies that are part of the overall retail agencement.
