In this study, an efficient algorithm is established to automatically segment livers in CT volumes. The efficiency of the method follows from its capability of dealing with the livers with low contrast, varying intensities and atypical shapes, as well as from the ability of accurate and complete segmentation of liver in the case that the liver parenchyma and vessels are heterogeneous. These abilities are gained based on the following experimental evidences. First, the initial slice is segmented in an unsupervised way, in which the liver parenchyma is automatically extracted by the DP clustering. Second, based on the pixel- and patch-wise features, a novel intensity model and a PCA-based regional appearance model are proposed to exclude complex background and highlight the liver region. These two models learn the features of liver from the initial segmented slice, and automatically acquire the parameters of these features. Third, the location constraint estimated from each previously segmented slice is utilized in subsequent slice segmentation, which is a powerful term to exclude some tissues with similar intensities in the iterative process. Next, the pixel-, patch-based and inter-slice based features are integrated into graph cuts, so that the liver can be recognized effectively and automatically without requiring any manual labeling of the source and sink seeds. Finally, for the undersegmented liver vessels, a novel vessel compensation method based on border marching is proposed to increase the accuracy.
The developed approach is tested on the public dataset SLIVER07 as well as the clinical dataset XHCSU14 we created. Experimental results indicate that our method can effectively segment the livers with vessel inclusion in different cases, such as low contrast, dissected liver regions, and atypical liver shapes. Additionally, the segmentation performance comparisons on the public database SLIVER07 in terms of the MICCAI criterion show the superiority of the proposed method.
