4.1. Conclusions from the analysisEvolution in the conception of exhaustion. – In conclusion, what strikes is that the concept of exhaustion has evolved from a metaphorical paraphrase of the boundaries of an exclusive right,266 over a kind of hierarchically higher norm that limits exclusive rights in certain circumstances,267 to potentially an actual right for third-party users to perform acts upon copyright-protected objects without the right holder's consent.268Distorting the international equilibrium. – When the WIPO Internet Treaties were negotiated, the contracting parties made certain choices with regard to copyright in a digitised society. Among other things, it was decided that questions on electronic market places would be treated by the new-founded on-demand right269 and that computer programs would be treated equally to works of literature.270 The extensive interpretation applied by the CJEU might severely disrupt the delicate and carefully considered international equilibrium.No need for digital exhaustion. – In its judgments in UsedSoft and Ranks, the CJEU calls upon the exhaustion doctrine to solve a conflict of interests that exists between a copyright holder and a user of its copyright-protected work. In the cases at hand however there is no need to invoke exhaustion, because with hindsight, there is no conflict that opposes the rights of the owner of goods incorporating a work to the right holder's exclusive right to distribute that work. The acts at hand are services, so there simply is no right of the distribution of goods for which boundaries are to be defined. Ergo, the Court should have chosen a track different from its exhaustion doctrine.
4.2. SuggestionsSimilar results can be achieved by other means. – In respect of all of the above, various arguments can be cited to defend the outcome – the actual ruling – of the CJEU UsedSoft and Ranks doctrine. To name just one, economic studies have been advanced to prove why the first acquirer of a user licence to a computer program should somehow be allowed to dispose of his licence and/or copy.271 These arguments de iure condendo might be perfectly valid. In any case the present contribution has no intention to refute them, as a legal scholar should not take a definite stand on this rather policy-related question. The advocated outcome can however be achieved in another, legally consistent way, at least in EU-continental law. In the following paragraphs, only a modest initial impetus to a potential solution is roughly sketched.Step 1: which two contracts are at hand? – First, one should take into account that in reality two different contractual agreements may be at stake when a contract on the supply of copyright-protected content is concluded: a user licence regarding the (immaterial) work on the one hand and a sales or service contract on the physical (material) supply of the content to the user's device on the other.272 If the content is to be supplied on a disc, the latter contract will be a sales contract. If supplied via the Internet, it is a service contract.Step 2: buyer of goods or holder of a right? – Second, this user is to be qualified in two corresponding ways. On the one hand he is a licensee (or sub-licensee) of the right holder. On the other, he is either a buyer of a copy (exemplaire) of the work or the holder of a right (titulaire d'un droit) vis-à-vis the supplier to obtain from the latter that the digital content is made accessible to the former subject to these or those conditions.Step 3: transferring ownership or rights. – Third, in case of a sales contract the buyer is entitled to resell his copy of the work to any third party pursuant to its rights as an owner (propriétaire). The right holder of the work cannot oppose this act, as his distribution right is exhausted because of the first sale, at least if and only if all conditions are fulfilled. If a service contract is at stake, then the user can transfer the rights he is entitled to pursuant to that contract to a third party, which then becomes the subsequent acquirer. When doing so, the initial acquirer must assure that he can no longer enjoy the services of the contract he transferred.273Step 4: transferring the licence and activating free trade on the internal market. – Fourth, the user should also transfer the rights he is entitled to in his capacity as a licensee. In both this licence agreement and in the service contract however, the user might encounter a clause which precludes him to transfer the rights he has vis-à-vis his co-contracting party/parties. It is exactly at that very point there may be room to take a modern, digital approach to implement principles that are long considered fundamental in Europe. Consider that in the twenty-first century a person's estate (i.e. the combination of all his/her assets274; patrimoine; Vermögen) is less and less composed of ownership rights in movable or immovable material goods. More and more, one's wealth nowadays is to a large extent dependent on the entitlement in rights: people have claims on banks (bank accounts), on companies (shares, bonds), etcetera. Tradability is historically seen as an essential characteristic of ownership rights. Free trade requires this.275 In the same interest, there seems to be no reason why other rights – such as rights pursuant to a licence agreement – should as a principle be less transferable and therefore less tradable.Excursus: fresh ground. – This praiseworthy premise seems to be underlying the CJEU's findings in the UsedSoft and Ranks cases. To reach the goal of equal treatment of ownership rights in material goods and other rights, the Court however need not invoke the old-school exhaustion doctrine. Instead, it should consider itself free to rule for instance that EU primary legislation and the ideas underlying EU intellectual property law prohibit parties in the circumstances outlined above to exclude the tradability of their rights. It may prove useful to examine whether the reasoning in this sense could be based on an extensive interpretation of the internal market principles, such as the principle of the free movement of goods276 or the free movement of services,277 or even on an interpretation of the fundamental right to property278 or to a high level of consumer protection.279 Due to the restricted scope of this contribution, none of these lines of reasoning are however further elaborated on below.Step 5: define the new legal positions. – Fifth, after the licence transfer the legal position of the subsequent acquirer should be established according to national law. Depending on the case for instance the undertaking to supply the content physically might be borne or executed either entirely by the first acquirer, or jointly by the first acquirer and the initial supplier. Furthermore, all valid contract clauses other than those related to non-transferability will continue to apply to the subsequent acquirer. This is true because rights fundamentally differ from goods by the fact that rights only exist if and insofar as they are created by legal acts, while goods also exist outside the legal sphere.280 Therefore, a right transferred to a third party cannot grant that party more or larger claims than the first acquirer was entitled to, since nemo plus iuris ad alium transferre potest quam ipse habet.281Step 6: acts of reproduction by the subsequent acquirer. – Then, only after all of these acts are qualified, it will come down to determine whether acts of reproduction performed by the subsequent acquirer are allowed, in spite of the right holder's exclusive reproduction right. Here, two paths lead to the same result. Either one applies the extensive interpretation of the exception for intended use upheld by the CJEU in UsedSoft282; either the subsequent acquirer is deemed to have substituted the first acquirer, so that he takes over the latter's full legal position as a licensee, including all rights. Consequently, the subsequent acquirer could claim that the right holder fails to perform the contract or abusively exercises his right if he opposes necessary reproduction acts performed by the acquirer.Rights, not copies. – Hence, the whole issue would no longer have to be treated as a question of conflicting interests in copies, but rather as a question of conflicting interests in rights,283 be it rights pursuant to a licence agreement, rights stemming from a service contract or rights as an owner.Comparison: cinema ticket. – One may compare this solution to the legal situation of a cinema ticket. The ticket does not grant its acquirer a right to perform any desired act on the movie chosen. It only allows its holder to get access to a specific cinema auditorium on certain conditions and on a specific date and time. The first acquirer of the ticket can use the ticket himself as long as it is valid, but he can also sell it to someone else. The latter then becomes the new owner of the right to get access to the specific movie under the conditions given. To a roughly similar extent, the first acquirer of a right to access a work (a computer program) can dispose of his (‘second-hand’) access right to someone else, provided that all conditions for access are met. An important difference however is that the subsequent acquirer of a cinema ticket need not make reproductions of the work in order to use it.In conformity with fundamental EU law. – This solution would fully comply with the fundamental EU principles of free movement as interpreted by the CJEU since the Deutsche Grammophon judgment. Still, the interests of copyright holders would cease to benefit from protection after the first dissemination of his work on the market with his consent. He would no longer be entitled to claim additional remuneration for those specific rights of access that he had voluntarily granted to members of the public.284 The aforementioned purposes of exhaustion285 would be achieved, but without the need to refer to the exhaustion doctrine, which necessarily only applies to goods. The boundaries of authors' rights other than the distribution right would simply prevent the right holder from hindering the free movement of goods within the EU internal market: in his capacity of right holder he simply has no right to prevent his co-contractor (the initial acquirer) from transferring his contractual right to a third party, nor to claim any remuneration thereof.Additional advantages of the suggested alternative. – Moreover, fewer uncertainties286 would arise from the fact that up till now only cases concerning user licences of unlimited term were addressed by the Court287 and a similar application to works other than computer programs may be envisaged. In addition, there would be no more need for the arduous quest for a definition of the sale condition, let alone to overcomplicate that issue, for instance by the argument288 that ‘it must be considered that, in the absence of any indication to the contrary in the order for reference, th[e] sale [of a material medium incorporating a copy of a computer program] is accompanied by an unlimited licence to use that copy.’289 Finally, the proposed track seems to be in line with the WCT and other international copyright law, which thus far has not dealt with transfers of licensee rights.
