A key feature of the FoF is that it bases its competitiveness nor on the optimization of its processes with the aim to reduce costs but rather on the degree of innovation of its products and processes. As a consequence, companies must rethink their approach to the innovation process, indeed they must go beyond the current model of closed innovation towards a more open model. Open innovation appears as a powerful approach to accelerate, reduce risk and costs of innovation. But open innovation advantages are not fully exploited and implemented because the industry has not developed efficient tool to support this approach. By definition this open innovation relies on collaboration. This collaboration dedicated to the inventive design should enable a community, composed of people with a very broad spectrum of skills, to share information, knowledge and ideas around a common design project. Another significant bottleneck is to develop a method supporting systematic engineering creativity in chemical and process engineering. In this context, the process system engineering community has to propose new methods and new computer aided tools that integrate all previous aspects. This is the main contribution of this paper to address these situations and to propose the next evolution stage of the Computer Aided Innovation, i.e. the Open CAI 2.0. Relying on the research leading to the proposed Open CAI 2.0 tool, the following conclusions can be drawn:
•Open innovation provides several advantages, among them: the possibility to deal with complex and broad problem, to enlarge the spectrum of knowledge, to increase the quality of the solution, to accelerate the ideation steps, to find solutions outside the field of expertise of the company.•Collective intelligence with its capacity to join intelligence and knowledge to achieve a common goal is a powerful enabler for efficient collaboration.•The raise of the digital company and more particularly the breakthroughs in information and communication technologies help to extend and improve the potential of collective intelligence by facilitating, exploiting and managing more efficiently user’s contributions. This is performed by taking advantage of the benefits of on line social networks.•TRIZ methods and tools are well suited for analyzing and formulating problem in chemical engineering and in remote domains, but also to generate solutions with a high degree of inventiveness. Furthermore, it can be regarded as a universal language to promote collaboration (improve knowledge exchange and transfer) between community members and for the implementation of an ideation stage.•For improving the problem solving stage and with the purpose for rapidly generating innovative ideas, TRIZ must be combined other problem resolution methods like case based reasoning in our case. The method based on the hybridization of both previous methods exploits a knowledge base of past experiences, offers the possibility to create new knowledge, and it facilitates the transfer of technological solutions while avoiding some pitfalls thanks to information on the implemented solution.
Obviously, the first perspectives for this proposition are to improve methods and tools that compose the three levels of the methodological framework, namely the innovation process, the collaboration support, and the collective intelligence. As an example, we intend to develop missing functionality about collective intelligence. It is possible to incorporate tag clouds, this component would help the user to make a rapid search using the tags concepts generated manually or the process for tags extraction.
The effectiveness of the ideation phase remains perfectible by the improvement of the methods and tools which could ease the collaboration, information and knowledge exchange between people with very different technical and none technical backgrounds, the acceleration of the generation of very inventive ideas in a context increasingly constrained (especially in time). An interesting way to explore could be the coupling between TRIZ and the CK method recently introduced in chemical engineering by (Potier et al., 2015). Likewise, to valorize all the knowledge acquired, it is crucial to consider the peculiarities of these heterogeneous, requiring prompt treatment and big data. The challenge is to transform this raw information into knowledge with high added value for rapidly generating concepts with better quality.
