This study focused on providing comparison among the proposed methodologies that takes advantage from samples originating from groups of subjects that performed similar tasks in previous sessions. The selection criteria for including subjects to the set is made based on the previous findings in [17], [18]. In addition, the impact of dimension reduction through the use of a PSO-based approach that reduces 99% of the EEG data dimensions is investigated. Finally, a set of conditions that include an extra training step are evaluated. The main aim of the study was to generate a methodology that allows the inclusion of extra training samples from other subjects while reducing the dimensions of the data. Advantages like i) having extra training samples originating from other subjects recorded and pre-processed in an off-line mode, ii) minimum dependency to training samples from the target subject (the subject that performs the tasks in on-line mode), and iii) low dimensionality of the data caused by the applied evolutionary dimension reduction approach that minimizes the required classifier's training period can be considered as the main points of attraction for such a system in on-line EEG based BCI systems.
Aiming to investigate the possibility of reducing the required own training samples, various percentages of the data originating from EEG of the target subject was utilized for training (from 0% to 90% in 5% steps). The results suggested 40% as the threshold for the amount of own (target subject) data required for training above which the ratio between the gained informedness and the amount of data utilized showed no significant improvement. This is equivalent to using 560 out of 1400 of 0.5 s sub-epochs (less than 5 min EEG recordings) for training the classifier. Among 5 subjects in the dataset, subject AL showed significant difference from others. The results indicate better overall performance for conditions that incorporate retraining. Dimension reduction through the use of PSO-DR operator showed slightly better performance on average in comparison with conditions that uses the full set of data with no DR. This is noteworthy since the employed DR method reduced 99% of data which on average resulted in spending less than 10 s for training the classifier. The results indicate the feasibility of the proposed PSO-DR operator within conditions that utilized lower percentages of data originating from target subjects (between 0% and 40%) within inclusion of samples originating from other subjects that performed similar tasks (in an off-line mode). This effect is more visible within weaker subjects, especially in schemes that first trained the classifiers using others subjects' data (in an off-line mode) and then retrained the classifiers using lower percentages of own (target subject) data.
It is important to do not over interpret these results. It should be noted that the EEG data utilized in this study are originated from healthy subjects and even though interesting and encouraging results are achieved with weaker subjects, this can not be interpreted as an indication of suitability of the proposed methodology for paralyzed patients, specially those who have been paralyzed for a long time.
