This study proposes a new construct, social disposition, in assessing anthropomorphism of smartphone users. Based on review of related studies of social interaction and anthropomorphism in computers, three variables in social disposition are identified. The data collected through an online survey provide empirical evidence that the three social dispositional factors are associated with smartphone anthropomorphism. The findings corroborate and add to the theory of sociality determinant of anthropomorphism (Epley et al., 2007) and the computing technology continuum of perspective (Marakas et al., 2000). This study does not identify any causal links in the associations but validates a new perspective in studying anthropomorphism and social interactions in current communication technologies such as smartphones.
Transitions laid by emerging communication technologies like smartphones may explain why social disposition should be considered in future studies of technology as social actors and anthropomorphism in communication technology. The density of information and form of messages characteristic of smartphones have drastically changed people's experiences since the mid-1990s when the World Wide Web was still new. Communication with smartphones is far more immediate and personalized than with desktop and laptop computers. Interactions with smartphones have gone beyond the textual and 2D graphical interfaces that early CASA studies examined, which justifies this study's choice of dealing with the device as a whole rather than just the screen interface. Beyond screen time, we get new kinds of interactions—from voice commands to wearable devices to virtual and augmented reality—all concentrated on smartphones, the new hub of our digital world. Google's Android 6.0 Compatibility Definition (2015) now outlines more sensors than traditional input devices for developers. As involuntary input by sensors and proactive responses from smartphones/computers become common in human-computer interactions, examining the social and psychological effects of these new technologies becomes critical. Meanwhile, as much as CASA studies efficiently identify social interactions per occurrence, smartphones and wearable devices interact with the user all the time. This companionability along with passive interactions contribute to increased intimacy and a new relationship between the user and the technology, which, as this study has suggested, may be at a cost of real-life close relationships for certain people. Tech developers and researchers start to look at context-sensitive app to provide mobile intervention for depression (Burns et al., 2011) and promote gratitude (Ghandeharioun, Azaria, Taylor, & Picard, 2016). Technological potential in alleviating chronic social consciousness and unhealthy emotional dependency on the technology can also be explored from the social disposition perspective. All these changes make social disposition—the baseline from which we adapt to and socially respond to new media—more important, not only in understanding anthropomorphism but also in gauging the impact of emerging communication technology on our social lives.
