Climate change is likely to increasingly impact marine ecosystems, fisheries, and the fishing communities that depend on those ecosystems. In order to adapt to those impacts, a considerable amount of additional research is needed to understand the complex ways in which the system will be affected. One of the ways to meet that need is through increased collaborative research, which provides a number of co-benefits to data production, including improved trust between researchers and fishers as well as improved integration of local knowledge into the research sphere. Collaborative research provides an opportunity for working together to ask questions, develop methodologies, collect data, train others, and apply findings. This is inherently a much more iterative, contextual, two-way approach to communication between researchers and fishers, and the interview participants in this research spoke highly of its possible applications to climate research in fisheries.
Despite its identified value, there are a number of challenges to collaborative research and communication between fishers and researchers. These challenges range from logistical constraints such as funding strains and the difficulties of meetings for fishers and researchers who work on very different schedules, to more complex, social limitations due to a perceived lack of trust between researchers and fishers and acceptance of the validity of one another's research. Most critically, fishers and researchers need to see each other as “experts” who are working together to ask and answer critical questions for maintaining fisheries in southern New England, and managers need to find ways to respect and make use of those varying forms of expertise. Current mediums of communication such as journal articles, public meetings, or scientific presentations are often ineffective for bridging the knowledge between fishers and researchers, so there is a need for new communication efforts, including increased collaborative research.
Because of the complexity of the known challenges facing fisheries and the likelihood of additional unknowns as a result of climate change, it will take the contributions of a broader set of “experts,” including those who spend their days on the water and who are most likely to be exposed to the biggest impacts, to identify opportunities for management alternatives. In addition, these local experts are best situated to monitor resources for indications of impacts, and to otherwise conduct the more timely research necessary for understanding impacts of climate change and adapting management accordingly.
There are a number of challenges to setting up new structures that accommodate collaborative research—including the adoption of standardized gear, the use of new communication and data technologies, the creation of new funding mechanisms to support this research, and changes in policy and management that can accommodate the research produced, but our research points to a number of possible significant benefits. These benefits include improved data collection, management, and relationship building. These place-specific, iterative mechanisms offer the best chance for useful research in the face of climate change-based uncertainty. These mechanisms offer opportunities to bring more forms of expertise and more researchers to the table, not fewer, in hopes of addressing the pressing challenges facing our fish stocks and the communities that depend on them.
