In this work, a novel multimodal affective data analysis framework is proposed. It includes the extraction of salient features, development of unimodal classifiers, building feature- and decision-level fusion frameworks. The deep CNN-SVM -based textual sentiment analysis component is found to be the key element for outperforming the state-of-the-art model’s accuracy. MKL has played a significant role in the fusion experiment. The novel decision-level fusion architecture is also an important contribution of this paper. In the case of the decision-level fusion experiment, the coupling of sentic patterns to determine the weight of textual modality has enriched the performance of the multimodal sentiment analysis framework considerably.
Interestingly, a lower accuracy was obtained for the emotion recognition task, which may indicate that extracting emotions from video may be more difficult than inferring polarity. While text is the most important factor for determining polarity, the visual modality shows the best performance for emotion analysis. The most interesting part of this paper is that a common multimodal affect data analysis framework is well capable of extracting emotion and sentiment from different datasets.
Future work will focus on extracting more relevant features via visual modality. Specifically, deep 3D CNNs will be employed for automatic feature extraction from videos. A feature selection method will be used to select only the best features in order to ensure both scalability and stability of the framework. Consequently, we will strive to improve the decision-level fusion process using a cognitive inspired fusion engine. In order to realize our ambitious goal of developing a novel real-time system for multimodal sentiment analysis, the time complexities of the methods need to be consistently reduced. Hence, another aspect of our future work will be to effectively analyze and appropriately address the system’s time complexity requirements in order to create a better, more time efficient and reliable multimodal sentiment analysis engine.
