This paper has described one type of user that UI designers employ when designing systems, the average user. It has been questioned whether this type truly reflects the current wide spectrum of users and whether it is ultimately useful for the design of interactive systems with heterogeneous categories of end-users. Subsequently, a review of traditional classifications of users was done to explore the variables on which established categorisations were based to ascertain whether they covered the whole spectrum of current users. Because of the permanent change in the context where the technology is used and the constant evolution of user profiles, those commonly accepted classifications have been revisited with a target update to accommodate new trends and user profiles. This work has proposed then a revision of user classifications, newly characterising the Occasional User, a user category consistent with the new trends, technologies and interaction scenarios. The variables that define the OU, knowledge of the interface and prospective use, define a user category orthogonal with the established ones placed outside the traditional learning curve of novice, intermediate and expert. The main characteristics of the OU have been studied, presenting their implications for UID and providing principles and recommendations supported by empirical data for UI designers and HCI community.
The lessons learned from the OU are directly applicable to UIs where the use of the system depends on circumstances beyond the designer's control. For example, whether the decision made by a first-time customer concerning repeating the use of a Self-Service Checkout depends on the outcome of their encounter. In commerce scenarios such as this, where the success of a business depends on maximising the probability that the customer is going to return, the OU has the potential to become a regular user/customer. However, in case of an error, they may stop the process and complain about the experience. They may become a problematic customer if they are not attended correctly and their problems are not solved. Bottlenecks and problems caused by suboptimal interactions may change opinions about organisations. The OU is a type of user necessary to address these issues and apply user-centred design (UCD) approach that understands the interaction with technology as universal, accessible and transparent for the user, independently of the technological era that users are in.
The increasing number of mobile devices and expansion of new context of use (e.g., indoor, outdoor, public space) is multiplying the number of potential users who want or need to use the technology but do not have an extensive knowledge of computer/technology concepts and, in other cases, do not want to master those systems. Designing interfaces for this type of users is a challenge because traditional mechanisms of learning (e.g., user memory recall or implicit visual recognition) are not normally applicable under these circumstances. However, alternative and elaborated ways of guiding the user to accomplish their goal can be implemented (e.g., Martinez et al., 2013, Carrillo and Falgueras, 2015). An additional benefit of the OU perspective is that this type of interface can inclusively gather other types of users requirements. Those users, for instance, who feel comfortable with the idea of not having to remember how to operate the interface. Instead, relieving the user from having to memorise specific functionalities and understand foreign task domain concepts can be achieved through guidance along the interaction.
There is an intentional omission of the article ‘the’ in the title of this paper because the authors understand that the term ‘occasional’ is imprecise by definition and, therefore, difficult to successfully define and completely embrace its range of values. This paper has presented a reflective and contemporary characterisation of what an OU is, as a consequence of the observed need for inclusively informing UID for such category of users. However, the definition is open to include more concepts, and nuances of the inherently diffuse conceptual interpretation of the occasional term. To our knowledge, this is an attempt to characterise a user category that seems set to grow over time.
