I have attempted a tour de force for how we can improve our scientific practices. Much of what I have written has focused on how to better manage the publication process, and how to best incentivize researchers. I focused on technical and methodological elements that we must improve on. I believe that the actions I suggested are a serious step forward to “vaccinating” our field against significosis, neophilia, theorrhea, arigorium, and disjunctivitis. In doing so, I believe that we will publish articles that will make useful contributions, that will be rigorous, and that will make a difference to research or practice.
Finding different ways to study leadership is what will take our knowledge base to the next level. In reflecting on the recent discovery of gravitational waves, an editorial in the journal Science stated: “measure what is measurable, and make measurable what is not so” (attributed to Galileo Galilei, see: Turner, 2016, p. 1243). Of course, we are not physicists nor will we be able to elaborate eloquent theories like that of general relativity or to make precise enough measures to detect outcomes akin to gravitation ways. However, in most instances, we can accomplish the following steps for a particular phenomenon:
1.conceive of and describe a construct, its different states and forms2.explain how the construct is affected or can affect other constructs3.identify how the system of relations is bounded by space or time4.demonstrate how the studied phenomenon can solve problems5.build an explanatory bridge of this phenomenon to another discipline
Developing different ways to measure constructs and their outcomes in a rigorous and reliable way, coding or quantifying the variables, exploring and observing them in situ, linking them to other variables, experimenting with them, testing their limits, showing how they affect practice, as well as understanding their proximal or ultimate causes, is what we should be pursuing, and this in a cohesive way. Each of these steps could be a study in its own right, would take years to fully understand, and might not have immediate applications; yet the steps—moving from basic to applied research and then reaching out to another discipline—each help illuminate the nature of the phenomenon.
Moreover, beyond doing our science better and more creatively, we should also reflect on what we are doing, on whether we are asking the right questions, and trying to solve the right problems (cf. Ellemers, 2013). Such reflection must challenge what we do so that we never lose sight of whom we are serving. Our leitmotif should always be: So what? Is it rigorous? Will it make a difference?
Finally, by improving on how we do our science I believe that what we publish will make a difference and have an impact. It is not just about this journal but what we collectively do as scientists that matters. We must do our science better; never mind how impact is measured, rescaled, or conceptualized, and whether it considers impact on social media, policy, or elsewhere. Doing better on journal impact factor or other individual-level metrics are not goals in themselves; doing better science is.
The editorial team of this journal is passionate about doing good science and ensuring that what we publish matters. But, if we chase success we might never find it. If we all follow our passion and do good science, success will find its way to us.
