The study was conducted in response to the reported lack of apps for maths in other subjects and the need for further research on the use of tablets for contextualisation of maths in real life problems and cross-curricular mathematics (Coffland & Xie, 2015) and the reported lack of studies on the effectiveness of integrating tablets for high order learning outcomes (Zydney & Warner, 2016). Our findings about the tablets supporting maths higher-order achievements are consistent with related studies, indicating that tablets support the cognitive domain (Kiger et al., 2012, Schacter and Jo, 2016, Schacter et al., 2015, Zhang et al., 2015) and learning outcomes in affective-social domain of learning (Alvarez et al., 2011, Zydney and Warner, 2016). The study compares the teaching and learning process involved in integrating tablet-based cross-curricular apps with that of the traditional setting where maths is taught as a discrete subject and without computer-aided activities. The EG was introduced to new curriculum material with tablet-based cross-curricular maths apps to examine the effect on the conceptual, procedural and problem solving knowledge and how tablet-based digital interactive representations (virtual manipulatives) support learning within the three stage model aligned with physical, cognitive and organisational ergonomics. Teachers of the CG used traditional curriculum material with mathematics as a discrete subject, using paper and pencil and traditional manipulatives. The experiment confirmed the hypothesis that the significant difference exists between the experimental and control group on the procedural and problem solving knowledge in favour of experimental group.
We also conducted observations in the EG to examine tablets' ergonomics in maths teaching, while applying Bruner's three stage learning model within three domains of learning. We examined how the three stages of representations, from concrete manipulation of objects through visual to abstract representations, manifest themselves in tablet-based learning. Our study confirmed the affordance of tablets indicated by Blackwell et al. (2016): that manipulation with tablets closely resembles children's manipulation of physical objects. Haßler et al. (2016, p. 145) examined studies of tablet hardware affordance's contribution to learning outcomes and among those highlighted the study of McClanahan, Williams, Kennedy, and Tate (2012) examining the touchscreen supporting multiple modalities and especially visual and tactile/kinaesthetic facilitating and enriching engagement in a classroom. Our study examined affordance with regard to multisensory engagement for the domains of learning among eight years old students. It also examined the integration of tablets in Bruner's three stage learning transiting between representational modes, identifying that when manipulating virtual representations tablets provide close resemblance to the manipulation of physical objects and at the same time allowed transition between visual and abstract level of representations. In contrast to findings by Anthony et al. (2014), the eight year olds in the EG were skilled at using touch-based interfaces as long as the targets were of adequate size. The authors responded to the need for studies introducing cross curricular teaching in the Slovenian context. Based on the study, the authors concluded that the utilisation of tablets in cross-curricular maths provides efficient use of resources from different subjects, and also provides multiple representations facilitating learning outcomes in cognitive, affective-social and psychomotor learning outcomes.
