At the beginning of the 1950s, the computer revolution to come, but also the rise of quantum chemistry as an independent discipline, strongly favored the revival of the ab initio approach.65 Hartree and Fock had been able to set up a remarkable method of resolution in the quantum many-body problem which was then ready for an extensive use. From its first results in the 1930s, the Hartree-Fock method quickly proved to be one of the most efficient methods for the calculation of atomic structures, but the major role played by computers long left the impression that during two decades, scientists did nothing much. The present work helps to nuance that idea, and puts forward the Hartree-Fock method as a vivid field of investigations during that period.
Our study was originally conceived as an investigation into the conceptual considerations concerning the self-consistent field method. However, it turns out that the role of the mathematical formalism actually proved to be one of the main issues at stake. We mostly focused on the actors, on their motivations, their conceptual views. Fock and Hartree, complementary actors in the elaboration of the method, turned out to have had a completely different approach in further works. Hartree׳s utilitarian approach of the problem led him to constantly improve computational aspects and to aim at better agreement with experiment. Fock remained concerned with securing the theoretical basis of his work and with its mathematical formalism. Their respective approaches, kept them away from the importance of clarifying the meaning and role of the quantum exchange phenomenon in the Hartree-Fock method. On his side, Slater, many years later, could explicitly use them in view of a practical simplification of the method.
James and Joas with a focus on the years 1926–1928 have put in evidence the interrelation between the applications of quantum mechanics and its theoretical understanding (James & Joas, 2015). Our case study illustrates and extends their statements. Slater׳s and Fock׳s considerations on the formalism of the quantum many-body problem were based on issues of the self-consistent field method. Also, clarifications of notions like exchange and electronic correlation arose from the application of the method. The method׳s role in contributing directly to the formalism and to the conceptual understanding of quantum mechanics in part explains its good reception, its diffusion, and, during the computer era, its successes.
