Expansion of government energy R&D budgets is likely to continue to be a key component of climate policy. Using an original data set of both scientific articles and patents pertaining to alternative energy technologies, this paper provides new evidence on the flows of knowledge between university, private, and government research. The paper makes three key contributions to both the study of energy research and to energy R&D policy.
First, using scientific articles to represent more basic, upstream research and patents to represent more applied downstream research, the paper provides new descriptive data on the flows of basic and applied research across institutions. There are notable differences in the importance of different institutions across technologies. For example, university patents are relatively more prevalent for biofuels, perhaps indicating the importance of genetic research to new patentable biofuel technologies. Similarly, wind research has moved to a more applied stage, where the most valuable inventions come from downstream institutions such as the private sector, rather than from universities.
Second, using non-patent literature references to link articles and patents, I show that highly cited academic literature is also valuable to the creation of applied technology (e.g. patents). The results are highly skewed. Few articles are ever cited by patents, and those that are cited by patents are amongst the most highly cited articles by other research articles. This result indicates that not only are journal article citations a good indicator of the usefulness of the research to other academic researchers, but also provide information on the value of published research for potential technology development.
Finally, analysis of citation flows across institutions highlights the high value of research performed at government institutions. Patents assigned to governments are more likely to be cited than other patents. Moreover, government articles are more likely to be cited by patents than any other institution, including universities. Thus, research performed at government institutions appears to play an important translational role linking basic and applied research. Funding agencies may wish to expand funding for government research facilities as they increase public energy R&D budgets.
