Most assume youth have little power or impact when it comes to direct conservation impacts; they can't vote or do extensive volunteer work, usually don't lobby policy-makers, and don't make large household purchasing decisions. However, we learned from this study that youth do have the power, ability and agency to contribute to conservation immediately as a collective, with site management impacts including informing city managers of ongoing pollution problems, conducting concrete restoration activities, and collecting data that directly contributes to the management of Marine Protected Areas.
However, conservation impacts through education often mean we must bank on the future actions and decisions of youth, hoping for measureable outcomes in twenty years. Our findings regarding environmental science agency, therefore, have particular importance. The CCS programs we studied seem to uniquely provide youth with not only ways to learn environmental science practices and content, and about the connections between human and ecological systems, but also a wide range and depth of opportunities to identify and practice their own roles and areas of expertise within science and conservation. It's likely that some of the youth in this study began the project with an interest in science, or writing skills, or public speaking skills; so the measure of impact is not whether they gained in those skills and knowledge, but that they were allowed to practice and develop those skills in the context and for the purposes of conservation and science work.
Not all youth evidenced all aspects of developing ESA in these programs; and most conservation activities by young people were often in the company of adult educators, which may yet limit the extent to which youth are able to address conservation issues and take up science for themselves. CCS is not a panacea for all youth conservation education and stewardship efforts. Further, our study design means that extrapolating our findings across similar projects might be limited, and further research is needed to further develop this framework. However, we identified some of the key processes and conditions under which youth did take up science and conservation knowledge, skills, roles, and actions for themselves, which all lay the foundation for future conservation behaviors in ways that shorter-term, isolated, constrained conservation education activities might not. By providing 1) longer-term CCS programs, 2) repeated experiences to build connections to a place, and 3) ways to contribute explicitly to authentic science research, CCS practitioners can provide fertile conditions for youth to develop ESA. In addition, our findings suggest CCS programs should provide opportunities for youth to take ownership and responsibility for 1) rigorous data collection and analysis, 2) disseminating and communicating findings to relevant public and scientific audiences, and 3) understanding their own social-ecological system and ways they can take actions to improve its health and resilience. As the field of citizen science grows, we hope these findings will help conservation scientists, managers and educators to be intentional and strategic in choosing goals and activities that will impact conservation in the near and long term.
