This study allows some insight into the system of multiple factors that influence game enjoyment. The authors believe that the findings indicate important avenues for future research regarding the use of mobile learning games. This study is one of the first to investigate the role of individual traits in predicting enjoyment and achievement in mobile games. The authors have proposed a model based on the supported relationships. Overall, the hypothesized relationships between enjoyment and certain individual traits, which included learning styles, game attitude, and collaboration skills were not supported. However, a link between intrinsic motivation and enjoyment was evident in the present study. More importantly, this significant correlation is consistent with the broad conceptualization of enjoyment as need satisfaction, which suggests a positive link between enjoyment and the satisfaction of autonomy, competence, and relatedness. Further, a player's game attitude was found to be a strong predictor of intrinsic motivation while collaboration skills were shown to account for achievement in a mobile gameplay.
This study presents a number of potential implications to video game researchers and educators who intend to use mobile games for educational purposes. The current findings suggest that motivation to play is determined by the attitude the player holds toward that particular game. As such, considering the growing popularity of mobile learning games, this study emphasizes the need for a continuous assessment of students’ attitudes towards commercially available games prior to their implementation in learning activities. As shown in this study, a player who has positive game attitude may be more intrinsically motivated to play, which can potentially lead to an enjoyable gaming experience. As implied by the data presented in this study, achievement, as the ultimate goal of gaming and learning activities, is directly related to enjoyment. A second important takeaway from this research is the importance of the social context of video games in promoting achievement. That is, positive collaboration skills can potentially lead players to achieve better. Overall, the authors suggest that collaboration skills are a promising area of study for future video game research that aim to explore the complex psychology of play.
In light of this study findings, a number of limitations should be considered. First, the small number of participants raises some issues of statistical power. The nature of the sample also puts some limitations on the generalization and significance of these findings. Specifically, students who participated in this research came from two elementary schools in South Korea; that is to say the findings may solely represent perceptions and impressions of this specific population.
Another important limitation is the fact that participants' nationality and cultural characteristics may have influenced their level of competitiveness and collaboration in this research study. As such, it is possible that certain aspects such as collaboration and motivation may change according to participants' nationalities and cultural backgrounds. Since the gaming experience involved group collaborations on a daily basis, peer pressure may have influenced certain behavioral aspects such as motivation to play and willingness to collaborate. Lastly, from a cultural perspective, the potential influence of researchers on students’ motivation or performance should also be noted.
