In this article, we have reviewed the previous work for the visual simulation of clouds. It is surprising that there have been such a tremendous number of researches focusing on this specific topic. For modeling clouds, methods on three types of approaches have been developed: procedural, physically-based, and image-based approaches. For rendering clouds, real-time and offline methods have been developed. The real-time methods usually use GPUs and the precomputation-based approach is sometimes employed to take into account multiple scattering. The offline methods can take into account the multiple scattering very accurately. The recent researches mostly focus on Monte Carlo sampling techniques to create highly realistic images. For computing motions of clouds to create realistic animations, procedural methods were often used because of its efficiency. Physically-based methods using fluid simulations are also useful for computing realistic motions.
However, with these methods, it is often difficult to choose appropriate parameters to generate clouds with the desired appearance. We introduce our inverse design approach for visual simulation of clouds in order to overcome the above problem. Our approach took two-dimensional information as input and computed three-dimensional information to create realistic images of clouds. For the cloud shapes, two-dimensional contour line of the desired shapes of clouds is used to generate three-dimensional shapes of clouds. For the cloud colors, a photograph of real clouds is used to find optimal parameters that can produce realistic images of the synthetic clouds.
Clouds are fascinating natural phenomena and always attract our attention. Although it has become possible to synthesize realistic images/animations of clouds, there is still room for us to work on this research topic. For example, the resolution of synthetic clouds is not sufficient when compared to clouds in the real world. Efficient rendering/simulation of large-scale clouds covering hundreds of kilometers of areas should also be resolved. The inverse approach should also be improved so that, for example, the realistic animation of clouds is created in real-time from the user’s sketch. We will keep working on these issues.
