The study, based on a large-scale dataset, reveals characteristics of Sina Weibo as an important local altmetrics platform on which global science is discussed. We conducted a systematic comparison between Weibo and the global microblogging platform, Twitter, aiming to draw attention to local altmetrics in developing countries, to investigate the common features of microblog altmetrics, and to shed light on cultural differences in scholarly communication on these social media platforms.
Sina Weibo, as a local social media platform in China, is meanwhile the world’s second largest microblog service. Weibo users discuss global science more actively than it is discussed on several global altmetrics sources. Being a channel connecting global science and regional community, local social media should be considered as an integral part of the altmetrics landscape. Strong evidence shows that Weibo, as well as Twitter and general altmetrics, have significant immediacy advantage over citations, endorsing earlier claims that altmetrics can potentially detect more realtime impact of research products.
The highly skewed distribution of Weibo and Twitter altmetrics is not surprising considering their nature of social media (Banditwattanawong, Masdisornchote, & Uthayopas, 2014; Jiang, Wang, Yang, & Li, 2015). However, certain types of articles, a number of journals and specific disciplines are found to attract more Weibo attention. The common motivations for posting scientific weibos is to disseminate or discuss the articles because they are interesting, surprising, academically useful, or practically useful. Weibo users pay particular attention on prestigious journals because of the Chinese academic reward system, which has biased awards for publications in these journals. In addition, discussion of articles published on important open access platforms confirms China’s acceptance of new forms of scientific communication. While focusing the most on General and “Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology”, Weibo users share interest in top discussed disciplines such as Health science, Medicine and Life Science, with Twitter. These disciplines with comparatively higher coverage of altmetrics, above other disciplines, can make use of social media scholarly communication and altmetrics to better achieve their development goals.
This study considers only articles. However, other types of research products also matter. As altmetrics studies evolve, researchers have noted that Twitter accounts are of different backgrounds, for example, automatic bots maintained by individuals or institutions (Haustein et al., 2016). Different user categories are also shown to have influence on the value of tweets (Yu, 2016b). Therefore, more content analysis taking context information into account is needed, to further reveal the nature of Weibo and general altmetrics.
