The results of this study clarify the value of CPs and MPs, and the fading effect on the regulation process for developing students' inquiry practices. Successful students (the high level inquiry group) performed metacognitive actions such as monitoring and evaluating during the prompted inquiry tasks, not only with a higher frequency than the less successful students (the low level inquiry group), but also in different sequences. According to the sequential analysis used in this study, the students' crucial learning patterns of successful inquiry practices are identified for educators and teachers to design the necessary scaffolds for weak learners to improve their metacognitive and inquiry strategies in CBLEs. The mechanism of fading is discussed based on the evidence of the sequential analysis. The results indicate that the mixture of CPs and MPs helped the students clarify the learning tasks, become aware of their learning difficulties, and select an appropriate strategy for ensuring the quality of their inquiry performance. In particular, the prompts assisted the students by providing them with explicit guidance for carefully examining their own inquiry processes, and then enhanced the development of their inquiry practices. The mixture of CPs and MPs enhanced the students' inquiry practices through the feedback mechanism of inquiry performance progress and metacognitive actions. Therefore, we suggest that educators develop a system of cognitive and metacognitive prompts for inquiry-based learning with a holistic view, and systematically explore its effects using the sequential analysis technique to identify the crucial patterns between prompts (instructional designs) and actions (learning behaviors) so as to better understand the mechanism of scaffolding in CBLEs. However, it should be noted that the scale of this study was relatively small, with only 20 students. We were constrained by the availability of volunteers and the laborious qualitative analysis. Future studies could replicate our study with more participants and perhaps with learners of more diverse backgrounds. Future researchers can also utilize other research designs (e.g., quasi-experimental) to investigate whether and how learner characteristics, such as their conceptions of inquiry, views on the support devices, or metacognitive awareness, influence their use of scaffolds and learning outcomes.
