In this paper, the problem of fault detection in randomized gossip algorithms is addressed using Set-valued Observers (SVOs). The introduction of the stochastic information to build the set is one of the main contributions of this paper that allows to detect faults based on the probability of that event. Two functions to measure the maximum attacker input signal for an undetectable fault are presented. The quadratic function is suitable for systems where the energy plays an important role whereas the linear function is characteristic of problems such as the consensus, where inputting a positive signal cancels the effect of a fault injecting a negative signal. We also showed the necessary number of past observations for the case of local information, when keeping the best value for the horizon is computationally intractable.
Building on the results of having an SVO for fault detection, without sharing state estimates, SVOs in the absence of faults are capable of determining average consensus in finite-time using only measurements available to the node, but may require a large computational burden. The result is suitable to situations where one node is able to control/command the sequence of communications in the network.
In order to drop the requirement of a large horizon, an algorithm is presented where each node computes its own set-valued state estimates and performs an intersection with state estimates received by the neighbors. Besides reducing the computational burden, this method also achieves finite-time average consensus for any horizon value, provided that the algorithm runs for sufficiently large number of observations, and each node computes less conservative set-valued estimates. The result is relevant in practice to determine a stopping time in a faulty environment, which is not a straightforward issue due to the iterative nature and uncertainty generated by the random choice of communicating nodes. If conditions for finite-time convergence are not met within the time that the algorithm is running, asymptotic convergence of the state of the nodes is also provided.
We envisage as directions for future work, the study of additional properties of specific classes of algorithms. In particular, structural premises that allow to eliminate certain sequences of matrices A(k) which are irrelevant for the computation of the SVO. In essence, associated with the results presented in this paper, such a mechanism would decrease the complexity even further and broaden the spectrum of application of the proposed fault detection methodology. Another line of possible research would be to integrate the SVO in a fault isolation mechanism as to progress towards a fault correction scheme where the nodes would, after detecting a fault, isolate the faulty node and correct the state of the algorithm to a value closer to the true state if there was no fault. Such a goal poses very interesting research problems.
