The article highlighted the need for architectural design and practice to follow a research programme (Lakatos, 1978), as opposed to ad-hoc solutions to design tasks. Imre Lakatos, a philosopher of mathematics and science, used the word – research programme – both in the pragmatic terms of cultivating experience and also the philosophical sense of maintaining a set of core-beliefs. Further, the three aspects of parametric design thinking were distilled from such an architectural research programme and exemplified with case studies. The case-studies in themselves showed that these features are enabling a dense network of cumulative, collaborative research involving academic institutions, professional firms and embedded research groups, to effectively realize architectural projects. In other words the cumulative research is enabling a successful outcome to the directed search of design-space.
The benefits of following a research program are thus two-fold. It may be noted here that, as trivially obvious as both aspects might seem, it is far from de facto in current architectural practice. On the one hand, aligning practice-embedded research with established research trajectories allows for practitioners to focus their efforts on the social implications of the built environment, which has, despite its importance and impact, hitherto received rather scant attention from designers (Hillier & Hanson, 1989). Early evidence of this can be discerned in the design of the mathematics gallery (Figure 18). Additionally, this alignment is also mutually beneficial to the researchers in that their work can be motivated by and tested against its application in the field.Download : Download high-res image (705KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 18. A computational approach to user navigation, occupation and ergonomics. 01 Concept diagram of air-flow around the aeroplane. 01, 02, 03, 04 Data driven approach to accommodate layout changes per curatorial vision and other constraints. 05 Snippet of the detailed list of 130 objects. 05–09 Bespoke tools to analyse user, navigation and dwell experience 10 View of the gallery. (Images: courtesy Zaha Hadid Architects)
On the other hand, practice can benefit both from historically accrued knowledge and from the significant progress being made by researchers in the fields of architectural design (Thomsen, Tamke, Gengnagel, Faircloth, & Scheurer, 2015), computational geometry (Adriaenssens, Gramazio, Kohler, Menges, & Pauly, 2016), structural design (“IASS Symposium,” 2015), robotic manufacture (Reinhardt, Saunders, & Burry, 2016) etc. This cultural accumulation and transmission is well-known to be critical to human evolutionary success and thus prudent to aim for.
