The primary goal of the study is to design and implement a serious game to help individuals to gain knowledge about ISO/IEC 12207 in an interactive virtual 3D environment. Rather than just reading the standard, participants are able to involve a live process with dialogues and quests. Every necessary step was taken to develop the game completely. Every digital creation was specifically designed for preserving this ambition. Moreover, several different programs were used in order to make more refined virtual environment with engaging features. Our essential finding is that those participants who adopted the serious game approach to learning about ISO/IEC 12207 appear to have benefited from superior educational outcomes when compared to those participants who applied the more traditional paper-based approach. This finding has implications for education in general, where it may be the case that games (as stated in [4]) can offer genuine and lasting improvements over classical teaching techniques. At the present time, we must acknowledge that virtual 3D environments such as were adopted in this study remain expensive from a technology perspective which may currently impact upon the adoption of this technology. However, in the fullness of time, it is suspected that the costs of this technology will decrease and when they do, educators and trainers should strongly consider embracing the technology as a means to improving educational outcomes. In the meantime, we intend to continue our research and to apply the technology in an educational setting. The contribution of this study has been to confirm that serious games have been proven effective for teaching ISO/IEC 12207 Software Lifecycle Processes.
The major limitation of this study is the evaluation of the suitability of serious games to learning 12207 was based on the 1995 revision. The first reason for this is that primary researcher was experienced on the standard. Secondly, the research was conducted as an exploratory study; therefore applicability of game elements to ISO/IEC 12207 was preliminary tested. Thirdly, like most of the serious games, researchers did not planed for a commercial release but to teach 12207 for novice developers. Consequently, more research is needed to better understand the game's potentials. However, it should be noted that using games as teaching tools is ultimately serves for improving student's understanding of the 12207 processes.
Notably, for the future improvement of Floors, Virtual Reality (VR) can be stated. Virtual Reality is a kind of computer technology that simulates the specified environments to enable user interaction [40]. Additionally, users get perceptional feelings about their existence in a virtually created world, which is known as immersion [41]. As a relatively new game technology, VR can enhance the prominent strength of Floors. Virtual Reality does not require traditional input devices. Users have chance to control their actions and movements without any limitations. However, in traditional gaming there is a need for specified input devices and controllers in order to move and complete specified activities during game play. However, by using VR technology, participants’ of Floors can examine and explore the features of the game and the game play scenario by themselves in a more free way.
