Over the last three decades, the increasing use of technology within industry and everyday life has positioned the field as a high-growth sector. Yet, since the 1980s, there have been concerns regarding the low number of women engaging in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), and specifically the information technology (IT) sector (Thébaud & Charles, 2018). Despite efforts to understand underlying scientific reasons and implement programmes to support the attraction and retention, and lessen the attrition, of women engaged in the IT pathway, the problem persists (Aspray, 2016). It appears that the studies have had little impact on women's participation and engagement in the field, and we still do not fully understand why there continues to be low numbers of women enrolling in IT degrees, what would attract more women into degrees, and what would contribute to their retention as they graduate and enter into employment in the field.
There are a few countries where women's rate of participation in IT degrees equals or surpasses that of men, such as Afghanistan (see Hoffmann, 2010), India (see Gupta, 2012) and Malaysia (Mellström, 2009). In these countries, employment in the industry is understood as a suitable career choice for women as it is situated in an office and outside physical tasks are not involved (Gupta, 2012). In Malaysia, according to Mellström (2009), the government decrees gender- and race-based ratios for education and employment, which predominantly position computer science (CS) education and the IT industry as suitable for women. However, in many countries without government decrees, universities seem to find attraction and retention of women in IT degrees a challenging problem to solve. Drawing on Australia as an example, women undergraduates in faculties of information technology (FIT) are significantly underrepresented compared with those in other STEM areas—for example, 13% in technology compared with 22% in physics and astronomy and 35% in mathematics (Office of the Chief Scientist, 2016). There is a compelling need to investigate the problem as we do not fully understand why women in some countries do not enter undergraduate degrees, have a high attrition rate, and then either do not enter the field or remain in the field for a short time.
The main aim of this paper is to use the concept of moral imagination to examine women's underrepresentation in the CS and IT fields and to better understand what may shape the participants' choices. We first situate the study in contemporary literature and review enrolment, retention and imagined possible futures as women enter the field of CS or IT. We then discuss the theoretical framing, drawing on Vygotsky, 1987, Vygotsky, 1997 cultural-historical approach, specifically, the concept of moral imagination put forward by Vadeboncoeur (2017) and Vadeboncoeur and Vellos (2016). This is followed by a broad overview of how the concept draws from Vygotsky, 1987, Vygotsky, 1997 theory of learning development and Greene's (1988) concept of social imagining referred to in her philosophy of education. The current study is then presented—the method, findings and discussion.
