What drives graduate students to participate in an online classroom, and what does this participation entail? As online graduate degree offerings expand, researchers must grapple with challenges in both conceptualizing and measuring various aspects of the student experience and contextualizing it to the age and career stage of graduate students. Developing a better idea of how students engage can inform not only an understanding of online learning behaviors, but also the shifting ways in which students and faculty engage in a virtual educational world.
Online participation, often measured as the interaction among students and between students and instructors (Hrastinski, 2008), allows students to develop critical thinking skills, reflect on course material, and improve cognitive processing capabilities (Bliss & Lawrence, 2009). Further, recent work has shown that peer support in the online environment has a positive relationship with the resources and social connections that students have in this setting, and that instructors play a key role in facilitating these connections (Cocquyt, Zhu, Diep, De Greef, & Vanwing, 2019). In comparison to the traditional classroom environment, some have argued that online discussion boards may allow for even deeper learning experiences and the engagement of a broader and more diverse student body (Bliss & Lawrence, 2009; Cheng, Paré; Collimore, & Joordens, 2011; Fredericksen, Picket, Shea, Pelz, & Swan, 2000).
The goal of this study is to explore the nature and intensity of student participation in graduate-level, online-only classrooms and how this participation varies among demographic groups. In studies of online courses, participation in virtual discussion boards constitutes one important predictor of student outcomes, including perceived learning (Jiang & Ting, 1999), course performance (Cheng, Paré, Collimore, & Joordens, 2011; Picciano, 2002), and persistence (Morris, Finnegan, & Wu, 2005). However, few studies exist at the intersection of a highly technical discipline and an adult population pursuing a graduate degree.
Our focus is in the discipline of computer science, where about half of US master's degrees are earned by international students, few racial/ethnic minorities are evident (3%Hispanic and 6%black), and most graduates (70%) are men (National Science Foundation, 2019). In many science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines, underrepresented groups have been shown to experience chilly climates and negative stereotypical judgments about their math abilities, contributing to low self-efficacy beliefs, anxiety, and timidity (Cheryan, Master, & Meltzoff, 2015; Du, Ge, & Xu, 2015). With computer-mediated communication, there is speculation that online education may reduce or remove many social and contextual cues and, thereby, create an environment that is gender and race neutral and inclusive (Gunn, McSporran, Macleod, & French, 2003; Kollock & Smith, 1996). This can be especially impactful in disciplines where stark demographic differences exist, and social exclusion can have effects on interest, and the pursuit of career opportunities, in the field.
With a growing literature on online learning, increased attention to the importance of examining various demographic attributes in such studies is critical (Money & Dean, 2019). Yet, most studies of adult learners in the online space are more remedial in nature (Money & Dean, 2019), which may not be translatable to more advanced populations of students. While some studies have identified an online gender participation gap, there is disagreement regarding its size and direction (Barrett & Lally, 1999; Herring, 2000; McSporran & Young, 2001; Rovai & Baker, 2005; Sankar, Gilmartin, & Sobel, 2015). Again, it is not clear whether this gap would be evident among working adults seeking an advanced degree. We seek to address these gaps and improve the understanding of online participation patterns among different demographic groups in a STEM discipline by examining the following research questions:
1.To what extent do graduate students participate in online learning discussion boards?2.For those who participate at all, what are the patterns of their engagement?3.How does the type and intensity of online participation vary by student demographics and class setting?
We address the questions above using data from a required online discussion board for several classes in a fully-online master's degree program in computer science. Data include 18% of courses in the two years of data we examined. The required modality enables us to examine student behavior in several different classes within a single institutional setting (and related norms, student body and so on). Our objectives are to a) identify the different forms of class participation in the online context and examine how that varies by individual characteristics, as well as class size, and b) to distinguish between active and passive participation, as well as to capture the intensity of participation.
Our study is somewhat exploratory in nature because participation in online settings, and particularly advanced degree settings, is neither well explored nor understood. Thus, we hope that our work contributes to the growing body of research in this realm in a few ways. First, as we note in our discussion, online graduate degrees are increasing, yet the body of empirical research on these programs is relatively small. Our research setting is a high-enrollment online computer science graduate degree program offered by a major research university in the United States. Most studies of online learning and related student experience investigate participation in single online or hybrid courses (Bainbridge et al., 2015; Bercovitz & Feldman, 2007; Song & McNary, 2011; Weidlich & Bastiaens, 2019; Young & McSporran, 2004) while research on online degree programs (Allen & Seaman, 2017), and particularly graduate programs, is rare, despite their growing significance in the United States. Second, our data comes from the discipline of computer science, where participation and advancement of underrepresented groups remains a challenge. Third, we examine a student body that demonstrates considerable age diversity, including a large number of mid-career, working adults. Given that most studies of online learner adults over the age of 25 are pursuing initial degrees and have a number of readiness limitations (Money & Dean, 2019), our examination of highly-qualified adult students examines a population not often found in this literature.
