Machine learning algorithms [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23] helps in finding interesting and usual patterns in data. It helps us in making better decisions and generating insight for the improved predictions. There are many machine learning techniques available in literature but the most widely used techniques are Artificial Neural Network, K-Nearest Neighbour, Naive Bayes Classifier and Support Vector Machine as shown in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (116KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Machine learning techniques used in this research.
1.1. Artificial neural Network (ANN)An artificial neuron network (ANN) is a special type of supervised learning algorithm which is based on the biological neural networks structure. It is a computational model which aims to function like a human brain. ANN learns and trains itself based on the input and output sets. It consists mainly of two layers: input and output but for complex problems, hidden layers can also be used. ANNs can be considered as nonlinear statistical data modeling tools because they are used to find the complex relationships between inputs and outputs. ANN is also known as a neural network. The main advantage of ANN is that it can learn from observing data sets. Therefore, an ANN is used as a random function approximation tool which helps in estimating the efficient, cost-effective and ideal solutions. We can take data samples for training rather than entire data sets for the solutions. It is used to save time and money. ANN is considered to be an effective method or simply a mathematical model that enhances existing data analysis technologies.
1.2.  K-nearest Neighbors (KNN)K-nearest neighbors (KNN) algorithm is the simplest and easy to implement technique of supervised Machine Learning. It is mainly used for classification problems of various applications. The main advantage of K-nearest neighbors algorithm is that it executes quickly for small training data sets. It can be used without prior knowledge about the structure of data in the training set. If we have to insert new training pattern to the existing training set, there is no requirement for any retraining. However, it has some limitations like when the training set is large, it may take a lot of space. It consumes a lot of time for testing because the distance between test data and all the training data is computed for every test data.
1.3. Naive Bayes Classifier (NBC)Naive Bayes is considered to be a probabilistic machine learning algorithm which is based on the Bayes Theorem. It has an assumption that all the predictors are independent of each other. It means the presence of a particular feature in a class is not related to the presence of any other feature. Its main advantage is that it is easy to build and useful for very large data sets. Although, they are fast and easy to implement but their biggest disadvantage is that it requires the predictors to be independent. If we consider the real life cases, most of the predictors are dependent. Thus, this disadvantage decreases its performance.
1.4. Support Vector Machine (SVM)Support Vector Machine is a supervised machine learning algorithm. It is a very powerful technique used for classification. It can solve linear and non-linear problems and works well for many practical problems. The idea of SVM is simple. For separating the data into classes, SVM creates a line or a hyperplane. SVM maps the data to a high-dimensional feature space so that data points can be categorized. It even works well for inseparable data. Once a separator between the categories is found, the data are transformed in such a way that the separator could be drawn as a hyperplane.
