The rapid growth of online news media and the presence of social media as a platform for public interaction in the digital space have changed the pattern of news consumption in society [1]. This change raises discourse about fragmentation in the news media landscape as well as in the way people consume information. Fragmentation in media landscape, or often expressed through the metaphor “echo-chambers” and “filter bubbles” [2, 3, 4], refers to situations where audience cluster around the news sources they access [5]. When this is intertwined with an individual tendency for confirmation bias on specific narratives, for example preferences over certain political issues, then the fragmentation of the media landscape can lead to extreme polarization of public opinion [6].
There are many studies that examine the phenomenon of fragmentation in the news media landscape [5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. However, it remains an empirical question to determine whether this is really a characteristic of current news consumption patterns, or whether the extent of fragmentation differs across countries and media platforms. Studies conducted by Mukerjee et al. [5] and Majó-Vázquez et al. [13] using news site traffic data shows that there are massive audience overlap between news outlets, which indicates that the tendency for fragmentation is not as extreme as imagined. Meanwhile, a study of news consumption patterns on Facebook by Schmidt et al. [15] suggests there is a strong tendency for fragmentation in the news media landscape on Facebook.
In this study we will use network analysis to explore the anatomy of media networks. on Twitter, one of the most popular social media platform. The study goal is threefold: (i) to investigate fragmentation in news media landscape on social media environment. In contrast to the majority of previous studies, we examine the fragmentation tendency in media network using three indicators at once, namely density [8, 17], centrality [5, 7, 8, 13] and network modularity (13); (ii) to explore the characteristics of media clusters in fragmented network structures. Different with previous research, we conducted an in-depth analysis of each media cluster, and we expected to find relatively homogeneous news outlet characteristics within each cluster; (iii) to compare the characteristic of news media landscape in three countries, namely Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. As suggested repeatedly in the literature, comparative analysis between countries with different media environments is needed to avoid making conclusions about various media markets using one single case study [13]. In this study, the three selected countries have different media regulations and journalistic practices [18], and we expected to find substantive and significant differences in the way audiences in these countries consume news online.
In general, this research contributes both methodologies and empirical facts for understanding whether news consumption trends in digital media environment are accompanied by fragmentation of news sources. Furthermore, the findings in this study present an alternative portrait of the phenomenon of balkanization or echo-chamber, as feared by some [2, 3, 4], which is usually investigated from the perspective of news consumers [3, 19].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 discuss some other works that related to this study, section 3 introduces the steps for implementing a network approach to news media follower overlap data. Section 4 presents results of the fragmentation analysis. Some conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
