Cities are complex entities by nature and modelling urban systems has interested planners for decades (Batty, 2008; Bettencourt, 2013; Isalgue et al., 2007). A range of approaches have been used to model urban processes, examples of which include cellular automata (Batty, 1997; Batty, Couclelis, & Eichen, 1997; de Almeida et al., 2003), fractals (Batty and Longley, 1994; Batty and Xie, 1996; Frankhauser, 1998; Murcio et al., 2015) and multi-agent models (Batty, 2005; Heppenstall, Crooks, See, & Batty, 2012). These models aim to understand cities by modelling their underlying components and exploring their systems, ultimately intending to inform decision making and policy (Batty, 2009; Calder et al., 2018). Due to the complexity and nonlinearity of cities, these models tend to explore or predict urban systems in a sectoral fashion. For example, transport models are used to simulate the potential impact of policy and infrastructure investment. Such models may fail to represent complex events in cities, in which multiple systems interact.
The success of deep learning and computer vision in pattern recognition over the past decade (LeCun et al., 2015) has created opportunities to understand cities through images (Reichstein et al., 2019). So far, the diversity of the algorithms of computer vision has enabled researchers to tackle and predict a wide spectrum of issues in more accurate and precise fashion (Goodfellow et al., 2017; LeCun et al., 2015; Reichstein et al., 2019).
In this paper, we review the algorithms and applications of computer vision related to urban analytics. Urban analytics can be defined as urban research that exploits new data resources that are captured, for example, from sensors (e.g. imagery, the internet of things), crowdsources and social media (Batty, 2019). Deep learning and computer vision technologies have tremendous potential in this area for dealing with heterogeneous data types, many of which are image-based. In the review, we identify the areas that have been intensively modelled using computer vision while also revealing the areas in which further research is needed. This is achieved by categorising the application areas of urban analytics into five layers of the city (the built environment, human interaction, transportation and traffic, the natural environment, and infrastructure). In doing so, we demonstrate that, while many urban processes are a result of interactions across these layers, the current approach is to tackle these layers differently and separately. Here, we note the potential of extracting data of different disciplines using a unified input (images/videos) that relies on computer vision methods to cover a wide spectrum of urban and transport research.
This review aims to provide a resource for urban planners and practitioners by: 1) reviewing the main methodologies of computer vision, and their applicability to various tasks of urban analytics, 2) illustrating the variation and nuances of deep learning and computer vision algorithms and their limitations in understanding cities, 3) giving a descriptive understanding of the algorithms of computer vision for policy-makers and planners, and how they are used in cities, 4) paving the way for developing AI-generated urban policies by highlighting the key enabling technologies and research directions. The remainder of this review is structured as follows: In Section 2, the methodology of the review is described. In Section 3, the key tasks of computer vision are described, along with the main algorithms. The applications of computer vision in urban analytics are reviewed in Section 4. Section 5 summarises what remains missing in current research, before Section 6 shows how we can move from prediction to decision making and policy recommendation. Finally, some conclusions are given in Section 7.
