Indonesia has a long and rich cultural heritage captured in the form of information about the noble culture of the past in either scripts or manuscripts that remained uncounted until recently [1]. These manuscripts contain historical information about worship, manners, history, folklore, traditional technologies, spells, genealogy, talismans, poetry, politics, governments, laws, customs, traditional medicine, and culture [2]. The medium of the manuscripts takes various forms. They were written in many different languages using different scripts [3], [4], [5], [6]. Many ancient manuscripts are still stored well in various museums or libraries in Indonesia. Automatic reading aids are valuable to help simplify and speed up the reading of these manuscripts. In this way, more generations of Indonesians will be able to use the important knowledge contained in the manuscripts.
An automatic transliteration of the manuscripts is an opportunity to ease the reading of those manuscripts. Manuscript transliteration is generally conducted by reading the manuscript and then writing the results to another piece of paper or storing them in a computer using a specific text-processing program. The procedure of transliteration presupposes that the workers fully understand how to read the manuscript, that no consideration is given to the length of the work, and that workers will concentrate sufficiently to minimize errors in the rewriting [7].
Many researchers have been working on automatic manuscript transliteration in various scripts using various methods. Shridhar and Kimura [8], in their seminal work, proposed an automatic transliteration method of handwritten words in Roman script, which comprises three main steps, i.e., pre-processing document, segmenting scripts in the document, and recognizing each of the scripts forming the words. These similar steps have been applied for Javanese manuscript transliteration as part of the Javanese optical character recognition (OCR) project [9], [10], [11], [12].
Javanese scripts are part of the Brahmi script group, which has been widely used in Southeast Asian societies in the past. Javanese scripts are different from alphabetical scripts because one Javanese letter represents a consonant or a combination of a consonant and a vowel, which results in two or more letters when transliterated into the Roman script. Since this transliteration results are in the form of syllables, this way of writing Javanese letters is called alphasyllabary or abugida [13], [14]. As an abugida writing system, a unit of Javanese script represents a consonant-vowel sequence based on the consonant letter. Each consonant has an inherent vowel that can be changed by diacritics or other modifications. One characteristic shared by this writing system is that there is no word delimiter.
In most of the classic Javanese manuscripts, many symbols stand as punctuation marks, including “adeg-adeg” for the beginning of a sentence, “pada lungsi” as a full stop, “pada lingsa” as a comma, and “pada” as a symbol marking the beginning, middle, or end of the letters or lyrics of songs. The complete process of segmenting and recognizing Javanese scripts and these punctuation symbols has been previously discussed by Widiarti et al. [12]. Among those symbols, however, there is no space symbol that separates words. The results of the transliteration of a Javanese manuscript image, therefore, will be a text document containing a sequence of syllables without spaces.
The spaceless writing model has been going on since the 20th century AD [15]. Various regions in Indonesia and other parts of the world, such as Bengkulu, Lampung, Bali, Japan, China, Cambodia, Laos, Tibet, Vietnam, and Roman manuscripts, also used the rule for writing manuscripts without spaces [16]. Such a way of writing without spaces is called scriptio continua. With the scriptio-continua writing model, the process of forming a sentence consisting of a sequence of words in each sentence becomes a problem because there are no punctuation marks that stand as a marker of the distance between words.
Scriptio continua typically happened because the manuscript's writer (or scribe) had to continue writing the content of the manuscript dictated by the author, who was continuously providing information that the scribe did not want to miss. In earlier times, oral tradition was more prominent, and the writer and author of a manuscript were usually of different people. By writing scripts continuously, there is also another advantage to be gained, namely that the readers are given full flexibility to interpret the groups of words according to the context of the conversation they caught [17].
This paper presents the results of our research in exploring methods for forming words out of syllables produced by the transliteration process of Javanese-language manuscripts as a solution to the scriptio-continuo problem. Two algorithms are developed and implemented, namely based on brute-force and greedy strategies. In principle, both algorithms use a depth-first search in processing the syllables. We describe the results of the implementation and then compare the two algorithms. Our aim in this paper is to develop a fast and efficient algorithm for segmenting contiguous syllables into words.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews related work in word segmentation. Section 3 describes the core ideas of the proposed algorithm. Section 4 details the data used to evaluate the proposed method. Section 5 presents the result of our experiments and discussion. The last section concludes the paper.
