This study contributes to the questions of which instructional methods are appropriate for school, what instructional methods should be applied in teaching individual subjects, and how instructional methods support the act of learning. All three questions represent challenges to general education and education in individual subjects
The wide range of instructional methods is almost incomprehensible. The Center for Teaching and Learning (2019) cites 150 instructional methods, Gugel (2011) more than 2000 methods including their variations. Handbooks describing instructional methods are provided by authors such as Ginnis (2001); Abell and Lederman (2007); Davis (2009); Petty (2009).
A useful definition of method which also represents the conceptual starting point for this study comes from Huber and Hader-Popp: “The word method is understood to mean a clearly defined, conceptually perceivable and independent, if also integrated, component of teaching.” (Huber and Hader-Popp, 2007, p. 3)
1.1. Literature review1.1.1. Empirical findings on the effectiveness of instructional methodsEmpirical findings on the effectiveness of learning are numerous. In his compilation of 800 metaanalyses, into which more than 50,000 studies were included, Hattie (2009) provides information on the influences on learning with respect to six domains: contributions of the person learning, the parental home, the school, the teacher, the curricula and teaching. In particular, the domain of teaching (Hattie, 2009, chapters 9 and 10) provides information on the effectiveness of instructional methods/approaches.High effect sizes (d > .50) were demonstrated for microteaching (d = .88), reciprocal teaching (d = .74), feedback (d = .73), problem solving (d = .61), direct instruction (d = .59), mastery learning (d = .58), case study (d = .57), concept mapping (d = .57), peer tutoring (d = .55), cooperative (vs. competitive) learning (d = .54) and interactive instructional videos (d = .52).The experiment method and computer simulation are two instructional methods for which a number of empirical findings are available. For the experiment method, Hattie (2009) cites 4 meta-analyses and 205 individual studies, for computer simulation 8 meta-analyses and 361 individual studies. According to Hattie (2009) mean effect size for the experiment method (including discovery learning) is d = .42, effects in biology (d = .30) and physics (d = .27) are higher compared to chemistry (d = .10); for computer simulation, on the other hand, the effect size is d = .33.The experiment method is often used in science education; learning effects are higher for process skills (d = .40) than for contents (d = -.26) (see Shymansky et al., 1990). These results are confirmed by Bangert-Drowns and Bankert (1990), who report major effects in terms of critical thinking (d = 1.09).For computer simulation, the empirical findings are not uniform. VanSickle (1986) reports that computer simulation has little advantage over traditional instructional methods. Learning effects for the development of attitudes have either been shown (VanSickle, 1986) or disproved (LeJeune, 2002). For natural science subjects, LeJeune (2002) showed that learning effects affect "deeper thinking", e.g. the ability to learn scientific facts or understand scientific processes.1.1.2. Assessment of instructionl methods by STEM teachersThe heat map seen in Fig. 1 shows the assessment of 20 methods in terms of six knowledge processes by STEM teachers. It contains visualized means for the six knowledge processes of build, process, apply, transfer, assess, and integrate (Zendler et al., 2018). The heat map also contains the grand means of the knowledge processes for the instructional methods. The instructional methods are sorted in accordance with these grand means.Download : Download high-res image (348KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Means of the instructional methods visualized for the knowledge processes.(adapted from Zendler et al., 2018)Fig. 1 shows that problem-based learning was assessed by STEM teachers as the best method for supporting the act of learning: This method is followed by five additional instructional methods: learning tasks, discovery learning, project work, direct instruction, and models method. Especially, Fig. 1 illustrates that the experiment method was highly assessed, especially for process, whereas computer simulation for apply and transfer.In a more detailed observation the heat map reveals that problem-based learning is distinguished by high values (> 3.50) for almost all knowledge processes. Learning tasks is characterized by high values (> 3.50) for the knowledge processes of process and apply. Discovery learning demonstrates high values (> 3.50) for the knowledge process build. Particularly high values (> 4.00) for the knowledge process build are shown by direct instruction, which additionally has relatively high values (> 3.00) for the knowledge processes of process and apply. Project work is notable for relatively high values (> 3.50) with the knowledge processes transfer and assess, direct instruction for the high values (> 3.50) with process. The following instructional methods in the heat map are also noteworthy: The models method due to its relatively high values in the knowledge process apply, programmed instruction due to its relatively high values in the knowledge processes build and process, learning stations due to its relatively high values in the knowledge process of process.The following instructional methods had relatively low values in all of the knowledge processes (< 3.00): learning by teaching, case study, the jigsaw method, concept mapping and the Leittext method. Web quest, reciprocal teaching and the portfolio method were rated as relatively poor (< 2.50) in all of the knowledge processes.1.1.3. Instructional methods in chemistry educationThe study of instructional methods for chemistry lessons has a long tradition. They go back to Ahmann (1949), who compared several methods favoring the so-called recitation-laboratory method. Castleberry et al. (1973) presents the results of a study involving the use of computer-based techniques in a general chemistry course with suggestions for using computers. Jackman et al. (1987) studied the effectiveness of instructional approaches on college chemistry laboratory achievement learning; computer simulation was the most effective.The search through recent English-language magazines on chemical education (Journal of Chemical Education, Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering, Education for Chemical Engineers, Chemistry Education Research and Practice, Education in Chemistry) provided findings related to instructional methods in regard to traditional and computer-assisted learning in teaching acids and base (Morgil et al., 2005), to the effectiveness of inquiry-based activities (Prince et al., 2009), to using concept maps as instructional materials to foster the understanding of the atomic model (Aguia and Correia, 2016). Current and Kowalske (2016) reported on the effectiveness of problem-based learning when building models of different chemical structures. Much evidence shows that instruction actively engaging students with learning materials is more effective than traditional, lecture-centric instruction (Rau et al., 2017). Finally, Azizan et al. (2018) report on improving teamwork skills and enhancing deep learning via development of board game using cooperative learning.There has been less investment in evaluating what features of simulations best support chemistry learning for a diverse range of learners (Plass et al., 2009). At high school level, Plass et al (2012) study the learning effectiveness of computer simulation in two schools of rural Texas and urban New York on kinetic molecular theory; they report on positive effects. Tatli and Ayas (2013) show that students of a ninth-grade classroom recognize laboratory equipment in a computer simulation environment. Donnelly et al. (2013) present case studies of four science teachers using a virtual chemistry laboratory with their students. Recently, Davenport et al. (2018) demonstrated the learning effectiveness of ChemVLab with a sample of 1400 high school students in a pre-post study.
1.2. The two instructional methodsAs the studies show, computer simulation has long been recognized as an instructional method for chemistry lessons. On the other hand, the experiment method has a long tradition when teaching chemistry. In the following, these methods are described in more detail in order to be able to ask the research question.1.2.1. Experiment methodThe basic structure of this instructional method (see Fig. 2) is as follows: (1) Viable phenomenon. The teacher confronts the students with a scientifically viable phenomenon. (2) Hypothesis formation. In consultation with the teacher the students form cause-and-effect hypotheses regarding the phenomenon based on the current state of knowledge. (3) Isolation of variables. In consultation with the teacher the students define the factors which are to be examined for their effects on the dependent variables – with the exclusion of disruptive influences. (4) Execution. With the help of the teacher, the students conduct the experiment, collect data, and document the course of an experiment. (5) Evaluation. In consultation with the teacher the students evaluate the experiment and examine the validity of the hypotheses. (6) Discussion. The teacher discusses the findings with the students with a view to follow-up experiments.Download : Download high-res image (244KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Process model of the experiment method (see Zendler et al., 2018).Examples of the experiment method with chemistry contents are numerous and are available in textbooks for chemistry lessons (e.g. ACS, 2017), on the websites of AACT (2019) and lehrer-online (2019).1.2.2. Computer simulationThis instructional method (see Fig. 3) comprises six steps: (1) Introduction. The students receive a problem-based introduction from the teacher on an educational subject. (2) Problem definition. With the support of the teacher, the students propose hypotheses on solving the problem in relation to the subject. (3) Planning. The students establish which interventions they want to introduce in the simulation software in order to solve the problem (or to understand it better). (4) Execution and logging. The students execute their planned interventions in the simulation software and document the information they receive as a result. (5) Expanding the knowledge base. The students expand and document their own knowledge base in the context of the information they have acquired from the simulation software. (6) New hypotheses. The students propose new hypotheses and repeat the steps 3 to 6.Download : Download high-res image (253KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Process model of computer simulation (see Zendler et al., 2018).Kranz (2012) describes exmples of the method in chemistry education: Simulations of equilibrium reactions and visualizations of organic molecules with structural and formula editors (e.g. Isis draw, Chem draw, ChemSketch). The University of Boulder (2019) presents more than 50 interactive simulations in the two categories General Chemistry and Quantum Chemistry. On the website of Crocodile Clips (2019) teaching examples are described using the simulation software Yenka.1.2.3. Positioning of experiment method and computer simulationBy using the frame of reference by Wiechmann and Wildhirt (2015), which consists of three educational dimensions (instruction control, mediation style, and lesson design), we positioned the experiment method and computer simulation (see Fig. 4). With regard to lesson design and mediation style, both methods are similarly classified. They are very discovery-oriented with respect to mediation style and planned concerning lesson design. Both instructional methods are different in terms of instruction control: The experiment method is more teacher-controlled than computer simulation. Because of this difference, it must be assumed that the cognitive load (Tversky et al., 2006) – amount of mental activity performed by the working memory with a specific task (Akaygun and Jones, 2013) – is lower for the experiment method than for computer siumulation.Download : Download high-res image (299KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. Positioning of the two instructional methods (based on Wiechmann and Wildhirt, but unique for experiment method and computer simulation).
1.3. Learning content and instructional methodsLearning objectives and learning content on the one hand and instructional methods on the other are interdependent. To compare instructional methods, it was important to have learning content, which can be taught with both instructional methods. Reactions of metals are one such topic. They contribute to content and process concepts of chemistry education. Moreover, they are consistent with the requirements of educational standards for chemistry education (AACT, 2019; ACS, 2017; KMK, 2004), and thus receive their educational legitimacy. When selecting the learning content, it was considered that only content that could easily be used as a student experiment was shortlisted: it should neither be dangerous nor life-threatening for the students.1.3.1. Burning of metalsMetals react with oxygen from the air. This reaction is different for individual metals. Alkali metals are very violent and readily oxygenated, i.e. they burn. In contrast, some precious metals (silver, gold, and platinum) do not react with oxygen at all. The burning of a metal is accompanied by a flame phenomenon. The release of energy accompanied by light and heat is called an exothermic reaction (see Cogill et al., 2009b).1.3.2. Reactions of metals with hydrochloric acidAs with burning, some metals react better (stronger) and some metals worse or not at all with hydrochloric acid. Again, the alkali metals react most violently with hydrochloric acid, precious metals not at all. The reaction of a metal with hydrochloric acid is a redox reaction: salt and hydrogen are produced (see Cogill et al., 2009a).
1.4. Research questionsThe experiment method and computer simulation are two instructional methods, which were classified similarly in the two dimensions of mediation style and lesson design. However, they are different in instructional control.The assessment of instructional methods by STEM teachers gave first answers to the questions of which instructional methods are suitable for which knowledge processes (see Fig. 1). In the opinion of the STEM teachers the experiment method is well suited to the knowledge processes of process, while computer simulation is suitable to the knowledge process of apply and transfer. Hattie (2009), on the other hand, found in his meta-analyses that the two methods are more or less effective.With these findings and assessments, however, it is not possible to clarify which of the two instructional methods are actually effective in the practical use of lessons, especially in the field of chemical education. Thus, the present study concentrates on the empirical comparison of the effectiveness of both methods, in order to answer the question of how effective the two methods are when used in authentic chemistry recitations.Due to the fact that there is little empirical material to date on instructional methods in chemical education, three questions are central to this study:(1)Experiment method vs. computer simulation: Which instructional method performs better with respect to learning outcomes on reactions of metals? The answer to the first question is the main interest of this study. However, it must be seen in the context of answering two further questions.(2)Class context: Are there any class differences for learning outcomes when the experiment method or computer simulation are used as instructional methods? The control of the class context is important because it can be used to verify whether instructional methods in different classes have similar effects or not. If they do not have similar effects, class effects for different learning outcomes have also to be considered.(3)Knowledge types: Learning outcome is a complex construct that can only be grasped through the interplay of several variables. Thus, the question arises as to whether learning outcome differs by using the experiment method and computer simulation, particularly with respect to prior, observation, and application knowledge.The following research hypothesis is linked to these three questions:"In chemical education (grade 8, secondary school) the experiment method performs better than computer simulation with respect to teaching reactivity of metals.”In the next section, we present the methods applied, describing the study design and procedures as well as the data analysis strategy. Then, we give a detailed account of our findings. In the last two sections, we discuss those findings and, finally, we draw conclusions for future research.
