Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a kind of viral pneumonia which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). It is one among the three respiratory disease outbreak caused by the coronavirus, other two being severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS). As on 7th of May 2020, more than 3.5 million cases of COVID-19 and 250,000 deaths due to the disease have been reported by the World Health Organization (WHO) [1]. WHO has listed COVID-19 as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) [2]. There is an urgent need for early diagnosis of the disease to prevent further spreading and control the death toll. The gold standard for diagnosing COVID-19 is reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test [2], [3]. However, the RT-PCR testing facility is inadequate in most of the areas hit by the COVID-19 outbreak [3]. COVID-19 is characterized by a lung infection in the post of the patients [4]. Easily available modalities like X-ray and CT can be used for detecting lung infections [4]. It is proven that X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan can be used effectively for the diagnosis of COVID-19 [5]. However, manual reading of X-ray and CT scan of a large number of patients could be time-consuming. A computer-aided diagnosis method could assist the radiologists in predicting COVID-19 from X-ray and CT-scan images [3].
Convolutional neural network (CNN) has shown promising results in the area of computer-aided detection and diagnosis of various diseases. CNN requires a large amount of data for training from scratch. In the case of medical images, it is difficult to obtain a huge number of labelled images. In such cases pre-trained CNNs trained on a large number of natural images like ImageNet can be used [6]. Pre-trained CNNs were earlier used successfully in diagnosis of prostate cancer [7], [8], breast cancer [9], brain diseases [10], leukemia [11], etc. to name a few. Pre-trained CNN is also found successful in predicting COVID-19 [12], [13], [14]. This paper presents a method for the prediction of COVID-19 using features extracted from multiple pre-trained networks.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 discusses the related works in the area of computer-aided detection of COVID-19. Section 1.2 describes the contributions of the proposed method. Section 2 describes the proposed multi-CNN, feature selection technique and classifier. Section 3 discusses the results achieved using various combinations of multi-CNN. The section also analyzes the results achieved using various classifiers in comparison with the proposed classifier. Section 4 explains the conclusions reached based on the experimental analysis.
1.1. Related worksRecently, a number of papers were published in the area of computer-aided detection of COVID-19 using pre-trained CNNs from X-ray and CT images. Shi et al. [3] performed a detailed review of the state-of-the-art computer-aided techniques for the detection of COVID-19 from X-ray and CT scans. Narin et al. [12] used Resnet-50 for predicting COVID-19 from a balanced set of 50 COVID-19 and 50 non-COVID cases. Castiglioni et al. [13] used Resnet-50 for classification of COVID-19 and non-COVID instances using a balanced dataset of 250 COVID-19 cases and 250 non-COVID cases. Hemdan et al. [14] employed Densenet to predict COVID-19 from a balanced dataset of 25 COVID-19 and 25 non-COVID images. Panwar et al. [15] proposed a transfer learning based model, nCOVnet, which adds 5 custom layers to VGG 16 network. The method used 142 COVID-19 images and 142 normal images. Pereira et al. [16] used features extracted using InceptionV3 in combination with texture features extracted using local binary pattern (LBP), elongated quinary patterns (EQP), local directional number (LDN), locally encoded transform feature histogram (LETRIST), binarized statistical image features (BSIF), local phase quantization (LPQ) and oriented basic image features (OBIFs). Training data was resampled in order to solve the class imbalance problem. The method used multi-class classification to classify images into COVID-19, normal, MERS, SARS, Varicella, Streptococcus and Pneumocystis. The total samples used were 1144 out of which 90 images belong to COVID-19 category. Toraman et al. [17] used a capsule network with 4 convolution layers and a primary capsule layer. The method used 231 COVID-19 images, 1050 pneumonia images and 1050 images with no-findings.The above-mentioned methods use X-ray images for the computer-aided detection of COVID-19. Few recent works also prove the effectiveness of CT scans in the detection of COVID-19. He et al. [18] performed transfer learning on a CT dataset, containing 349 COVID-19 CT scans and 397 normal CT scans. The method proposed a novel transfer learning technology called self-trans that learns features that are robust to overfitting. Mei et al. [19] used two CNN models (one for slice selection and another one for diagnosis) in combination with clinical data to predict COVID-19 using CT scans. Shan et al. [20] proposed a deep learning based scheme that uses 'VB-Net' , a modification of V-Net architecture for the segmentation of COVID-19 affected areas in chest CT scans. The method used CT scans of 249 subjects for training and 300 subjects for validation. Chen et al. [21] proposed a Residual Attention U-Net for the segmentation of COVID-19 affected areas in CT scans. The dataset used for the method contains 110 CT images. Chen et al. [22] further proposed a contrastive learning technique to train an encoder for the detection of COVID-19 from CT scans. Fan et al. [23] proposed a model that employs implicit reverse attention and explicit edge-attention for the segmentation of COVID-19 infected areas in CT scans.In this work, we have chosen to use X-ray for COVID-19 detection as X-ray is cost-effective compared to CT scans.
1.2. Contribution of the proposed methodThe aforementioned methods have used a single pre-trained CNN to predict COVID-19 from a balanced dataset. The discriminatory features extracted from each pre-trained network will be different. Combination of features extracted from pre-trained CNN is expected to improve the performance of computer-aided diagnosis systems. The proposed method explores a combination of features from multiple CNNs for the diagnosis of COVID-19.The proposed method has the following contributions.i.The method uses a multi-CNN comprising of several pre-trained CNNs for the extraction of features from chest X-ray images for the diagnosis of COVID-19. Most of the existing methods have used a single pre-trained CNN.ii.The method uses a combination of multi-CNN with correlation-based feature selection (CFS) and Bayesnet classifier. No existing state-of-the-art methods have employed multi-CNN, CFS based feature selection and Bayesnet classifier for the diagnosis of COVID-19.iii.Most of the existing works have used a small dataset whereas the proposed method used a relatively large number of COVID-19 cases.
