In this paper we argue that current methods of ethical oversight regarding cyber-security ethics are inadequate. These methods fail in at least two areas: university-based development and in the broader community of practising cybersecurity experts. In the former the problems stem from a lack of awareness among members of the computer security community and ethical review committees as to the nature of the ethical problems regarding cybersecurity. In the latter the problems are widely known, but a lack of adequate guidance or accountability forms a barrier to consistent ethical practice. We are not claiming that current cybersecurity development or practice are unethical. Rather, our point is that these practices go largely ungoverned and unguided, despite the clear potential for significant harm. We argue that there hence needs to be a greater appreciation of the risks of cybersecurity development in ethical review committees and clear codes of conduct for the professional community which cover both development and practice.
The paper opens with a case study regarding academic research into cybersecurity which was ethically flawed, but which genuinely sought ethics committee approval. This approval was denied, not because of the flaws in the case but rather because the case did not raise obvious issues of human subject research or personally identifiable information. This suggests that the ethics committees in the institutions consulted had a worryingly narrow view of ethical issues in their own field of research. We then list ethical issues which include, but go much further than, privacy and the confidential handling of personally identifiable information.
In the second part of the paper we look at a case study concerning research in the non-academic practitioner sector. Here again we note ethical flaws in the research which, in this case, arguably went unnoticed due to the absence of adequate ethical oversight. As with Part I, we follow the case study with a list of perceived ethical issues pertaining to practitioner research in cybersecurity. Some, but not all, of these issues overlap with those faced by the academic community. We conclude with a call for a mature discussion on ethical issues in the realms of cybersecurity research which embraces but also goes beyond concerns with privacy.1
The challenge facing governance, we argue, is that existing structures in university and other formal research environments can be insufficiently flexible in recognizing the ethical issues raised herein. This is illustrated by the first case study in which several Research Ethics Boards (REB) failed to protect the interests of research subjects in what, we argue, was obviously ethically questionable research. On the other hand, where research takes place outside of these environments, typically in the private sector, there are no governance structures in place, leaving researchers with an even harder task when seeking ethical input to guide their research.
Finally, this paper is not intended to be a systematic analysis of ethical issues arising in cybersecurity. It is rather an ethical analysis of two case studies, combined with reflections from the authors’ collective experience in teaching the subject over twenty years and additional research. An exhaustive exploration of all the ethical issues in cybersecurity goes well beyond the scope of a single research paper. Likewise, it is intended as a broad critique of the state of governance currently available to the cybersecurity community. It is not intended to be aimed solely at the nature of REBs. Indeed, the international variety of approaches to ethics review would require a systematic empirical review of REB constitution and practices. Nonetheless, to emphasise the global nature of our concerns, we have referred throughout to REBs rather than the US nomenclature of Institutional Research Boards (IRBs), or the European Research Ethics Committees (RECs) or other, except where these appear in quotes. Lastly, it is our hope that this analysis will raise awareness of ethical issues in cybersecurity which go beyond those most commonly acknowledged (such as privacy) and stimulate debate as to the state of governance in the cybersecurity community both within academia and without.
