Model emulators are “models of models,” typically implemented in order to reduce the complexity and computational resources of numerical models (Castelletti et al., 2012; Ratto et al., 2012; Razavi et al., 2012a). Within decision-making contexts such as watershed management, the reduction of complexity and computational resources is attractive because it may result in faster scenario testing and lower barriers for stakeholders to directly interact with models. Besides these performance-based benefits however, how emulation models fit into complex decision-making contexts has been less explored (Hong et al., 2017). This is particularly true given recent advances in deep/machine learning which is process-agnostic, but highly predictive of environmental phenomena (e.g.: Nearing et al., 2020). The implications of faster and higher resolution model emulators in decision-making contexts is less addressed, however (Shen, 2018).
As “boundary objects” between environmental scientists, local and state governments, and many other stakeholders affected by watershed management (the particular area of environmental management that this article focuses on), models play important roles, including facilitating research, communication, and participation (Hamilton et al., 2019). The evaluation of environmental models should therefore extend beyond their ability to predict or explain physical phenomena, to include evaluation of their usefulness in other aspects of the socio-technical processes of environmental management (Elsawah et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2019; Voinov and Gaddis, 2008). In this view of the role of environmental models, model emulators are a unique object of study. On the one hand, they could play an important bridge between environmental science and management by increasing accessibility (through reduced complexity) of complex models. On the other hand, the use of emulators could result in less trust in the model or reduced salience for answering key management questions. The balance between increased accessibility and preserving credibility, salience, and legitimacy of the model depends on how complexity is reduced and the purpose of the model.
A number of trends continue to strengthen that indicate that important advancements will be made with increasingly computationally or numerically complex models and that model emulation will be utilized to improve the operationalization of such models. First, sustainable management of natural resources requires acknowledgment of the interconnectedness of social-ecological systems. Interconnections involve the (often non-linear) feedbacks that exist between multiple system compartments and models’ coupling at different spatial and temporal scales (Liu et al., 2008; Mahmoud et al., 2009; Wagener et al., 2005). Second, process-based models, also called “bottom-up” models are increasingly used to represent emergent phenomena, especially in “no-analog” situations such as large-scale land use change or climate change (Fatichi et al., 2016). Lastly, computational resources are increasingly available for relatively low costs to researchers and scientists. The availability of these computational resources for researchers enables more computational power for increasingly demanding simulations, but has also led to advances in the field of machine learning and artificial intelligence. The combined use of machine learning coupled with physically-based models (Karpatne et al., 2017) exhibits promise for emulation modeling, including the capability to mimic high resolution spatial-temporal output, with vastly reduced simulation times.
This study explores the role of emulation modeling in reducing complexity at the science-management interface of watershed management. Based on the qualitative analysis of primary gathered data from facilitated focus group responses and program documents from a key regional watershed in the United States, I offer an examination of emulation modeling within the environmental management context, highlighting the relationships between how emulators are evaluated and diverse learning activities. This research aims to make two contributions:
1.Define the primary criteria by which emulators used specifically in environmental management and planning should be assessed.2.Illustrate emulation as a process of balancing model complexity in a socio-environmental system management context that includes relationships between evolving evaluation criteria and diverse learning activities.
The following section presents further review of the key concepts relevant to this study.
