In this era of a digital revolution, protecting our personal information from being accessed by unauthorized users is becoming a daunting task. The need for securing our information on the increasing digital platforms has become a global security concern as the proliferation of internet connectivity and accessibility to the internet has generated tremendous security threats to information systems worldwide [1]. Highly classified details are becoming more available on many public databases, much vital personal information is contained on many social media platforms (e.g., Twitter, YouTube, WhatsApp, or Facebook). Also, there has been an increase in the use of many electronic commerce platforms such as Amazon, eBay, and Ali Express, for many online transactions [2]. These social media platforms and digital marketing websites are awash with our profiles, credit card details, and other valuable information. Therefore, securing our digital platforms from intruders – hackers and phishers has become a major challenge among many researchers in the security community.
An intrusion [3]is a set of activities that seek to annihilate the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of resources or systems by exploiting the vulnerabilities of such systems and resources. This includes a conscious illegal effort to access information, distort information, or render a system invalid. Intrusion detection involves the use of computational methods to detect illegal use, fraudulent use-age and perversion of computer systems by hackers, phishers, and other intruders. An Intrusion detection system (IDS) is a computer program or hardware designed to detect any malicious activity or attack against the system or network. The main task of IDS [4] is to defend a computer system or computer network by detecting hostile attacks on a network system or host device, overseeing the activities on-going in a computer system or network, and scrutinizing them for symptoms of intrusions. Network intrusion detection includes identifying a set of baleful events that annihilate the integrity, confidentiality, and availability of computer resource.
Machine learning techniques [5]and data analytics [6] has become a vital approach to developing intrusion detection systems and algorithms. Machine learning algorithms are used to develop models that learn from experience and discover novel patterns in a dataset. Generally, they are divided into two categories as supervised [7] (eg. SVM, Artificial Neural Networks, and Naive Bayes) and unsupervised learning [8] (e.g clustering). Data analytics [9] is an emerging technology that combines methods and algorithms from diverse fields of study such as data mining, mathematics, statistics, machine learning, and high-performance computing to effectively handle big data problem.
Several authors have proposed algorithms and methods for detecting and preventing network intrusions. In [10], anomalies classification for network-based intrusions was proposed. The network intrusion system uses machine intelligence approaches to automatically categorize events discovered by a packet header-based anomaly detection system. Semi-Supervised learning for false alarm reduction was presented in [11] to generate an alarm filter for a signature-based intrusion detection system. A hybrid of SVM and decision trees was employed in [12] for attack classification of all categories of intrusion in the Knowledge Discovery and Data mining 1999 (KDD’99) tools competition dataset and the construction of the multi-class intrusion detection system. In [13], a network intrusion detection system was developed using association rules to generate rules that detect attacks in network audit data using association rules algorithm on KDD’ 99 datasets. A hybrid of Bayesian classification with Artificial Neural Networks was proposed in [14] for increasing the accuracy of network intrusion detection systems. A denial of service attack detection using KDD’ 99 datasets were presented in [15]. In [16] a backpropagation approach was proposed to detect intrusion in the input and its corresponding target called its training pair[17]. proposed a model on Feature Reduction for Intrusion Detection using Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA). He used the LDA algorithm as a reduction tool, to extract features for detecting intrusions and also the Back Propagation algorithm for classifying the attack on the NSL-KDD dataset[18]. used a rough set and dependency ratio to determine relevance features for intrusion detection on the KDD’99 dataset and discovered five of the attributes are not relevant to the detection of any attack type. The authors opined that selecting relevant features reduces computational time and improves accuracy Other intrusion detection systems and algorithms were proposed in [19], [20], [21], [22]. The major limitations of the aforementioned intrusion detection systems and algorithms are (i) high computational time not practical for real-time Network intrusion detection due to several irrelevant features and (ii) high level of false alarm rate as a result of noise or irrelevant features and poor feature selection methods. Hence, the need for less computational and reduced false alarm rate intrusion detection algorithms for real-time detection of anomaly traffics on computer networks. This paper attempts to address these challenges by selecting relevant features of intrusions’ and developing intrusion detection models using Apriori and SVM with their efficiency measured on NSL-KDD and the UNSW-NB15 intrusion detection datasets. Our key contribution in this study, is our lightweight intrusion detection algorithm for real-time network intrusion detection in real-life application scenarios.
