Constraints on transmitted power and on the electrical and magnetic field strength due to transmission exist currently in documents prepared and published by several international standards organizations [1], [2], [3], [4]. Some of these regulations are explicitly formulated for the purpose of avoiding possible harmful effects on health [5], [6], and others are formulated as technical restrictions on the use of electromagnetic spectrum, for communication [7], without explicitly acknowledging the potential for harm to be caused.
Currently power constraints are expressed as if devices share spectrum by never using the same frequency at the same time as a nearby device. However, efficient use of spectrum over time forces wireless protocols to use the same spectrum at the same time as nearby devices [8]. Under these circumstances, if many users cluster together, the health impact of their wireless communication will be cumulative. The total EMF spectral density (Electro-magnetic field spectral density, in V/m/Hz), of all nearby devices, is what needs to be regulated, for the health of those in the vicinity of these devices.
Furthermore, if the regulatory constraint continues to be expressed in terms of the transmitted power of each device it becomes possible to subvert the intention of this constraint by using a collection of devices which share the same spectrum, and all transmit at the same time. This goes against the spirit of the regulations on wireless communication, or, looking at the problem a little differently, shows that regulations on transmitted power should be expressed differently to avoid this type of abuse.
Consider, for example, a bus with 20 passengers with their mobile phones and other devices. All of the devices in the bus are permitted to transmit, or receive, signals simultaneously. If they are all using the same protocol, for example 802.11n, it is possible that simultaneous transmission will be inhibited but there is no reason to presume that all MAC protocols inhibit simultaneous transmission. In fact, in future [9], simultaneous transmission could be the best way for these devices to share spectrum. Each person in the bus could be exposed to 20 devices' signals at the same time. If there are 200 devices, each person may be exposed to 200 simultaneous signals. In effect, the aggregate signal is unregulated. We need a way to express the regulation on EMF to be enforced, even when there are many devices simultaneously active in the same location.
In order for such regulations to be expressed in a convenient and clear manner, since we cannot anticipate the full range of ways in which spectrum is sub-divided by devices, it is logical that the regulated constraint should be expressed in EMF spectral density V/m/Hz, or total transmitted power spectral density W/Hz, or total received power spectral density W/m2/Hz. These three approaches are all possible, and under reasonable assumptions might be regarded as equivalent. However, in order to express the central problem most clearly, the quantity which should be regulated should be total EMF spectral density (for both the device which is regulated and nearby independent devices) for all frequencies, expressed in V/m/Hz.
The fact that total EMF (or received power), due to all nearby transmitting devices, is what needs to be regulated is acknowledged, implicitly, in [10]. However, it seems unrealistic to impose this constraint on the entire range of electromagnetic spectrum, from 1 Hz to 300 GHz. When electromagnetic spectrum is used for communication, efficient use requires that power is distributed across frequencies as a density, rather than at discrete frequencies. Therefore, if a regulation is imposed on the spectral density of transmitted power, or EMF, it is not limit the efficiency of communication. Research into techniques for efficient use of spectrum without focused use of specific frequency ranges is a topic in its own right which has been studied in [11]. By expressing regulations in terms of a spectral density, we can avoid the need for communicating devices to make use of narrowly selective spectra when limiting transmitted power. It is necessary, and appropriate, for all devices to be aware of other devices transmitting in the same range of frequencies, but it is not necessary to be aware of devices transmitting in disjoint ranges of frequencies. This observation enables a practical, and realizable, but fundamentally more rigorous approach to regulating spectrum use to be expressed.
