SPEECH is one of the fundamental and prominent way of communication for human being to deal with real life challenges. In the modern era, automatic speech recognition (ASR) is one of the most profitable way for human to interact with computer because it is advantageous for illiterates as well. Interaction with computer through speech is beneficial for those who feel difficulties with normal interface such as keyboard, mouse, touchpad, and so on. Speech recognition [1], is the process of transforming the speech signal into words or phonemes. The basic ambition of ASR is to handle all the challenges faced in the domain of speech recognition such as different speaking styles, uncertain environmental noise, and so on [2, 3]. Working on ASR has started about half century ago for English language but development of ASR for local languages is a new trend, emerged in the last few decades which opens the door for layman to interact with computer in friendly manner. Thus, native speakers [4], can communicate with computer through speech in their own regional languages. The development of an ASR for local languages is quite a challenging task due to the lack of resources such as corpus with enough vocabulary, dialectical variation and so on. Many works have been done for local languages such as in Punjabi (spoken in Pakistan and India) [5, 6, 7], Gujrati (local language of India) [8], Urdu (national language of Pakistan and forth most widely spoken language in the world) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13], Hindi (an official language of India) [1, 14, 15, 16], Marathi (spoken in India) [17], Arabic (an official language of Arab and fifth widely used language in the world) [18, 19], Bengali (spoken language of Bangladesh) [20]. The current work also includes Pashto language but very little works has been done in the development of Pashto speech recognition system [4]. Fortunately, Pashto share some characteristics with other languages like Arabic, Urdu and Persian languages. Therefore, some of the existence work for these languages can be utilized for Pashto as well [21].
Pashto is one of the most spoken languages of Pakistan and an official language of Afghanistan. It is spoken language of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa's people in Pakistan. The word “Pashto” is pronounced in three different ways; Pakhto, Pukhto, Pushto [22]. About 50–60 million population of the world speak Pashto including countries such as Pakistan, Afghanistan, UAE, UK, USA, and India [22, 23]. Adversely, the educational aspect of Pashtoon people (people speaking Pashto) are not advance enough [23], due to this issue most of the people face difficulties in the use of modern technology. To overcome this issue, an ASR is needed to be develop for Pashto language in such a way that it most robust and less error proven.
The basic aim of this research work is to develop an ASR for Pashto language by utilizing new machine learning technique such as deep learning. More particularly, the primary goal of this research study is to design Pashto isolated digit recognition system by using deep convolutional neural network (CNN). Originally, CNN is developed for image recognition and become more popular for handwritten digit recognition, however in the last few years it also used for speech recognition [3, 24]. To the best of our knowledge no CNN even no deep learning technique is used in the field of Pashto speech recognition. This is the first step toward Pashto speech recognition with deep learning.
A Pashto isolated digits ASR along with database was developed by [4]. Features were extracted through MFCC and k-NN classifier was used for digits classification. Total average accuracy of 76.8% was obtained. Recently, a new corpus was developed by [23], containing Pashto digits from zero (Sefar) to nine (Naha) with 150 instances for each digit. Mel-frequency cepstral coefficient (MFCC) was used for feature extraction and SVM classifier for classification. The total average result was 91.5%. The database developed by Zakir Ali in [4], is used in this work which contain 50 instance for each digits (25 males and 25 females). MFCC is used to extract 20 features and CNN is used for recognition of digits. The total accuracy of the model is 84.17% which is quite satisfactory as compare to 76.8% obtained by [4].
All the works of the paper is divided in to the following sections. Section 2 discusses the related works done in the field of speech recognition. A brief explanation of Pashto digit database is presented in section 3. Section 4 describes an overview of ASR along with MFCC features extraction and CNN Model. Section 5 of the paper narrates the result analysis and finally the conclusion and future work are reported in section 6.
