There were not many technological changes to the construction industry over the past 100 years even though there are many advancements to the construction technologies such as the emergence of 3D printing and laser cutting technology bringing imminent transformations to this industry (Kanyilmaz, 2019). For instance, users can now fabricate precise object swiftly employing a wide variety of digital fabrication tools such as 3D printers, laser cutters and milling machines (Mueller et al., 2012). Besides, automated digital manufacturing processes with advanced computer-aided design methods can be used to manufacture a large volume of products, prototypes and parts (Tobergte and Curtis, 2013). Laser cutting offers a high degree of precision, superior quality and speedy cutting of most materials using a non-contact, thermal-based fabrication process (Madic et al., 2012). Following the discovery of laser in the 1960s, the use of laser applications has been widespread, principally in material processing such as marking, cutting, engraving, drilling and welding of engineering structures to intensify accuracy and production quality (Riveiro et al., 2018). Laser beam cutting (LBC) is suitable for assorted types of materials, for example: wood, rubbers, plastics, ceramics and composites (Eltawahni et al., 2011). In the early 1970s, laser cutting of wood was introduced in the packing industry to cut plywood mouldings (Eltawahni et al., 2011). Thus, laser cutter allows intricate and precise patterns to be laser cut or engraved on various materials such as paper, textiles, card, glass and wood. In this regard, high-power engineering applications using a laser are seen to deliver improved cutting speeds, enhanced product quality and greater flexibility (Madic et al., 2012). Timber frame has a glorious history, whose origin could probably be traced back to the Roman Empire; used for centuries by woodworkers worldwide to bind pieces of woods in ancient timber houses (Mohamed, 2014). Indeed, the timber frame has existed for thousands of years and the mortise & tenon joints were created between 500 B.C. and 200 B.C. (Benson, 1997).
Wood interlocking joineries hold the members of timber frame tightly in place and transfer building loads to posts then onto the foundation (Lyu et al., 2017). Mortise & tenon joints, according to Peavy and Schmidt (1995), is used to attach two pieces of wood at a right angle (90o) using a hardwood peg. Thus, traditional pegged mortise & tenon joints are typically used for post and beam construction of a heavy timber structure. It is therefore not surprising to see countless structures made with mortise & tenon joints erected a few hundreds of years still in use today (Peavy and Schmidt, 1995). It is worth noting that the ancient Chinese people were very good at using wood and created the utilised complex mortise and tenon joints to make wood structures such as beams, struts and roof interlock with perfect fit without using any nails or rivets (Chen et al., 2016). However, this timber-connection method loses popularity in the early 1800s as cheap nails began to replace traditional timber connections (Gold and Rubik, 2009). Then again, this traditional style of connecting is regaining its popularity in housing and heavy timber construction since the 1900s (Bragança et al., 2017). There is a revival of interest in the timber frame construction during the 1970s and since then timber frame has grown to keep up with the increasing demand for the timber houses, barns, and churches (Xin et al., 2017). Mohamed (2014) points out that complicated structural designs limit the utilisation of timber as building materials. The emergence of engineered wood for structural use such as glulam which is a glue-laminated timber has converted timber into versatile building material for wide applications such as large trusses and glulam beams that can span a longer length (Mohamed, 2014). Mortise & tenon joints are the most important parts in the timber frame but also the weakest points (Yeoh et al., 2004). Given the combination of anisotropic behaviour and the nonlinear material properties, the understanding of timber joints increases in complexity (Yeoh et al., 2004). Modern timber frame is energy efficient, comfortable to live or work in, beautiful, and low waste but it remains as a relatively small industry because only very skilled labours are capable to produce mortise & tenon joints making the labour cost much higher than conventional construction (Bergström and Stehn, 2005). The enhancement of automated machines to produce finished timbers is elevating timber productivity and the advancement in technology can definitely make timber frame structures come at more competitive prices (Peavy and Schmidt, 1995). In fact, Yusoff et al. (2008) note that CO2 lasers are often used for the processing (to cut and engrave) of non-metallic materials such as timber simply because these materials have a high absorption of the CO2 laser wavelength. The advantages of compactness, high-reliability, high-efficiency and potentially low-cost of laser materials processing over other mechanical means in producing a successful cut to even thermally sensitive materials such as wood will inextricably shape its future in the field of material processing. Laser cutting has advantages in cutting woods with high accuracy, no tool wear and low noise (Mukherjee et al., 1990). According to Barnekov et al. (1989), the key problem is to understand the complex relationships and interactions between wood and the laser beam. Accordingly, this study seeks to rationalise and demonstrate the efficacy of utilising laser cutting technique in the fabrication of glulam mortise & tenon joints in timber frame.
