Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is one of the most common malignancies in western countries. In Spain, it is the second most common cancer after prostate cancer in men, and breast cancer in women. An estimated 40,000 new cases of CRC are diagnosed every year in Spain and 39% of those affected die from this disease. Two different strategies have been proposed to reduce the burden of the disease: CRC screening and early diagnosis in symptomatic patients [1].
Colonoscopy plays a key role in any of the strategies aimed at reducing the incidence and mortality due to CRC. In this sense, the detection and endoscopic resection of the precursor lesions, mainly colorectal adenomas, produces a significant reduction of the CRC incidence [2]. However, diagnostic performance is limited and up to 3.7% of CRC are post colonoscopy or interval CRC: CRCs diagnosed in the three years after a normal colonoscopy [3]. One of the reasons beyond this problem is the limited capacity of the endoscopists to detect subtle lesions. In fact, the miss rate for adenomas is 26%, 9% for advanced adenomas and 27% for serrated polyps [4]. In order to improve the quality of colonoscopy, several indicators have been proposed. The adenoma detection rate (ADR) has become the most important quality indicator of screening colonoscopy because it is directly related with key outcome measures, such as interval cancer incidence and mortality.
In the last few years, a variety of optical technologies has been developed to assist endoscopists in the determination of the histological diagnosis. However, these technologies require: (i) the usage of magnification endoscopy equipment, (ii) the application of stains or pigments, and (iii) highly experienced endoscopists. To overcome these limitations, the international NICE (Narrow band imaging Colorectal Endoscopic classification) classification was released to be used together with Narrow Band Imaging (NBI) endoscopes, with or without magnification. As these techniques still require highly experienced endoscopists, there has been a growing interest in the development of Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) systems for automatic polyp detection and prediction of the histology without polyp resection and biopsies.
The classification of images of colorectal tumors have been accomplished by CAD systems based on Machine Learning (ML). As an example of this, Tamaki et al. proposed a CAD system colorectal tumor classification in NBI endoscopy using local features [5], achieving an accuracy of 96% on a 10-fold cross validation using a dataset of 908 NBI images and 93% using an independent test dataset. It is important to note that these kinds of ML-based systems require a high expertise and an extensive preprocessing of the image datasets in order to extract the relevant features of the images that are used as input by the ML algorithms. This issue is extensible to any type of medical image analysis.
In this scenario, Deep Learning (DL) has attracted a lot of attention in the field of medical image analysis because of its higher performance in image classification when compared to previous state-of-the-art techniques [6], [7]. Simply speaking, these models have the advantage that do not require a previous preprocessing of the image datasets and they can be trained using the raw images thanks to their ability to automatically extract and learn the relevant features. As a matter of fact, a recent review gathers more than three hundred studies on the field of medical image analysis based in DL techniques [8] and a recent meta-analysis found that the diagnostic performance of DL models is equivalent to that of health-care professionals [9]. The analysis of colonoscopic videos and images has not lagged far behind this hype and a significant number of studies on automatic polyp detection and classification have been carried out since 2014. Remarkably, some of the participants in the Automatic Polyp Detection sub-challenge conducted as part of the Endoscopic Vision Challenge at the international conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) in 2015 [10] already used DL approaches. Since then, a growing number of studies using DL to accomplish these tasks are published every year with promising results. Thus, DL is expected to aid endoscopists to improve their diagnosis performance by automatically detecting and classifying colorectal polyps [11]. Probably the most important limitation for the application of DL to medical image analysis and colonoscopic videos and images in particular is the need of large, annotated datasets of videos or images of the particular domain. As the creation of this high-quality datasets is difficult in the biomedical domain due to the high costs in terms of both the money and expertise required, strategies like data augmentation can help to deal with this issue.
Recently, Samy A. Azer reviewed the usage of DL for automatic polyp detection, focused on discussing the current challenges when dealing with CRC screening and training programs, quality measures in colonoscopy, and the role that CNNs play in increasing the detection rate of polyps and early cancerous lesions [12]. Similarly, Min et al. made a broader review about the application of DL in gastrointestinal endoscopy, putting emphasis on the effects of DL on gastroenterology with a special interest on automatic diagnosis based on endoscopic findings [13]. Both reviews agree that DL can help endoscopists in providing more accurate diagnosis and improve the current CRC detection rates. In order to complement these reviews, our work aims to review the most relevant studies using DL for polyp detection and classification from a technical point of view, focusing on the low-level details for the implementation of the DL models. Thus, this review analyzes the published research covering aspects like DL architectures, training strategies, data augmentation, transfer learning, or the features of the datasets used and their impact on the performance of the models, which is also discussed in a specific section. As a complementary contribution, a public repository with comparative tables summarizing the main aspects of the research works covered in this review has been published at https://github.com/sing-group/deep-learning-colonoscopy, an open repository that is expected to grow with information about future studies published in the same topic.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 identifies the main applications of DL in colonoscopies and characterizes the most relevant studies carried out in the field. Section 3 describes both public and private datasets used in the surveyed approaches. Section 4 analyzes the DL architectures while Section 5 compares their performance for polyp detection and classification tasks. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the main conclusions extracted from the state of the art.
