The IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) states that” Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, and sea level has risen.” (Core Writing Team et al., 2014). The GHG (Greenhouse Gas) emissions are pointed as the cause of climate change.
The ICT(Information and Communication Technology) sector has a significant footprint, which request quite some effort to capture an accurate estimation. (Malmodin and Lundén, 2018) show that smartphone production makes up the largest part of the manufacturing footprint of ICT, which is more important than both desktop and laptop computers together. The market of mobile devices has seen sharp growth over the last decade, there are more mobile devices today than people in the world (Boren, 2014). Understanding the environmental impact of these devices is essential for assessing the global impact of the ICT sector as they play a major role in it (Malmodin and Lundén, 2018; Moberg et al., 2014). LCA methodology, defined by the ISO standards 14040 and 14044, allows researchers to fulfil this goal based on several mid-point and end-point indicators. The most studied indicator in this context is GWP100 which is provided as a quantity of GHG (greenhouse gas) emissions in kgCO2e (kilograms carbon dioxide equivalent). This partial LCA output is also known as the carbon footprint (ISO 14067).
In the context of global warming, when a coordinated effort must be done in order to achieve emission reduction goals from the Paris agreement and progress in the UN Sustainable Goals 13, reliable figures must be available for decision-makers.
Therefore, it is relevant to scrutinize the environmental role of mobile devices by analysing available LCA studies. Several authors have pointed out that the results for GHG emissions vary considerably across studies for devices that seem to be quite similar (Manhart et al., 2016; Andrae and Andersen, 2010; Arndt and Ewe, 2017; Suckling and Lee, 2015; Andrae and Vaija, 2014; Güvendik, 2014). These variations can in principle have two sources: (i) variations in the materials, energy sources and processes used (e.g. semiconductor device fabrication) and (ii) variations in the LCI data used to assess their environmental impact (primary or secondary data and their quality).
The scope of our study is the analysis of studies that reports the environmental impact of smartphones and tablet computers in terms of global warming potential over 100 years (GWP100). The target is to identify the main sources of variation in LCAs of smartphones and tablet computers to improve comparability across results.
Section 2 defines the materials and methods that have been used. Section 3 analyses scientific studies and reports from manufacturers, reporting the sources of variation. Section 4 details simplified LCAs that exclude some life cycle phases/processes. Section 5 concludes by discussing the results.
