In mathematics learning, it is important to use visualization, spatial reasoning, and geometric modeling to solve studying problems (NCTM, 2000). Geometry has broad implications for every student as it provides a natural environment for constructing geometric reasoning and proof (NCTM, 2000). In fact, it is employed to develop students' spatial skills, intuition, visualization, solve practical problems, and more (Fabiyi, 2017).
Many researchers have stated that spatial ability has an important role in understanding geometry (Güven and Kosa, 2008); Hartatiana et al. (2017a, b); Muntazhimah and Miatun (2018); Unal et al. (2009). Furthermore, the development of spatial abilities will enable students to easily understand mathematical and geometric problems (Kepceoğlu, 2018). Moreover, experiences related to geometric concepts that are obtained in the classroom enhance students' spatial abilities. Students who have high spatial skills can easily understand geometric shapes and the connections between the shapes (Baratti et al., 2020; Yani and Rosma, 2020). This finding clearly showed that mastery of spatial abilities has broad implications for students.
Nevertheless, it has been discovered that the spatial ability of Indonesian students is still low. Hence, they are unable to compete with others. This has been reflected in the results of the Trend evaluation in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA). The evaluation results showed that Indonesian students occupy the last 5 positions (Mullis et al., 2015; Schleicher, 2014, 2018). Furthermore, a thorough evaluation showed that the students' spatial ability was low (Widana, 2017). This is directly proportional to the low attention to spatial ability, which is closely related to geometry (Syahputra, 2013).
Determining the best method to develop students' spatial abilities seems to be the focus of studies in learning geometry to date. In fact, suggested learning highlights the importance of using computer technology media to improve students' spatial abilities (Balacheff and Kaput, 2018; Hohenwarter and Jones, 2007; Laborde, 2001; Renavitasari et al., 2018). Therefore, the integration of computer technology in education, especially in mathematics learning is important, and has become a trend to meet the challenges of the 21stcentury (Adelabu et al., 2019); Adelabu and Makgato, 2019; Azizul and Din (2016).
One of the computer-aided learning media that can explore geometry and spatial ability is the Cabri 3D program. Learning with this program allows users to create 3-dimensional shapes that can be manipulated. Furthermore, it facilitates students to understand concepts that are previously abstract or material that requires spatial ability (Nasongkhla et al., 2019). Therefore, the use of dynamic media such as Cabri 3D can reduce students’ cognitive burdens by applying visualization that is easier to understand (Tejada and Serra, 2018).
Previously, there have been many studies examining the effectiveness of Cabri 3D program on students' spatial abilities (Güven and Kosa, 2008) (Hartatiana et al., 2017b; Hendriana et al., 2019; Muntazhimah and Miatun, 2018; Subroto, 2011; Syahputra, 2011). The studies were conducted using a computer model only as additional support, while the teacher was the main instructor. However, the research did not examine the affective abilities needed to support the use of computers in learning. Meanwhile, previous research on the importance of improving spatial ability involved the use of Mobile-Based Augmented Reality to improve students' understanding of 3-dimensional shapes. The results showed a significant improvement in spatial abilities (Rohendi and Wihardi, 2020).
Therefore, this study aimed to expand previous research that examined the effectiveness of Cabri 3D on spatial abilities. In a study conducted with a computer-based learning model using Cabri 3D program, the teacher acts as a facilitator, while students play an active role in understanding construction using the program. This model needs to be supported by the strong ability of students self-regulated learning. This type of learning is believed to play a key role in student success, academic life, and career (Ros et al., 2012); Žydžiūnaitė et al. (2014). Furthermore, the principle of self-regulated learning means that in teaching and learning activities, it needs to be developed as early as possible. The realization of this principle is to place teachers in the main role as facilitators and motivators (Mulyono, 2017; Lai and Hwang, 2016). However, research that collaborates learning with computers on spatial abilities has not been widely conducted.
Therefore, this study aimed to examine the effectiveness of the Cabri 3D on spatial abilities and self-regulated learning of students. In this case, the following questions were examined:
1)Analyzing the improvement of students' spatial ability using learning assisted by the Cabri 3D program, compared to using conventional learning.2)Analyzing the achievement of students 'spatial abilities using the Cabri 3D program, compared to using conventional learning.3)Analyze the improvement of student learning independence using the Cabri 3D program, compared to using conventional learning.4)Analyze the achievement of student learning independence using the Cabri 3D program, compared to using conventional learning.
