Brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) are a hybrid cross-disciplinary field of computer and brain sciences. It studies how to interact with external machinery directly using neural signals and how to control or operate external devices through brain signals. In a machine interface system, an electroencephalogram (EEG) signal is usually considered an input (Lin et al., 2007). A control device must be preset into the human brain; thus, BCIs are divided into two types: implanted and nonimplanted (Gao, 2009). In accordance with the classification of brain activity patterns, BCI systems can be divided among event-related desynchronization/synchronization (Jia et al., 2007), steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) (Li et al., 2013), event correlation potential P300 signals (Bakardjian et al., 2010), and slow cortical potentials (Zhu et al., 2010). BCI technology can provide a new type of human–computer interaction and improve the speed of information transmission between humans and machines, hence contributing to mixed reality environments, which blend virtual content into the real world, and enabling the virtual content to respond to the real world (Chen et al., 2017).
When subjected to a fixed-frequency visual stimulus, the human visual cortex continuously responds to a stimulus frequency (the fundamental or octave of the stimulus frequency) called SSVEP (Maggi et al., 2006). Monitoring this potential change can roughly judge the visual stimulus of human gaze. As a mature BCI implementation scheme, SSVEP has many implementation methods, such as power spectral density (PSD) (Liu et al., 2003, Kong et al., 2015), principal component analysis, canonical correlation analysis (CCA), minimum energy coding, and average maximum contrast combination (Gao, 2009, Jia et al., 2007, Nan et al., 2011), which are used presently. Researchers have used SSVEP to achieve several practical applications. For example, the Tokyo University of Agriculture and Industry implemented an eight-category racing control system (Bakardjian et al., 2010), which can control the speed and direction of vehicles using brainwaves. The University of Malta implemented a brain-controlled music player on a cathode-ray tube screen; hence, when the controllers of different frequencies are seen, the player can perform functions, such as pause, up and down, and volume control. The BCI digital spelling system designed by the team of Tsinghua University (Jia et al., 2007) can reach an input speed of 46 bits/min at an accurate rate. The team of Li Yuanqing from the South China University of Technology combined SSVEP with a P300 signal to complete a wheelchair system controlled by a BCI (Li et al., 2013), which can achieve the online control of wheelchair movement and stop two-class control. Bin et al. (2009) presents an online multi-channel SSVEP-based BCI system using a canonical correlation analysis (CCA) method for extraction of frequency information associated with the SSVEP. (Lin et al., 2006) A recognition approach is proposed based on the extracted frequency features for an SSVEP-based brain computer interface (BCI). (Zhang et al., 2013) A multiway extension of the CCA, called MCCA, is first presented, in which collaborative CCAs are exploited to optimize the reference signals in correlation analysis for SSVEP recognition alternatingly from the channel-way and trial-way arrays of constructed EEG tensor. Therefore, we intend to introduce a unique voting mechanism which can effectively solve the problem of unstable recognition effect in non-effective stimulus time period.
