The development of science and technology brings us intelligent office. This has also accelerated the development of intelligent medicine. At present, in medical field, doctors use electronic devices to assist diagnosis and store medical data, which greatly facilitates the scientific research and communication of medical researchers. For example, in the research of epidemic diseases, the storage, query and shared use of related reports in the form of PDF file provide valuable reference for human beings. Especially during the current Covid-19 epidemic, the rapidly sharing and spreading of the scarce and valuable data and reports in PDF forms play a vital role in fighting against the epidemic. The convenience and excellence of PDF reader not only enables people handle various kinds of businesses anytime and anywhere by mobile devices, but also can be embed with JavaScript code URIs as required. Reading PDF documents on mobile devices has become the most important part of intelligent office. However, due to the universality of mobile devices and the fictile characteristic of the PDF file, PDF files are often used by attackers to disguise malicious codes to conduct malicious acts.
When at office, people are usually not prudent to open PDF files. It makes malicious PDF files to be an efficient weapon of adversaries. In reality, a common user will possibly not execute a suspicious executable file, even he or she has no background in computer security, while many computer experts will not hesitate to open an unknown PDF file. Moreover, there are a great deal of PDF reader softwares to choose, from common generic tools (e.g., web browsers) to professional tools (e.g., Adobe Acrobat Pro). However, most of them have no latest security patches. Furthermore, in some Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attacks, hackers use phishing email to disguise fax messages, scan and send notifications from multipurpose printers so as to lure users to open “trusted” malicious files. What is worse, neither traditional anti-malware software nor email scanning software can effectively handle these PDF file attacks.
Generally speaking, common attacks via PDF files include JavaScript code attack, embedded files attack and form submission & URI attack [1]. PDF files allow users to embed JavaScript code and other files, such as HTML files, Microsoft Office files (.doc, for example), and even executable files (.exe, for example in Windows OS), for certain purposes, such as form validation, animation displaying, calculation, etc. More complicated, a PDF file can also contain another PDF file, which makes security inspection more difficult. These files may lead to JavaScript code attack or embedded files attack. Form submission & URI attack usually occurs in PDF files that contain forms. For example, an innocent user that has been controlled by a hacker will click the “submit” button after finishing a form. But this false “submit” button will actually trigger an attack by linking to a malicious website rather than submitting the form.
Although there are mature technologies to detect malicious JavaScript code. Embedded files attack and form submission & URI attack are quite more complex. To detect embedded files attack, it needs to distinguish malicious files from massive files with different formats. To detect form submission & URI attack, it needs to check whether the URI resource is malicious or not. Therefore, both of the two problems are difficult to effectively resolve. Moreover, most traditional JavaScript code detection methods are based on content signatures, and they can only prevent existing attacks, but are meaningless to zero-day attack, which is ordinary in an Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attack initiated by PDF files. Therefore, it is obvious that traditional detection methods cannot effectively detect malicious PDF files any longer in this case.
In recent years, deep learning such as Random Forests (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree (DT), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) and Deep Neural Network (DNN) have played an extraordinary role in many fields since it is good at extracting similarities from massive and irregular content without priori knowledge. By simulating the cognitive process of human brain, machine learning first trains the model by a training set and then judges and predicts, and further gets new cognition for self-renewal constantly. Moreover, machine learning can also effectively reduce the cost of data analysis besides effectively analyzing massive data. For example, Zhang et al. [2] proposed a deep-learning-based approach to proactive cache content at the edge of mobile network, and it is verified that the proposed approach could effectively improve user experience and reduce network load. Based on this, in this paper, we introduce DNN to malicious PDF files detection and propose a secure detector of malicious PDF (SDMP) to detect malicious PDF files for mobile devices. We totally gathered 20,769 PDF files as training and testing set, and finally achieve up to 99.3% accuracy, which is more effective than most of the antivirus softwares in commerce. Moreover, training DNN models usually requires a lot of time and resources, but our designed model is exceptionally fast, less than 1s per epoch, even running on a low-end server without GPU cards.
The main contributions of this work are listed below.

•We propose a DNN model to realize secure detection of malicious PDF files for mobile devices.•The detection accuracy of SDMP can achieve up to 99.3%.•The time cost on training and prediction of the proposed DNN model is extremely low, less than 1s per epoch.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 we make a brief introduction to the background and related research. In Section 3 we describe the structure of SDMP. In Section 4 we propose the DNN model and show the experiment results with detailed analysis.
