Motherboard (MB) is a key component that mechanically fastens and electrically connects resistors, capacitors, inductors, processors, chipsets, and interface controllers. The name, “mother”, means that all components attached to printed circuit board form an interface to communicate and functionalize computer products, such as desktops, laptops, servers, printers, etc. On the one hand, demand volatility and seasonal variations arising from downstream products (vertical relationships) results in difficulties in conducting effective demand planning (DP) and sales forecasting (SF) for upstream component manufacturers (Shapiro, 2006, Cho and Lee, 2013, Saleh et al., 2016). On the other hand, technology competition or complementary dynamics between downstream products (horizontal relationships) also leads to obstacles in achieving successful DP and SF (Hood et al., 2003, Jacobs and Chase, 2015, Tsai et al., 2013). Demand uncertainties composed of cyclic variations mixed with trends tend to rise and fall within specific time durations. This phenomenon can be partially explained by the so-called “bullwhip effect”: a small variation in the downstream viewed as a ripple can be amplified as a big variation in the upstream (Miller and Park, 2005, Addo-Tenkorang and Helo, 2016, Stevenson, 2015).
As a consequence, a systematic way to capture both vertical and horizontal relationships that can link DP into SF is necessary to achieve successful supply chain management (Guidolin, Guseo, & Mortarino, 2019). Specifically, demand uncertainty arising from downstream computer products can be roughly attributed to several reasons (Holt, 2004, Huang et al., 2008, Ziser et al., 2012, Wang and Chien, 2016, Aryal et al., 2018): (1) smartphones and tablets have more or less replaced the conventional desktops and laptops. Meanwhile, smartphones have also killed low-end digital cameras (demand-pull transition), (2) artificial intelligence, big data, and cloud computing have significantly increased the requirements for servers and high-end graphics cards (technology-push transition), (3) smart cars are expected to boost automotive applications of MB (new applications of existing technologies), (4) internet of things (IOT) and cyber-physical systems (CPS) have dramatically brought about a rising wave of smart-home appliances (extensions of existing technologies). Hence, this research accommodates both vertical and horizontal relationships to incorporate them into DP and SF (Wang & Chen, 2019).
To respond to demand uncertainties and product volatility, sensitivity analyses with respect to computer products (desktop, laptop, server, printer) and MB can help firms better estimate its production capacity and sales revenues. For instance, a manager needs to know the impact on the firm if a computer product is expected to grow or decline by 10%. To conduct data-driven decision making, DP and SF for the upstream components must be linked together and related to the downstream products. Although numerous quantitative techniques have been proposed (Maia and Carvalho, 2011, Saleh et al., 2016, Zhong et al., 2016, Al-Musaylh et al., 2018), they have the following drawbacks:
•Mathematical programming usually handles internal resource constraints to determine the optimal capacity without considering external market demand,•Regression considers the predictors to estimate the outcome but incapable of tackling seasonal effects as well as identifying the time-lags between them,•Time-series can capture “time-lags” between the predictors and the outcome but it cannot accommodate the dynamic interactions to reveal managerial insights.
Consequently, a conceptual framework shown in Fig. 1 is presented to highlight the impacts of computer products and dynamic interactions on MB manufacturers. In DP, global sales of computer products drive the demand for MB. In SF, the vertical relationships between the MB and computer products and the horizontal relationships among MB manufacturers concurrently estimate financial performances. The rest of the study is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews DP and SF in supply-chain analytics. Section 3 details the proposed framework. Experimental results are justified in Section 4. Discussions and research limitations are described in Section 5. Conclusions and future work are shown in Section 6.Download : Download high-res image (237KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Conceptual research framework.
