It is no secret that interfaces are designed to disappear. We have heard this before from many scholars of digital composition, such as Cynthia L. Selfe and Richard J. Selfe, Jr. (1994), Christina Haas, 1996, Anne Frances Wysocki and Julia Jasken (2004), Ben McCorkle, 2012, and Lori Emerson (2014) to name a few, and there has even been a special issue of this journal devoted to the topic (edited by Joel Haefner, 2009). Yet it remains easy for teachers and researchers of writing to let writers’ interface-level interactions recede into the background of inquiry into online composing environments – such as online writing communities. More specifically, writing teachers and scholars often direct their attention toward the compositions created, relationships cultivated, and information shared within online writing communities without accounting for the interfaces that mediate them, and this tendency can have consequential impacts on how students are assessed, curriculum is designed, and technology is implemented within writing classrooms.
The tendency to overlook the interface is analogous to how we rarely think about our interactions with a door handle: we are much more likely to simply think about what we will do once we pass through a door. Of course, as Benjamin H. Bratton (2015) reminds us, we are only able to ignore the door handle (i.e., interface) until something goes awry with its functionality or it is not accessible to us. Similarly, except in moments of breakdown or error, the computer interfaces that seamlessly facilitate our desired interactions with computational systems achieve what many theorists discuss as “transparency” and, as Haefner (2009) warned, “accommodating the idea of a transparent interface without question or examination, is actually a dangerous course” (p. 135). Following the lead of other digital writing scholars who turn to moments of “glitch” or error to make the transparent opaque (e.g., Boyle, 2015), in this article I focus on two moments of technological breakdown within an online writing community as reminders to look at rather than through the interface (Lanham, 1993). Looking at the interface opens the door to new conceptualizations of the its role in shaping the "networked publics" in which students write within and beyond the classroom. (boyd, 2010). For teachers and researchers of screen-mediated writing, reframing the role of the interface in this way also opens up possibilities for reframing student and system error in networked composing, with implications for the instructional and infrastructional design of educational online writing environments.
In what follows, I demonstrate the importance of such new conceptualizations by drawing on two “telling cases” (Mitchell, 1984) that document the interface-level human-computer interactions of three high school students during moments of technological error within an educational online writing community called Write4Change. These three young men, who joined the Write4Change community as part of a larger study about educational social networking, each encountered a moment of technological and communicative breakdown in their interface-level interactions that had repercussions for how they presented themselves and participated within the community going forward. I provide micro-ethnographic accounts of the students’ interactions to reveal how seemingly small-scale actions such as mouse clicks and the interface’s response time can have ripple effects that alter digital composing landscapes and students’ participation within and attitudes toward them.
Ultimately, I argue for looking at the interface-level origin-point of such ripples from a Bakhtinian, dialogic perspective that accounts for socio-historical, cultural, and material contexts in order to better account for, respond to, and design in anticipation of the inevitable moments of human-computer communicative breakdown in online writing communities that so often appear as student or system "error." The proposed dialogic reframing of "error" as communicative breakdown between interface and students also allows for an examination of the power differentials at play in its negotiation, which can prompt changes in the way we design, assess, and teach students to critically navigate technological landscapes of networked writing.
