The process of translation is responsible for converting mRNAs into protein. The whole process is carried out in three different steps namely: initiation, elongation of polypeptide chain and termination. Translation initiation site is the position where this process initiates and it terminates at the first in-frame codon downstream. The non-coding sequences that present around coding sequences are known as 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions. The problem of translation initiation site prediction is to accurately recognize this site in genomic sequences (i.e mRNA, cDNA and uncharacterized DNA). By knowing the exact location of TIS in genomic sequences, the corresponding protein can be easily identified. Therefore, recognition of TIS is a central problem in gene prediction which further helps in understanding the gene structure and its product. Usually, a TIS consists of a tri-nucleotide ATG (in DNA or cDNA) and AUG (in mRNA) and used as a start codon. Translation can also occur at other codons, such as ACG and CTG, however, this is a rare event reported in eukaryotes and is not considered here.
The scanning model states that the ribosome, firstly, binds to the 5′ end of mRNA then migrates along the 5′-3′ end and stop at first AUG codon where a favorable context for initiating translation is present. Although the scanning model hypothesis of first AUG occurs in 90% of the cases, there are notable exceptions also. Some mechanism explaining these exceptions are: leaky scanning where the translation initiates from a downstream ATG after bypassing the first AUG codon due to the presence of poor context, reinitiation where a small open reading frame causes ribosome to continue with the scanning until another ATG is found to make the protein, internal initiation where the ribosome directly attaches near the actual ATG without scanning and this fact is reported in a number of viral mRNAs.
With the help of new technologies, more and more TISs have been verified experimentally. However, it has been reported that 40 % of the mRNAs taken from GenBank database include upstream AUGs. The problem turns out to be more difficult when unannotated genomic sequences or ESTs (small sequences derived from cDNAs) which usually contain more errors, are used. Moreover, the experimental approaches are very costly and time-consuming. Thus, prediction of correct TIS is a complex problem because the sequences are not complete, can contain errors and their underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. Therefore, efficient and accurate computational methods that automatically try to solve this problem are needed for TIS prediction. Moreover, the computational recognition of TISs is an important component of every gene prediction system and thus plays a crucial role in genome annotation projects. In past, several computational methods are developed to predict TIS in transcript data i.e. mRNA, EST, and cDNA. However, in gene prediction system, the TIS need to be predicted at genomic level. This makes the problem of TIS prediction even more challenging because at the genome level the number of false TIS is much more as compared to true TIS. Also, the prediction of TIS in genomic sequences is different from transcript sequences due to the following reasons: transcripts usually contain zero or one TIS which aid the prediction process; scanning models of translation cannot be applied to genomic sequences because of the presence of large number of candidate TISs; genomic sequences contain introns which disrupt the coding sequence downstream the TIS. The focus of this paper is to predict TIS in genomic sequences.
This section addresses the problem of TIS prediction in genomic sequences and its importance in gene prediction. The remaining of the paper is outlined as follows: The next section describes related work for TIS prediction. Thereafter, the datasets and the methods used in this work are presented. In section 4, the results of the proposed method are illustrated along with evaluation measures. The last section includes the discussion and conclusion of this work.
