Academic diversity is omnipresent in today’s classrooms. As differences between students matter greatly in learning, practices that address the individual needs of students are key to ensure all students receive appropriate academic challenges (Tomlinson et al., 2003). The supremacy of personalized learning over one-size-fits-all approaches is well-established in the literature (for review, see e.g., Deunk et al. (2015) and Kulik et al. (1990)). Yet, actual implementation in school lags behind due to time, knowledge, and practical constraints present in traditional teaching (Aleven et al., 2017). Consequently, the use of technology in education increased in recent years, offering the possibility of personalized learning (Deunk et al., 2015). Meta-analyses on computer-based learning environments indicate positive effects compared with traditional teaching methods (Cheung & Slavin, 2013; Tamin et al., 2011), in particular when the environment is adaptive to the needs of students (Aleven et al., 2017; Faber et al., 2017). However, despite the large amount of research on the effectiveness of technology as a direct input in the education production function, it remains unclear, when, how, and which particular components of the computer-based learning environment contribute to learning (Shute & Zapata-Rivera, 2012; Faber et al., 2017). For instance, Muralidharan et al. (2019) provide a review of empirical evidence on computer-assisted instruction. Despite large heterogeneity in effects, they observed that interventions delivering the largest effects incorporated an adaptive component (e.g., Banerjee et al., 2007). However, as the earlier literature focused on the value-added of computer-assisted instruction, no distinction was made in the various components of the instruction (Muralidharan et al., 2019). The present paper contributes to the literature by examining the combined and isolated effects of two commonly-used components, i.e., adaptive instruction and feedback, in a computer-assisted program.
To establish our results, we conducted a randomized control trial in the eighth and ninth grade of Flemish secondary education involving 1,177 students in 32 schools. The computer-assisted program dealt with financial literacy education. Financial education is an attractive subject for our study as large discrepancies in financial literacy among youth are found. While family, sociodemographic, and peer characteristics can explain the differences in financial literacy, cognitive ability also appears to be an important determinant, i.e., financial knowledge is substantially higher for high-ability students (Lusardi et al., 2010). Given these differences, one may question the effectiveness of financial education when all students are taught the same program uniformly.1 As suggested by Kaiser and Menkhoff (2019), a differentiated approach may be more effective.
