Farming computer games engage millions of players world-wide in farming practices, ranging from planting crops and milking cattle to farm business planning (Kelly, 2015; Chan, 2018; Parsons, 2019). Popular games like Farming Simulator – a recreational portrayal of farming practices so realistic it is used in American colleges to train future farmers (Lane, 2018) – has sold over 25 million copies across its multiple versions (VB Staff, 2020). Farmville, a cartoonised Facebook game where players plant and harvest crops, enrolled over 60 million players at its height of popularity (Alderman, 2011). Stardew Valley – similarly cartoonised but much more complex, has sold over 10 million copies to date (Strickland, 2020), becoming one of the most popular indie (independently developed) computer games since Minecraft (White, 2018). Farming games appeal to a broad demographic who are interested in ‘peaceful’ gameplay – a genre far removed from the popular first-person shooters and sports-based games commonly associated with computer and video gameplay. In this paper I argue that farming games represent important sites of cultural production, where contemporary representations and experiences of rurality are being produced and enacted. The makers and players of these games represent an important cohort which to date has been neglected in the rural studies literature: what I term the ‘desk-chair countryside’.
The representation of farming practices as leisure activities in popular media is deeply embedded in Western cultures. The notion of the rural idyll has a lengthy history, which can be traced back to the literature of Virgil and Theocritus (Bunce, 2003). Little and Austin (1996) define the rural idyll simply as a set of myths or images that endure over time, particularly invoking nostalgia and heritage. More critical portrayals emphasise the construction of idyllic rurality as normative and power infused (Shucksmith, 2018). The rural is subject to considerable romanticisation, which has sat uncomfortably (for contemporary rural scholars) beside prosaic realities of social exclusion and environmental degradation, the former which is caused in part by the efforts of rural idyll seekers to enable and protect their lifestyles (Kondo et al., 2012; Shucksmith, 2012).
Work on representations of rurality at the turn of the century argued that crime, alcoholism, and homelessness are typically omitted (Yarwood, 2001; Jayne et al., 2011; Cloke et al., 2001). Agritourism activities similarly commodify and sanitise farming practices for public consumption (Annes and Bessiere, 2018; Flanigan et al., 2015). Peeren and Souch (2019) argue that the persistence of idealised rural images reflects a deep, emotional investment in ‘good life’ ideals, representing a broader ‘good life genre’; they argue that media participants would rather abandon their perceptions of reality than these deeply held ideals. However, recent work on popular media (including Peeren and Souch, 2019; Dickason, 2017), demonstrates the successful integration of more realistic portrayals of rural life, utilising rural issues such as poverty as sources of dramatic or comic effect. This work demonstrates the potential of different media to challenge and rework contemporary imaginings of rurality.
In this paper I progress the literature on imaginings of idyllic rurality, by assessing how these are staged and reworked by computer game designers and players, utilising a case study of Stardew Valley. I do so by developing the concept of the ‘desk-chair countryside’: a global cohort who experience rurality primarily through their computers. This term draws on Bunce' (1994, 2003) work on the ‘armchair countryside’, which he defined as generations of individuals who experience country life indirectly (i.e. primarily through representations, rather than lived experience). Bunce emphasises the romantic, often Utopian ideal of rural (arguably ‘peasant’) life as simple, tranquil and full of abundance, represented in literature, art, and latterly mass media, for consumption by the middle and upper classes.
Computer gameplay is radically different from the media engagement which Bunce considered. Although computer games may similarly portray situated representations of idyllic rurality (see Sutherland, 2020b), computer games give players an agency lacking from other media. As Laurel (1991 in Perron and Schröter, 2016) points out, popular media is typically consumed in third person; computer interaction requires first person engagement. In farming games, players actively practice and engage in rural encounters, shaping their environments through the actions they decide to take (e.g. constructing housing, planting fields, chopping down trees). Gameplay requires active decision-making and kinesthetic responses – players enter and move themselves through game worlds by moving handsets, tapping keys and clicking with their mice. Players also move their whole bodies in response to in-game stimula (Rambusch, 2016) – in my case moving closer to the screen during intense events, sitting back during ‘cut scenes’ (short videos) and unconsciously ducking when my avatar approaches a low ceiling. Players typically play while seated in desk chairs, in their own homes, but also in the homes of others and in any number of public spaces, particularly on public transit. Playing transports them into on-line worlds where they may engage (or not) with other players, but are usually disconnected from the people around them.
From a cognitive perspective, game designers aim for immersive experiences, which engage players in exploring and personalising their own virtual worlds: the illusive ‘flow’ that sees players lose track of everything outside of the game world (Michailidis et al., 2018). Computer gameplay requires continual, ongoing interaction - farming game players spend hours engaged in virtual commodity production and community engagement. At the same time, players are several steps removed from their actions: games are animations, cartoonised to varying degrees, and less restricted to laws of time, gravity or nature than photo-realistic television shows and cinema. Psychological distance is produced by clicking on symbols to perform actions, and often by players' personal representation in the games by an avatar they design and control. Computer games also elicit a different set of emotional responses from other media; Isbister (2016) points out that cinema and television rarely elicit popular gaming responses of pride, achievement and guilt.
I focus the paper particularly on these ‘affective’ relations of computer games, analysing the affective responses sought, produced and reproduced by playing Stardew Valley. Shaw and Warf (2009) argue that computer and video games produce both ‘worlds of representation’ – the portrayals of place, gender, race and politics in game spaces - and ‘worlds of affect’ – the embodied, preconscious impact of games on players. Contemporary analysis of imaginings of idyllic rurality typically utilise representational approaches: content and discourse analysis of images and dialogue (e.g. Horton, 2008; Lagerqvist, 2014; Peeren and Souch, 2019) and surveys of migrants' motivations and associations with rural life (e.g. Kondo et al., 2012; Sardinha, 2015). Studies of affect offer the opportunity to learn what these representations make or enable participants to experience, influencing unconscious cognitive processing. ‘Affect’ includes emotion but also encompasses biological and unconscious responses to particular events, and is not limited to a single (human) body. For example, places can have affective atmospheres (e.g. the ‘feel’ of a sporting stadium or outdoor event, Bille et al., 2015). Affect is thus conceptualised as a “set of flows moving through bodies of humans and other beings” (Thrift, 2008, p. 236). Ash (2010) argues that affective encounters are essential to successful computer game design. In this paper I argue that mobilisation of affective responses involves reworking of notions of authentic rurality.
Stardew Valley is particularly suited to the analysis of affect. Game advertisements emphasise opportunities to self-actualise (e.g. “create the farm of your dreams” and to “become a part of the local community”, Stardew Valley Web-site, 2020). Stardew has been identified as particularly suited to active elicitation of affective response, owing to the peaceful nature of gameplay. In Stardew, players actively build and personalise their individual farms through crop and livestock production, and associated building construction, investing hours of time in rote farming tasks (e.g. hoeing, watering, harvesting, feeding). They are also encouraged to establish relationships with local community members. Game creator Eric Barone openly declared his intention of producing realistic community interactions:
Ultimately, I wanted the game world to feel like a living place. I wanted you to forget that it was a video game and to feel like these people had a life of their own
(Barone in White, 2018)
Playing Stardew is an opportunity to reconnect with “what matters most in life … real connections with other people and nature” (Stardew came play introductory cut scene text). Stardew has stayed near the top of the Personal Computer (PC) game charts since its launch in 2016, and is available in 12 languages (English, German, Spanish, Brazilian Portuguese, Russian, Japanese, Simplified Chinese, Italian, French, Korean, Turkish, and Hungarian) and multiple formats (e.g. PlayStation, Xbox, Nintendo Switch i.e. it is both a computer and video game). Stardew Valley is thus a location in which idyllic rurality is being staged for and performed by a global player base.
In this paper I assess how affective responses are mobilised through Stardew Valley structures and gameplay, advancing the considerable body of literature on the making and remaking of the rural idyll through cultural practices. The paper is organised as follows. In the next section I outline the theoretical concepts utilised to structure the analysis, particularly affect and authenticity. I then describe the research methods before presenting the research findings, which focus on sentient, affective encounters embedded within Stardew gameplay. I conclude with a discussion of the implications the desk chair countryside and new computer mediated ‘virtual ruralities’ for rural studies.
