With the advent of the fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0) manufacturing systems are transformed into Semiconductor Industry. In this transformation, the Internet of Things (IoT) and other emerging technologies pose a major role. To shift manufacturing companies in computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM). The so-called smart parts-based manufacturing system addresses these concerns well. The smart part carries operating instructions for the manufacturing worker or machine. Uniquely identified individual parts can process according to their specific requirements based on individual customer preferences. Therefore, it is necessary that each part correct identified, to ensure reliable process control in such a flexible and customer-oriented manufacturing system.
When a new component released, systems always require fine tune. Therefore, it must have a gap between new RFID system and old SMART system. Although it has an experienced EA term, there still exist challenges for system stability, and it will trace it by on-call rate until it is the same level as other FAB.
Many companies use RFID to trace their products. Until now, RFID tracking has only been able to locate a tag’s position to within a rough area (about 13*13 mm). The second challenge is thus to improve the precise position location of RFID tags. The new technology of PDA and wireless may change dispatching behavior such that all CIM systems need to consider in order to gain system enhancement [1].
Focusing on FAB, the biggest challenge currently faced is the maturation of the integration between the RFID reader and the equipment controller. Since the CIM host does not connect to the RFID reader directly, the only way it can get the information stored in the RFID Tag is through the equipment controller. If the equipment controller does not send the correct information from the RFID Tag, it will be very difficult to determine problems when they arise, because there are too many factors that may impact the RFID reading result [2].
In this paper, it will describe how to use radio frequency identification (RFID) in computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) as a lot identification system with the following benefits:

•Low cost when compared with smart tag systems•No need to detach tag while POD is cleaned•Increased ease of carrier tracing•Reduces the probability of missing lots (when compared with smart tag systems)•Ease of maintaining the system & minimizing tag failure rate•Reduced complexity of CIM system•Operation Benefit with Smart Tag•Ability to fulfill a “place and go” scenario•RFID is easier to operate split function when compared with barcodes [3], [4].
The purpose of test lot use to analysis and simulate the process result of the equipment. In FAB, the smart tag used to carry several pieces of test lot information; the equipment can directly get detailed secure information from the tag, such as lot stage and recipe. The user can update test lot information to the tag from the operation management interface (OMI). While front opening unified pods (FOUPs) are loaded onto the equipment load port, a tool control system (TCS) reads the test lot information from the tag [1], [5], [6]. If the test lot data exist in the tag, the TCS will process this lot.
In FAB, RFID acts as an alternative lot identification method for a 300-mm environment. All lot data need to be stored with RFID for TCS inquiry. With a smart tag system, however, the RFID treated differently. Limitations on storage capacity mean that date storage is limited. In other words, RFID cannot successfully store all the test lot information. As a result, other solutions must find in order to store the data [4]. In order to implement the test lot, a channel is necessary between the RFID and the equipment to enable the smart tag to provide the same function as FAB. This paper to propose a solution to change the operation flow to fit the characteristics of IoT. In addition to introducing the design concept and the system architecture of this new IoT solution, the objective of this paper is to incorporate deep learning in the IoT system into the current CIM and to reveal the benefits in FAB [7], [8].
The rest of this paper was organized as follows. Some background information was introduced in Section 2, including RFID technology and design strategy. In Section 3 describes IoT based CIM system design for open Cassette, includes design purpose, system architecture and detail process flow. The IoT based CIM system design in 300-mm FAB, is further revealed the separate FAB, separate wired link and foup tray in Section 4. A series of performance evaluation and relation analysis are carried out in Section 5. Finally, it concludes this paper and give some future research work in Section 6.
