Over 60,000 fatal injuries are reported to occur every year from construction projects worldwide [40]. According to the Occupation Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), for example, the construction industry is responsible for more than 20% of fatalities in the United States [45]. In the United Kingdom, for example, a similar scenario occurs where construction accounts for the highest number of fatalities across all sectors [15].
Typically hazard analysis is undertaken before construction and may be performed using manual methods and/or three-dimensional (3D) models [24,43]. Hazards can change once construction commences, and their identification then needs to be undertaken manually, which can be a labour-intensive and time-consuming process. Several automatic computer vision-based approaches have been developed to overcome the drawbacks of manually identifying hazards [[18], [19], [20], [21], [22],53].
Despite the success of being able to deploy computer vision to identify hazards, it is unable to recognise those that are newly defined as a result of changes to safety regulations and procedures as: (1) typically one computer vision algorithm is used to identify a single hazard in a scene. For example, identifying a person who is not wearing their safety helmet; and (2) current computer vision approaches are unable to extract semantic relationships between detected objects. As a result, a ‘semantic gap’ is formed between the low-level features extracted from images and the high-level semantic information that people obtain.
This paper combines computer vision algorithms with ontology to construct a knowledge graph that can automatically detect hazards to address the ‘semantic gap’ that prevails. We aim to determine whether our as-built semantic vision-based knowledge graph can identify hazards with complex rules. In doing so, we develop a knowledge graph that integrates computer-vision with ontology. An ontology is used to help experts annotate knowledge and is used to describe the relationships between the entities. Describing these relationships enables computer applications to represent and reason about safety knowledge efficiently. When an ontology is used in conjunction wit0068 computer vision, knowledge can be extracted (i.e., entity recognition and relationship extraction) from images automatically.
We commence our paper by providing a review of computer vision-based object detection approaches and applications of ontology-based risk management that have been developed in construction (Section 2). Then, we introduce and describe our proposed knowledge graph framework for identifying hazards (Section 3). Following a description of the developed framework, we then demonstrate and test the validity of our developed framework using hazards identified during the construction of the Wuhan Rail Transit System in China (Section 4). Next, we discuss our research findings, specifically highlighting the benefits and limitations of our framework. We conclude our paper by identifying the paper's contributions to the field of computer vision in construction.
