With the advances of image rendering techniques and the prevalence of 3D modeling software, now it is easy to create computer-generated (CG) images of very high visual quality (Yamaguchi et al., 2020). Fig. 1 shows four groups (columns) of CG images, which are respectively rendered by Artlantis (Artlantis gallery, 2020), Autodesk (Autodesk A360 rendering gallery, 2020), Corona (Corona renderer gallery, 2020), and VRay (Chaosgroup gallery, 2020) from left to right. It is difficult to identify whether the images were captured by digital cameras or produced by computer graphics rendering because they have very high level of photorealism. Although rendering techniques bring convenience to our daily life, they also potentially challenge forensic systems. Therefore, distinguishing computer-generated images from natural images (NIs) has become an important research problem in image forensics. Hereafter, we call it as the CG image forensic problem.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. From left to right: four groups (columns) of computer-generated images which were rendered by Artlantis (Artlantis gallery, 2020), Autodesk (Autodesk A360 rendering gallery, 2020), Corona (Corona renderer gallery, 2020), and VRay (Chaosgroup gallery, 2020), respectively.
In the past decades, researchers have proposed hand-crafted-feature-based methods (Ng et al., 2005; Lyu and Farid, 2005; Chen et al., 2007; Gallagher and Chen, 2008; Zhang et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2017) and CNN(convolutional neural network)-based methods (Rahmouni et al., 2017; Quan et al., 2018; Yao et al. Shi; He et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2019; Bhalang Tarianga et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020) to solve this forensic problem. The former usually consists of multidimensional feature extraction and classifier training, and the latter directly formulates an optimization problem to find a good mapping function from a given image to its label and solves it efficiently in an end-to-end manner. Due to the powerful learning capacity of CNN, the CNN-based methods often achieve better forensic performance; however, the blind detection problem (or the so-called generalization problem) has been omitted in existing methods. This problem occurs when we train a CNN model using CG images from “known” computer graphics rendering techniques, and then test the model on images generated by “unknown” rendering techniques. Take Fig. 1 as an example, the CG images in second, third, and fourth columns (rendered by Autodesk, Corona, and VRay, respectively) are misclassified as NI by a CNN model trained on NIs and CG images rendered by Artlantis (first column). The misclassification is probably due to the existence of subtle and different “intrinsic” traces left by each rendering technique, e.g., in color use and light-material interaction. It is worth mentioning that this problem can be frequently encountered in practice when deploying detectors of CG images in real-world applications, as there can always exist CG images generated by new and/or customized rendering tools.
To improve the forensic performance, especially the generalization capability, we make efforts in two aspects of CNN: network architecture and network training. The core idea is to design and implement CNN with more diversity in feature learning and with the use of harder negative samples in the so-called enhanced training. Here, the negative sample means the artificially constructed image by only using the original training dataset (potentially combined with information from CNN model), and its ground-truth label is same as that of CG image. Specifically, we design a two-branch neural network which can capture more diverse features. Then, after the normal training, we generate the harder negative samples based on gradient information of CNN model, and then conduct enhanced training with original training dataset and additional negative samples.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
•We first raise and study in the literature the generalization issue of the CG image forensic problem. For the experimental study of this generalization problem, we collect four computer graphics datasets which were generated by four different rendering tools.•We design a new network which has better generalization. The beginning part of the network has two branches with different initializations for the first layer.•We propose a novel and effective model-centric method to generate negative samples. Given a trained model and a CG image, we iteratively modify this image via gradient-based distortion to make the distorted version close to the decision boundary of the CNN model. The gradient can be easily computed using backpropagation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 presents the datasets used for studying this generalization problem and for validating of our method. Section 4 discusses the motivation of our work, and elaborates the details of the proposed method. Section 5 evaluates the performance of our method. Section 6 draws the conclusions and discusses the future working directions.
