Intramuscular fat (IMF) deposition or marbling in muscle is the most important factor determining the beef quality grade (QG) in Korean cattle, with highly marbled beef preferred due to its good palatability (Park et al., 2018). Korean cattle have been genetically selected for the marbling trait, and stage-specific feeding systems have been developed for the production of highly marbled beef (Park et al., 2018).
Marbling is used to describe the presence of white particles or flecks of IMF between muscle bundles (Hocquette et al., 2010). In addition to the degree of marbling, the spatial distribution, number, and size (coarse or fine) of marbling particles (MPs) are also important marbling traits (Gerrard, Gao, & Tan, 1996; Konarska, Kuchida, Tarr, & Polkinghorne, 2017; Lee et al., 2018). The size and distribution (fineness or coarseness) of MPs have attracted the attention of beef producers because finely marbled-beef is desired by consumers and improves sales (Lee et al., 2018). In Japan, beef with evenly distributed frost-like fine marbling is preferred and is priced higher than beef with coarse marbling (Motoyama, Sasaki, & Watanabe, 2016). Similarly, the demand for finely marbled beef has increased in South Korea (Chung, Lee, Cho, Kwon, & Lee, 2018). Little information is currently available regarding the relationship between the size and distribution characteristics of marbling traits and beef price.
Video image analysis (VIA) or computer image analysis (CIA) have been applied to various aspects of the evaluation of both carcass and meat eating quality (Albrecht, Teuscher, Ender, & Wegner, 2006; Cross, Gilliland, Durland, & Seideman, 1983; Ferguson, 2004; Kuchida, Kurihara, Suzuki, & Miyoshi, 1997). It has been well documented that these systems are suitable tools for the grading and payment settlement of beef in the EUROP and USDA systems (Albrecht et al., 2006; Craigie et al., 2012; Steiner et al., 2003). The CIA has evolved to measure not only the IMF content but also the number, size, and distribution characteristics (fineness or coarseness) of MPs in the muscles (Albrecht et al., 2006; Cheng, Cheng, Sun, & Pu, 2015; Konarska et al., 2017).
Korean cattle are recognized as a cattle breed that produces relatively highly marbled beef (Park et al., 2018; Piao et al., 2019). Korean cattle could therefore be a suitable breed to assess the size and distribution characteristics of marbling traits. However, little information is available about the size and distribution of marbling traits and their relationship with auction price (AP) of Korean cattle beef. This study was conducted to evaluate the size and distribution characteristics of MP using CIA and their relationship with AP in Korean cattle beef.
