Drowsy driving is a serious problem and accounts for approximately 100,000 accidents, 1550 deaths, and $230 billion in monetary losses annually in the United States alone (Foundation, 2017, Garcés Correa et al., 2014, NHTSA, 2015). Prior research has found that drowsy driving can be as dangerous, and have the same effects, as drunk driving (Powell et al., 2001, Verster et al., 2011). Drowsy driving occurs even though many people do not like to admit to it (Powell, Schechtman, Riley, Li, & Guilleminault, 2002). According to a study conducted by the National Sleep Foundation (2017), approximately 168 million people have reported driving while drowsy, of which 103 million have admitted to falling asleep at the wheel. Despite recent increases in attention to distracted and/or impaired driving, there has been less emphasis on drowsy driving. Part of the problem is that drowsiness levels vary by individual and automotive systems have been unable to adequately assess the state of a drowsy driver. Prior studies have explored drowsy drivers using invasive electrophysiological devices with numerous electrodes that obtain valuable data regarding the driver’s state, but are unlikely to be used in a real-world driving context (Brown et al., 2013, Li and Chung, 2014, Lin, 2015). BCI devices attain data though Electroencephalography (EEG) and are typically placed on the head of a participant (Nicolas-Alonso & Gomez-Gil, 2012). Attaining electrical brain activity measurements through EEG is the most widely used, standard technique for sleep studies (De-Rosario et al., 2010, Garcés Correa et al., 2014). BCI devices can attain various frequencies from users, such as delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma. It is evident in the literature that alpha (8–12 Hz) and theta (4–7 Hz) frequencies are those related to drowsiness and an increase in drowsiness is indicated by an increase in alpha and theta frequencies (Aspinall et al., 2015, Lal and Craig, 2001, Makeig and Jung, 1996). This research examines the subjective self-reported and objective electrophysiological indices of a drowsy driver with the use of a consumer grade off-the-shelf BCI device.
1.1. Driver distraction and sleep alerting systemsThe continuous enhancement of Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) has resulted in several monitoring systems included in the automobile environment. Many of the current monitoring and safety systems that alert distracted drivers include Lane Keep Assist, Blind Spot Assist, and Forward Collision Warning, among several others (Kountouriotis and Merat, 2016, Merat and Lee, 2012). These systems alert a driver who may have been otherwise distracted by secondary tasks. However, only a limited amount of Automotive Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) have systems directly implemented to assist a drowsy driver. Of the few systems that exist, predictions are made regarding the driver’s drowsiness state based on parameters such as time driven, lane deviations, vehicle speed, etc. (BMW, 2013, Halpert, 2016). These assumptions can sometimes be incorrect, and prior research suggests that alerts do frustrate some drivers and only momentarily raises a driver’s awareness (Dunbar and Gilbert, 2017, Marshall et al., 2007). The design of some of these systems for a drowsy driver also permits a large gap between alerts, which is in itself a problem as it relates to the time-based systems. There is currently no in-vehicle safety system that is known to independently use electrophysiological data to determine the drowsiness state of a driver.
1.2. BCI for in-vehicle experiencesBCIs have become prevalent in recent years and less obtrusive based on their wireless nature. BCI devices attain data via EEG and can be invasive or non-invasive. The key difference between the two is that invasive devices employ some form of wet electrode or gel, while the non-invasive devices only need to rest on the head of the user. It is apparent that the invasive devices would not work in a realistic driving environment. As previously mentioned, prior research has explored the use of invasive electrophysiological devices to assess the sleepiness state of a driver, but these are often conducted with BCI devices that are unlikely to be implemented in a realistic driving context (Brown et al., 2013, Li and Chung, 2014, Lin, 2015). Three off-the-shelf wireless BCI devices were considered for this research, which included the Emotiv Epoc, MUSE, and Emotiv Insight. In this section, justification regarding the selected non-invasive BCI device will be discussed in greater detail.The Emotiv Epoc is a 14-channel EEG device that is wirelessly enabled (Emotiv, 2018). An image of the Emotiv Epoc is provided in Fig. 1 (top left). From an accuracy standpoint, the Epoc initially appeared to be suitable based on the high number of channels. Ultimately, it was not selected since wet electrodes with a saline solution are required for functionality. Wet or gel electrodes in a realistic driving scenario would be almost unlikely, too tedious and impractical for users. Additionally, it is evident in the BCI space that many participants are more reluctant to use wet electrodes as opposed to dry electrodes, which leads to a longer setup process (Grozea, Voinescu, & Fazli, 2011). A relatively quick, non-wet and non-gel BCI setup process is much more ideal for the driving environment. Another concern for the Emotiv Epoc was that it looks more like a scientific device rather than a user-friendly device, which could potentially deter some participants. This research aimed at considering BCI devices that would not discourage participants and would also be more closely aligned with a user-friendly device that could be used in a realistic driving scenario. The MUSE, seen in Fig. 1 (top right) is a 4-channel EEG device that was also explored for this research (MUSE, 2017). The MUSE does have a more user-friendly appearance, but was not selected due to the lower number of channels as compared to the Emotiv Insight and the increased likelihood of lower data quality. The MUSE has an additional issue with regard to the ability to attain consistent data with some hairstyles, such as an afro, certain hair buns placed on the sides of the head, among several others. The user friendly look of the MUSE would be most beneficial from a usability and realistic in-vehicle perspective, but this would not be practical if BCI data cannot be attained from some participants.Download : Download high-res image (88KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Emotiv Epoc (top left), MUSE (top right) and Emotiv Insight (bottom center).The Emotiv Insight in Fig. 1 (bottom center), is a 5-channel non-invasive Bluetooth enabled device. The Emotiv Insight was selected for use since it has the capability to acquire EEG brain data wirelessly and is able to attain relevant alpha and theta waves from the participant’s brain. The Emotiv Insight has more channels than the MUSE, as mentioned earlier, and was better able to navigate through different areas of the hair in order to make skin contact for users with thick hair or complex hairstyles. An added benefit for the Emotiv Insight was that it had fewer points of contact than the Emotiv Epoc, which creates a more seamless mounting and unmounting user experience from a usability perspective. In comparison to the Emotiv Epoc or the MUSE, the Emotiv Insight was most ideal for this research based on its ability to acquire the required data, overall usability, and participant user experience.
1.3. Drowsiness manipulationBased on prior studies conducted on sleep, drowsiness manipulation occurs via three key factors; which include sleep deprivation, time-of-day, and time-on-tasks (Horne and Reyner, 1999, Horne and Reyner, 1996, Liu et al., 2009). Furthermore, there are possible individual differences where the type of drowsiness manipulation method selected has more severe effects on some participants than others. In other words, even though it is evident in the literature that the key factors related to sleep should affect participants, some participants are affected more adversely by some factors than others. As a result, this research will use a combination of the three key manipulation techniques (sleep deprivation, time-of-day, and time-on-tasks) grounded in the literature to increase the likelihood of participant drowsiness. Recruited participants were required to sleep for only 5 hours and consume no caffeine as done in previous studies relating to sleep (Horne and Reyner, 1996, Otmani et al., 2005). It is also evident from the literature that time-of-day is a key factor that affect drowsiness, which is likely to increase after lunch between 1:30p.m. and 4p.m., or at night between 10p.m. and 6 a.m. (Lenny et al., 1997, Moller et al., 2006). Consequently, all experiments throughout this research were conducted after consuming lunch, since participants are likely to be drowsier after lunch or dinner. The entire experiment was scheduled for 45 minutes since prior drowsy related experiments demonstrated that on average participants would exhibit signs of drowsiness within 20–45 minutes of monotonous driving (Lin et al., 2005, Liu et al., 2009, Thiffault and Bergeron, 2003).
1.4. Subjective self-reported sleep data and objective drowsy drivingThe Karolinska Sleepiness Scale (KSS) is a widely used self-assessment measure to subjectively quantify the level of sleepiness of participants in numerous experiments related to sleep (Horne and Reyner, 1996, Liu et al., 2009). The KSS is typically administered to the participant verbally by the researcher. Participants are asked to rate their level of drowsiness ranging from 1 (Extremely Alert) to 9 (Extremely sleepy, fighting sleep). Considering that the KSS is a widely used subjective sleep assessment measure, this was employed for this work to compare the KSS findings to the electrophysiological data from the BCI device.As previously mentioned, there is currently no known sleep detection in-vehicle system that independently uses electrophysiological data to assess a drowsy driver’s state. It is important to note that some vehicles have heart rate monitors included in the vehicle system, such as on the steering wheel, but this system does not assess drowsiness state (Li & Chung, 2014). Additionally, researchers have explored methods of acquiring objective driver drowsiness data, such as eye tracking or blink rate. However, these approaches have several accuracy issues based on lighting and the use of glasses in a real world driving context (Li and Chung, 2014, Lin et al., 2014).Visual signs of drowsiness were determined in prior research based on a participant having eye closure for more than five seconds or two or more yawns within eight minutes (Miller et al., 2015, Senaratne and Hardy, 2007, Verwey and Zaidel, 2000). This third method of assessing drowsiness was used in this research to objectively determine the drowsiness state of participants. This eye closure and yawn drowsiness validation method was used to create a binary representation of participant drowsiness for subsequent KSS and electrophysiological comparisons. While the KSS method is subjective and likely awakens participants to some degree, and the electrophysiological method is being investigated, the eye closure and yawn assessment method has been validated by prior research.
