In recent years, digital signage is widely developed for DOOH advertising. Digital signage can be found in public areas such as shopping malls, airports, stations, and retail shops [1, 2, 3]. The digital signage has an advantage over the traditional signage, which is able to show different multimedia content as requested by the advertiser. Most of the digital signage are designed with the display screen and computer equipment to deliver the message to the public [3, 4]. Instead of using static images, a variety of changeable content, such as video, audio, and animation are normally used to attract the audience's attention [5, 6].
Many types of research about vision-based DOOH systems have been studied and implemented to collect the audience measurement with digital cameras [1, 7, 8, 9]. The audience measurement metric includes the number of audiences, time duration, distance, and height. It helps the advertiser to understand the audience's behavior and measure the effectiveness of advertising. Thus, the vision-based DOOH system is equipped with a digital camera for collecting the ambient information in real-time. The ambient information includes the people that pass-by or stays in front of the display. Whenever the vision-based DOOH system detects an audience's face, it requires to show a personalized advertisement in the shortest time [10]. Therefore, the computational power for face detection and tracking algorithms indirectly affect the responsiveness of the vision-based DOOH system for real-time targeted advertising [11].
In such an uncontrolled environment of the public areas, there are two main challenges that need to be handled by the vision-based DOOH system. The phenomenon where people generally walking alone or together in a group shows the single or multi-person interaction in an uncontrolled environment. When a group of audiences is facing the digital display, the faces that are nearby each other may merge together and are generally treated as a single audience in the counting and tracking procedure [12, 13, 14]. Since the aforementioned digital signage is available in an uncontrolled environment, the passer-by may occasionally occlude the audience who is watching the advertisement. The presence of passer-by will create an obstacle for face detection and tracking algorithms to process the audience's face. Figure 1 demonstrates the sequence of scenes for both of the aforementioned challenges in an uncontrolled environment.Download : Download high-res image (473KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. The sequence of the video frames in an uncontrolled environment for (a) multiple adjacent audiences and (b) occlusion by a passer-by.
This paper presents a new framework of vision-based DOOH system that utilizes a depth camera to address the challenges of multiple adjacent faces and passer-by occlusion in the uncontrolled environment. DOOH advertising system is commonly equipped with a screen display and limited performance of processor hardware. The integration of the depth camera is specially designed to detect the audience's face within the region-of-interest (ROI) before determining a personalized advertisement for the audience. The computational power for the vision-based DOOH system indirectly affects the responsiveness of targeted advertising to the presence of the audience in ROI.
Figure 2 shows the bounded ROI used in the proposed framework to discover the presence of the audience. The area of ROI is restricted within 0.5 meter (m) of minimum distance and 2.5m of maximum distance from the digital signage. The vision-based DOOH system detects the audience's face and extracts the depth information (distance) within the ROI. The face information generally contains the two-dimensional (2D) position (x, y). The integration of depth information (z) with the 2D-position is determined as 3D-position (x, y, z) for face tracking.Download : Download high-res image (110KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 2. The ROI of the proposed framework is bounded within (a) 0.5m of minimum distance, and (b) 2.5m of maximum distance from the digital signage.
Figure 3 illustrates the processing flow of the proposed 3D face tracker. During the advertisement broadcasting, the face of the audience who stands within the ROI is detected by the depth camera. Each detected audience in the same video frame is labeled and assigned to an independent tracker path. The proposed 3D face tracker processes the audience's face based on the 3D-position (x, y, z). When each advertisement broadcast is completed, the audience trajectory is recorded into the aerial map based on the tracker path. The aerial map simulates the movement of the audience when he/she is watching the advertisement. Consequently, the advertiser can measure the targeting effect of advertisements based on the audience's behavior.Download : Download high-res image (459KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 3. The processing flow of the proposed 3D face tracker.
The contributions in this paper are summarized as the following: 1) a proposed framework for DOOH system that utilized the RGB-D camera to detect and track multiple audiences; 2) a new 3D face tracker that integrated the depth (z) with xy-position; 3) a new mapping method to simulate the audience's real-world movement in the aerial map. In this paper, Section 2 describes the related work about the method used by the existing vision-based DOOH system. Section 3 describes the proposed framework with the face tracking algorithm and aerial map mapping method. The experimental setup and results are recorded in Section 4. Lastly, the conclusion is remarked in Section 5.
