Within various fields such as social welfare, healthcare, school and government agencies, children’s perspectives and experiences are increasingly being viewed as important and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) has been ratified in almost all countries in the world (UN General Assembly, 1989). This place new high demands on the way children are heard and has led to an increased need for evidence-based methods for communicating with children. Therefore, researchers and practitioners are turning to the empirically tested child interview methods developed within the field of forensic science (National Board of Health and Welfare, 2015). However, the research on child forensic interviews has mainly focused on interviewing techniques and methods that affect and enhance children’s cognitive and factual accounts (Ahern & Lyon, 2013). Less attention has been given to children’s evaluative accounts and recommendations on how to enhance and increase these. There is thus a need to increase knowledge on supportive and reliable interviewing techniques that can be used in various fields and that can aid children to express their emotional and physical reactions to experiences. The interactive computer-assisted interview In My Shoes is a method that was developed to meet the requirements of the forensic process (Calam, Cox, Glasgow, Jimmieson, & Groth Larsen, 2000), and aims to aid children communicating their emotions. However, whether In My Shoes can help young children to communicate their emotions related to negative experiences has not been investigated. The aim of the current study was to qualitatively explore to what extent the computer-assisted interview In My Shoes aids preschool aged children in verbalising negative emotional experiences of a health care visit.
1.1. Evidence-based child interview methodsOver the last 30 years there has been a systematic and imperative development of evidence-based methods for interviewing children within the field of forensic science (Ceci and Bruck, 1993, Faller, 2015, Goodman and Melinder, 2007, Lamb et al., 2011). A corresponding development of structured and systematic child interview methods is lacking in other fields, which might explain why the interview methods developed within the field of forensic science are increasingly being transferred to other arenas such as social work, health care and school (Brubacher et al., 2019, Brubacher and Powell, 2019, Meissner and Lyles, 2019, Silverman et al., 2016, Cederborg, 2005).Based on research within the field of memory and forensic science, there is a good understanding of how memory works and how children’s developmental capabilities and vulnerabilities impact the interview (Hershkowitz et al., 2012, Lamb and Brown, 2006, Nelson and Fivush, 2004, Peterson, 2012). This knowledge has formed the basis for a core set of evidence-based components to facilitating children’s reporting, which are being included in most child forensic interview protocols. These components consists of; question type, ground rules, and narrative practice (Faller, 2015, Lamb et al., 2007, Vrij et al., 2014).The main focus of the research in the forensic field, both in analogue and field studies, has been on the factual content of children’s statements, i.e. accounts of actions, objects and people and the cognitive factors related to children’s ability to retrieve this information (e.g. Goodman et al., 1997, Lamb et al., 2003, Lyon, 2014, Melinder et al., 2010, Schneider and Bjorklund, 1998). Thus, the recommended best practice components and evidence-based interview protocols, such as the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) protocol, have been developed to increase accuracy and completeness of children’s statements regarding these aspects of experiences (Lamb et al., 2007). Less attention has been paid to the subjective and evaluative content of children’s statements and factors that can affect these.
1.2. Evaluative content in child interviewsThere are a number of reasons why it is important to aid children in expressing evaluative content in interviews. Children’s ability to describe their subjective experiences, including emotions, can impact how the well-being of the child is perceived and, if interventions are offered, to target this (Cross and Hershkowitz, 2017, Schalkers et al., 2015, Wilson et al., 2010). This is also one of the main objectives of child interviews in a social work context, i.e. to understand more about children’s needs and offer interventions. In addition, the information children provide on their thoughts, emotions and opinions plays an increasingly important role in decision making in contexts ranging from case planning, court proceedings to placement decisions (Boshier and Steel-Baker, 2007, Clark, 2005, Cousins and Simmonds, 2011, Unrau, 2007). In investigative cases, children’s accounts of their emotions in relation to abuse are important as they make the narrative seem more coherent (Lyon et al., 2012, Snow et al., 2009, Westcott and Kynan, 2006). This in turn can affect the credibility of children’s statements (Cooper et al., 2014, Landström et al., 2015, Lyon et al., 2012).In recent years there has been an increased interest in the evaluative content of children’s accounts (Fängström et al., 2017, Karni-Visel et al., 2019, Lyon et al., 2012) and how interviewers respond to children’s reports of such experiences (Iversen, 2019). The evaluative content encompasses children’s emotional reactions, cognitive content and physical sensations in relation to their experiences of, for example, violence, abuse or maltreatment (Stolzenberg, Williams, McWilliams, Liang, & Lyon, 2019). It can also include how children experience the interview situation per se. Previous studies have shown that children seldom mention their emotional or physical reactions spontaneously in forensic interviews. For example, Westcott and Kynan (2004) examined investigative interviews with children aged 4–12 and concluded that only 5% of children under 7 years of age spontaneously described their emotional reactions (20% of all children). No child under 7 described their physical reactions unprompted (10% of all children).In parallel with the fact that the emotional aspects of children's statements have received more attention generally, research in the forensic field has increased on these factors (Ahern and Lyon, 2013, Katz et al., 2016). For example, the NICHD protocol has been revised to also take into account socio-emotional factors that may affect the interview (Hershkowitz, 2009). The revised protocol (RP) was designed to emphasise supportive interviewing in order to increase children’s cooperativeness (Hershkowitz, Lamb, & Katz, 2014). More recent studies have focused on specific interviewing protocols or techniques to increase the evaluative information in children’s statements. For example, Karni-Visel et al. (2019) investigated whether The Revised NICHD Protocol (RP) could increase children’s (age 4–14 years old) communication of emotions. The RP includes techniques for enhanced rapport building, support, and instructions on how to prompt for emotions when they are not spontaneously mentioned. The authors concluded that the RP not only increased children’s expression of diverse emotions related to the abuse, but also that the emotional expressiveness was associated with increased informativeness overall. A recent study by Stolzenberg et al. (2019) examined the relation between question type and the subjective content of children’s accounts. They showed that “how feel” and “what think” questions were particularly helpful to elicit subjective responses and when these questions were followed up by requests to elaborate on the answer, the productivity increased. Despite the increase in understanding how questions and supportive interviewing can aid children in general, knowledge on how to specifically support the youngest children to express the emotions related to their experiences is still lacking.
1.3. Interviewing aidsPrevious studies have demonstrated that younger children are less likely compared to older children to generate memory cues on their own, which impacts their ability to provide information in interviews (Lyon, McWilliams, & Williams, 2019). Young children therefore need more scaffolded and focused age appropriate questions (Lamb et al., 2003). In addition to these, they might also benefit from being provided with external retrieval cues, such as visual or verbal cues (Hamond and Fivush, 1991, Saywitz and Camparo, 2013). The cues can assist the reinstatement of the environment in which the input was encoded, and facilitate the recall of an episodic event (Tulving & Thomson, 1973). However, the use of props and cues in child forensic interviews has been criticised as a wealth of research points to the risk of using aids such as dolls, body diagrams and other props (e.g. Brown et al., 2007, Ceci and Bruck, 1993, Goodman and Melinder, 2007). These props have been demonstrated to decrease the accuracy of children’s verbal reports, especially for young children (Bruck et al., 1995, Hungerford, 2005). The communicative shortcomings of young children have encouraged researchers to continue to explore methods that aid children’s memory without compromising accuracy. One method that has been developed for this purpose is the Narrative Elaboration interview technique (NE) (Saywitz & Snyder, 1996). This technique includes external visual cues in the form of pictorial cue cards to aid children to provide the sort of information needed. Four cards are used: participants, setting, actions and thoughts/conversations/affective states. Prior to or at the beginning of the interview, children are trained to use these cards to aid their memory retrieval (Saywitz & Camparo, 2013). Empirical studies have concluded that the NE technique can benefit both elementary school-aged children (Brown and Pipe, 2003a, Brown and Pipe, 2003b, Camparo et al., 2001) and preschool-aged children (Bowen and Howie, 2002, Dorado and Saywitz, 2001) to provide accurate and complete information. One study has examined whether NE also aid children to increase the emotionally evaluated recall (Peterson, Warren, & Hayes, 2013). In the study, 52 children aged 3–7 years old, were interviewed about a highly stressful real-life event, whereof half were interviewed with the NE technique and half with a standardised verbal interview. The results demonstrated that the children interviewed with NE provided significantly more information about their emotions and thoughts compared to the children interviewed with the standardised method. The authors discuss that by presenting emotional cues the child is instructed on what information the interviewer wants and the cue remind children to include that information (Brubacher, Peterson, La Rooy, Dickinson, & Poole, 2019). The results are in line with previous research showing that using icons expressing different emotions and labelling emotional reactions can enhance the recall of information that relates to the emotion state (Liwag & Stein, 1995). Studies have also demonstrated that if children are provided with techniques that require less complex verbal or nonverbal responses, their communication of emotions can be enhanced (Measelle et al., 1998, Welsh and Bierman, 2003).A fairly novel approach in child interviews is the use of computers as aids. Today there is a range of techniques including for example computer-assisted self-interviews (Davies and Morgan, 2005, Morgan and Fraser, 2010), computer-assisted personal interviews (Jones, Price, & Selby, 1998), and avatar interviewing aids (Hsu & Teoh, 2017). One advantage of computers is that children find it an enjoyable tool, which can increase their engagement, motivation and attention (Wrzesien and Alcañiz Raya, 2010, Steward et al., 1996). When the computer is used as a party in the conversation between the interviewer and the interviewee it becomes a triadic conversation (Scott and Purves, 1996, Grasso et al., 2013). The triadic conversation as well as the use of an interactive computer software as an aid, is thought to increase a collaborative atmosphere (Coyle, Doherty, & Sharry, 2009), reduce the child’s stress (Steward et al., 1996), and allow children to express themselves in various ways (Butler et al., 1995, Measelle et al., 1998).
1.4. The computer-assisted interview In My ShoesThe computer-assisted interview In My Shoes is an interviewing tool developed to aid children verbalising their experiences, thoughts and emotions. It was developed to work across services, and it can be used to talk to children about their experiences in various settings and in relation to different people in these settings. In My Shoes consists of a series of modules with stylised icons of places, people, emotions, speech, thoughts and sensations. The icons are a visual support to children’s communication as it can aid the memory retrieval and provide children with more ways to express themselves, i.e. they can point to the screen, click with the mouse or write. A trained interviewer sits side-by-side with the child, using In My Shoes together, which means it becomes a triadic interview. The modules give a structure and a scaffold to the interview and the icons also function as a prompt for the interviewer to pose questions in various areas (Grasso et al., 2013).In My Shoes was developed to aid children to self-express and to provide reliable information and several considerations have been made to achieve this. First, the icons used in the program are based on children’s drawings and evaluated stepwise with children to make sure that they capture children’s sentiments and support their communication (Grasso et al., 2013). Another important consideration is that the recommended questions posed by the interviewer when using In My Shoes adhere to best practice interviewing to elicit children’s experiences in their own words. In addition, the modules move from less emotive to potentially more emotive areas (Calam, Cox, et al., 2000), and the first modules are used to build rapport, while the subsequent three modules constitute the substantive phase. Another feature of In My Shoes is that all the choices made, the scenes that are created and everything typed into the program is automatically saved into a tamper-proof log, which can be printed and used in investigative or therapeutic contexts (Calam, Cox, et al., 2000). Moreover, the interviewer clearly conveys that the program is not a game or a toy, something which is further emphasised by the simple graphics (Calam, Cox, Glasgow, Jimmieson, & Groth Larsen, 2014).In My Shoes differs from regular verbal interview protocols as well as from computer-assisted self-interviews in several ways. One of the significant features of In My Shoes is that it includes visual support in the form of icons to aid children’s communication. These icons are used interactively by the child and help personalise the interview, e.g. the child chooses a representation for him/herself, the emotion icons fly onto or can be manually placed on people when used etc. (Calam, Cox, et al., 2000). One of the main ideas in In My Shoes is that emotions can be an important starting point for aiding children’s memory retrieval. By systematically asking children about both positive and negative emotions as well as providing them with the emotional prompt in the form of emotional icons, children are encouraged and guided to verbalise or graphically demonstrate their experiences (Grasso et al., 2013). In addition, the fact that the interview is conducted as a triadic conversation between the child, the computer and the interviewer, also constitutes an important characteristic.In My Shoes has been used and evaluated in a range of contexts (Barrow and Hannah, 2012, Calam et al., 2000, Cousins and Simmonds, 2011, Fängström et al., 2016, Fängström et al., 2017, Bøhren and Stabrun, 2013). However, its ability to help children verbalise emotions related to negative experiences has not been previously explored.
1.5. The current studyThe purpose of the present study was to qualitatively explore to what extent the computer-assisted interview In My Shoes aids preschool aged children in verbalising experiences of distress or discomfort. The data relating to In My Shoes was gathered in the context of health care. The child’s annual health visit at the Child Health Centre (CHC) was video recorded and 14–37 days later the child was interviewed about the visit. We were thus able to compare children’s accounts of their emotional experiences relating to the health visit with the observable signs of discomfort or distress in the same visit. We chose to study the health visits for children aged 4 and 5 years, as these visits include procedures that contain interaction and physical contact, which could evoke different emotional reactions.We specifically focused on the following questions:•To what extent do children verbalise experiences of distress/discomfort in the In My Shoes interviews?•How does In My Shoes work as a prompt for emotional experiences?•What type of evaluative information is included in the children’s statements?•What is the relationship between the distress/discomfort at the health visit and verbalised distress/discomfort in the interviews?
