Simplifying human-computer interaction process has become a research hotspot in the field of intelligent control. The diversity of gesture makes the development of human-computer interaction technology based on gesture recognition more and more important [1], [2]. Surface electromyography (sEMG) signal is gradually developed in the wave of human-computer interaction. As an important means of perceiving human motion, it can not only reflect the flexion and extension function of hand joints, but also reflect the dynamic information such as the position and intensity of limbs in the process of action completion. Many scholars have done a lot of research on gesture recognition based on sEMG. The problem of electrode redundancy in thumb motion recognition by sEMG is solved by using variance theory of statistics. This method is helpful to optimize the human-computer interaction process in this field.
Surface EMG signal acquisition equipment is relatively simple, most of them are general equipment, and few of them are specially designed for specific actions of specific parts. The most direct impact of this phenomenon is that when using general equipment to collect special or fine actions, the interference signals generated by some redundant channels will not only increase the difficulty of data processing, but also affect the recognition accuracy. The innovation of this paper is to use statistical theory to eliminate redundant channels in the process of signal acquisition. It is of great significance to detect and eliminate the interference signals generated by redundant channels during the acquisition of certain specific actions by using the universal sEMG signal acquisition equipment.
Taking 16 channel sEMG acquisition equipment as the research object, common redundant electrodes can be obtained by identifying the thumb fine motion of 9 targets [3], [4], [5]. This study not only reduces the cost of hardware equipment, but also provides a reference for optimizing electrode distribution. It can also reduce the amount of data processing and save time.
The remaining arrangements are as follows. The second part introduces the related work of thumb motion recognition. See Section 3 for experimental materials and methods. The fourth part introduces the theory and calculation in the experiment. The fifth part is the experimental results and the discussion of the experimental results. See Section 6 for conclusions.
