Image superpixel segmentation, grouping single pixels into homogeneous regions using color, texture or spatial information, has been widely used in many computer vision applications, such as image segmentation [1], [2], [3], [4], object recognition [5], [6], object tracking [7], [8], and boundary detection [9]. Although the desired properties of superpixels vary depending on different applications, it is believed that the following ones are generally desirable. First of all, the generated superpixels should adhere to image boundaries well, and all the pixels constituting a superpixel should belong to a same object. Then, with good boundary adherence, the superpixel segmentation method should also reduce the number of image primitives as much as possible. Finally, it can reduce the complexity and improve the accuracy of subsequent image processing tasks effectively by using superpixels instead of pixels.
Attempting to achieve the properties above, many superpixel methods [10] have been proposed, which can be roughly categorized into graph-based and gradient-ascent-based methods. In graph-based methods, pixels and similarities between each two neighboring pixels are respectively treated as nodes and weights of edges connecting each two nodes in a graph, and superpixels are obtained by minimizing an energy function defined over the graph. Based on this, Shi and Malik [11] proposed a normalized cuts algorithm for image superpixel segmentation, where contour and texture information are used to define an energy function for segmentation. This method can produce very regular superpixels but its boundary adherence performance is poor. To segment image into sub-regions, Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher [12] first defined a predicate for finding a boundary between two sub-regions in a graph-based representation of an image and then developed two different kinds of energy functions for segmentation based on this predicate. Contrary to [11], this method has a relatively good boundary adherence performance, but the produced superpixels are in a highly irregular shape. In an effort to make all the pixels within a certain superpixel belonging to a same object, Moore et al. [13] proposed a grid-based superpixel method, in which a method similar to seam carving [14] is used to generate superpixels by finding optimal paths across the whole image. An objective function that consists of an entropy rate term and a balancing term was proposed by Liu et al. [15] for superpixel segmentation, in which the segmentation is performed by maximizing the objective function with a developed greedy algorithm. In [16], the issue of image superpixel segmentation is formulated as an energy minimization problem, and superpixels are obtained by seeking optimal stitching of image patches via graph cuts. Moreover, to meet different application requirements, two variants of this superpixel method are presented in [16], one for producing compact superpixels and the other for constant intensity superpixels. To obtain multiple sub-regions for an image automatically, Gómez et al. [17] proposed a graph-based fuzzy image segmentation (GFIS) method, where a spanning forest is first constructed using intensity differences of adjacent pixels and then multiple thresholds are introduced for hierarchical image segmentation. This method, however, cannot segment objects with weak boundaries effectively.
For gradient-ascent-based methods, some initial clusters are first obtained and then further refined iteratively to form the final superpixels until some convergence condition is met. In [18], a geometric flow algorithm based on image local gradient is adapted to generate superpixels with uniform size and compactness. However, this approach tends to over-segmentation and exhibits relatively poor performance on image boundary adherence and time efficiency. To address these problems, Achanta et al. [19] proposed a simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC) method for superpixel segmentation, in which k-means clustering is adapted to generate superpixels, and image color proximity and spatial proximity are used as distance measures. Moreover, an adaptive SLIC (ASLIC) method is also investigated in [19], which dynamically normalizes the color and spatial proximities using the maximum distances of each cluster instead of a constant value. SLIC and ASLIC achieve much better segmentation performance than most graph-based methods in terms of boundary adherence, speed, and memory efficiency. Based on SLIC framework, several superpixel methods have been developed in recent years. Huang et al. [20] proposed a fast superpixel extraction method, where the quantified spatial and color information is first used to represent pixels and superpixels to reduce the computational burden, and then a maximum posteriori estimation approach is employed in both pixel level and patch level to produce superpixels. This method is more time efficient than SLIC, while its boundary adherence performance is not as good as that of SLIC. Rubio et al. [21] developed a superpixel segmentation method using image boundary information, in which some seeds of superpixels need choosing according to image gradient in advance and the resulting superpixels are in an irregular shape. A superpixel segmentation method based on boundary constraint was proposed by Zhang et al. [22] to balance the characteristics of the generated superpixels on boundary adherence, color homogeneity and compactness. Chen et al. [23] proposed a linear spectral clustering (LSC) method to produce superpixels. Similar to SLIC, it also uses color and spatial proximities to build a normalized-cuts-based formulation for image superpixel segmentation. Utilizing k-means clustering framework, Zhang et al. [24] presented an image superpixel segmentation method, in which a distance function based on the shortest gradient distance is adopted to make superpixels fit image boundaries. Achanta and Susstrunk [25] provided an improved version of SLIC, called SNIC (simple non-iterative clustering), for superpixel segmentation, which is more memory and time efficient than SLIC. In addition to color and spatial information, contour features along with the linear paths from the pixels to the barycenters of their corresponding superpixels are also utilized in Giraud et al. [26] for image superpixel segmentation to improve the performance on boundary adherence. Machairas et al. [27] employed a marker controlled watershed transformation for superpixel decomposition, in which a set of seeds spaced over the image plane needs choosing first, and watershed transformation is then used to generate superpixels according to image gradient. For almost all these gradient-ascent-based methods mentioned above, the number or seeds of superpixels to be generated need specifying by the users manually in advance. However, it is usually a difficult task to determine a proper number or suitable seeds directly for different image with varied size and content. Moreover, most of these methods could fit strong boundaries well, but fail to weak ones.
Recently, hierarchical multi-level segmentation strategy has been introduced for superpixel segmentation to achieve good performance. Vasquez and Scharcanski [28] proposed an iterative approach to obtain multi-scale superpixels using stochastic graph contraction operations. First, an over segmentation at pixel level is created by multi-channel stochastic graph contractions. Then, the over-segmented superpixels are merged by an iterative hierarchical stochastic graph contraction scheme at each scale. This method allows image represented by hierarchical trees which consist of the superpixels produced at different scales. Conze et al. [29] proposed a liver tumor segmentation method using multi-scale supervoxels and random forests, where the liver region in Computed Tomography (CT) volume is first decomposed into hierarchical multi-scale supervoxels by SLIC, and then random forests is used to perform supervoxel-wise classification with multi-phase supervoxel-based features. This method can achieve a much better segmentation result by using hierarchical multi-scale supervoxels instead of single-scale ones. However, the number of scales cannot be acquired adaptively, which may easily lead to under- or over- segmentation.
In this paper, we propose a new image superpixel segmentation method based on hierarchical multi-level LI-SLIC, which mainly consists of three steps: initial segmentation, hierarchical multi-level segmentation, and superpixel merging. Firstly, LI-SLIC is proposed and used to generate initial superpixels. Then, the initial superpixels are segmented hierarchically to ensure that a single superpixel should not contain multiple objects. Finally, the over-segmented superpixels are merged according to the probability distribution similarity of adjacent superpixels. Compared to previous works, the proposed method has following advantages. First, there is no need to specify the number or seeds of superpixels to be generated in advance. The proposed method can segment image into an appropriate number of superpixels without under- or over- segmentation automatically according to its content. Second, with the use of neighboring information, the proposed method is robust to noise and can fit image boundaries including distinct and weak ones well even when the image corrupted by various noises. Third, benefitting from its hierarchical strategy, the proposed method can prevent under-segmentation for regions with rich details and over-segmentation for flat regions effectively.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A complete methodology of the proposed superpixel segmentation algorithm is elaborated in Section 2. Its performance in terms of the accuracy, time efficiency, and robustness to noise is discussed in Section 3. The contributions and conclusions are summarized in Section 4. Moreover, the common terms and abbreviations used in this paper are listed in Appendix A.
