Fibre ropes are increasingly gaining recognition as a viable alternative to steel ropes for use in deep sea lifting operations. High Modulus Polyethylene (HMPE) ropes have been shown to have about the same mechanical properties as those of steel ropes, but with other potential benefits and constraints. Due to its lighter weight and almost neutral buoyancy, HMPE ropes can be used in subsea construction cranes to exceed the depth limits imposed by steel rope sage. Additionally with their greater ease of handling and lighter weight, there is potential to use smaller cranes and vessels in lifting and subsea deployment operations.
The first issue with HMPE from an endurance perspective is failure by creep. The three main parameters that effect creep in HMPE ropes are a combination of the load, temperature and time of usage. Depending on the size of payload, type of lifting operation and environment where the lift takes place, the extent at which creep influences deformation behaviour in ropes can vary greatly. HMPE rope typically has a maximum working temperature of 65 ∘C, on which exceeding this limit will lead to deterioration of the material through temperature alone.
The second issue is failure through wear. Offshore lifting operations involve periods where active heave compensation occurs when deploying a payload subsea. The rope will be subject to cyclic bend over sheaves (CBOS), where it is continually driven back and forth over sheaves, the severity of which will be influenced by load size and sea state. In addition to heat generation from bending deformation, friction from both inter-strand motion and sheave contact will contribute to heat generation during operation. Due to the plethora of potential damage mechanisms that have potential to influence the remaining useful life (RUL) of the rope, condition monitoring for this regime requires particular attention through a combination of methods.
Fibre rope for usage in maritime operations is not a novel concept but their application to deep sea lifting operations is a fairly recent development. Applications in vessel and offshore structure mooring are detailed in current standards set by industry, however their application in lifting operations and associated discard criteria is mentioned briefly. DNV-RP-E304 [1] details how the damage of the fibre rope must be assessed, where each constituent substructure (i.e filament, strand, sub-rope, etc) has to be checked by manual inspection and then re-classified or discarded based on inspector judgement. CI 2001-04 [2] provides a thorough guide of fibre rope damage types and mechanisms for inspectors. DNVGL-OS-E303 [3] states that if a rope has been subjected to 70% of its minimum break load (MBL), then the rope has to be retired or re-certified. DNV-GL-ST-E407 [4] requires that fibre rope used in deployment and recovery systems must have all its physical properties detailed, including potential failure modes, to be certified. Finally, the 3-T parameter developed by DNV-GL [5] is used to obtain a linear relationship between tension and time-to-rupture by evaluating the logarithmic time-to-rupture as a function of tension at a given temperature. However to investigate if longer RUL for deepsea lifting fibre rope is possible, a continuous means of monitoring with thorough data interpretation must be developed, rather than a simple re-classification or re-certification.
Extensive CBOS testing is beneficial to explore RUL. Davies et al [6] presented the results of testing on HMPE braided rope of 19 mm nominal diameter from which an empirical model for RUL was derived, though it is acknowledged that further testing is required on ropes of larger diameters to qualify their method for lifting operations.
Given that visual inspection is common for fibre rope, use of computer vision can potentially replace manual inspection. Hearle et al [7] used a webcam to monitor the strains in yarns during testing. Since machine vision technology has improved after their work, there were obvious limitations in the equipment used, but they showed the possible application of computer vision and image processing for fibre rope monitoring. Additionally, Ghoreishi et al [8] used computer vision and image processing as one of their three independent measuring systems for extensometry during tension-torsion testing to validate their analytical model of rope behaviour. For steel wire ropes, Söhnchen [9] details a system for visual inspection of ropeways and mining shafts from four different perspectives to analyse lay length, diameter, and wire breaks. Yaman and Karakose [10] proposed image processing for monitoring steel rope in elevator systems, where fault detection was performed by analysing the auto-correlation signals of pixels in the rope images to detect wire breaks.
Assessment of rope geometric parameters has been used in other fibre rope monitoring systems. For example, Mupende and Zerza [11] made a patent where the diameter of the rope for lifting operations is monitored using clamping roller set up and position sensor with a warning activated at a user-defined discard criteria, along with length change estimations. Van der Woude and Zijlmans [12] proposed as monitoring system for offshore lifting operations (using steel rope as an example), where the device can take cross-sectional area measurements and log its position along the rope. Ernst et al [13] also detail embedded methods for monitoring of elongation of discrete sections of fibre rope where bending occurs in operation and replacing the rope subject to exceeding a pre-set limit.
Additionally, it is important to distinguish between the sections being monitored via some form of marking system throughout the length of the rope and monitor them for changes. De Angelis [14] proposes a system to replace fibre rope based on the deterioration of markers and evaluate them by visual inspection. In addition to this, Logan et al [15] detailed a patent for having markers on load bearing members for elevators such as rope, with the spaces between these markers being monitored for strain and fatigue.
Temperature measurement of fibre rope for lifting operations is of paramount importance due to material limitations in maximum temperature. Active heave compensation in offshore construction cranes will cause heat generation in the rope if a payload is held at the same depth subsea for extended periods of time. In terms of thermal monitoring of fibre rope, Törnqvist et al [16] analysed rope samples during CBOS testing with embedded thermocouples and an IR camera. However, both are mainly used to observe the effects of water cooling on the rope samples, in order to ensure that they do not reach critical temperature. In addition to this, Davies et al [17] include some results from IR camera during CBOS testing to try to couple rope properties and temperature changes, however references are only made regarding the change in temperature in ropes during dry and wet tests. Additionally, Nordgård-Hansen et al [18] explored the use of chemometrics as method for quantifying aging in fibre ropes based on infrared images recorded using some of the ropes tested as part of the campaigns outlined in this paper, including providing extensive review of possible explanations for observed changes as the rope deteriorates. De Angelis [19] proposed using a conductive thermal element and provides a warning to the user if a critical temperature is exceeded. More recently, Ning et al [20] used embedded thermocouples inside and outside of several different rope samples during CBOS testing by evaluating thermal damage through varying test conditions and its subsequent influence.
Manual inspection of rope without thorough knowledge of its use history has significant potential for waste through premature retirement. Deterioration in fibre ropes through CBOS deformations results in length, width and temperature changes that require monitoring throughout use. This paper builds upon previous work [21] performed at the University of Agder, where computer vision techniques were used to monitor rope width and length in tension-tension tests.
Improved monitoring systems are the first steps in developing more informed RUL estimations and subsequently avoiding fibre rope waste. Still, there is currently no single detailed study of a combined computer vision and thermal monitoring method for fibre ropes under a CBOS regime. In the present work, data is extracted through image processing algorithms to monitor changes in local length and width for fibre ropes. It has been confirmed that there is local motion of strands during usage, and the methods applied allow the continuous monitoring of this movement. The geometric data is combined with temperature measurements, which show corresponding changes over time. This work may therefore serve as the basis for a potential monitoring system to be implemented in an offshore crane.
Test details are given in Section 2, and the algorithms from previous work have been modified, as presented in Section 3. These algorithms are then applied to data recorded during CBOS testing. The results of local length, width and temperature monitoring in different bending zones in five ropes during CBOS testing are presented in Section 4, and their effectiveness with regards to rope condition is discussed in Section 5, before further work is considered and conclusions offered.
