Cutaneous melanoma is responsible for over 75% of skin cancer deaths [1,2]. In 2020, an estimated 100,350 patients will be diagnosed with melanoma, and 6850 patients are expected to die of melanoma in the U.S. [3]. However, the prognosis is excellent for localized disease and primary tumors which are 1.00 mm or less in thickness. The 5-year survival rate in these patients is more than 90% [1]. For later tumor stages III and IV where the tumor has spread to nearby and distant tissues, the survival rate drops to 62.6% and 16.1% [4], respectively, with a 20-fold increase in treatment costs [5]. Hence, early detection is key to reducing melanoma mortality and lowering treatment costs.
Pilot screening programs have shown encouraging results [6,7], and a recent literature review of international melanoma experts states the need to develop methods to identify precursor lesions at high risk for progression to melanoma [2]. The screening for these precursor lesions, to which we will refer to as suspicious pigmented lesions (SPLs) is known as macro-screening for outlier lesions [8]. For this purpose, characteristics of a lesion including asymmetry, border irregularities, uneven distribution of colors, lesion diameter, and changes over time (known as ABCDE criteria [9]) are taken into account, in combination with, patient history, the number of nevi, and recognition of the “ugly duckling” lesion (outlier lesion on the patient's mole types) [10]. Although the current approach of patient screening is effective, there are less than 15 dermatology visits per 100 persons annually in the USA [11], leaving a large population without expert opportunistic identification of these lesions. Unlike dermatologists, internists and family practitioners see around 330 million combined patient visits in the USA [11], putting primary care physicians (PCPs) in a prime position for opportunistic identification of melanoma. However, the majority of PCPs are currently not trained for skin examination [12], and some studies assert they have insufficient diagnostic and referral accuracy [[13], [14], [15]44]. The ability to expand melanoma screening to a broader population could aid in identifying melanoma early and positively impacting patient outcomes.
Computer-aided diagnosis systems have been developed to identify malignant characteristics from images of single lesions, but only few are commercially available [16]. The purpose of such systems is to help dermatologists with individual lesion diagnosis and to assist non-dermatologists with accurate and fast referrals. However, to maximize sensitivity and avoid missing melanomas, the full spectrum of lesions on a patient should be assessed, which would require a significant amount of time when using the approach of validating every single lesion on a patients’ body with these single-lesion imaging and analysis systems. Due to the time constraints in primary care practice, this could limit the practical use of computer-based screening in a non-expert setting, at least in a cost effective manner.
It may be possible to acquire more digital data per patient in a rapid manner for computer-based pre-screening systems by using wide-field digital images. Wide-field images can be quickly and easily acquired with a user-friendly commercial camera. Furthermore, these wider field images can include a multitude of skin lesions within one image, since the area imaged may be increased by more than tenfold in comparison to images that are taken with a dermoscope. The manual collection of a number of these images in sequence could allow for greater or even complete coverage of a patient's body for pre-screening in a simple and cost-effective way. However, the image quality is fundamentally different from dermoscopy images, since there is minimal illumination, magnification, or polarized control. Computer-based pre-screening systems that use these types of images could be able to do both, lesion recognition (identifying individual lesions on the image) and lesion analysis to determine which of the identified individual lesions require further investigation (i.e. are suspicious).
In this paper, the goal is to demonstrate that individual lesion analysis is possible for lesion-images that have been taken from wide-field photographs using a computer aided classification (CAC) system. The uniqueness of this approach is that (1) the developed computer aided classification system was optimized to work with lesion-images from wide-field photographs (lower resolution than previous approaches), (2) the said system gives lesions a suspiciousness score, and classifies suspicious and non-suspicious lesions, not the traditional melanoma vs non-melanoma, (3) training of the system explicitly included an important source of image variability due to acquisition considerations of the database, and (4) it allows for low-cost image acquisition instruments like digital photographic cameras and mobile phones.
Within this manuscript, our contributions are as follows:
•We have optimized a machine learning classification algorithm to distinguish suspicious (SPLs) from non-suspicious (non-SPLs) pigmented lesions•We have acquired images of major body parts of 133 patients in a new clinical database of images, which included 1759 skin lesions•We have established a suspiciousness score, which is aligned with common macro-screening (naked eye) practice.
