Major rain storms and hurricanes, such as Hurricanes Katrina in 2005; Sandy in 2012; Harvey, Irma, and Maria in 2017; and Florence in 2018; can cause flooding events that disrupt operations of major cities and result in physical infrastructure, social, and economic damages. Magnitude of high water and duration found in hydrographs during these extreme flood events correlate to the extent of these damages. Currently, high water marks and stream gages provide hydrological data, along with debris lines found on structures. For instance, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) collected flood data from 2,123 high water marks and 40 USGS stream gages throughout Texas following Hurricane Harvey. This information is important because it assists officials in updating building codes, planning evacuation routes, creating floodplain management ordinances, providing environmental assessments and planning other community efforts to become more flood-resilient (Lu et al., 2018; Rani et al., 2018; Watson et al., 2018; Xiao et al., 2018). However, continuous flood hydrographs are difficult to construct given only the information from water marks and stream gages (Calvo and Savi, 2009; Xing et al., 2018). For example, high water marks and debris lines only describe the water elevation at its peak, but it lacks information about the duration of the event, the time of day of peak water levels, or the rate at which the water level rose or fell. When temporal sequence of water level information is available, these signals can be modeled and used to interpolate and extrapolate (predict) the spatial and temporal expanse of flood inundation (Ali Ghorbani et al., 2010; Kisi et al., 2012; Maheswaran and Khosa, 2013), for geographic visualization (Kulkarni et al., 2014), simulations (Chen et al., 2018), and flood warning system for emergency evacuation and response (Wang et al., 2018).
Water related data can also be obtained from different sources, such as sensors mounted on stream gages (Ali Ghorbani et al., 2010; Kisi et al., 2012, Maheswaran and Khosa, 2013), airborne sensing (Li et al., 2010), satellite imagery (Kulkarni et al., 2014), wireless sensor networks and geographic information (Horita et al., 2015), and various social media and crowdsourcing data (Wang et al., 2018). Stream gages provide more data on these characteristics, but these instruments are often installed far from the flooded areas of interest to relay accurate and real-time data to emergency operation centers. This dearth of data available for flood hydrograph reconstruction is hampering communities to learn from past events in order to become resilient towards future floods, hurricanes, and sea level rise. Accordingly, the impetus for this study stems from the realization that big datasets of time-lapse videos and images are created every day, including traffic monitoring, private and public security, and social media. For example, the Houston TRANSTAR system consists of approximately 900 cameras that continuously streams live footage. These images are publicly accessible through the internet and hence represent a rich data source if water levels can be extracted from reference objects using computer vision techniques.
Extracting water level information from image and video data is nontrivial because it is inherently difficult to segment water. Thus, this work aims to tackle this problem by advancing object-based image analysis (OBIA) techniques. OBIA has been previously applied in conjunction with aerial photography for vegetation classification and urban feature identification, along with damage analysis, disaster management, and risk management (Blaschke, 2010; Garcia et al., 2018; Lee and Yang 2018; Bandini et al., 2017). Van der Sande et al. (2003) also classified land use in the villages of Itteren and Borgharen in The Netherlands to create a floodplain friction map for use with flood models. Beyond the current applications, this paper describes a novel methodology to estimate water elevations by leveraging time-lapse photos and OBIA. To achieve this objective, two control laboratory experiments and three flood events in bayous and canals around the Louisiana State University (LSU) campus were conducted to develop hydrographs for method verification. A segmentation algorithm was developed to automatically label the water and gage from these experiments. Manually estimated water levels were used to verify the accuracy of the segmentation algorithm and program. To establish the applicability to natural hazards, the segmentation algorithm was subsequently used to estimate flood levels in Buffalo Bayou in downtown Houston, Texas during Hurricane Harvey. The algorithm- and program-estimated water elevations were recorded as hydrographs and compared to in-situ measurements and nearby stream gages. With a validated methodology, the societal impact is immense because databases of time-lapse camera images can be collected and analyzed in near real-time to provide insight to the rise and fall of water levels and spatial coverage during flooding from rainstorms or hurricanes.
