In the field of second language (L2) education, achieving native-like fluency has always been the Holy Grail of many learners worldwide, but pie in the sky for most language educators and engineers, especially as the notion of fluency itself has been plagued by its polysemy. Its variable interpretations in different disciplines render its assessment an even more challenging task (de Jong, 2018), since it may encompass pronunciation, lexical access, syntactic complexity, discourse planning, and, for non-specialists, is even sometimes conflated with the notion of proficiency when referring to the degree of proficiency of an individual in a given language. Other scholars, such as Ellis (2009, p. 475), consider fluency as a key component in the definition of proficiency in L2 oral production: “The three aspects of learner performance [(fluency, complexity/range and accuracy)] can be seen as constituting a learner's language proficiency”. Hence the abundance of literature tackling the general notion of fluency (e.g. Segalowitz, 2010, distinguishing between cognitive fluency (planning), utterance fluency (production) and perceived fluency (perception)). It is also presented as such in the new Companion Volume of the Common European Framework of References for Languages (CEFRL) (2018, p. 144): “Spoken fluency […] has a broader, holistic meaning […] and a narrower, technical and more psycholinguistic meaning […]. Key concepts operationalized in the scale include the following: ability to construct utterances, despite hesitations and pauses (lower levels); ability to maintain a lengthy production or conversation; ease and spontaneity of expression”.
The scale for the lower levels of spoken proficiency in the CEFRL (i.e. the basic stage made up of the A1 “Breakthrough” and A2 “Waystage” levels) is now described as follows (2018, p. 144):
Pre-A1: “Can manage very short, isolated, rehearsed, utterances using gestures and signaled requests for help when necessary”;
A1: “Can manage very short, isolated, mainly pre-packaged utterances, with much pausing to search for expressions, to articulate less familiar words, and to repair communication”;
A2: “Can construct phrases on familiar topics with sufficient ease to handle short exchanges, despite very noticeable hesitation and false starts. Can make him/herself understood in short contributions, even though pauses, false starts and reformulation are very evident”.
Even though these descriptors are now widely used in L2 education curricula, tools are still lacking to enable learners develop their fluency in an autonomous way, especially during their first learning stages. Indeed, while “fluency” has often been associated with “proficiency” (i.e. overall L2 proficiency), we know that “phonetic fluency” relates to what researchers working in a pedagogical perspective for pronunciation teaching guidelines sometimes define as “the degree to which speech flows easily without pauses and other disfluency markers” (Derwing and Munro, 2015, p. 5). In that respect, it could and should receive an early pedagogical focus, since it is linked to the acquisition of rhythmicity and suprasegmental contours, as is clearly highlighted in the Reference Level Description for lower levels of the CEFRL: “We emphasize, for the A1 level, the importance of setting up a suprasegmental framework, primarily including rhythm. [...] It is important to consider pronunciation within the framework of a rhythmic group and not at the level of the isolated word, which rarely occurs as such in real speech” (our translation, Level A1 for French, Beacco and Porquier, 2007, p. 133). Therefore, even at an early stage (A1 or less), phonetic fluency should be targeted, however limited and simple the lexical and syntactic repertoires of the learner are, in order to foster L2 suprasegmental features acquisition (in reading or speaking tasks) as well as lexical chunks and formulaic sequences learning (contra isolated word learning), especially in a construction/usage-based language learning perspective (Bybee, 2001; Goldberg, 2003; Wulff and Ellis, 2018). Once we focus on the phonetic level of speech fluency, the challenges for L2 educators are well-known: fluency assessment and ensuing feed-back must be carried out individually; identification of ‘fluency’ problems per se versus other pronunciation problems (either on the segmental or on the suprasegmental level) can be difficult; proper training to assess fluency is often lacking; perceptual assessments may be strongly biased. Hence the potential usefulness of objective, fast and detailed assessing tools, which computerized programs should provide. Therefore, automatic phonetic fluency assessment has been part of the objectives of most Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Computer-Assisted Pronunciation Training (CAPT) developers (Eskenazy, 2009; Detey, Fontan and Pellegrini, 2016; Litman et al., 2018).
In the field of L2 speech processing – in tune with the above-mentioned approach of ‘phonetic fluency’ – the notion of fluency is typically linked to temporal variables such as pauses and speech rate (Ghanem and Kang, 2018), in connection with the notions of accent, intelligibility and comprehensibility (Thomson, 2015), even though some studies point out that “L2 fluency” and “perceived L2 accent” can be envisaged as two different constructs from the point of view of language testing practices (Pinget et al., 2014). However, despite the methodological advances made in fluency evaluation in the fields of L2 speech (Cucchiarini et al., 2000, 2002; De Jong, 2016; Gut and Fuchs, 2017; Mao et al., 2019) and pathological speech (Cmejla et al., 2013; Lustyk et al., 2014), and despite the renewed interest in the multifaceted issue of pronunciation assessment among L2 researchers (Isaacs and Trofimovitch, 2017; Kim and Ginther, 2018), including L2 speech fluency (Wright and Tavakoli, 2016), the tools which are available to L2 learners and teachers to assess fluency are still scarce. Looking at current practice to evaluate L2 pronunciation, the evaluation of fluency is usually carried out either perceptually, by human listeners on a given scale, or technically, with measures of speech rate, phonation time ratio, pruned syllables, articulation rate, mean length of run, silent pause ratio or filled pause ratio for example (Kormos, 2006; Thomson, 2015; De Jong, 2016; Hirotani, Fukada and Matsumoto, 2020). Some researchers also paid attention to the need to include the qualitative perception of fluency by native listeners in the assessment process (Préfontaine and Kormos, 2016). Other researchers have included fluency assessment tasks in their efforts to provide annotated non-native speech corpora useful for applications in CAPT systems (Chen et al., 2016), while others have focused on reading abilities (Patel et al., 2014). Still, part of the explanation for the lack of available pedagogical tools may lie in the prevalent tendency to rely on automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems, trained on native or non-native data which makes it difficult to extend it to a generic usage, despite methodological advances over the past twenty years – from read-aloud data with Hidden-Markov-Models-based speech recognition systems (Franco et al., 2000) to spontaneous speech (Zechner et al., 2009) and Deep-Neural-Networks-based approaches (Wang et al., 2018).
Furthermore, while many researchers have focused on L2 English as the non-native language, targeting English language certificates users and embracing educational assessment perspectives (Zechner et al., 2009, 2015) – some of them combining automated and human scores (Yoon and Zechner, 2017) – it seems necessary to expand the scope of L1 and L2 tested, both for heuristic and pragmatic purposes. As far as Japanese speakers are concerned, fluency patterns have been investigated both in L1 Japanese and in L2 English (Rose, 2017), but very little with L2 French so far. Likewise, the paucity of longitudinal studies examining fluency acquisition overall (Derwing et al., 2009) also holds for Japanese learners: while L2 English has been investigated among Japanese first-year university students (e.g. Long III, 2012) and L2 Japanese among novice American students (Hirotani et al., 2012; Houston, 2016), no similar research, to our knowledge, has been carried out with L2 French for Japanese students.
In order to tackle the aforementioned shortcomings, we developed and tested a non-ASR-based type of fluency assessment, using the forward-backward divergence segmentation algorithm (FBDS; André-Obrecht, 1988) with recordings of Japanese learners with different levels of proficiency in L2 French. The objective was to develop a language-independent tool, with three FBDS-based indicators which could be combined to predict fluency: (i) speech rate, assuming that the faster the speech rate, the higher the number of segments per time unit; (ii) regularity of speech rate, considering that a regular flow of speech implies regular speech length spans; (iii) speech fluidity, reckoning that formant transitions will be affected by the lack of proficiency in L2 coarticulation. The three FBDS-based indicators were eventually combined together with a more “classic” acoustic predictor of speech fluency — the percentage of speech — through a multiple linear regression (see Sections 2.4 and 3.2.2. for a more detailed description of the predictors and of the linear regression). In order to assess the potential validity and pedagogical usefulness of our system, we applied the algorithm to data collected in a corpus-based longitudinal study of beginner Japanese learners of French in Japan recorded four times in a text-reading task over two years.
