The information technology revolution has extensively improved the daily routine services like managing financial account, online services, online purchasing of items, accommodation arrangements, travelling arrangement and other enterprise resource planning (ERP) related activities but this technology revolution has also generated the uneconomical operations and inefficient manipulations through transmission of a computer virus. These computer viruses cause heavy financial expenses to companies and customers. Moreover, it deletes significant data as well. Computer virus is a malignant mobile code or programming which has the ability of copying itself and it also corrupts the system or crushes the data very easily. Examples of some common computer viruses are Trojan horses, Worm, Melissa, Sasser, Logic bomb and Mydoom etc. The virus does not only copies itself but also disturbs other computers. It results in loss of data, dislocation of files and modification of specific operations on account of resemblance between biological viruses and computer viruses.
The perception of computer virus which became prominent around 1980 has been a challenge to the society since then. The concept of mathematical models to investigate the computer virus became originated in early eighties. The concept of self-replicating code has been developed, presented and studied by Cohen [1] for the first time. The study of epidemic models for computer virus has been started since 1988. In epidemiology, an epidemic is an unusually large or short-term outbreak of a contagious disease. If a disease persists in a population then it is called endemic. The escalation of a contagious disease incorporates not only disease-associated gradients such as the infected agent, susceptibility, resistance, transmission mode, infectious and latent time intervals but also demographic, social, economic, geographic and cultural elements.
In the last decade, a large collection of disease related models have been introduced such as SIR (Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered), SEIR (Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered), SIRS (Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered-Susceptible) and SEIRS (Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered-Susceptible) and they have been mathematically structured, examined and tried to interpret the different problems related to contagious diseases. Brauer et al. [2] have studied the various mathematical models in the field of population biology and epidemiology. Smith [3] and Alexander et al. [4] have studied the bifurcation analysis of SIR model and SIRS epidemic models respectively. Makinde [5] had investigated the SIR epidemic model by using Adomian decomposition method (ADM). Xu et al. [6] have studied a delayed SEIRS epidemic model in the context of global stability. Kumar et al. (2014) have proposed a new fractional modeling for SIR model with constant vaccination rate and also investigated the model in the context of stability analysis [7]. For contagious epidemics such as smallpox, rubeola (measles), malaria, rubella, chickenpox, rabies, dengue and cholera, various mathematically structured models have been proposed. Epidemiology includes mainly control measures to uproot and do away with a disease. Infectious disease models are very useful in respect of comparisons, implementations and evaluations. Moreover, it provides specific clue for detection as well as prevention through control programs [8].
For the first time, Murray [9] proposed the relationship between computer viruses and epidemiology but not provided any specific model for propagation of computer virus. The way a computer virus operates in a network has a lot of similarities with the dissemination of a contagious disease among inhabitants in a populated area. The case of susceptible and infected individuals regarding contagious epidemic is just like non-infected and infected computer nodes in the operational area of virus contaminated computer network [10,11]. Thus the concept of epidemiological modeling of disease has a lot of relevance and is quite useful in the analysis of escalation of computer viruses in macroscopic scale [12,13]. The most celebrated epidemic model is SIR which is generally hired to investigate the dynamics of contagious diseases. This kinship between the biological virus model and computer virus model has motivated us to study the approximate analytical solution and local stability of considered fractional order computer virus model which is in resemblance with epidemiological SIR model.
In recent years, a collection of computer virus propagation models have been suggested by Sun and Hsieh [14], Song et al. [15], Ren et al. [16] and Mishra and Pandey [17]. This dynamical modeling regarding the operational activity of computer virus provides a definite clue towards studying the behavior of computer virus and adopting certain effective measures in order to prevent infection. Mishra and Saini [18] have studied various mathematical models on computer viruses. Pinto and Machado [19] have modeled the computer virus propagation through fractional order modeling. The model shows the interactivity between computers and removable devices. The dynamics of fractional order delay-varying CVP model have been investigated by Ansari et al. [20]. Very recently Zhao et al. [21] have performed the Hopf bifurcation for a computer virus spreading model. Bonyah and Atangana et al. have used the Caputo derivative operator and the Beta derivative to model the dissemination of computer virus [22]. The fractional order modeling of physical models has gained considerable attention among the researchers because the perception of fractional order modeling and fractional calculus is helpful to understand the reality of nature. The books of I. Podlubny [23], Oldham and Spanier [24] and Miller and Ross [25] provide fundamental literature of fractional calculus. The fractional differential equations (FDEs) of nonlinear type are relevant in the context of mathematical modeling of scientific events in nature because different areas of science and engineering include the extensive application of nonlinear analysis. The FDEs are getting attention because of the capability of convergence of systems with fractional order to the integer order systems. But the most appealing feature of fractional derivative operators is their non-local characteristic. The exact solution of nonlinear FDEs is not determined easily. Thus various numerical schemes have been generated to handle a class of nonlinear equations. In 2004, Diethelm [26] had studied the multi order FDEs and their approximate solutions. In the last decade, various approximate mathematical schemes have been introduced to compute the solutions of FDEs, such as ADM [27,28], homotopy analysis method (HAM) [29], Generalized differential transform method (GDTM) [30], homotopy perturbation method (HPM) [31,32], Variational iteration technique [33,34], Modified Laplace decomposition technique [35,36], homotopy perturbation transform method (HPTM) [37,38], homotopy Sumudu perturbation transform technique [39,40] and q-HATM [41,42]. Recently modified differential transform scheme has been utilized to generate the numerical solution of a computer virus model with antivirus [43].
HPM has been very popular in the last decade for solving various FDEs in the field of science and technology. It was introduced by J. H. He [44,45] for solving boundary value problems (BVPs) [46]. The method is a joint venture of homotopy, Laplace transform (LT) operator and He's polynomials [47,48] to handle the nonlinear factors arising in nonlinear problems.
The present work is focused on the application of HPTM to study the fractional order computer virus propagation model with time fractional derivatives and further comparison with Laplace Adomian decomposition method (LADM) is also presented. The important characteristic of HPTM is that it is directly applicable without using linearization or discretization related assumptions. In addition, there is also no requirement of small-scale parameters in the equations, which is, in turn, helpful to reduce the limitations of classical perturbation schemes. These factors have been the reason of motivation to choose this scheme for application in the proposed work. Further, the central objective of the paper is to analyze the meeting time of susceptible, infected and recovered computers and their individual variations with the variation of fractional order α and time t. The local stability analysis of time fractional computer virus propagation model is also carried out in the paper by using Routh–Hurwitz criterion. The rest part of the paper is constituted in the following manner: In Section 2, elemental definitions, formulae and procedure of semi-analytical methods related to fractional calculus are provided. Section 3 presents the mathematical formulation of the fractional computer virus propagation model. Section 4 discusses the stability analysis for fractional CVP model with basic description of Routh–Hurwitz stability criterion. In Section 5, LADM is extended for the approximate solution of the fractional CVP model. Section 6 presents the application of HPTM for fractional CVP model. Section 7 records the numerical simulation and discussions for CVP model of fractional order. Finally in Section 8, we conclude the manuscript.
