Tuberculosis (TB) is a major health problem in many regions of the world, especially in developing countries. While a majority of patients have their lungs infected with TB, some individuals might have TB infection in other body organs. Hence, unlike other infectious diseases, the diagnosis of TB is relatively more difficult and several tests are usually needed. Although Chest X-ray (CXR) is one of the primary tools for TB screening, a suspected individual requires clinical, biological, and genetic investigations before the actual diagnosis can be made and the medications are readily prescribed. As part of the World Health Organization (WHO) systematic screening strategy to ensure early and correct diagnosis for all people with TB, CXR is one of the primary tools for triaging and screening for TB because of its relatively high sensitivity, depending on how the CXR is interpreted [1]. However, significant intra- and inter-observer variations in the reading of CXR can lead to overdiagnosis or underdiagnosis of tuberculosis.
Deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) has emerged as an attractive technique for TB surveillance and detection. Besides, one study indicated that this approach can accurately detect TB cases in less than 3 min at minimal expense (https://www.digitalcreed.in/ai-for-tb/). This ‘supervised’ machine learning algorithm learns a mapping from a set of covariates to the outcome of interest by using the training data then applies this mapping to the new test data for identification or prediction tasks [2]. In a common deep learning model, the covariates are the color pixel values of the CXR images whereas the outcome is the radiologist's interpretation and impression of the corresponding CXR.
Recently, the National Institute of Health (NIH) released the ChestX-ray8 dataset with more than 100,000 anonymized CXR images and their associated data which compiled from more than 32,000 patients [3]. These data allow researchers to further develop an algorithm for classifying lung abnormalities labelled from the radiological reports using the National Language Processing technique [4, 5]. Nonetheless, according to the ChestX-ray8 criteria, a CXR image with minimal lung lesions could be incorrectly labelled as normal whereas these radiologic labels are not specific to TB [3].
The Computer-Aided Detection for Tuberculosis (CAD4TB), SemanticMD, and Qure.ai are selected examples of currently available computer-aided detection (CAD) software. CAD4TB is TB specific and had demonstrated a good diagnostic performance [6, 7] but still inferior to that of expert readers [8]. As of 2016, WHO provided no recommendations on using CAD for TB because of the small number of studies, methodological limitations, and limited generalizability of the findings [1]. The other two software cover a broader range of clinical conditions but available only for investigational use in the U.S.
Unlike other diagnostic tests, the technical specification of CXR images and disease severity distribution could affect the diagnostic performance of a supervised machine learning model. That is, the picture archive and communication system (PACS) data has more information but requires more time, storage, and processing power than low bit-depth formats (.jpg) whereas the supervised deep learning model developed based on CXR images of hospitalized patients would be smarter at detecting severe case than another community-based model. To quantify the extent of dataset specificity that limits the generalizability of CAD for TB, we developed a DCNN model using a TB-specific CXR dataset of one population and tested it with non-TB-specific CXR dataset of another population.
