The main goal of this paper is a comparison study of simultaneous methods for the determination of simple zeros of algebraic polynomials. This study combines three methodologies: numerical model, theoretical model and empirical model, each of them described in Sections 4 Comparative study of simultaneous methods based on numerical results, 5 Comparative study of simultaneous methods based on theoretical models, 6 Empirical methodology, respectively. The aim of our research and experiments is to find a group of iterative simultaneous methods with best performance, primarily those with globally convergent behavior. To our knowledge, this is the first combined comparison study of simultaneous methods in the literature.
The use of digital computers is increasingly expanding to the area traditionally considered as purely theoretical. New computer tools and methods have provided a novel approach and insight to the qualitative analysis of the behavior of numerous phenomenons and processes, as well as various techniques and methods for their study. They also found significant role in applied mathematics, involving theory of iterative processes for solving nonlinear equations. In this paper we restrict our attention to the effectiveness of methods for simultaneous determination of polynomial zeros by the use of computer tools.
Considering a specific class of numerical algorithms (such as root-finding algorithms presented in this paper), it is most frequently very difficult to proclaim a particular algorithm as ultimately the best since the performance of algorithms depends on many criteria, often incomparable. Very seldom users can apply a universal algorithm that can solve different classes of problems in an optimal way. Such situation also appears in the case of algorithms for solving polynomial equations.
The problem of determination of zeros of algebraic polynomials has had a tempestuous history for many centuries. In his book [1] Kalantari wrote: “The world of polynomials and approximation of their roots is an extremely fascinating world and has played a very significant and influential role in the history of mathematics and science”. Nowadays, in spite of the existence of many root-solving methods, some of which are incorporated in computing software, this problem is still one of the most actual tasks in the theory and practice; apart from mathematics, it also appears in a wide variety of areas of scientific disciplines such as computer science, physics, engineering, biology, economics, chemistry, social science, etc.
In most cases the most powerful methods for approximating all polynomial zeros are based on simultaneous calculation of all zeros. Such approach has an important advantage compared to the deflation method which combines the approximation only one zero at the time and removing the corresponding linear factor to lower the degree of the “deflated” polynomial by one. Since the linear factors do not deal with the zeros but with their approximations of limited accuracy, the deflated polynomials are often falsified, which is a serious disadvantage of methods of successive deflation. More details can be found in hundreds of books and thousands of papers devoted to the above topic.
At present, about 20 essentially different iterative methods for the simultaneous approximation of polynomial zeros have been developed, see, e.g., the books [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8] and references cited there. As in the case of all numerical algorithms, the quality of these methods is of great importance for users, either researchers who use zero-finding methods in own experiments, or computer companies that develop software or computer algebra systems (CAS).
Twenty years or more, in pre-computer visualization era, the main criterion for the estimation of the quality of a newly proposed zero-finding method (by comparing with existing methods) was based on numerical experiments: starting from reasonably close initial points, the accuracy of approximations to the zeros produced in a fixed number of iterations is controlled. Obviously, by this approach only local performance of considered methods can be stated. The choice of initial points may cause different convergence behavior (bad, average or fast convergence) of tested methods. However, in spite of the mentioned drawback, this approach can provide a good insight into the convergence speed of the tested methods. More details are given in Section 4. Note that, even nowadays, some authors proclaim that their new methods are better than the others only on the fact that the demonstrated examples show higher accuracy of approximations to the zeros, which is an insufficiently convincing conclusion.
The comparison of iterative methods for finding only one zero of a function f (not necessarily an algebraic polynomial) is significantly simpler than the comparison of methods that find all zeros of polynomials simultaneously. This is provided by a fruitful methodology which combines numerical experiments (controlling convergence speed, accuracy of approximations) and dynamic study based on basins of attraction (giving insight into domain of convergence, convergence behavior), sometimes called numerical-dynamic analysis. There is a vast literature on combined analysis of this kind, see, e.g., [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16] and the recent extensive comparative study of three-point methods presented in [17] and [18]. Unfortunately, numerical-dynamic analysis cannot be applied to simultaneous methods due to their complexity and iterating a set of approximations of each zero separately (instead of one zero).
The first study of computational efficiency of simultaneous methods was published in [19], known as theoretical model. It was based on convergence rate and computational cost of tested methods using data of four super-computers. Similar theoretical models have been often applied in latter papers; these are the main subject of Section 5. Such theoretical methodologies are of benefit for users, but from the practical point of view they do not necessarily lead to a proper rank of simultaneous methods; the rank strictly depends on the characteristics of hardware. However, similar outcome can occur by applying numerical experimentation (more often, Section 4) and empirical model (very seldom, Section 6). There follows that each of three mentioned methodologies has certain drawbacks, which makes the problem of comparison of simultaneous methods very complex. It turns out that it is desirable to combine all three methodologies to get more realistic quality assessment of considered methods, as done in this paper.
The mentioned disadvantages of numerical model and theoretical model motivated us to develop a new methodology for ranking simultaneous methods, called empirical methodology, established under considerably weaker conditions and possessing global performance. This approach gives a reliable estimate of the quality of simultaneous methods under real conditions. We presume that the presented empirical model is of interest for users who solve real life problems involving iterative methods for the simultaneous approximation of polynomial zeros. In this paper we use the empirical model to examine the global convergence performances of existing simultaneous methods under real conditions when initial approximations are practically arbitrary. We use the term “practically arbitrary” initial approximations since there is a rule for their initial location known as Aberth’s distribution [20]: they are distributed equidistantly along a circle. However, such distribution does not affect the convergence characteristics of some classes of powerful methods, confirmed by a number of numerical experiments, so that the estimate of the quality of the considered methods is acceptable for scientists who are interested in new development and applications. To achieve this goal, we have tested the most frequently used simultaneous methods and a considerable number of algebraic polynomials of various types. We emphasize that our aim is not to make the ultimate rank of simultaneous methods since it is not possible due to many influential factors of different kind. Instead, we search for a group of the most powerful, globally convergent simultaneous methods of practical importance.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we give the list of considered simultaneous methods. Section 3 contains the list of 10 polynomials tested in our experiments, together with the locations of zeros presented in complex plane (Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10). Numerical results obtained by applying eight selected simultaneous methods and their analysis are given in Section 4. The description of a theoretical model for the comparison of simultaneous methods is presented in Section 5. Results obtained by the application of empirical methodology are given in Section 6. In Section 7 we summarize our conclusions followed by some trajectories of approximations for three methods that demonstrate the convergence behavior of these methods.
 Download : Download high-res image (54KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Zeros of P1.Download : Download high-res image (56KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Zeros of P2.Download : Download high-res image (63KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Zeros of P3.Download : Download high-res image (54KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. Zeros of P4.Download : Download high-res image (60KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 5. Zeros of P5.Download : Download high-res image (53KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 6. Zeros of P6.Download : Download high-res image (70KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 7. Zeros of P7.Download : Download high-res image (61KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 8. Zeros of P8.Download : Download high-res image (52KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 9. Zeros of P9.Download : Download high-res image (67KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 10. Zeros of P10.
