The wild blueberry also known as lowbush blueberry (Vaccinium angustifolium Aiton) is the predominant species in a complex of blueberry species cultivated in Maine, which is the largest producer of wild blueberry in the United States, and accounts for about 97% of U.S. wild blueberry total production (Jones et al., 2014, Strik and Yarborough, 2005). The wild blueberry is one of only a few commercially grown crops native to North America. This crop is not planted. It is a complex of five ericaceous plant species that are natural forest understory plants. Forests are harvested and the blueberry plants are then managed to produce fruit (Drummond, 2019a). The productivity of this crop is largely influenced by cross-pollination that requires bees (Asare et al., 2017, Drummond, 2016). The yield of wild blueberry is not always a continuous non-linear relationship to bee density (Asare et al., 2017), it may also be subject to variation of weather, climate warming, soil fertility, pests and disease, and other temporal and spatial abiotic and biotic factors (Tasnim et al., 2020; Aras et al., 1996).
The greatest and the most challenging activities in precision agriculture are accurate predictions of crop yield. Extensive research is underway in agriculture to better predict crop yield using machine learning algorithms (Chlingaryan et al., 2018, Crane-Droesch, 2018, Jeong et al., 2016). Many machine learning algorithms require large amounts of data to provide reliable results (Johnson et al., 2016). One of the major challenges in training and experimenting with machine learning algorithms is the availability of training data in sufficient quality and quantity. For most studies, this remains a limiting factor.
One way to overcome the problem of collecting large training data for machine-learning algorithms is to generate data by using computer simulation modeling techniques. The Naval Postgraduate Schools (NPS) Simulation, Experiments and Efficient Design (SEED) Center for Data Farming defines data farming as the process of using simulations and computer modeling to compile data sets. As such, data farming seeks to provide decision-makers with insights into complex issues by using simulations to produce data (Tolk, 2015). Hence, for this study, we used previously validated simulation-based modeling of wild blueberry pollination (Qu and Drummond, 2018) and designed computational experiments to ‘grow’ training data, which can then be used to train and validate machine learning algorithms.
The machine learning algorithms trained on a simulation model are called meta-models (Simpson et al., 2001), which possess two obvious advantages over using either machine learning models trained directly on empirical datasets or running computationally intensive simulation models for direct predictions. On one hand, meta-models are surrogates to simulation models which represent detailed causalities of interacting ecological processes that are helpful to precisely predict system behaviors (Drummond et al., 2003, Puntel et al., 2019). Because meta-models can learn patterns of connections among inputs and outputs of the original simulation model and have the ability to extrapolate across varying temporal and spatial scales (Fienen et al., 2015). On the other hand, meta-modeling techniques have been widely accepted by the scientific community in constructing predictive models because in most cases it is more practical to use a real-time meta-model to make predictions than run the often much slower (higher cost) simulation model if the prediction accuracy between the two is within an acceptable range (e.g., less than 20% error) (Fienen et al., 2015).
Simulation data is increasingly being used by researchers and companies for machine learning applications especially in computer vision where a model is trained on a simulation generated dataset (Bohn et al., 2013). Efforts have been made to construct general-purpose simulated data generators to enable data science experiments (Patki et al., 2016). In general, simulated data has several advantages: (1) it is fast and usually inexpensive to produce as much data as needed once the simulation environment is ready; (2) simulation data can have perfectly accurate labels; (3) including labeling that may be very expensive or impossible to obtain by hand, the simulation environment can be modified to improve the model and training; (4) simulation data can be used as a substitute for certain real data segments that contain sensitive information; and (5) it is useful in cases where the generation of training data involves expensive sample acquisition or training data cannot be obtained in sufficient quantity for ethical reasons (Dahmen et al., 2019).
Many researchers have used linear regression models to predict crop yield (Ji et al., 2007, Matsumura et al., 2015, Zaman et al., 2008, Zhang et al., 2019). As far as we know, there is no published study except that by (Shahhosseini et al., 2019) who used simulation data to train machine learning algorithms to predict crop productivity. These authors used the APSIM (Agricultural Production Systems SiMulator; (Holzworth et al., 2014) cropping systems model to generate maize yield and nitrogen loss data for seven locations in the US Midwest. Simulations were conducted for 5–7 years and several management treatments resulting in more than 3 million data points representing maize yields and nitrogen losses.
Our research objective was to develop a predictive model with the assistance of computer simulation and machine learning algorithms. Once we determined the best model to predict yield, our study aimed to address three scientific objectives. First, we conducted simulations and prescreened the simulated data used for developing predictive models of wild blueberry yield. Second, we wanted to determine the important factors that predict yield most effectively. Third, we elucidated, through sensitivity analysis, the optimal bee species composition and weather conditions that predict the best yield estimates compared to the actual simulation derived yields. Furthermore, our goal was to determine the most robust model for yield prediction by comparing traditional and modern machine learning algorithms while at the same time using a minimal number of features.
