The 11th of March 2020 is a landmark day in the short history of the 21st century. It was the day when the World Health Organization (WHO) announced a global pandemic. Since then, the coronavirus disease 2019, Covid-19, has had immediate and long-term effects on the entire fabric of societies. To flatten the curve of infection, individual governments have been encouraging physical distancing. Most countries adopted a lockdown strategy, accompanied with a closure of public places including schools and pre-schools. The situation in Norway mirrored that of European countries in that politicians implemented strategies in line with WHO’s advice for ≪testing, isolation and tracking≫. Norway has created its own Covid-19 tests and politicians locked-down large parts of the society to control the spread of the virus. The Norwegian Institute of Public Health, acting as the key Advisory Body to the Norwegian Government, followed the strategy of controlling the epidemic and evaluating possibilities for slowing down its spread. The first Covid-19 infection was detected on the 26th of February 2020 and official lockdown mandate was issued on the 12th of March 2020. The lockdown included shutting down of schools and kindergartens, but child day care was re-opened on the 20th of April 2020 and primary school classes for years 1–4 and out-of-school care programs from the 27th of April. Norway has a free high-quality healthcare system with equal access to all services for all citizens. At the time of writing, the mortality rate in Norway is low, with 264 deaths, more than 10.162 reported cases and 588.550 tested people [1].
Our research group at the University of Stavanger is an interdisciplinary group of early childhood researchers interested in documenting and improving young children’s learning and development. The pandemic imposed three main changes to our current research activities: 1, we replaced researcher observations with parent observations; 2, we expanded our hub of resources for parents and children with corona e-books and 3, we switched from face-to-face focus group interviews to online-based digital interviews. We outline the details of these changes and the lessons we learnt in implementing them, with the intention of informing future child–computer interaction studies that might experience similar challenges. We summarize our observations as extracted from three case studies, structured around the context of the study, challenges during the early stages of the pandemic, the changes we implemented and our own researchers’ reflections on the impact of these changes for the quality of the individual research studies. We discuss our experiences in light of the frameworks of funds of knowledge and funds of identity as useful strategic tools for future work in child–computer interaction studies (CCIS).
