The problem how to justify an application of a natural science in a human science is perpetual [1], [2], [3]. When involved in such an application, scholars feel necessary to declare their own methodological positions, which – although basically undefendable – should be at least clear. Our task here is less general, as we are going to re-express with an agent-based algorithm some theorems which are already given by a renowned sociologist in a verbal form.
The theorems have been provided by Peter M. Blau [4], [5]. They are related to structure of populations and its consequences for opportunities of contacts. We would like to demonstrate that some of them can be reproduced from a computational model in the frames of social networks theory. Here we focus on an inference, which properties of links can be derived from properties of nodes. As the Blau’s theory includes also the reverse relation, only the first part of its assumptions (A) and theorems (T) is considered here. They are as follows:

•A-1 The probability of social relations depends on opportunities for contact.•A-2 Social proximity promotes social relation.•T-1 The probability of intergroup relations declines with proportionate increase in group size.•T-2 Heterogeneity, defined by the probability that any two persons belong to different groups, increases the rates of intergroup relations.•T-3 The probability of status-distant social contacts and associations increases with increasing inequality (the latter is defined in terms of average status difference).•T-4 Mobility improves the chances of intergroup relations.•T-11 Multiple intersection increases the probability of intergroup relations (intersection theorem).
The numbering of theorems (T-11) is preserved here for a consistency with literature [5]. In Blau’s writings, a differentiation has been made between ascribed positions (as race or sex) and status-related graduated positions (as wealth or education). As the ascribed variables are not ordinal, the Hamming distance is used to measure a difference between chains of them. Recall that this kind of distance is just the number of chain cells, where the values of variables are different; the Hamming distance varies from zero to F.
A comment should be added on intersection. According to Blau, ”the degree to which parameters are intersecting is the inverse of their positive correlation. Maximum intersection for nominal parameters is when they are orthogonal” [4]. Having this in mind, we are going to evaluate intersection using the Pearson correlation coefficient r between characteristics of actors within the same group. Further, mobility encompasses changes in social position; mobile persons occupy two social positions, which makes their ingroup relations from one perspective intergroup relations from the other [5]. The next assumption (A-3) takes mobility, which is a property of nodes, as dependent on links; therefore (A-3) and subsequent theorems are not analyzed here. As our space is limited, we postpone also a more elaborate review of literature. Yet, a few sentences are necessary.
In [6], Thomas Fararo defines directly a basic concept called ’Blau space’. This is: (i) a set of all possible states, where a state is a chain of values of nominal and graduated variables, (ii) a set of actors, each actor in a given state, (iii) symmetric links between actors. We note that a similar space of states has been used later by Robert Axelrod to discuss spread of culture [7]. Further research has been concentrated on a parameterization of structures embedded in this space.
Also in [6], a salience of particular characteristics has been expressed within the so-called biased net theory. A standard relation of this kind is P(E)=P(B)+[1−P(B)]PR(E), where P(E) is the probability of an event E, P(B) is the probability of a hypothetical bias, and PR(E) is the probability that E occurs in a random model, i.e. without bias. To give an example, let us consider the heterogeneity parameter, defined as H=1−∑ipi2. There, pi is the probability that an actor belongs to group i, and H is the probability that two actors belong to different groups. Accordingly, the probability that two linked actors belong to the same group is equal to τ+(1−τ)(1−H), where again τ is a measure of a hypothetical bias. This kind of parameterization is popular in the literature about the Blau theorems. As a rule, the bias parameters are fitted from experimental data.
Attempts to verify Blau’s theory by a comparison of its prediction with real data confirm it rather than deny [8], [9], [10]. On a margin, it is worthwhile to quote an opinion of Steven Rytina, that Blau’s theory “is a mixture of tautology and contingency” [8]. Despite this criticism, Rytina has been able to identify falsifiable results in the theory and resolve them to its advantage [8]. Still in some instants competitive mechanisms have been found at work, like this: once one of two groups is reduced, so is the number of intergroup relations. On the other hand, the potency to create intergroup barriers declines, what makes the intergroup connections easier to be formed. The effect was termed as ’nearly paradoxical’ ([8], p. 97).
Further, correlations have been explored between particular characteristics of the population. John Skvoretz made steps forward along the line of biased net theory in [11], where he concentrates on T-11, called there ’Multiform Heterogeneity Theorem’. In its early formulation it states: ”The lower the positive correlations between parameters, the more extensive are intergroup relations” (T-12 in [4]). More recently, the analytical approach within the biased net theory has been applied to a particular phenomenon of rejecting a tie with a dissimilar person [12], [13]. Here again we notice a link to the Axelrod model [7], where repulsion between dissimilar actors, if taken into account, strongly influences the integration [14], [15].
Our computational approach benefits by the concept of the Blau space. Actors distributed there can form links to some of their neighbors; their task is to select those most similar to themselves. This means, that the choice of links to be selected is determined by the states of nodes. Our aim is to check, if this process of links selection does lead to states which provide a confirmation of the Blau theory.
In the next section we describe an algorithm, the same for each node-actor. In Section 3 we show consequences of the action of actors for the behavior of the whole system, and we check if the Blau’s predictions are fulfilled. A summary of the approach and conclusions close the text.
