The literature on wage differentials by field of study (major) among university graduates (hereafter called “graduates”) often provides findings from developed countries, where the post-secondary education system and labor market conditions may be very different from those in developing economies (Doan et al., 2018aa; Doan et al., 2018ab).Vietnam offers an interesting case study because on the one hand, the country is characterized by a transitional economy that has experienced massive structural changes in all sectors towards a marked-based economy over the past three decades (Le & Tran, 2019). High economic growth, the radical shift in economic structure and the emergence of new manufacturing and service sectors (banking and finance, communications, technology) in the economy have provided graduates with a wide range of high-return job opportunities (Le & Tran, 2019).
On the other hand, recent official statistics often indicate that more highly educated workers face challenges in finding suitable jobs and are more likely to suffer from unemployment1 (Le & Tran, 2019; Tran, 2015). In particular, a recent study by Doan et al. (2018a, 2018b) reports a declining return to post-high school education levels, which sends “a negative signal” that may discourage investment in human capital formation in Vietnam, especially in higher education. The declining return on university education may be the result of both the supply and demand sides. There were huge changes in higher education policies in the 2000s, which substantially increased the supply of highly educated workers over the past decades2 . On the demand side, there has been a lower demand for highly educated workers due to slowing economic growth, distortion in the labour market, education/job mismatch, and poor quality of education (Doan et al., 2018a, b; Nguyen, Nguyen et al., 2015).
While there has been a growing number of studies focusing on the return on the number of schooling years and/or a specific level of study (e.g., high school vs university level) (Doan & Gibson, 2012; Doan, Le, et al., 2018; O’Connor, 1996; Tran et al., 2019), no evidence exists as yet for wage differentials by field of study in Vietnam. Estimations of the return on various majors or earning differences by field of study among graduates provide useful information on the value of various kinds of human capital which the corresponding disciplines represent (Finnie & Frenette, 2003). More importantly, policymakers need evidence concerning which disciplines should be given more or less priority when considering expanding enrolments and public spending (Webber, 2014). In addition, such findings may help future students plan or make a reasonable choice with a better understanding of differences in earning by field of study. Considering the gap in the literature and the importance of the research topic, our study is the first to examine wage differentials by field of study among Vietnamese graduates.
Our study provides evidence that many fields, even more technically and quantitatively oriented disciplines such as engineering, science, math, computer science and business and finance, offer lower earnings than do disciplines in the arts and humanities. The differences are statistically significant and, in many cases, large, even after controlling for other individual and regional characteristics. This finding is inconsistent with that in several high-income economies, where the arts and humanities have always been the field leading to the lowest earnings, whereas the highest wages are earned in engineering, business and finance, and math and computer science. Notably, our study finds that the differences are greater among female than among male graduates. Our results shed light on the value of various types of human capital which the sundry disciplines represent and provide important policy implications for policy makers and educators in Vietnam.
The current paper is structured as follows: the next section includes a literature review while data and methods are given in Section 3, followed by results and discussion in Section 4, and a conclusion outlining policy implications is provided in Section 5.
