1.1. BackgroundMaterials characterization is a cornerstone in materials science, providing insights on materials' structures and properties to further the understanding of fundamental phenomena and guide the materials optimization process for application development. Visualization techniques, such as scanning and transmission electron microscopy, electron diffraction, X-ray computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, among others, are widely used providing high spatial resolution images of atomic arrangements, morphologies, particle shapes, and microstructure information including defects and voids within materials. With significant improvements in science and technology of materials characterization methods, visualization tools listed above have also made advancements providing higher resolutions and faster data collection capabilities. With these breakthroughs in visualization techniques, the bottleneck in advancements in materials characterization will no longer be the capability limitations of the characterization tools themselves, but rather the ability to rapidly analyze and interpret the large amount of high-quality data.Additionally, one of the most beneficial aspects of visualization characterization techniques is the immediate feedback one receives upon analyzing one's samples. For example, a scanning electron microscopy with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) provides its users immediate information regarding size, morphology, composition and other microstructure information. However, as samples become more complex and heterogeneous, the immediate feedback is no longer definitive, as information becomes qualitative, and not quantitative. To obtain more quantitative values, additional analyses are needed, especially for heterogeneous samples. As images or micrographs collected by SEM and other visualization tools become more complex (high dimensional data), additional analysis methods are needed to impart significance to the data. Although human interpretation is often sufficient to elucidate the significance of the visual data, it also can introduce personal bias, which can overlook or neglect potentially important information.To reduce human workload and to accelerate extraction of quantifiable values from SEM images of heterogeneous samples, computer vision techniques can be applied for feature detection and extraction. Computer vision techniques have been widely used for object identification, medical imaging, satellite image analysis, and numerous other applications. It is a well-established technique applied to labor intensive processes to accelerate identification of objects as well as automate feature extraction. Computer vision assisted techniques have also been utilized in materials science for microstructure characterization and recognition [1]–[3], including powder characterization for additive manufacturing [4]. Computer vision feature detection techniques such as Harris-Laplace [5], Difference of Gaussian [6], Haralick texture features [7], and histogram of oriented gradients [1] have been previously utilized. In particular, the “bag of visual words” image representation employed by Holm et al. [8] to create “fingerprint” microstructures is a good example of using computer vision techniques to extract information from micrograph images. In addition, more recent cognitive neural network based approaches have also been utilized [9] to help identify molecular assemblies on surfaces and microstructures. These previous works and approaches have shown significant values in analyzing visualization data that can significantly increase the throughput of often labor and time-intensive image data analysis.While prior works have focused on characterization, our work takes computer assisted image processing and analysis a step further, to correlate image features with materials performance. In order to demonstrate this capability, we focus on correlating features from SEM images of organic crystal microstructures (i.e. crystal size, morphology, surface area, etc.) to uniaxially compressed peak stress of consolidated 2,4,6-triamino-1,3,5-trinitrobenzene (TATB) samples, while holding the processing conditions constant. TATB is an insensitive high explosive compound of interest for both Department of Energy and Department of Defense [10]. Although the specific models that are developed in this work only pertain to the use case described herein, the methods and the conclusions that are presented can have a broad implication for materials scientists who can adopt the developed approach for a variety of applications.
