In the current time, the Internet has a great commitment to progress, to reduce daily work. Many foundations and universities are developing re-awareness and understanding of these developments in the information given in some new courses. In each case, the fund faces a series of problems, including the lack of experienced instructors to show their understudies a particular course. Therefore, to overcome this problem, many of these courses offer online help facility management. E-learning virtual or electronic-based learning or teaching, including those based on the address of the university study overflow internally and externally, for example on the organization's website. A term is used to describe the website. Online learning program answers, especially for developing countries to create several countries to improve their beneficial norms. In each case, there are countries in the world achieve these configurations, such as the lack of legal framework and offices in lucrative facility problems. Therefore, distributed computing innovation in e-learning is the best answer to overcome this problem. In college, there are many alternates available, for example, different departments need to register and acquire assets, very easy programming, and equipment. Distributed computing is an ideal climate system, which limits the scale and system.
Distributed computing management have ubiquitous connectivity and applications over a network. Program-specific areas of work and the use of Application Programming Interfaces (API) with phones. The university cloud computing has many advantages, for example, it records storage information, library information, valuable assets, research applications, and devices, as required. Distributed computing also reduces the university's Information Technology (IT) costs and randomness. Physical machines, in any case, are not active when the old, wasteful offers maximum capacity. Consistently it goes, and university research and education need can be fulfilled through the creation of innovative change. All of the University of Products and equipment must be to restore the change. training includes office applications software, programming language, and creative media courses. As it is more stable, the new format has been used in the course of the industry needs.
Fig. 1 the relevance and focus of this work are to study techniques of Open Distance Learning (ODL) programs and cloud-based e-learning structures that use computer science training as context analysis. This study aims to propose the creation of a structure for computer science education, to eliminate these obstacles and difficulties through the power of bridging the cloud. The system eliminates local needs for the understudies, and employees to form a circle, intuitive, comprehensive team. Similarly, cloud computing offers many facilities by way of the investigation complexity of sensible problem without damaging cloud computing, to prevent the risk of damage to the frame to help tutor. Internal virtualization innovation. The new cloud-strong e-learning environment is holding more advanced bundles and if worried about the constraints of the frame, you can back up with a substantial lack of synchronization. Assets need to be and can be rented from the cloud.Download : Download high-res image (168KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Overall Architecture for Remote Cloud Classroom Based On FPGA System.
