Recent years have witnessed booming of computer technology, and application of computer technology have brought tremendous revolutions to biomedical and chemical fields. Simulation software like COMSOL Multiphysics plays an irreplaceable role in hydrodynamics, materials, biochemical and other disciplines (Luo et al., 2019, Bhatnagar et al., 2019, Gökçe et al., 2019). Molecular simulation facilitates the research of medical and protein-folding by manipulation of structure and behavior of molecular at the atomic level (Freddolino et al., 2010, Hasanzade and Raissi, 2019, Cruz et al., 2019). Technologies in big data analysis, image processing, as well as 5G network architectures, are under development. The employment of computer technologies has greatly released the power of traditional analysis methods in chemical, biomedical and other fields.
Natural products such as polyphenols, flavonoids, sterols, saponins and saccharides have received much attention because of their health beneficial effects (Murray et al., 2015, Yang et al., 2011, Peterson et al., 2012, Thilakarathna and Rupasinghe, 2013, Tsuda, 2012, Demonty et al., 2009, Maiani et al., 2009). It is essential for application in food or medical industry to figure out the structures of bioactives, which are the basis of physicochemical and biological properties. Conventionally, mass spectroscopy (MS) (Tsugawa et al., 2015, Keller et al., 2002), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (Wang et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2019) and infrared spectroscopy (IR) (Sun et al., 2019, Dubey et al., 2019) are employed to detect the structures of bioactives. Although these methods are highly sensitive and accurate, special solvents, laborious pretreatments and expensive instruments are required for analysis. Usually, large-scale initial screening of natural products to seek out qualified candidates for further studies does not require very accurate analysis, while a cost-effective and high-throughput method is more important.
Thin layer chromatography has remained popular for many decades under the background of booming development of science and instruments (Khrebtova, & Berezkin, 2019) owing to broad scope of structural types of compounds, simplicity of sample preparation and high throughput analysis. In recent years, great development has been achieved in TLC. Technologies like TLC coupled with fluorescence detection, mass spectrum, Raman spectroscopy make structure determination possible (Xie et al., 2017, Chen and Schwack, 2013). However, special instruments are still needed and limit its application. Actually, the structural features of compounds have been buried in traditional TLC and careful analysis by computer technology would extract out these valuable information. Recently, a quantitative analysis method of bioactives on TLC was reported, determining the content of the sample through image analysis on TLC (Xu, Shu, & Liu, 2019). Based on previous studies, it is feasible to further classify structures of bioactives through image analysis on TLC.
Traditionally, sample spots of bioactives on TLC plates are usually visualized by staining agents, and the resulted colors vary between different types of compounds, giving additional information about the structure. Among the commonly used staining agents, anisaldehyde based staining agent is exceptional for further structural analysis owing to its broad substrate scope and structure sensitive response. Although correlation of the structure of a compound and its stained color on TLC has long been observed (Stahl and Glatz, 1982a, Stahl and Glatz, 1982b, Kibwage et al., 1983, Kritchevsky and Tepper, 1968), quantitative analysis of the correlation has not been performed. Furthermore, the mechanism under the color development during staining and heating has not been elucidated. Once the relationship of the color development and structure of a compound is quantitatively established, structural classification by traditional TLC will be realized.
Consequently, a simplified classification method, based on data extracted from color formation process on TLC plates through computer technology (Fig. 1), was developed and established in this study. Totally 36 Compounds of 11 classes of bioactives including polyphenols, flavonoids, phytosterols, saponin and saccharides exhibited a good separation according to the color feature, and similar bioactives were generally clustered together. After creating the classification protocol, 4 compounds were tested to verify the efficacy. Finally, the mechanism of color formation was explored.Download : Download high-res image (59KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Conceptual illustration of structural analysis of natural products through color formation on TLC.
