Face verification is one of the most challenging topics in computer vision and has been the most actively researched area over the past few decades [3], [4], [7], [8]. The key objective of face verification systems is to determine if the two images or videos belong to the same person. Many face recognition algorithms have been presented by researchers that work well under the controlled settings. However, we are yet anticipating to build a system that is invariant to variations in pose, illumination, expression, and occlusion, showing comparable accuracy as that of a human. To deal with the aforementioned challenges, we developed a fusion based face recognition method using soft biometric, i.e. facial mark (FM) [1], [5], [8] and deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) [31] methods to achieve higher verification accuracy. The proposed system is evaluated on the unconstrained IJB-A dataset [9] (more than 5000 probe and gallery images from 500 subjects including various pose, illumination, expression, aging, image resolution, and occlusion).
In face verification, FM serves significantly in providing valuable information in distinguishing identities [7] where a face image is occluded or captured in an off-frontal pose. The FM are the embedded traits in an individual's face that can-not be fully distinctive by themselves. However, this biometric information could be incorporated in a face verification system by utilizing the FM based matching results as a complementary information. We presented an automatic FM detection module that takes a 2D input image and performs: i) facial feature (nose, eye, mouth) localization, ii) user-specific mask construction, iii) blob detection, and iv) morphological operations. More details about FM detection are provided in Section 3.1. Recent advancements in computer vision approaches show that DCNN based approaches perform well for face verification task. The DCNN is a biologically inspired mathematical model that is capable of achieving top performance in various tasks of computer vision, including object classification [11], face detection [12], [13], facial landmark detection [14], face alignment [15] and face verification [16]. The DCNN has a powerful learning capability and consists of both training and testing stages. In our FR system, the training of DCNN is performed by using CASIA-WebFace dataset.1 Given a test dataset (IJB-A) image, a similarity score is computed based on the DCNN features and the learned metrics [9], [17]. The score-level fusion of DCNN and FM based recognition method achieves accuracy improvement over the conventional schemes, whose detail will be explained in the upcoming sections.
1.1. Major contributionsFollowing are the major contributions of this paper.•Unconstrained Dataset: Our face mark (FM) based approach is tested on unconstrained IJB-A datasets which gives us larger variations in pose, lighting, expression, aging, occlusion, and illumination. The images in IJB-A dataset are collected from 500 subjects which include wider geographic variations of the subjects in a fully unconstrained environment. Also, the images are collected at a different resolution. The IJB-A dataset is much harder than the FERET, Mugshot and FG-NET datasets used in the previous works for mark detection and face recognition.•FM based Matching Score: We developed a score computation scheme for FM based matching. Each mark detected on the probe image is compared with all the marks in the gallery image. Two marks on Probe and Gallery images are considered a match when the matching distance (selected empirically) between them is less than the threshold (τ = 13). We selected the matching threshold empirically. The score is computed as the inverse of the distance and sum of number of matched marks.•Fusion of Soft Biometrics and VGG Descriptors: For performance improvement, we combined the two face recognition approaches using FM and VGG based matching. The fusion is performed by the weighted score sum method. The overall face recognition performance of our approach is better than the previous approaches in FM which report their results on comparatively easier datasets, i.e. FERET and Mugshot datasets.•Performance Evaluations using IJB-A, FERET, and Mugshot Datasets: For performance evaluations, we used the IJB-A test dataset which is highly unconstrained to the best of our knowledge and haven't been evaluated yet in the FM based FR papers. Thus our findings in face recognition d omain using IJB-A dataset may serve as a baseline for further explorations and studies. Furthermore, for a fair comparison with state-of-the-art FM approaches, we have evaluated our FM + DCNN based matching method on FERET and Mugshot datasets. The comparisons are provided in the experimental result section.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the previous studies in face identification utilizing soft biometrics and DCNN based matching. Section 3 addresses different components of the proposed approach of face verification by using FM combined with DCNN method. In Section 4, we provide experimental results in details reporting the fusion performance of FM + DCNN based face matching. The experimentations are performed on FERET, Mughsot, and IJB-A dataset which is described in the subsection of Section 4. In Section 5, we conclude our work by providing an insight into the future research direction.
