Aging nuclear power plants (NPPs) in the United States require routine maintenance shutdowns (known as “outages”) to ensure continuous power supplies (Lloyd, 2003). Outages are necessary to ensure efficient NPP operations by refueling the reactor and executing essential repairs. Abnormal human/team behaviors (e.g., prolonged task completion, long waiting) during field operation and preparation (FO & P) processes bring significant challenges in controlling delays during outages. Real-time monitoring of FO & P processes for capturing abnormal human/team behaviors and estimating potential delays is vital to ensure resilient outage control. Such a monitoring system aims to support the outage control center (OCC) for making appropriate schedule updates and reducing delays (Fig. 1). A typical NPP outage requires hundreds of contract workers to complete thousands of refueling and maintenance activities within 30 days (B.N. Spring 2009). However, workers with diverse backgrounds and prior outage experiences require extensive training to fulfill the productivity requirements during NPP outages (Sun et al., 2018a; Zhang et al., 2018a). Poor human/team performance that causes prolonged task completion and long waiting time could jeopardize NPP outages. Timely capturing such poor human/team behaviors that cause performance bottlenecks during FO &P processes is thus crucial for predictive control of NPP outages.Download : Download high-res image (326KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Real-time field information acquisitions for capturing waiting time and task duration variations.
Integrated uses of automatic video analysis algorithms and computational simulation models for automated monitoring, diagnosis, and control of teamwork processes during outages is becoming possible with the development of computer vision techniques and computational simulation methods (Luo et al., 2014, 2019; Sun et al., 2020). Field videos of outage workspaces are becoming widely available for FO &P process monitoring with the increasing use of cameras in workspaces (Bolton, 2015). Current outage control practices rely heavily on tedious and error-prone manual inspections and experience-based judgments of outage professionals (Germain et al., 2014). Video data collection has the advantage of capturing rich spatiotemporal details of human motions without having to install any contact sensors on workers. A video-based approach for human/team behavior analysis in outages is thus of great potential for supporting human factors analysis and predictive NPP outage control (Fang et al., 2018). Such a video-based approach can help to capture the prolonged task completion and long waiting time during FO & P processes. The captured anomalies could become rich data sources for OCC to decide schedule updates for mitigating delays.
Formal models and simulations have the potential to resolve the difficulties of assessing the captured abnormal human/team behaviors and predicting delays caused by those anomalies (Bolton, 2015; Pan and Bolton, 2015). Specifically, agent-based simulation models could represent 1) human agents – representing behaviors of workers and the outage supervisors (Zhang et al., 2019; Bonabeau, 2002); and 2) workflows – representing the maintenance workflow based on given schedules (Wang et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2012). Some simulation models show the potential of being able to take the captured anomalies from the real-time videos as inputs for predicting workflow delays (Chen et al., 2012; Mohamed et al., 2017; Han et al., 2013; Alzraiee et al., 2015). For example, Chen et al. established an intelligent scheduling system for optimizing resource sharing during construction projects through simulations (Chen et al., 2012). This study established a simulation model that includes representations of a construction schedule and relationships between available resources (e.g., workforce, equipment) and workspaces. However, these simulation models fell short in providing detailed attributes when modeling human agents in the simulation. Such attributes, such as traveling activities, communication behaviors, and waiting at a station, are pivotal for capturing abnormal human/team behaviors. A data-driven simulation model that represents detailed human/team behaviors during outages is vital for predicting delays using the captured field anomalies from videos.
Previous studies have examined the use of computer vision and machine learning techniques to detect abnormal human/team behaviors using real-time videos (Fang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Wang and Liu, 2018). However, limited studies have examined the use of real-time field videos in a compact workspace with significant occlusions for capturing abnormal human/team behaviors. Challenges remain in automatically capturing field teamwork anomalies and related productivity losses for predicting delays. Such challenges include 1) significant occlusions in the field videos recorded in a compact indoor workspace during outages, and 2) modeling of interwoven human-task-workspace interactions during FO & P processes for predicting delays due to the captured anomalies. This study proposed an integrated use of computer vision and simulation for capturing abnormal human/team behaviors and predicting delays caused by the captured anomalies (Fig. 2). The proposed method includes using a single-camera based trajectory analysis approach for increasing the coverage of monitoring with the same number of cameras during indoor monitoring. Specifically, this study 1) examined real-time human tracking and spatiotemporal analysis methods for automatically diagnosing abnormal human interactions and unexpected trajectories of workers, and 2) developed a data-driven agent-based simulation model for using the detected abnormal human/team behaviors as input for predicting delays during NPP outages.Download : Download high-res image (519KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The proposed predictive NPP outage control framework.
The proposed framework integrates knowledge from human factors, computer vision, and simulations that enable engineers to fully discover the interactions between humans, resources, and workflow that influence outage productivities. The goal is to advancing disciplines of human systems integration and computer vision in the construction management domain. First, the authors conducted an extensive literature review about human factors in NPP outages. The review aims to identify abnormal human/team behaviors in FO & P processes during NPP outages. The authors then developed and tested state-of-the-art computer vision algorithms that help to monitor and capture field anomalies in compact workspaces during FO & P processes of NPP outages. The developed computer vision algorithms enable timely and detailed monitoring of the FO & P processes for supporting real-time schedule adjustments and resource allocations during NPP outages. Last, the presented research study established a data-driven agent-based simulation model based on typical FO & P processes during NPP outages. The model integrates the synthesized findings of human errors in outage control to model “difficult” FO & P processes during NPP outages that challenge teamwork performance. Running simulations could help to examine the occurrence and propagation of abnormal human/team behaviors during NPP outages.
The organization of the remaining parts of the paper is: Section 2 provides a detailed literature review about three practical problems in NPP outages. Section 3 illustrates the developed agent-based model of human/team behaviors within outage workflows. Section 4 introduces the developed computer vision algorithms for automatic human behavior data acquisition and analysis. Section 5 describes the framework of the data-driven simulation model for assessing the impact of abnormal human/team behaviors on workflow delays. Section 6 summarizes the major research findings and technical challenges. Section 7 concludes and synthesizes the future research directions.
