The integration of tablet computers into K-12 settings is a lasting interest of educators and researchers, due to the decreasing costs of the physical devices and the increasing availability of wireless connection in schools. Tablet computers make the delivery of instructional materials to students much more convenient than ever before and afford a wide range of online tools for instructors to design teaching activities. In addition, tablet computers nowadays are featured with advanced functions, such as touch screen input, handwriting recognition, text-to-speech, and built-in recreational games, which are attractive to students who grow up in the digital age (Johnson, 2013). Motivated by these advanced and interactive features of tablet computers, students can improve their writing, reading, and math abilities (Patchan & Puranik, 2016). For instance, Kondo et al. (2012) found that students who used tablet computers to assist their language learning spent more time on learning tasks, had higher levels of satisfaction, as well as achieved better performance than those who did not use tablet computers. The benefits of tablet computers bring a growing interest in the use of tablet computers in K-12 education (Mulet, Van de Leemput, & Amadieu, 2019).
It is noteworthy that the prerequisite for fulfilling the benefits of tablet computers in students’ learning is that they indeed accept and use tablet computers. Students will not use tablet computers unless they perceive a sense of usefulness and feel comfortable with the technology. The last three decades have seen the emergence of some frameworks to study students’ technology acceptance and use. Technology acceptance model (TAM) is ‘one of the simplest, easiest to use, and most powerful computer usage models’ (McFarland & Hamilton, 2006, p 428). TAM proposed that two variables of perceived ease of use (PEOU) and perceived usefulness (PU) affect students’ attitude towards using a new application, system or technology, and then students’ attitude ultimately influences their behavioral intention to use. However, researchers reported repeatedly that the TAM explained only a fraction of variances in students’ intentions to use new computer applications or technologies. As pointed out by McFarland and Hamilton (2006), researchers who used TAM to understand students’ technology adoption process were only able to explain between 45 % and 57 % of the variance at its most.
The purpose of this study is to enhance a comprehensive understanding of factors that may influence students’ intention to use tablet computers using an extended TAM framework. Specifically, we considered self-efficacy and technology anxiety as two antecedents of TAM as students used a tablet-based educational initiative (i.e., electronic schoolbag) for learning in classroom settings. We also introduced the factor of family support into our extended TAM framework. This research extends the literature on students’ intentions to use tablet computers for learning by (1) examining students’ technology acceptance of tablet computers, psychological reactions (i.e., self-efficacy and technology anxiety), and family support simultaneously into one study, (2) situating such examination into a specific interactive learning environment which promotes the comparison and generalization of relevant research. The latter consideration is crucial since some studies muddled the TAM related research as they examined students’ technology acceptance when the system/technology-rich environment was not implemented, or the students had not accumulated hands-on experiences yet (King & He, 2006). This study could contribute to our theoretical understanding of variables that influence students’ adoption of tablet computers and inform practitioners by identifying effective intervention strategies to improve adoption rates of tablet computers.
