As opportunities for involvement in direct patient care are limited to students due to the protection of patient rights and confidentiality, simulation-based education has become an essential part of clinical education in nursing. It is an effective teaching method by which real-life clinical experiences and instant feedback are provided to students in a simulated setting (Jeffries, 2012) and it has been found to improve nursing knowledge, nursing skills, communication skills, empathy, critical thinking abilities, leadership, and situation management among nursing students (Cant and Cooper, 2010; Guise et al., 2012; La Cerra et al., 2019; Sherwood and Francis, 2018). In particular, larger effect sizes were reported for knowledge and skills performance than for other outcomes (La Cerra et al., 2019).
Therapeutic communication skill is an essential competency that nurses need to acquire to understand the needs of patients, foster therapeutic nurse-patient relationships, and thereby work to help reduce a patient's anxiety, fear, and aggression (Riley, 2017). Simulation-based education designed to foster communication skills using standardized patients (SPs) or high fidelity patient simulators has helped nursing students to foster empathy and simulation-related efficacy and diminish prejudice toward mental illness and anxiety related to clinical practicum (Choi, 2012; Choi et al., 2016; Lehr and Kaplan, 2013; Park and Kweon, 2012). However, simulation-based education using SPs or high fidelity patient simulators is resource-intensive and can be limited in its consistency and repeatability (Kameg et al., 2010; Wallace, 2007). Due to these limitations, in Korea, simulation-based education using SPs or high fidelity patient simulators is offered only at nursing schools located in the metropolitan area with sufficient resources. In addition, because debriefing—a facilitated, interactive process for reflective learning in simulation education (Wallace, 2007)—has been offered solely in a group format, students have not had access to individual feedback.
Web- or computer-based learning is a useful approach to reach a large number of learners while maintaining the consistency and quality of education with relatively low costs (Cant et al., 2015). Until now, web- or computer-based education has been applied only to knowledge and skill-building courses, and computer-based simulation to enhance communication skills is very limited. Bogossian et al. (2015) demonstrated that e-simulation of sudden patient deterioration was an effective learning method in improving nursing students' knowledge, efficacy, and performance. However, the study was limited by its design (i.e., one-group, pre-post study design) and one-way, uniform content for all students (e.g., generic debriefing for all students). This is not surprising, since studies testing the effects of simulation-based education still tend to be limited in their fidelity and robustness of experimental design. According to a systematic review and meta-analysis of simulation studies (La Cerra et al., 2019; Sherwood and Francis, 2018), about 75% of reviewed studies showed a high risk of bias; significant heterogeneity among the studies was also noted.
A study that examined the effects of a computer simulation on teaching communication skills for second-year medical students (Kron et al., 2017) demonstrated that computer simulations were effective in imparting clinical knowledge and communication skills among second-year medical students. In addition, the students who received the computer simulation showed high levels of satisfaction and positive attitudes toward the new learning method.
To our knowledge, currently, no computer simulation-based, interactive communication education program for nursing students exists. Considering the potential benefits, standardized, interactive, and effective computer simulation-based education programs that focus on building communication skills among nursing students are greatly needed. Based on the Social Cognitive Theory (Bandura, 1994), we developed a computer simulation-based, interactive communication education (ComEd) program for nursing students (Choi et al., 2019a, Choi et al., 2019b).
The present study was designed to test the efficacy of the newly developed ComEd program on communication knowledge, learning self-efficacy, and communication efficacy among nursing students. The specific aims of this study were (1) to compare the efficacy of a ComEd program and an attention control (AC) program on communication knowledge, learning self-efficacy, and communication efficacy at baseline and twice after the intervention (immediate after and two weeks after); and (2) to assess the acceptability and satisfaction of the ComEd program reported by the participants.
