Breathing disorders are common sleep-related problems that affect the entire population (irrespective of gender or age) of a major group of individuals who suffer from obesity or are overweight. These disorders manifest via pharyngeal airway collapse, preventing regular breathing during sleep. Hence, patients suffer from somnolence, reduced daytime cognitive performance, and cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [1]. Disordered breathing includes sleep apnea and nocturnal hypoventilation. Sleep apnea is induced by an obstruction in the upper respiratory tract, and the breathing effort is maintained and nocturnal hypoventilation causes shallow and slowed breathing where the airflow is less than the actual requirements of the body [2].
To detect breathing disorders [3], [4], computer-aided diagnostic (CAD) techniques can be implemented in many feasible approaches, including different ways of measurements and different type of sensors. The first group of approaches is based on electrocardiogram (ECG) devices and works on the principle of measuring the projection of the heart polarization vector. It is measured via two or three electrodes placed on the human body, where multiple electrodes have a better signal-to-noise ratio [5]. Another complex practice of ECG measuring is via 10 electrodes used by 12-lead ECG systems used commonly in arrhythmia detection [6]. Various articles over the past five years have focused on breathing disorder diagnosis from ECGs [1], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13].
A. R. Hassan [1] presented normal inverse Gaussian (NIG) modeling in the tunable-Q factor wavelet transform (TQWT) domain. It forms a CAD system on single-lead ECG signals for sleep apnea diagnosis. First, TQWT decomposes the ECG signal segments, and corresponding NIG parameters are computed from each of the sub-bands. Thereafter, the adaptive boosting approach is used as a classifier on intuitively, statistically, and graphically selected features. [7] Proposed an SVM and random forest classifiers for breathing disorder detection via heart rate variability, which is widely accepted as a characteristic of sleeping apnea. They used the principal component analysis method for feature extraction. In the task of classification, a random forest with feature reduction is the optimal approach to compare accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of the model [14].
The second type of sensors that can be used for breathing disorder detection are ballistocardiography (BCG) tensiometers. Specifically, BCG is a non-invasive method for body micro-movement detection caused by heart activity and blood flow in large arteries. Compared with ECG, BCG can provide significantly more information on the physical state of the cardiovascular system. Another advantage of BCG is that it is an unobtrusive method of measurement, as it eliminates the need for placing sensors directly on the human body to collect information [15].
In [16], a novel approach was proposed for detecting a long-term heartbeat cycle length. They measured BCG and ECG concurrently to assess the correlation between the beat-to-beat cycle of both types of sensors. The correlation of the length of a cycle was 0.95 with an absolute difference in the cycle length of 4±72 ms. A piezoelectric foil sensor was used, and individuals were examined in a prone position on their back, which was necessary to achieve good results. In [17], an algorithm was proposed for the task of separating cardiac and respiratory components with noise reduction on the heart rate and respiration components of BCG signals. This was performed via the locally projective noise reduction (LPNR) algorithm for denoising deterministic chaotic time series. It is applied to signals that are not cleanly deterministic such as physiological time series like ECG, BCG and EEG. In another study [18], overnight polysomnography and ballistocardiography recording pairs were collected from patients with and without nocturnal hypoxemia. Regression analysis indicated an average accuracy of 96.5%. Sadek et al. [19] evaluated the capacity of the microbend fiber optic sensors to monitor heart rate and respiration in a nonintrusive manner. Additionally, they tested discrimination between shallow and no breathing. The approach achieved a high correlation between the heart rate and breathing rate of 0.96 and 0.78. However, the proposed sensor provided extremely low sensitivity of 24.2±12.81% and specificity 85.88±6.01%. Liu et al. [20] examined the detection of obstructive sleep apnea. Their algorithm first preprocessed raw BCG data and located potential event segments by detecting arousals. Thereafter, the distribution of each potential event into three phases and the selection of features to detect respiratory patterns was performed. Subsequently, they used a backpropagation (BP) neural network to classify the events into apnea and non-apnea classes. The experimental results based on a real BCG data-sheet revealed that the accuracy, recall, and AUC corresponded to 94.6%, 93.1%, and 95.1%, respectively. Zhao et al. [16] used BCG signals to detect variations in the heart rate, which they associated with sleep apnea syndrome. They applied wavelet decompositions extraction to analyze the BCG signal to obtain the heartbeat interval. The features were used as inputs to the support vector machine classification model. Experimental results on 42 subjects with 5-fold cross-validation achieved a 90.46% precision rate and 88.89% recall rate. In another related study [21], the signals of five sensors and their placement combinations for measuring of a sleeping person were compared from the perspective of their measurement sensitivities and waveform quality. The study concluded that heartbeat and respiration parts are optimally represented in the signals measured with mattress force sensors.
In a previous study [22], a novel approach was presented to recognize the form of breathing (independent of body position) by using BCG sensors. The signals were processed via Cartan curvature, and pulse arrival time related to human respiration and blood pressure were extracted via the Moens-Korteweg relationship [23]. Subsequently, breathing anomalies were detected between heartbeats measured by ECG and pulse arrival times. The delays of heartbeat and pulse wave were used as the inputs to train a convolutional neural network classifier. The novelty of the paper consists of two main objectives. The first one is the independence of the position of the human body on the bed from the mutual position of the sensors. The second one is the study of advanced physiological phenomena rather than calculating just heart rate. Sensors were placed at the legs position part of the bed for measuring the micro-movements of furniture caused by movements in the human body. In [24] authors study changes in BCG signals with different positions of the measured individual however their goal was only to estimate the heart rate without any other phenomena physicians may be interested in (such as pulse wave velocity, elastic properties of the aorta, etc.). In [25] authors present a novel approach to estimate heart rate from BCG signals with beat-to-beat precision and they recognized phase shift between BCG and ECG signal however, in such work there is no physiological explanation of this phenomena. Using Cartan curvatures, pulse arrival time tp could be able calculated. It is directly related with blood pressure through Moens-Korteweg relation by formula (1):(1)BP=alnb(dtp-c)2-1,where BP represents the blood pressure and a,b,c and d are constants dependent on the human physiology [23].
Usually, when using CNN (convolution Neural Network) based architecture, it requires significant preprocessing analysis for data. After Cartan curvature computation, it was necessary to detect a pulse wave in the signal to recognize its relationship with breathing patterns. This detection also needs some considerable computation time. Moreover, differences in delays of pulse waves between individual heartbeats are in milliseconds, meaning the model is very sensitive and leads to issues in detection with a person lying on their side and not on the back where the signal to noise ratio is better.
In this study, a new approach of processing ballistocardiography signals and classification of breathing disorders is introduce. The system worked with four ballistocardiography sensors placed on the corners of a measuring bed. Using new optimal formulas of Cartan curvatures, it is feasible to recognize breathing problems without dependencies on body position during measuring (Cartan curvatures are invariant under rotational or translational changes of the subject), and obtain clearer results compared to other works. The study commences with a presentation of the classical method for R peak detection from the ECG signal. Subsequently, it continues with a formulation of Cartan curvatures and a description of the information, which can be found in them. The final part of data processing is input preparation for our CNN classifier. Finally, the paper presents results and a discussion related to other articles from branch and conclusion.
