Generally, people that work in the industry of chemical and petrochemical processes need workers highly trained in thermodynamics. People with that training have excellent troubleshooting skills that help them to solve many problems in a highly effective way. To acquire this skill, it is necessary to have exceptional preparation in their thermodynamics courses, as well as in the engineering laboratory practices because it provides students real manipulation of instruments and devices, allowing them to have both experiences, theory, and practice. Although laboratories are one of the best ways of teaching, they have some disadvantages, such as the cost of their creation as well as their maintenance [1]. Due to technological advancement, the use of computational tools for simulation of industrial processes is an exciting alternative to complement the theoretical classes in a classroom. It has been found that the implementation of process simulations increases the interest of students and their motivation [2].
The teaching of thermodynamics has made significant progress moving from the traditional theoretical method to the use of computer technology, allowing the student to have higher participation in the development of classes [3, 4]. Ahmet Gurses [5], determined that students trained through interactive teaching obtained significantly higher performance than through the traditional training method. This trend is driven by the growing interest of students in e-learning systems, which are web-based learning systems, computers, and everything related to virtual learning that includes technologies and information systems either online or offline [6]. The implementation of this type of knowledge provides many benefits to students promoting better education [7, 8]. However, this new way of learning has a significant challenge in measuring its quality level, because there is no reference base to evaluate electronic learning systems [9, 10].
There are two essential aspects when evaluating the quality of e-learning systems; these are the pedagogical and the technical issues, which are related to measuring the level of quality of this type of e-learning systems [11, 12, 13, 14]. Besides, the opinion of the institutions, teachers, students, and software designers [15, 16, 17, 18] is considered in the evaluation. Vladimir Nikolic [19] did a survey to determine the primary indicator that measures the quality of e-learning systems considering the two main perspectives, pedagogical and technical. He used different criteria such as the learning environment, efficiency, performance, reliability, functionality, usability, interaction, services, customization, learning activities, access, cost, technology, content, among others [20, 21]. Nicolic [19] found that content was the crucial quality factor for e-learning systems and that the main disadvantage when analyzing quality models was the absence of model validation. Eldin Wee Chuan Lim [22] developed software of design within the Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) to facilitate learning through a repeated practice approach by Chemical Engineering students who work with a central module called Fluid- Solid Systems. He determined that the students that use the software with higher frequency during the semester obtained better results in the final exam. It is related to the significant number of variables used when studying or simulating a chemical or mechanical process, which affects the student motivation to obtain the specific competences of the class. The mood of the students is critical to absorb a considerable amount of vital information [23] Novel engineering software is being implemented in engineering classes to help in the solution of this problem.
Samuel Cartaxo [24] developed free educational software to teach transient analysis of shell and tube heat exchangers to undergraduate students. He concluded that the use of the program improves the student performance on engineering classes, as it allows students to practice heat exchanger analysis avoiding tedious, repetitive calculations. Currently, there is a substantial increase in the development of computer applications that seek to facilitate and promote engineering education [25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30].
The arrival of ICTs has radically changed the landscape of education; its evolution in recent years has boosted the innovation and creativity of students, encouraging the development of computational tools. They are more frequently used in different areas of engineering, propagating the advantages of process simulation in student learning.
The ICT's have allowed the introduction of e-learning, giving students the possibility of non-face-to-face learning, motivating a self-taught training, and therefore helping the “Lifelong Learning.” It was possible because the ICTs were able to work with some of the basic postulates of the classical educational theories such as behaviorism, cognitivism, constructivism, and socio-constructivism. Behaviorism seeks to achieve the appropriate response of students to the stimulus; cognitivism pursues the stimulation of learning strategies by the student; constructivism takes the learning as an active process of the students; socio-constructivism focuses on the integral development of the student.
With the progress of the educational theories, the students have taken a more critical role in their education [31], where they are responsible for their learning process. Therefore, the main contribution of this paper is to present the development of a new educational package focused on the teaching of thermodynamics where the students can improve their theoretical-practical skills, without limiting their learning to the institution's facilities, as is the case with classical engineering laboratories. The software package uses the applications of information and communications technologies (ICT). It contains three software that can be downloaded from the SICVI platform of the University, allowing students to use it from anywhere and at any time. In this way, the student can be motivated to do research, allowing them to analyze thermodynamic processes [32, 33], applied energy, and entropy balances [34, 35] making parametric variations that are usually tedious when doing them manually. The aim is to encourage the development of lifelong learning [36, 37], increase the ability of students to analyze the phenomena that happen in these processes, and train engineering students to meet the competencies of the ABET accreditation model [33, 34, 35, 36].
The literature review of the educational theories used to develop this new educational software is included in section 2. Section 3 presents the motivating example, where the benefits of this new software on the student learning process are shown. Then, in section 4 (Proposed design), the structure and organization of the new educational package in the area of thermodynamics are developed and supported in a flowchart of the algorithm. Section 5 (methodology) presents the technical specification of the graphical user interface, a description of the cognitive skills developed with the educational package, the method used to score the test results, and the fundamental equations involved in the informatics application. The results and discussions are presented in section 6. This section contains a sensitivity analysis, the case studies used, and a usability test analysis done to the computational package. Finally, the conclusion is presented in section 7.
