Knee and hip replacements typically lead to substantial improvements in pain, function, and overall health-related quality of life. As a result, both procedures are considered to be cost-effective when compared with nonsurgical alternatives for patients with symptoms that are refractory to nonsurgical treatment.1,2 Patients typically achieve more than 60% and 80% of their potential improvement in patient-reported outcomes after knee and hip replacement, respectively. There is, however, a substantial variation in outcomes, with 16% and 8% of patients reporting either the same or worse patient-reported outcomes after knee and hip replacement, respectively.3 In addition, after surgery there remains an enduring risk of revision, where implant components are removed, added, or exchanged. Although the risk of revision is relatively low for older patients, the lifetime risk of revision may be as high as 35% for men in their early 50s.4 Undergoing a revision procedure is associated with a substantial drop in quality of life,5 and revisions are even more costly for providers than primary procedures.6
There has been a long and continuing history of innovation in knee and hip replacement. One area of innovation has been around the development of computer-navigated and robotic-assisted systems, which have been developed to control component positioning and, in some cases, improve surgical precision.7 Although such systems are now used in around 7% of knee replacements in the United States,8 uptake in other contexts, such as the English National Health Service (NHS), has been limited.
The evidence base around the effectiveness of computer- and robot-assisted systems in knee replacement is limited. Although there is some evidence that they can lead to better implant positioning, evidence that these systems lead to meaningful improvements in long-term clinical outcomes is lacking.9, 10, 11 Although economic evaluations have been performed,12, 13, 14 with one, for example, finding robot-assisted unicompartmental knee replacement to have an incremental cost of $47 180 per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY),13 any such definitive conclusion is likely to be premature given the strong assumptions around effectiveness which underpin these analyses.
A more general early stage economic evaluation of computer- and robot-assisted knee and hip replacement can be used to help to inform current considerations around their potential cost-effectiveness and for future decision making as further evidence on the effectiveness of these systems emerges. The threshold price for computer- and robot-assisted knee and hip replacement is the price at which the health benefits gained from their use will be offset by equivalent health displaced owing to opportunity cost (ie, where the net health benefit from funding them would be zero).15 For a given health improvement, if the price of computer- and robot-assisted knee and hip replacement fell below the associated threshold price, they would be considered cost-effective. Conversely, for a given increase in cost due to the technologies, threshold prices for health improvements would indicate the minimum improvement required for the additional cost to be considered acceptable.
In the absence of good evidence on their long-term effectiveness, threshold prices can be estimated for a plausible range of potential improvements. In this study, we estimate threshold prices for potential improvements in both quality of life after surgery and reductions in the revision risk after knee and hip replacement from the use of computer- and robot-assisted systems.
