‘The most valuable asset of a 21st-century institution (whether business or non-business) will be its knowledge workers and their productivity’ Drucker (1999). Knowledge workers constantly face challenges, such as a high work fragmentation, continuous disruptions and distractions, highly complex and demanding tasks, and long working hours Czerwinski et al. (2004); González and Mark (2004); Mark et al. (2008). These challenges, amongst others, can lead to stress in the workplace. Stress is an ever-growing concern as it can lead to fatigue, burnout and various other illnesses, ultimately resulting in work absences and marked productivity losses Hockey (1997); for the Improvement of Living and Conditions (2010); Setz et al. (2010).
Given the importance of understanding stress and its relationship and effect on work, a number of studies have been conducted using a variety of methods. Minimally invasive studies have shown the benefit of sensing autonomic nervous system (ANS) activity by analyzing certain biometric (aka. psycho-physiological) signals of the human body, such as skin temperature Kataoka et al. (2000). These approaches can be used in long-term field studies, opening up the question of what stress looks like in the wild. In contrast, other studies have studied stress using more invasive techniques, such as measuring cortisol as a stress biomarker Piazza et al. (2010). These studies are best suited for laboratory environments.
Our work builds on this ability to non-invasively monitor stress by performing an eight-week study in the workplace with 14 knowledge workers examining stress as well as two related human aspects: focus and awakeness (i.e., wakefulness). We collected data on these two additional aspects because stress and the challenges that contribute to stress levels can also affect sleep. A lack of sleep can affect the ability of knowledge workers to stay awake and focused at work which, in turn, can result in undesired consequences on work and productivity Cohen et al. (1997); Connor et al. (2002); Mark et al. (2014).
In this paper, we investigate two research questions. Our first question examines how knowledge workers experience stress and awakeness in their workplace over a long period of time. Our second question explores the possibility of using biometric data to predict whether a knowledge worker is experiencing stress, is focused, and is awake at a given moment in time. A better understanding of how knowledge workers experience stress, focus and awakeness can help inform the design of workplaces to manage and alleviate stress, and to encourage focus and awakeness. An ability to predict stress, focus and awakeness in the moment can enable the development of digital tools to support knowledge workers in their work by better managing disruptions, automatically adjusting lighting to reduce sleepiness, or by avoiding stress, amongst other possibilities.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the longest in-situ study performed in a real-world environment of knowledge workers analyzing an extensive collection of biometric signals with experience samples examining real-time prediction of stress, focus and awakeness in the workplace. Previous studies are predominantly controlled lab studies, which used only a subset of the relevant biometric signals we captured, much more limited in duration, or not focused on a real-world environment Goyal and Fussell (2017); Healey and Picard (2005); Nakagawa et al. (2014); Parnin (2011); Radevski et al. (2015); Sano and Picard (2013); Wijsman et al. (2011); Züger and Fritz (2015).
The participants in our study perform various job functions for a research and development group within a single large corporation. For this study, they wore a novel, state-of-the-art biometric armband comprised of precise sensors2 which captured heart-, respiration- and skin-related measures with low invasiveness. This modality was chosen to ease longitudinal deployment in the field. We then used machine learning to create classifiers and analyze their ability to predict stress, focus and awakeness levels based on the biometric signs gathered by the sensors. Considering all of these three human aspects helps us to consider whether one aspect might be easier to detect than another. If one aspect is easier to predict, it might serve as a proxy or an indicator of the presence (or absence) of other aspects.
In our analysis, we identify several trends in day-to-day stress levels that emerged over the course of our eight-week study. The results of our analysis show that biometric signals collected from a single minimally invasive device can be used to predict stress and its related aspects accurately, with the abstract concept of focus (predictably) being the hardest to detect. Our results further determine that knowledge workers’ self-reported levels of stress, focus and awakeness, and their physiological manifestation and prediction can vary substantially between individuals. The three main contributions of our work are:
•A qualitative examination of how knowledge worker stress and awakeness behaves and fluctuates in the wild based on an eight-week field study with 14 office workers.•The creation and analysis of measures for the automatic monitoring of knowledge workers’ stress, focus and awakeness in the workplace based on a machine learning model trained on biometric data and experience samples.•A discussion on the impact of applying this research to improve the interaction of knowledge workers with their digital environment leading to an improvement in their productivity and well-being, besides a reflection on aspects that can be further improved in future studies.
