Currently most students from the department of hospitality management have negative responses to the hospitality accounting course, including that it is too fast for class progress, has too much content and is not easy to understanding, which result in an obstacle to learning and low motivation (Chen, Sue-Ching, Chen, & Cho, 2003). On the other hand, other students feel the teaching speed is too low and the content is too easy, and they hope the difficulty can be increased. This is the portrayal of traditional “teacher centered” teaching environment in which teachers follow a course schedule to conduct teaching activity, and ignores differences in student learning levels, resulting in a teaching environment that can not satisfy the needs of all students. Therefore, as a teacher of hospitality accounting, it is extremely important to design and create a teaching environment that is both “student centered” and “active learning strategy”. That is, give the initiative of learning to students, allow them to study according to their own ability and time, plan their own study progress by themselves, which can increase their learning motivation and most importantly not discourage them from learning. Kim and Davies (2014) pointed out that tourism and hospitality teachers have been encouraged to implement various student-centered teaching practices beyond conventional teacher-directed approaches. The goal of flipped classroom teaching is to solve the above issues.
The flipped classroom is gaining acceptance in higher education as an alternative to traditional teaching methods (Steen-Utheim & Foldnes, 2018). The flipped classroom is based on constructivism and social learning theory (Moraros, Islam, Yu, Banow, & Schindelka, 2015). Its ideology is to give learning initiative to students and its class design is a type of blended learning which allows students to actively and interactively learn. Its activities are to allow students to watch online video tutorials at home as a preview of lessons, and in the classroom, teachers play the role of guide or facilitator, leading students to perform cooperative learning, answering doubts, guiding thinking, conducting dialogues and discussing together.
The prevalence of flipped classroom is due to the advancement of (mobile) network technology; most students owns laptops, tablets, and smartphones, giving them access to Facebook, Youtube, and many more internet resources. Giving them the opportunity to learn from teaching videos at their own pace before class, and replay them if necessary. Teachers can also add instant feedback quizzes in the videos, helping students examine their absorbance. Research done by the Graduate School of Education at Stanford found that when students watch lesson videos before formal classroom teaching, and then go through the process of self discovering and interactive learning with their classmates, learning motivation is easier to trigger, and learning performance is better, than traditional teaching. Therefore, the flipped classroom is commonly viewed as the best teaching method (Akinoglu & Tandogan, 2006; E-school, 2013; O'Dowd & Aguilar-Roca, 2009; Sams & Bergmann, 2012).
Although many scholars and papers proved flipped classroom is helpful with learning performance and motivation, it is not an elixir; a few critical factors would negatively impact its effectiveness. Scholars (Strayer, 2007, 2012) have indicated three weaknesses impacting the learning effects of flipped classroom: 1. Flipped classroom teaching lacks completeness and structure. 2. Flipped classroom teaching lacks independent thinking and gets poor learning performance. 3. Flipped classroom teaching cannot satisfy all subjects and lessons. Especially, hospitality accounting is a subject with high structure and completeness (Chiou, 2008), it needs teachers to build up a scaffolding for students to allow them to construct their personal knowledge automatically. To overcome these shortcomings, this research attempts to use structured computer-assisted collaborative concept mapping as a teaching strategy to aid flipped classroom teaching, and explore whether it can improve its shortcomings.
Structured concept mapping is a structured and visual learning tool with advance organizer, subsumption learning, superordinate learning, progressive differentiation, and integration (Novak & Gowin, 1984; Roessger, Daley, & Hafez, 2018). It can improve the mentioned weaknesses of flipped classroom: 1. Using the 5 features of structured concept mapping, it can allow students to integrate, assort, and rank video clips that are scattered in relation, making learning more complete and structured (Huang et al., 2012). 2. Through the construction of structured computer-assisted concept maps, students can integrate the content of the curriculum to construct a personal learning cognitive map, which can improve the lack of independent thinking and poor learning performance (Chiou, 2008, 2009; Chiou et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2012). 3. A teacher can be informed about all students’ progress and understanding levels through computer-assisted drawing of concept maps cooperatively between classmates, which enables teachers to plan the course schedule accordingly and solve problems students may have on the spot (Heinze-Fry & Novak, 1990; Novak, 1980; Stewart, Van, & Rowell, 1979). This can make up for the shortcomings of the flipping teaching effectiveness that cannot be achieved due to the difference of disciplines and curriculum attributes and the deficiency of teaching ability. Many articles in the past have also shown that structured computer-assisted concept mapping helps students engage in adaptive learning and improve their learning motivation and effectiveness (Adeopoe, Cavagnetto, & Hunsu, 2016; Akcay, 2017; Chiou, 2008, 2009; Dias, Dolianiti, Hadjileontiadou, Diniz, & Hadjileontiadis, 2019; Huang et al., 2012; Liu, Chen, & Chang, 2010; Novak & Gowin, 1984). Engelmann and Hesse (2010) pointed out it is very important to get what the collaborators know when collaborative learning, and verified that using the digital concept map method to obtain the knowledge structure and information of the collaborator can help solve the problem more quickly and more frequently.
Flipped classroom has solemnly become a prevalent innovative teaching method in 21st century. However, there is a common problem existing in flipped teaching. That is, many flipped teaching teachers do not know how to conduct teaching in class. Hence, how teachers reach a balance between ‘learning’ and ‘teaching’, and how to scaffold an efficient, meaningful, and structured teaching and learning strategy to aid flipped classroom teaching, are highly critical for the successfulness of flipped classroom teaching. Structured concept mapping, a meaningful learning strategy, may be as a good strategy. Therefore, this research attempts to use structured computer-assisted collaborative concept mapping as a teaching and learning strategy to aid flipped classroom teaching. Specifically, there are two purposes for this research as the following:
(1)Comparing whether there is significant difference between the use of structured computer-assisted collaborative concept mapping as a tool for assisting flipped classroom teaching and the use of traditional flipped classroom teaching for students' learning motivation in learning a hospitality accounting course.(2)Comparing whether there is significant difference between the use of structured computer-assisted collaborative concept mapping as a tool for assisting flipped classroom teaching and the use of traditional flipped classroom teaching for students' learning achievements in learning a hospitality accounting course.
