Over the past 50 years there has been a significant increase in sedentary, computer-based workplaces (Church et al., 2011; Hedge and Ray, 2004; Levine, 2015; Owen et al., 2010). A growing body of evidence suggests that increased sedentary behaviors and physical inactivity is a public health risk (de Rezende et al., 2014; Dunstan et al., 2012; Owen et al., 2020). Studies indicate that increased sedentary behaviors and physical inactivity are associated with greater risks for cardiovascular disease, obesity, weight gain, type-2 diabetes, some forms of cancer, and premature mortality (Chau et al., 2013; Katzmarzyk et al., 2009; Young et al., 2016). Furthermore, hours of computer use can increase risks for musculoskeletal disorders of the upper extremities (Punnett and Bergqvist, 1997, Rempel et al., 2006; Village et al., 2005), though causal pathways for this association are unclear (Andersen et al., 2011; Wærsted et al., 2010). From an employers’ perspective, increased occupational sedentarism is associated with absenteeism, reduced quality and quantity of work, short-term disability, work impairment, and additional healthcare costs (Cancelliere et al., 2011; Pronk and Kottke, 2009; Trogdon et al., 2008). In 2013, the global economic burden of sedentary behaviors and physical inactivity was estimated at $67.5 billion (Ding et al., 2016).
Given that many working adults are engaged in sedentary occupations, it is estimated that workplace sitting is the largest contributor to the increase in sedentary behaviors (Clemes et al., 2014; Hill and Peters, 1998; Parry and Straker, 2013). Time use data from Australia, the Netherlands, the U.S. and the U.K. indicate that working adults spend between 6.2–9.6 h/day in sedentary behaviors, much of which involves long durations of occupational sitting (Tudor-Locke et al., 2011; Van Uffelen et al., 2010). Trends for 2030 suggest a sustained increase in sedentary behaviors and physical inactivity for the global working age population. Not only is this increase projected for countries such as the U.S. and the U.K., but also for countries with large and growing working age populations such as China and India (Ng and Popkin, 2012). As the prevalence and magnitude of sedentary behaviors increase in the global workplace, and more evidence for negative health impacts of prolonged sitting are established, there is a growing case for research on ways to improve health, wellbeing, and productivity in the sedentary office.
In response to the deleterious health impacts of increased sedentary behaviors, the physical activity guidelines for the U.S. emphasizes ‘the need to move more and sit less,’ (Piercy et al., 2018) while in the U.K. an expert statement recommends office workers to ‘reduce sitting time, accumulate at least 2 h of standing, and include short bouts of light physical activity throughout the workday.’ (Buckley et al., 2015). These guidelines suggest that office workers should not only reduce overall sitting time, but also break up sitting with intermittent bouts of light-intensity physical activity spaced throughout the workday. Recommendations are based on research evidence that non-exercise physical activities (such as sit-to-stand postural transitions), and intermittent bouts of light-intensity physical activity (such as self-paced walking), spaced throughout the workday can have a protective effect on health risks of increased sedentary behaviors (Dohrn et al., 2018; Ekblom-Bak et al., 2014; Pulsford et al., 2015). In parallel, research on physiological recovery from simulated microgravity demonstrates the benefits of 16 postural transitions, equally spaced throughout the workday (Vernikos et al., 1996). Although these findings originate in research on simulated microgravity, they may have implications for sedentary behavior and health, as the experience of reduced gravitational stimulus is a phenomenon common to both simulated microgravity and uninterrupted sedentary behaviors (Strollo et al., 2018; Vernikos and Schneider, 2010; Vernikos, 2017). While more evidence is needed to add precision and certainty to workplace interventions that can reduce occupational sedentary behaviors – the key idea is to reduce sitting durations, increase sit-stand postural transitions, and elevate light-intensity physical activity at work (Holtermann et al., 2018).
Recent studies report on the feasibility of reducing occupational sitting by adopting alternatives to the sedentary paradigm of office work (Tudor-Locke et al., 2014). Sit-Stand Workstations (SSWs), which enable office workers to alternate between sitting and standing work postures, are the most prominent of these alternatives. Reviews of SSWs for office work indicate beneficial reductions in sitting time, musculoskeletal discomfort, fatigue, and low back pain, without negative effects on productivity (Agarwal et al., 2018; ; Karakolis and Callaghan, 2014). Studies indicate that breaking up sitting with short bouts of standing is associated with significant reduction in perceived fatigue (Paul, 1995; Hasegawa et al., 2001), modest improvements in cardio-metabolic health (Healy et al., 2015), and potential improvements in cognitive performance (Wennberg et al., 2016). However, the use of SSWs does not increase energy expenditure above the sedentary activity threshold of 1.5 METs (Chambers et al., 2019), and physical activity does not increase significantly when compared to sedentary work (Zhu et al., 2018). Moreover, there is no consensus on what constitutes an optimal sit-to-stand ratio, and how this may vary with populations and occupations (Chambers et al., 2019; Karakolis and Callaghan, 2014).
In recent years there has been a trend towards the use of standing desks as an alternative to the sedentary paradigm of office work. Compared to seated work, use of standing desks is associated with modest increases in physical activity and energy expenditure (Grunseit et al., 2013; Miyachi et al., 2015), without a reduction in cognitive performance (Russell et al., 2016; Kar and Hedge, 2016). However, occupational standing for prolonged durations is known to be associated with negative health outcomes such as increased lower back and leg pain, physical fatigue and musculoskeletal discomfort, and risks for cardiovascular problems (Andersen et al., 2007; Baker et al., 2018; Balasubramanian et al., 2009; Chester et al., 2002; Graf et al., 2015; Krause et al., 2000; Tüchsen et al., 2000; Waters and Dick, 2015). Currently, there is a dearth of studies which compare musculoskeletal discomfort, perceived fatigue, and productivity in computer-based work between sitting, sit-stand, and standing work conditions.
Another approach to reduce the deleterious health impacts of occupational sitting involves changes in the temporal pattern of office work. The use of microbreaks - which are short, rest breaks of 30–180 s duration at 10 ~ 20 min intervals - can reduce musculoskeletal discomfort, attenuate fatigue, without reducing productivity in computer-based work (Bennett, 2015; Galinsky et al., 2000, 2007; Hedge and Evans, 2001; Henning et al., 1989, 1994; Konz, 1998; McLean et al., 2001). Recent studies suggest that active breaks, i.e. microbreaks that enable office workers to perform light-intensity physical activity such as stretching exercises and walking – can reduce musculoskeletal discomfort and pain (Barredo and Mahon, 2007; Van Eerd at al., 2016; Waongenngarm et al., 2018), improve cardiometabolic health (Bailey and Locke, 2015), increase cerebrovascular blood flow (Carter et al., 2018), and reduce mental fatigue (Engelmann et al., 2011). However, there is an absence of studies to investigate how postural variability enabled by SSWs combined with short frequent bouts of light-intensity physical activity afforded by active breaks - can impact musculoskeletal discomfort, perceived physical and mental fatigue, and productivity in computer-based work (Kar, 2019).
Another aspect of computer-based work that researchers have investigated is gender differences in the prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms and fatigue. Studies of computer-based work, primarily in the seated condition have consistently reported higher incidences of work-related musculoskeletal symptoms in females compared to males (Gerr et al., 2002; Hedge, 1988; Karlqvist et al., 2002; Schneider et al., 2010), and especially for the neck, shoulder, and upper limbs (Nordander et al., 2016; Treaster and Burr, 2004). Research on short-cycle repetitive tasks indicate that differences in muscle coordination and movement strategies between females and males may explain gender differences in susceptibility to musculoskeletal symptoms and fatigue (Srinivasan et al., 2016). However, recent research on use of SSWs for computer-based work offers mixed results on gender differences. While a study of simulated work using SSWs reported that males tend to develop higher musculoskeletal symptoms in standing, and females tend to develop higher musculoskeletal symptoms in sitting (Karakolis et al., 2016), another study of simulated work using SSWs reported no gender differences for lower limb muscle activity and musculoskeletal symptoms (Pei et al., 2017). These inconsistent findings on how the prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms and fatigue in use of SSWs vary with gender, suggest need for further research.
Given the negative health consequences associated with occupational sitting, there is a critical need to investigate the efficacy of different approaches to reduce sitting durations and increase physical activity in the workplace. The use of SSWs in office work shows evidence of attenuating discomfort and fatigue, without negatively impacting productivity (Karakolis and Callaghan, 2014). However, physical activity is not significantly higher compared to sitting work (Chambers et al., 2019). The use of standing desks is associated with moderate increase in physical activity and energy expenditure (Grunseit et al., 2013; Miyachi et al., 2015). However, as previously described the negative health impacts of prolonged standing such as lower back and leg pain, cardiovascular problems, discomfort and fatigue are well established. In contrast, the adoption of active breaks in computer-based work has demonstrated reductions in discomfort and fatigue without negatively impacting productivity. At present, there is an absence of studies to investigate how the effects of combining postural variability with short frequent bouts of light-intensity physical activity can impact health and productivity in computer-based work (Kar, 2019). In addition, the potential role of gender as a moderator between the work condition and the dependent variables needs to be investigated.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of different work conditions on musculoskeletal discomfort, perceived physical and mental fatigue, and task productivity, for a short-duration computer-based task in a controlled laboratory environment. Participants from the working age population were randomly assigned to one of five work conditions – Sit-Stand, Stand-Sit, Sitting, Standing, and Sit-Stand-Walk - described in detail in the following section. We hypothesized that participants in the Sit-Stand-Walk work condition would report significantly lower scores for musculoskeletal discomfort, perceived physical and mental fatigue, and be more productive on the computer-based task when compared to participants in the other work conditions. Gender was included as an independent variable in the analyses to see if there were any effects of gender on the dependent variables.
