World Wide Web data have been broadly applied to research applications including public opinion measurement (O'Connor et al., 2010) and election forecasting (Tumasjan et al., 2010), epidemiology (Culotta, 2010), and even to philosophy (Cheong, 2018). Geo-tagged visual media in particular, as a form of Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI), has seen a strong interest in scientific research, as they allowed scientists to make firsthand observations from remote, sparsely populated places that would be otherwise impractical or expensive for data collection (Barve, 2014, Daume, 2016, ElQadi et al., 2017, Estima and Painho, 2013). This ability to make such omnipresent observations is particularly useful in land cover research to improve land cover maps.
Land cover impacts global climate by changing biogeochemical cycles and consequently the composition of the atmosphere, as well as changing the biogeophysical processes that affect energy absorption at the Earth's surface (Feddema et al., 2005). An understanding of changes in land cover and the associated monitoring of human land use such as agriculture, mining, and urban development, also enables us to better grasp human encroachment on natural ecosystems and habitats. Mapping land cover is therefore essential for understanding and simulating anthropogenic climate change and our impact on Earth's ecosystems (Feddema et al., 2005). Land cover maps are usually created by automatic classification of satellite imagery, a process that results in discrepancies between global land cover products (Fritz et al., 2011, McCallum et al., 2006). To aid in solving discrepancies, citizen science is a high value resource. For example, the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) has created Geo-Wiki, an information portal that allows volunteers to improve data on land cover using satellite imagery from Google Earth (Fritz et al., 2017, See et al., 2015). Results show volunteer-contributed data to be generally equivalent to expert data (See et al., 2013).
Satellite imagery interpretation frequently depends on the existence of images taken in-situ, requiring researchers to seek alternative sources of visual data to build a robust model of the environment. Estima and Painho (2013) explored the adequacy of Flickr images to help the quality control of the CORINE land cover (CLC). They concluded there is potential for such use, admitting however that their study has not looked into the content of the images and their adequacy for this purpose. Nevertheless, ElQadi et al. (2017) demonstrated that since Flickr contains such a massive amount of photos, even if only a small fraction are relevant, there is potential to achieve high value outcomes from open data on social network sites (SNS) by careful filtering, which avoids some of the issues associated with raw image data (Barve, 2014).
Social network sites (SNS) geo-tagged photographs were used in previous research to determine land cover classes. For instance, Estima et al. (2014) compared CORINE Land Cover information obtained from Flickr geo-tagged photos against classification based on satellite imagery. They concluded that the SNS geotagged photos are a valuable supplementary data source. Oba et al. (2014) retrieved photos from Flickr using text tags corresponding to land cover classes. They then classified regions to land cover types based on image feature classification using a support vector machine (SVM), as well as photos’ titles and tags. Xu et al. (2017) and Xing et al. (2018) used Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to classify geotagged photos from the Global Geo-Referenced Field Photo Library and Flickr into land cover classes.
Our work seeks to support remote sensing scientists’ decision making on land cover type, rather than to automate the decision process. This distinction is made primarily because our research problem stems from discrepancies in land cover satellite imagery.
Consequently, our work provides a practical framework to solve existing problems in land cover classification in understudied regions, rather than suggesting theory to be validated in well-studied regions as was the focus of previous work.
To achieve our objectives, we developed a framework that uses computer vision to describe image visual content, and an artificial neural network classification model to decide whether or not the image is relevant based on this description.
The main outcome of our study is a reusable framework to find and filter imagery that can help determine land cover types. Therefore, we investigate whether particular countries should have customised models, or whether data from all countries can be used to build one generalised model. To build the suggested framework, human labour is required to label images for training the machine learning algorithm. It is therefore worthwhile testing whether models can be reused in countries other than those from where the training data originates. We developed country-based and generalised models for Africa, and compared the results to establish the most appropriate ways to use them. Our framework was integrated into Geo-wiki.
Although our framework is independent of the social network site data source, we chose Flickr for its favourable Application Programming Interface (API) since it accepts queries simultaneously filtered spatially, temporally, and textually. We used the Python Flickr API (Mignon, 2016).
In the next sections we present our methodology, and discuss the results of the different models we developed. Finally, we present our publicly available API allowing other users to invoke our models.
