Studies of the productivity effects of computers are almost as old as computers themselves (e.g. Shureman, 1957) and even early studies (Abernathy and Townsend, 1975, Danziger, 1979) reflect an ambivalence that has characterized most subsequent assessments (Van Ark, 2016, Polak, 2017). Scholars refer to a “productivity paradox” (Brynjolfsson, 1993), perhaps best summarized by Nobel Prize winner Robert Solow who observed “we see computers everywhere except in the productivity statistics” (Solow, 1987, p. 36).
Since the early years of high-speed computing, one of the major functions of computers has been to improve efficiency by using computer-based applications to administration. A corollary question to the productivity paradox is whether computer-based systems contribute significantly to administrative efficiency or effectiveness. Unsurprisingly, empirical research suggests that sometimes computer-assisted administration leads to significant gains and sometimes not (for literature reviews see Byrd and Marshall, 1997, Goodard, et al., 2012). Effects depend not only on characteristics of systems design but also the functional context of administration, the skills of administrators, and the degree of communication and cooperation among relevant parties (Kohli and Devaraj, 2003).
Our research examines the effects of one pervasive type of computer application in one specific context. We focus on a relatively innovation in research administration in universities, “robotic bureaucracy” (Bozeman and Youtie, 2020). Robotic bureaucracy entails refers to administrative communications and compliance requests being conducted on the basis of automated, highly structured, computer-based interactions that usually originate with a “robotic email.” Robotic emails are standardized and based on routines and are sent according to routinized time intervals or event triggers, often with no necessity of direct human involvement.
For almost all computer-based automated administrative systems, one objective is to increase efficiency, often by reducing administrative burden. As we know from decades of management information systems (MIS) research, efficiency-focused efforts have mixed effects, including shifts in administrative burden from some parties to others. Often the burden shift is quite intentional. Thus, businesses and government agencies can save money by having customers and clients be responsible for providing online data rather than having direct communications with employees. For example, online banking has saved banks money by reducing the number of tellers employed (Hoehle, et al., 2012). In government, electronic filing of income taxes has both reduced the number of tax examiners needed and saved money by allowing easily targeted, criterion-based audits (Wang, 2003).
In universities if there is a burden shift from research administrators to the university's academic researchers it is rarely the case that the shift is intentional. As discussed below, evidence suggests that the administrative burden experienced by university researchers is rapidly increasing (Decker, et al., 2007; Rockwell, 2009; Saha, et al., 2011). There is widespread concern that more and more of researchers’ time is taken up with administration, leaving less time for actual research. It is not only the researchers themselves who are interested in this problem; university leaders and higher education policymakers who focus on the financial realities of the research enterprise have good reason to be concerned. Aside from the value of social and economic of the knowledge created the researchers, for many universities external research funding is an important component of the overall university budget. In the United States, for example, since 2010, research intensive state government universities have, on average, received more funding from research grants and contracts than from the appropriations funding from the state governments that created them (American Institutes for Research, 2016, 220). In many universities total research funding brings in almost as much (80% on average in research intensive universities) as does student tuition. Thus, the administrative efficiency and productivity of research has serious implications for the future of many universities.
We must emphasize that we do not discount the importance of research administrators’ duties or the difficulties they face in keeping up with increasing, largely external, demands. However, when we consider the human capital investments and the social and economic returns involved in the direct production of research compared to the human capital investments and returns from administration of research, then it becomes clear enough that a burden shift from administrators to researchers rarely results in a net productivity gain. Thus, the topic of robotic bureaucracy in research administration merits scrutiny. Not only are the objective outcomes of robotic bureaucracy important but in many respects the perceptions of researchers are equally important. Perceptions of outcomes, especially burden shift, frame researchers approach to their work, their work satisfaction and motivation, and in some cases their students’ decisions as to whether to pursue academic careers or choose an environment perceived as more hospitable to their talents and efforts.
Our attempt to better understand the effects of robotic bureaucracy in university administration involves two very different research approaches: “electronic participant-observation” and semi-structured interviews. The participant-observer approach (Platt, 1983; Musante and DeWalt, 2010), focuses on our own direct experiences with the robotic bureaucracy flowing from our own research grants; these experiences are reflected in 945 email exchanges (ergo, “electronic participant-observation”).
The use of semi-structured interviews is a much more common approach and a useful complement to electronic participant-observation. Our research team conducted interviews with 116 academic faculty at several universities and in each major STEM field. All interviewees were principal investigators who had grants from the National Science Foundation (in some cases, these interviewees also had grants from the National Institutes of Health or other US extramural granting agencies).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, we present a discussion of administrative burden, including the conceptualization employed here. The next section provides a discussion of issues in university research administration, focusing especially administrative burden. Third, we consider in more detail the concept of robotic bureaucracy as it pertains to research administration. Fourth, we give more detail on the research approaches employed in this study. A fifth section proffers research questions, followed by a review of our findings related to those questions. A final section provides a discussion of limitations of the present study, an agenda for future research and suggested approaches for improving the design and use of automated emails for research administration.
