Wheat grains are rich in starch, protein, lipids, minerals and other nutrients, and can be used in the development of highly nutritious and functional food. However, they have no shell protection, thin cortex, soft structure, a lot of hydrophilic substances and strong moisture absorption capacity. Compared with maize and rice, wheat is more prone to breeding pests and mould. Fusarium head blight is a worldwide wheat disease, which brings a great loss to wheat production worldwide every year (Bai & Shaner, 2004). In addition to causing yield loss, mycotoxins such as deoxynivalenol (DON) can be produced in the process of F. graminearum infection, and this can seriously affect the quality and commodity value of wheat, and poison people and animals (Walter et al., 2010). Therefore, it is necessary to be able to estimate the DON levels in wheat grains before they enter the food chain.
At present, there are several commonly used methods for identifying DON contents, including thin-layer chromatography (TLC, Rocha et al., 2017), high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Moazami & Jinap, 2009), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA, Li et al., 2012), Gas chromatography (GC, Cunha & Fernandes, 2012). All of these methods require trained operators and the use of unfriendly chemicals, are destructive in nature, take a long time for the examination of a single sample, and have high cost, which limits their feasibility for real time measurements. Therefore, an effective, rapid and non-destructive method is needed for wheat safety control.
Spectroscopic and imaging-based sensing techniques are increasingly being studied as potential alternatives to chemical approaches, for their advantages of little or no sample pre-treatment, high accuracy, fast and non-invasive detection with robust and cost-efficient sensor technology available nowadays (He et al., 2018). Among them, visible and near infrared (Vis-NIR) spectroscopy and computer vision techniques have great potential in the online detection of foodstuffs and have been widely used in practice (Qu et al., 2015). Because metabolic activity of toxigenic fungus in samples can result in considerable change in the chemical parameters and physical characteristics, so these two techniques could be promising tools for non-destructive detection of contaminated foodstuffs (Wu et al., 2018). In recent years, many scholars have applied NIR spectroscopy to the rapid analysis of mycotoxin contamination in grains (Hossain & Goto, 2014). De Girolamo et al. (2019) analysed the ochratoxin A contaminated wheat grains using Fourier transform NIR and Fourier transform mid-infrared spectroscopy. The threshold of ochratoxin A was set to 2 μg kg−1, and the results showed that both discrimination accuracies are higher than 94%. Shen et al. (2018) applied NIR and electronic nose techniques to the detection of Aspergillus spp. contamination levels in peanuts (acceptable: colony counts log CFU/g < 2.7, mouldy: log CFU/g ≥ 2.7), and the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) results showed correct classification rates of 92.11% and 86.84% respectively. Dvoáek et al. (2012) quantitatively predicted the DON contents of wheat grains by using NIR spectroscopy, and a correlation coefficient of 0.88 was obtained by partial least squares regression (PLSR). As for computer vision, Bayraktar et al. (2006) demonstrated an application of computer vision and pattern-recognition techniques to classify scatter patterns formed by Listeria colonies. Wang et al. (2014) developed a selective growth medium and a more rapid detection method based on computer vision for selective isolation and identification of Staphylococcus aureus in foods. Both studies suggested the feasibility of image-based bio-detection systems. There have been a number of reports of the detection of mildewed nuts based on colour (Chen et al., 2011; Kumar et al., 2010) and texture (Chen et al., 2007) information. However, there have been few reports that applied computer vision to the detection of mycotoxins in grains. In general, most studies have been conducted under laboratory conditions and have focused on static detection, so feasibility studies of online detection of DON contents in wheat grains are urgently needed.
In this study, naturally-grown wheat grain samples (normal and diseased) have been collected from several of the main-producing areas in China and were assessed with no inoculation and with simulated storage. The Vis-NIR and computer vision techniques were combined to realise online discrimination of normal and DON contaminated wheat grains, and the specific components of this study were: (1) to build a dynamic detection system for simulating online detection to obtain the spectral and image information; (2) to collect and extract the optimal spectral and image features of wheat grain samples; (3) to integrate spectral and image features for discrimination of different DON levels in wheat grains; (4) to compare the results of different feature integrations and analyse the effects.
