The U.S. Department of Education's (DoEd) Ready To Learn (RTL) initiative provides $25 million annually for the development of mass media intended to promote school readiness, with a particular emphasis on early literacy (Hurwitz, 2019). It is one among many international initiatives intended to provide educational media/technology to promote school readiness (Plowman & Stephen, 2003). In the U.S., RTL has provided an added stream of funding for some longstanding educational media properties that premiered prior to the launch of the grant, such as Sesame Street, along with seed money for new properties that did not exist before RTL, including Between the Lions, Super WHY! and WordWorld (Lowenstein, Johnson, & Fragale, 2019). Today, the majority of young children in the U.S. have been exposed to media paid for in part by RTL (Corporation for Public Broadcasting & Public Broadcasting Service [hereafter CPB and PBS, respectively], 2011). Research suggests RTL-funded mediahas successfuly promoted basic early academic skills (e.g., alphabet knowledge) in the short-term (Hurwitz, 2019), but whether this expenditure has resulted in more children truly being ready to succeed in school is an open question. Theoreticians believe early educational media exposure can catalyze long-term learning, an idea known as the Early Learning Hypothesis (Anderson, Huston, Schmitt, Linebarger, & Wright, 2001). To date, this hypothesis largely has been substantiated by correlational or indirect measures of the long-term effects of educational television (e.g., Anderson et al., 2001, Kearney and Levine, 2019) and with minimal consideration for child-level factors that might moderate effects.
In the current study, children who participated in an evaluation of RTL-funded literacy-themed computer games in early childhood were re-contacted to determine if these games had measurable impacts on their middle childhood literacy skills and overall school performance. Literacy skills are essential for children's academic success, and children who fail to acquire early literacy skills remain at-risk throughout schooling (Hoff, 2013, Stanovich, 2000). Children with strong literacy skills tend to exhibit stronger performance across a host of school subjects (e.g., English, social studies), because many courses require children to read texts and process written and verbal directions (Schiefele, Schaffner, Möller, & Wigfield, 2012).
Findings from the present study provide accountability evidence for the RTL initiative by demonstrating the effect media funded by RTL has had on literacy and school readiness. These results also validate and modernize scholarly understanding of the Early Learning Hypothesis.
1.1. Ready To Learn initiativeRTL launched in 1994, a time when the American public was concerned about a dearth of high quality children's television programming and large numbers of young children entering elementary school ill-prepared for formal schooling (Bryant et al., 2001, Lowenstein et al., 2019). The intention of the initiative was to fund mass media that would help America's school children, especially at-risk populations, gain foundational early learning skills necessary for success in elementary school and beyond (Lowenstein et al., 2019). To maintain accountability for this use of public funds, RTL grants also require fund recipients to partner with third party researchers to conduct rigorous evaluative research (Lowenstein et al., 2019). RTL grant recipients uniquely have made most of their content publicly available for free or at a low cost (CPB & PBS, 2011), have promoted positive parenting practices via social marketing campaigns (with taglines like “Raising Readers” or “Anytime is learning time”; Hurtado, Galdo, Agin, & Heil, 2010), and have created outreach programming (e.g., media-themed summer camps) intended to complement and extend the lessons present in the media (Lowenstein et al., 2019). Together, these factors have helped to make RTL-funded media wide-reaching (CPB, 2011, DeWitt and Simensky, 2019). Media producers funded by RTL also have been at the forefront of experimenting with newer forms of media; starting in 2005, the grant explicitly tasked content producers with creating new media content, such as educational computer games (Lowenstein et al., 2019, Michael Cohen Group, 2012). The present study aims in part to evaluate the long-term success of one such tool: an educational computer gaming suite that promoted foundational reading skills ()(Schmitt, Hurwitz, Sheridan Duel, & Nichols Linebarger, 2018).
1.2. Educational media as a catalyst for long-term learning and growthWith their Early Learning Hypothesis, Anderson et al. (2001) proposed that early exposure to educational television, such as programs funded by RTL, could spark growth and learning that persists throughout children's time in school. They suggested that children who acquire key school readiness skills from educational television in early childhood might be better prepared for elementary school, initially placed in higher ability groups in school, and thus set on a trajectory of continued success. As described in greater detail later in this sub-section, Anderson and team (2001) substantiated their thinking with a large correlational study, linking natural variation in children's television consumption in preschool to their grades in high school. The present study provides a causal test of this hypothesis and explores whether exposure to interactive media such as RTL-funded computer games leads to long-term growth.A host of studies following up with RTL and other educational media evaluations provide causal evidence that positive effects from educational media are detectable several months after initial exposure. For instance, in an evaluation of an RTL-funded vocabulary intervention, participants retained vocabulary gains six months after the intervention had concluded (Neuman, Newman, & Dwyer, 2011). Likewise, in another RTL intervention, young children who watched episodes of literacy-themed Super WHY! towards the beginning of the school year outperformed control group peers at the end of the year on a measure of letter sound knowledge, and children who watched the show and played complementary online games outperformed peers on measures of lower case letter knowledge and rhyme awareness (Linebarger, 2010). However, contrary to the Early Learning Hypothesis, children in the study's control group who did not consume any media had the strongest long-term performance on a measure of beginning sound awareness (i.e., understanding of the sounds at the beginning of words; Linebarger, 2010).Similar experimental studies looking at non-RTL-funded media also found results consistent with the Early Learning Hypothesis. For example, children who played a noncommercial, literacy-themed computer game that promoted letter-sound knowledge saw sustained effects relative to a control group several months after an initial effectiveness evaluation (Segers & Verhoeven, 2005). Likewise, kindergarten students who played computer games that promoted blending (i.e., combining letter sounds into words) demonstrated stronger reading skills than control group counterparts mid-way through first grade (Reitsma & Wesseling, 1998). And kindergartners who played a mix of literacy-themed computer games and apps evinced stronger performance on a composite measure of early literacy skill at multiple time points across first grade (Ponciano & Thai, 2016).A small number of scholars, including Anderson and team (2001), have examined even longer-term impacts from educational media (mostly television) prior to the launch of the RTL initiative using correlational or indirect methods. The evidence these studies provide is mixed. To illustrate, Anderson and associates (2001) found that preschoolers who watched child-targeted television in the early 1980's (including educational programs such as Sesame Street, which at the time had not yet received RTL funding) read more books and achieved better grades in high school English, math, and science. In contrast, in another quasi-experimental study, Kearney and Levine (2019) found no differences in high school reading, vocabulary, or math performance between preschoolers who lived in and outside communities with access to Sesame Street in the late 1960's, suggesting that Sesame Street did not impact school performance. However, in the same study, those living in communities with Sesame Street demonstrated stronger labor force outcomes despite the lack of evidence of differential school performance (Kearney & Levine, 2019). Differences in outcomes between these two studies may be driven in part by changes in Sesame Street's curriculum over the past half-decade (Fisch, 2004) or as a result of methodological differences.
1.3. Differential susceptibility to media effectsPer other media theories, it may be overly simplistic to assume all children would realize comparable long-term benefits from early educational media exposure, and indeed, a focus on individual differences between children may help explain why different studies yield seemingly conflicting findings (Piotrowski and Valkenburg, 2015, Valkenburg and Peter, 2013). Piotrowski and Valkenburg (2015) distinguish between “dandelion children” (p. 4), whose developmental trajectories are largely unaffected by exposure to positive or negative media content, and “orchid children” (p. 4), who flourish when exposed to educational media but who wither or face negative developmental outcomes when unable to consume curriculum-based fare. Turning to theories originally conceived to explain short-term learning from media may shed insight into which children are most likely to be “orchid” children who demonstrate long-term benefits from consuming RTL-funded media. Put different, other theoretical work has the potential to add nuance to scholarly understanding of the Early Learning Hypothesis by pointing to profiles of children most likely to see long-term benefits from educational media exposure.The Moderate Discrepancy Hypothesis (Siegler and Alibali, 2005, Valkenburg and Piotrowski, 2017) and Traveling Lens Model (Huston and Wright, 1989, Rice et al., 1982) both posit that children benefit from media when they perceive its content as being moderately difficult – not too easy or too challenging. These frameworks align with classic developmental psychology principles, such as the notion that learning is strongest when educational content is presented within children's “zone of proximal development” or slightly beyond their current level of mastery (Vygotsky, 1930–1934/1978). Along these lines, both the Moderate Discrepancy Hypothesis and Traveling Lens Model propose that children will find content that presents material slightly above their current level of understanding/ability to be appealing and thus will allocate considerable attention to such content. The Traveling Lens Model goes on to suggest that this interest and attention will facilitate learning. Both of these frameworks refer to how difficult an individual child perceives media content to be. Thus, a child with below average skills relative to peers might find a media program to be at just the right level for them as an individual, even if that same program would be too easy to engage a same-aged peer with stronger skills. Of particular relevance to the current paper, the Traveling Lens Model further suggests that as an individual child's thinking becomes more advanced or their familiarity with the mediated content increases (i.e., as their personal lens travels), their interest, attention, and learning from a given media stimulus may decline. In such situations, children might begin attending to more challenging aspects of favored media products or seek out more challenging fare entirely.In the present interactive media environment, replete with computer games and apps, the media itself might “level up” to continuously present children with content aligned to their evolving skillsets (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015, Walker, 2011). Extending this line of thinking, perhaps educational media may have more pronounced long-term effects for children who found content moderately difficult at initial exposure and in cases when media present children increasingly challenging content over time.The evidence is mixed as to whether, in the short-term, children with average abilities were indeed the “orchids” who flourished following exposure to RTL-funded media. In some studies, weaker early readers’ skillsets seemed to best align with the body of RTL-funded content, while in other cases, stronger early readers seemed better suited to RTL-funded media. For instance, in an evaluation of the RTL-funded television show WordWorld, children with higher initial literacy skills prior to WordWorld exposure showed greater gains on posttest measures of word recognition, while children with lower initial literacy demonstrated greater gains in phonemic awareness (i.e., mastery of language sounds; Michael Cohen Group, 2009). In other studies focused on literacy summer camps using curricula and media from Super WHY! and on Between the Lions television episodes, children with average and above average literacy at pretest benefited most from media exposure (Jennings, 2013, Linebarger et al., 2004). Conversely, in another evaluation, children under the age of 4.5 years only benefited from RTL-funded Pocoyo apps if their language skills were poor pre-exposure (Michael Cohen Group, 2013). This substantial variation makes it difficult to say if the body of RTL short-term evaluations substantiate the Moderate Discrepancy Hypothesis and Traveling Lens Model. It may be the alignment between media content and child skillsets varies across different RTL-funded media products or different samples of children.The Capacity Model proposes somewhat different mechanisms underlying learning from media (Fisch, 2000, Fisch, 2004, Fisch, 2016). This model is most well-known for its nuanced discussion of the characteristics of media that lead to learning, but, especially pertinent to the current discussion, it also outlines individual differences that may distinguish “orchid” vs. “dandelion” children. The model posits that children with stronger media-related subject matter knowledge, interest, and, in some cases, verbal ability should gain more from educational media because they should be able to assimilate the narrative and/or educational messages presented in the media more efficiently, easily, and readily (Fisch, 2004). That is, the model implies a linear relationship between subject matter knowledge, interest, and verbal ability, and learning (however, Fisch never uses the word “linear” to describe these relationships, and in a footnote focused on the characteristics of media that facilitate learning, acknowledges the possibility of nonlinear relationships; Fisch, 2004).The RTL literature reviewed earlier in this subsection calls into question the assumption that prior knowledge, verbal ability, and subject matter interest linearly predict learning (e.g., Michael Cohen Group, 2009, Michael Cohen Group, 2013). Also, similar to the Traveling Lens Model and Moderate Discrepancy Hypothesis, the Capacity Model's tenets about child characteristics have only been examined in the short-term, and it therefore is difficult to say if and how these individual differences would manifest in the long-term.
