In the 21st century, technology is a key enabler of the integration and prosperity of many institutions. Using it, institutions can have better visibility through real-time information sharing that will lead to internal and external improvements. Geographical information technologies (GIT) are gaining special attention based on their ability to support institutions in reaching their objectives (Harrison et al., 2007). This dimension is of particular importance in Africa, where GIT performs an extremely relevant role in development activities. In fact, sectors such as the environment and natural resources, economic development and agriculture, among others, greatly benefit from GIT use (Amade et al., 2018). The use of satellite imagery, global positioning systems and geographic information systems help in the management of information and decision support for those sectors enormously (Amade et al., 2018; ESRI, 2002; Mashimbye et al., 2012; Panek, 2013; Tanser and le Sueur, 2002). This use has been increasing steadily in the past few decades, and Mozambique is also following this trend (Amade et al., 2018). The growth and relevance of the use of GIT in Africa is also exemplified by its compulsory use in projects funded by donor and development organisations such as the World Bank.
Understanding the factors that lead institutions to adopt new technologies is a permanent issue in the field of information systems (Taylor and Todd, 1995). There is a clear need to understand the post-adoption stage of GIT in institutions; however existing studies focus more on the adoption of technology in general (Amade et al., 2017; Eslami et al., 2011; Hong, 2014; Li and Liu, 2014; Obal, 2017; Orimoloye et al., 2019; Schaefer and Thinh, 2019; Torresani et al., 2019; Van Westen, 2013; Wolf et al., 2015) and not on the post-adoption of GIT in the Mozambican context.
Inspired by these issues, this research seeks to improve the comprehension of GIT with attention in identifying the determinants behind the post-adoption use and intention to increase the level of use in Mozambican institutions. Through a proposed model based on a synthesis of three theoretical frameworks (the diffusion of innovation theory (DOI), technology – organisation – environment (TOE) framework, and institutional theory), the major priority of the study resides in seeking to comprehend what motivates organisations to keep using and increase the level of use GIT. The contribution of the article is threefold. First, the research addresses a gap by focusing on the post-adoption stages of GIT in an African context. Second, we integrated three well-established models, i.e., DOI theory, TOE framework, and institutional theory. We propose a holistic model that evaluates the direct and indirect effects of intention to increase the level of GIT. Finally, our model also analyses the moderation effects of the environmental context, as suggested by (Oliveira et al., 2019).
The paper is organised into seven sections. In the first and second sections, we provide an overview of GIT, compare differences with other technologies, and contextualise GIT in the African continent. Section 3 covers the research model. We present the methodology in section 4. In section 5, we introduce the study data. Section 6 contains the research discussion and raises some implications pertinent to our study. Finally, we conclude the paper by summarising and providing closing remarks.
