The global emissions report by the United Nations Environment Programs (UNEP) has again raised the alarm that the world will struggle to meet its <1.5 °C global warming target unless global emissions of greenhouse gases are decreased by 7.6% annually from 2020 through 2030 [1]. To meet this target, China's low-carbon development goal is to reduce its total carbon emissions from over 10 billion tons at present to 3–4 billion tons by 2050, making the per capita carbon emissions the same as the required global per capita [2]. Considering China's current energy consumption, this represents a great challenge. China's rapid economic development and high population density in urbanized areas have led to an exponential increase in the floor areas of buildings with an associated increase in energy consumption. The research on energy efficiency is thus imperative to achieve China's low-carbon emission reduction target.
Dormitory buildings in university campuses are a type of large apartment buildings with a dense occupation proportion (usually 4–6 students in each room with 8–12 m2 per student) and consistent use patterns attributable to the collective living conditions. A report from China's Ministry of Education [3] noted that a total of 38.33 million students enrolled in higher education whit about 82% of them (31.43 million) living in campus dormitory buildings. There are 2663 universities in China, of which the total floor area of campus dormitories accounted for approximately 977 million square meters, with an increase of 23 million square meters per year. The dormitory buildings offer a great opportunity to reduce significant amount of energy demand in university campuses. However, there is a lack of relevant research to aid universities to better design and manage this important asset. Therefore, research is urgently needed to investigate the energy consumption characteristics of these dormitory buildings. The dormitory buildings accommodate the young generation who display similar behavioral patterns due to the university lifestyle. It is thus of great importance to understand their behaviors related to energy consumption.
The research of energy use behaviors has come to the spotlight since buildings do not use energy: users do [4]. In recent years, numerous studies have been conducted to find out the energy use behaviors in residential buildings and have demonstrated that residents’ behaviors played an important role in household energy savings in China [[5], [6], [7]], Netherlands [8], Ireland [9], Portugal [10], the United States [11], India [12], Northern Ireland [13] and the United Kingdom [14]. In particular, Wood and Newborough [15] reported that on average, 14% of energy could be saved simply by changing the behavior of residents within households. There is a big potential to conserve significant amount of energy by changing residents' behaviors towards energy consumption habits [16,17].
This research focuses on dormitory buildings in the hot summer and cold winter climate region. Climate is of critical importance in determining building energy consumption [11,18,19]. In China, the climate region of hot summer and cold winter covers an area of 1.8 million square kilometers with a population of 550 million [20]. There is a wide seasonal temperature change; summer and winter are long and heavily differentiated, while spring and autumn are short and quickly transitioning [21]. In China, most relevant research has been conducted in cold [22,23] and severely cold regions [24]. Meanwhile, the existing literature in the hot summer and cold winter region mainly focuses on thermal comfort and related behaviors [[25], [26], [27], [28]]. In winter, although central heating is not provided, residents in this region still use independent heating equipment intermittently [7], while in summer, residents usually adapt to the weather by a series of behaviors, such as turning on the refrigeration equipment and adjusting clothing [7,17]. The research on energy consumption characteristics and influencing behavioral factors in this area is still scarce. This work provides researchers and designers with a clear understanding of the energy consumption and influential behavioral factors in this climatic region.
In sum, the study aims to understand the energy consumption characteristics and influential behavioral factors in dormitory buildings in China's hot summer and cold winter region. The research has been conducted in three stages. First, data on electricity consumption in dormitories has been collected at a university campus in Mianyang, China (a city displaying a hot summer-cold winter climate). The data included monthly electricity consumption for 620 rooms which accommodate a total of 2480 university students within two large student apartment buildings. The data covers the years of 2018 and 2019. We analyzed the data for these years separately to verify each other. Next, we surveyed the residents within the 620 rooms to collect data on their behaviors of using three electric appliances: computer, electric water heating for shower, and air conditioning. Finally, we established a hierarchical regression model to systematically identify the quantitative relationship between the electricity consumption characteristics and the behavioral factors analyzed. Non-behavioral factors have also been considered to explain the difference found in both the electric consumption and the behaviors of using the appliances.
Indeed, researchers in many countries and regions have been able to effectively assess the potential of residential energy consumption by analyzing household energy consumption behavior. The novelty of this research is about the building type under the investigation, namely the dormitory building. Large dormitory buildings are characterized by simplicity and particularity of function. By studying the energy consumption of students of different genders, floors and orientations and the behavioral factors related to energy consumption, it is helpful for the design and management of student dormitory buildings in university campus. By understanding and analyzing different behavior patterns of students, it is also helpful to develop energy mindful education programmes for the next generation.
