The quantity of stored grain in warehouses has commercial and crucial importance for a country. It is therefore imperative to frequently check the grain quantity in granaries to ensure grain safety. There are still a large number of grain depots where manually inspection ways are used to check the quantity of grain, e.g., measuring the volume of grain in a warehouse manually. However, the traditional ways have been proven to be more expensive and also cannot get the grain quantity in real time if need to check all warehouses. To solve the problems, some online auto-measurement methods are proposed, including, but not limited to, pressure estimation-based approach, infrared laser scanner-based approach, radar-based approach and ultrasonic wave-based approach which can automatically obtain more accurate grain quantity.
Pressure estimation-based approach [1] can directly measure the grain weight according to the grain pressure obtained by sensors placed at the bottom of a granary. In this approach, a pressure-based grain weight mode is built using machine learning methods, which transforms the pressure of grain to its weight in real time. The main disadvantage of this approach is that the sensitivity and accuracy of these sensors will decrease under prolonged stress. Infrared laser scanner-based approach [2] first detects the height of points on the grain surface by laser scanning. Based on the height of these points, this approach calculates the grain volume of a granary and then obtains the grain weight according to the volume and the bulk density. Although this approach can achieve accurate grain volume, it is more time-consuming as it takes a long time to scan the whole granary each time (about 2,000 points need to be scanned for a large granary). Radar-based approach [3] and Ultrasonic-based approach [4] detect the amount of grain in silos by collecting 3D height information of grain surface with radar and ultrasonic devices, respectively. The two approaches can obtain accurate volumes of grain, but they are susceptible to dust, and moreover, they are only applied for the silos and there is no example for warehouses.
Recently, with the construction of intelligent granary, most of them are equipped with cameras. Warehouse staff can check the grain situation in granaries (e.g., the height of the grain surface) through the cameras with Palt-Tilt-Zoom (PTZ). However, it is time-consuming to check all the granaries and harmful to people health. Inspired from the observation, we developed a computer vision-based monitoring method instead of the manual inspection. The key idea of our proposed method is to determine whether the grain quantity has changed according to how much grain surface dropped relative to grain loading line (or new marker line above grain loading line). Thus, the goal of our proposed method is to obtain grain loading line and grain surface. To this end, we firstly use the camera to take an image at the outlet of a granary, and then detect grain loading line and grain surface of the image with accurate boundaries. In order to utilize the existing hardware devices of warehouses without adding new equipment, we emploied Support Vector Machine (SVM) [5] to detect grain loading line and grain surface. Thereafter, GrubCut [6] with higher order potentials was utilized to refine the initial results, which could get more accurate grain loading line and grain surface. Finally, the area between the grain loading line and the grain surface was calculated and compared with the previous measured data to determine whether the grain surface had dropped (as shown in Fig. 1). However, SVM has a limitation of obtaining compact and homogeneous segments due to it does not consider any information about spatial context. For example, we used standard SVM to detect initial grain surface which was fed into GrabCut as seeds to refine the initial result. Due to some of these seeds which might be located in background or grain loading line, we couldn't obtain accurate grain surface. To tackle the problem, two-level spatial constraints derived from two types of superpixels were integrated into SVM to obtain initial segmentation of an image. The main contributions of this paper were summarized as follows. We proposed a computer vision system with a camera instead of manual inspection ways to monitor the change of grain quantity in warehouses. Different from other methods which try to get the accurate grain quality, our method was used to monitor the change of grain quantity. Two-level spatial constraints were introduced into the SVM classification process to ameliorate the misclassification problem due to SVM inability to consider any information about spatial context. In addition, GrabCut with high order potentials was adopted to refine the results obtained by SVM, which can automatically draw boxes without interaction. Through incorporating the spatial constraints, our method strengthened the interactions between the low-level superpixels within a same high-level superpixel and prevented over smoothing across region boundaries. The experiment results demonstrate the practical usability of our proposed monitoring scheme.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Schematic diagram of our proposed method.
