This case study explores an educational innovation, the introduction of tablet computers to a school, and its impact upon the various elements of the classroom Activity System. Digital technologies are often introduced to educational settings on the assumption that they will have positive impact, for example on learner engagement and motivation, which will enhance learning. As Selwyn (2017) shows, there is little evidence directly linking digital tools with ‘better’ learning and subtle agendas often underlie these innovations. Rationales for introducing new technologies may include the desire to promote (non-pedagogic) change, the belief that digital skills are essential for modern life; the potential for using digital tools for teaching (non-computing) subjects and the perceived need to train future programmers (Hawkridge, 1989).
In this case, the innovation was led by a headteacher in a disadvantaged, mountainous region of Oman, far from conurbations, taking advantage of a Ministry of Education (MoE) initiative to introduce tablet computers. She believed that tablets could replace pupils’ heavy book bags, improve their digital skills and develop learner autonomy. Although the school was an unlikely candidate for such an initiative, the personal vision and drive of the headteacher led to the provision of four iPads and fifteen Windows tablets. The MoE had agreed that a researcher could follow the introduction of tablets and, and as this school was the chosen site for the MoE it was thus the site of the research study.
The most recent information about the use of digital technologies in Oman is a survey conducted in 2016 by the Information Technology Authority of the Sultanate of Oman (ITA, 2019). The report does not say how families (5351 households) were selected other than that samples were chosen to be representative of the population. Furthermore, the report does not clearly show differences between urban and rural areas. The survey showed that 86% of households have access to the internet, mostly through mobile phones. Only 21% have broadband internet. 38% of participants cited lack of skills as the reason for not accessing the internet whereas 14% cited their high prices and lack of time. 12% said that slow connection speeds prevented them from using the internet. According to the survey, the top 3 activities when using the internet are 96% social media, 73% video downloading and 41% voice calls. In the governorate where this research study was conducted, 88% of households had internet access although parent interviews and the school experience on which this study reports, indicate that this digital technology use is much lower in the school catchment area than in the governorate as a whole.
1.1. Tablet computers in educationAffordable, easy to use touchscreen tablet computers with downloadable apps have been available since the introduction of the iPad in 2010. Much research focuses on attitudes to these technologies (e.g Dündar & Akçayır, 2014; Ifenthaler & Schweinbenz, 2016; Khlaif, 2018; Lu, Chang, Kinshuk, Huang, & Chen, 2014; Villani et al., 2018) and while this can be revealing, it only captures one element in educational systems. Like all educational change (Fullan, 2008; Wedell, 2009), introducing new technologies impacts in complex ways, mediated through affordances of the technologies and the attitudes and abilities of the people involved. Several studies have found that tablets improved learning but also had drawbacks. In the systematic review of tablets in schools, conducted by (Haßler, Major, & Hennessy, 2016), twelve out of 33 studies were methodologically rigorous and, of these, nine showed positive effects and three showed no difference in learning outcomes. Haβler et al. included only studies in which tablets had been successfully introduced but noted that in several cases implementation was unsuccessful due to factors such as poor project management or technological problems. Yanikoglu, Gogus, and Inal (2017) found that tablets motivated primary school pupils to improve their handwriting but increased teachers' workload cf. Vrasidas (2015) finding that digital tools slowed the teaching process. Fokides and Atsikpasi (2017) found that tablets enhanced the learning of (botanical) knowledge but did not reduce scientific misunderstandings whilst in Volk, Cotič, Zajc, and Istenic Starcic (2017) tablets improved the teaching of mathematics but the speed of the app meant that weaker students had fewer opportunities to observe and learn from more expert learners. Volk et al. also showed teachers had to manage student conceptualisations of tablets as devices for playing games or engaging with social media. Several studies have raised concerns related to those in Volk et al. (2017) about potential negative impacts of mobile technologies on factors such as learners’ concentration (Ditzler, Hong, & Strudler, 2016) and reduced awareness of the non-digital world (Dunn, Gray, Moffett, & Mitchell, 2018). The complexity of these effects requires an holistic view of what happens in the school or classroom and led to an Activity Theory analysis to answer the question “What impact might the introduction of tablet computers have on the Activity System of a school?”
1.2. Activity TheoryActivity Theory provides a philosophical framework for analysing forms of individual and social developmental processes that are interlinked (Kuutti, 1996). When studying tablet introduction into the school system, it was important not only to look at how individual teachers or pupils used tablets, without the wider context. The Activity System must be taken as a whole. What is perceived as a minor change may result in disturbing the whole Activity and may go beyond that to another Activity.The Activity Theory lens provided an holistic view of the introduction and impact of introducing tablets. Activity Theory evolved from the ideas of Vygotsky in the 1920s (Vygotsky, 1978; Engeström & Kerosuo, 2007; Leontev, 2018). The core unit of analysis is the Activity or Activity System, which (Kaptelinin & Nardi, 2012: 12) gloss as a “unit of life.” An Activity System comprises a set of mutually determining elements: principally, a Subject, typically an individual, who is trying to achieve a purpose or Object, leading to an Outcome, within a Community. (Capitalised terms have technical meanings within Activity Theory). Subjects use physical, social or psychological Artefacts to achieve their Object with the relationship between Subjects and the Community organised by a system of Rules, the articulation between the Community and the Object mediated by a particular Division of Labour. An Activity System is commonly represented by the diagram in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (113KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Activity system (Engestrom, 2000).An Activity does not simply come into being but draws on the histories of the individuals, the community and previous Activities. An Activity may have Contradictions, which (Kuutti, 1996: 34) describes as “a misfit within elements, between them, between different activities or between different developmental phases of a single activity”. Contradictions drive the process of Transformation as the elements of the Activity change in response to the introduction of new elements and as individuals question and reform pre-existing norms.Activities are comprised of Actions, which consist of Operations. However, Activities may be nested so an Action within one Activity may be viewed as a (smaller) Activity in its own right, which can then be broken down into its own set of Actions and Operations. Operations are the smallest possible units of Activities.Activity Theory has been widely used for evaluating the impact of innovations in education. For example, Lewin, Cranmer, and McNicol (2018) used Activity Theory to evaluate the introduction of a collaborative digital pedagogy. In this study, the new pedagogy was understood as an Object with concomitant Mediational Tools that introduced new Rules, widened the Community and changed the Division of Labour. Activity Theory enabled the researchers to identify and explore the Contradictions created by the changes in the System. Some of these could be resolved but others showed the need for support at local and national level that would be required for successful introduction of a new digital pedagogy based on collaboration. Goodnough (2018) also explored Contradictions when looking at science teachers' professional development (PD). In this case, the teachers were engaged in a 5-year PD programme. This PD programme also aimed to change pedagogy, in this case inquiry-based learning. The study explored existing Contradictions in the teachers' practice, which enabled the researchers to see how PD might help teachers to resolve the Contradictions. Zheng, Kim, Lai, and Hwang (2019) used Activity Theory at classroom level to explore flipped learning. In Zheng et al.‘s study, the classroom was identified as a system and the use of Activity Theory enabled them to find Contradictions between all elements of the System and thus to make recommendations about how the implementation of flipped learning could be more effective. All of these studies demonstrate the power of Activity Theory in identifying the tensions that arise when innovations are introduced.One study that used Activity Theory to explore the impact of digital technologies in the context of rural education is Holen, Jung and Gourneau (2017) who looked at the introduction of individual laptops. Although their study was conducted in the United States, the remote location shared meant that home internet use was expensive and difficult, as was the case in the region of Oman where the current study was based. However, in most other respects the context explored by Holen et al. was completely different, as it did not share the challenging geography, with resulting social impacts, of rural Oman. Nevertheless, Activity Theory enabled Holen at al. to explore all aspects of the system to identify both positive and negative aspects of the innovation.
