Distraction is a common technique used to increase pain tolerance and reduce emotional distress during clinical procedures, particularly in paediatric medicine (Koller and Goldman, 2012). It has been argued that technology, particularly games and Virtual Reality (VR) experiences, can distract from pain by drawing attention from painful stimuli (Law et al., 2011; Wohlheiter and Dahlquist, 2013). The utility of VR as a form of distraction therapy has been extensively reviewed (Malloy and Milling, 2010; Turner and Casey, 2014), particularly for painful procedures related to the treatment of burns (Morris et al., 2009).
The neurocognitive perspective on attentional processes and pain (Eccleston and Crombez, 1999; Legrain et al., 2009) provides an explanation of how technology can distract attention from pain. Attentional engagement with the game is characterised as a top-down process, wherein task-specific stimuli are prioritised for action preparation (Allport, 1987). The presence of pain exerts an interruptive influence on this process (Eccleston and Crombez, 1999) leading to competition between top-down attention to task-relevant stimuli and bottom-up orientation to a painful sensation (Legrain et al., 2012). The resulting antagonism has been extensively explored in pain research; for recent summary, see (Torta et al., 2017).
According to this neurocognitive perspective, any analgesic effect of technology is achieved by activating top-down attentional engagement as an integral part of the human-computer interaction. With respect to VR, engagement with the virtual world is achieved by creating a convincing illusion of spatial presence (Slater, 1999), which captures top-down attention and completely dominates the visual and auditory senses of the user. In the case of conventional computer games, top-down attention is engaged in a graded fashion by the degree of challenge presented to the player, which has been characterized as immersion (Jennett et al., 2008). Immersion was described as three stages of attentional focus on game-related stimuli, which are: (a) engagement (minimal effort investment to play), (b) engrossment (significant investment of attention and emotional involvement) and (c) total immersion (a state of complete involvement where players feels as though they are ‘in the game’) (Brown and Cairns, 2004); see Cairns et al. (2014) for review of immersion and game play experience.
The potential of technology to create a sense of total immersion, when distraction from pain is maximised, is influenced by the technical characteristics of the hardware used to render the digital world and the level of immersion with the digital task (McMahan, 2003). In their analysis of gameplay experience, Ermi and Mayra (2005) made a distinction between: (a) sensory immersion (i.e. the audiovisua rendering of the digital world), (b) challenge-based immersion (i.e. level of cognitive and motor skill required to play the game) and imaginative immersion (i.e. emotional responses to story-telling, characterisation). Given the multifaceted nature of immersion as gameplay experience, which aspect is most important for a game to function effectively as a distractor from pain?
Sensory immersion describes the technical fidelity of hardware to accurately render the game world. For example, creation of the place illusion in VR is totally dependent on the technical quality of the display hardware, e.g. field of view, update rate, tracking movement (Cummings and Bailenson, 2016). With respect to conventional visual displays, a greater degree of immersion is associated with increased screen size (Hou et al., 2012; Van Den Hoogen et al., 2009; Wu and Lin, 2011). A number of related studies have found that head-mounted displays (HMD) are experienced as more immersive than flatscreen displays, as the HMD completely occupies the visual field (Bowman and McMahan, 2007; Schnall et al., 2012; Tyndiuk et al., 2004). The study conducted by Zeroth Julia et al. (2018) is particularly relevant to the current work, these authors utilised the cold pressor test, i.e. participants are required to immerse a limb in cold water until the resulting pain is unbearable, to study the effect of HMD vs. standard television displays on pain tolerance; they reported a reduction of pain for participants in the HMD condition. However, a number of experimental pain studies failed to replicate this advantage for HMD (Armstrong et al., 2010; Gordon et al., 2011; Sil et al., 2014). The graphical fidelity of the HMD is another dimension of sensory immersion that can also influence the effectiveness of VR to distract from pain with several studies reporting reduced pain relief when a low-fidelity HMD was used (Hoffman et al., 2004; Mosso Vázquez et al., 2018).
The auditory characteristics of the digital world is an important influence on the level of sensory immersion experienced by a player. Previous research has demonstrated increased immersion during gameplay with the addition of sound and music (Gallacher, 2013; Gormanley, 2013; Zhang et al., 2015). The introduction of music also increases emotional responses to events within a computer game (Abia and Caroux, 2019; Klimmt et al., 2019). With respect to research on the relationship between audio and pain, animal research has argued for a dose-dependent relationship between noise intensity and analgesia (Helmstetter and Bellgowan, 1994). In addition, exposure to music during painful experience has been found to reduce subjective pain (MacDonald et al., 2012) and there is neurophysiological evidence for modulation of the pain response when the experience is paired with music (Dobek et al., 2014). Music and noise both distract the experience of pain (Boyle et al., 2008; Finlay, 2014) and increase pain tolerance during the cold pressor test (Choi et al., 2018). There is also evidence that characteristics of the musical piece can influence observed effects of pain; for example, Kenntner-Mabiala et al. (2007) reported that fast tempo music increased autonomic activation and enhanced subjective ratings of pain, but this effect was only observed in female participants.
Challenge-based immersion is related to the level of effortful engagement with task-related goals (Fairclough et al., 2013) and is tied to a motivational perspective on gameplay (Przybylski et al., 2010). According to this perspective, top-down attentional engagement with goals is a necessary precondition for challenge-based immersion, for similar explanations, see: Chanel and Rebetez (2008), Ewing et al. (2016), and Nacke and Lindley (2008). A state of high attentional engagement with task-related goals characterizes a state of total immersion, which is associated with ‘flow’ (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990); see Michailidis et al. (2018) for recent discussion of relationship between immersion and flow. However, it should also be noted that challenge-based immersion only occurs during the active investment of mental effort, and effort is only invested in response to increased demand if success is perceived to be achievable (Richter et al., 2016). There is evidence that neurophysiological markers of effort are reduced when players faced with an impossible level of challenge during a computer game (Ewing et al., 2016). Hence, the potential of challenge-based immersion to distract from pain is dependent on the relationship between game demand and the skills of the player to meet those demands (Cowley et al., 2008; Cox et al., 2012), see also the “perceived-challenge-skill-balance” as described by Keller and Landhäußer (2012). The challenge-based dimension of immersion may incorporate additional psychological elements (Boyle et al., 2012), such as the demonstration of mastery, which enables players to persist in the face of repeated failure (Anderson et al., 2019) and strong emotional states (Mekler et al., 2016). Emotional responses to game content and performance outcomes, particularly adverse states like anger or frustration, may be highly significant in this context, as negative emotions can exert a priming effect that enhances attention to painful sensations (Pourtois et al., 2013a).
The research literature on gaming demonstrates that higher levels of demand or challenge are associated with increased immersion (Burns and Fairclough, 2015; Cox et al., 2012; Qin et al., 2010). With respect to the influence of challenge-based immersion on pain perception, few studies have systematically manipulated game demand to distract from painful sensations. The study conducted by Piskorz and Czub (2013) is one exception, these authors reported a reduction of subjective pain when participants performed VR tasks of high complexity vs. low complexity.
The current paper presents four experiments conducted to explore how sensory and challenge-based immersion influence the perception of experimental pain during a computer game. All studies utilised the Cold Pressor Test (CPT) (von Baeyer et al., 2005) as a protocol for experimental pain. This protocol was selected because it is possible to derive a behavioural measure of pain tolerance, i.e. the duration of time for which the participant can immerse the limb in very cold water. It was predicted that increased sensory and challenge-based immersion would enhance pain tolerance. The experiments were performed in a linear fashion in order to explore four hypotheses, which were:
1Is pain tolerance increased when the game is presented via an HMD capable of rendering an immersive, three-dimensional presentation of the game world due to sensory immersion (Study 1)?2Does an increased level of game demand enhance the level of pain tolerance exhibited by participants due to challenge-based immersion (Study 2)?3When challenge-based and sensory immersion (visual display) are simultaneously manipulated, does increased game demand and screen size induce higher levels of pain tolerance (Study 3)?4When challenge-based and sensory immersion (game audio) are simultaneously manipulated, does increased game demand and louder levels of game music/sound effects lead to higher pain tolerance (Study 4)?
In addition to a behavioural measure of pain, all four experiments included a subjective measure of immersion and a cardiovascular measure to quantify the level of autonomic activation.
All experimental procedures reported in this paper were approved by our Institutional Research Ethics Committee prior to data collection. Due to the nature of the cold pressor test, exclusion criteria for participation in any of the four experiments included a history of: cardiovascular disease, fainting, seizures, chronic or current pain, Reynaud's disease or diabetes. Individuals who were pregnant or had fractures or open cuts or sores on the feet or calves were also excluded from participation.
