Video teaching is gathering of images and sound. Sobel methods of images and sound are used for video teaching. Web design course is more beneficial because it can hide more data with less distortion rate. It has used random frame selection and edge detection techniques to hide the data into the frame of video. In random frame selection technique, random frames of video are taken to hide the data, if we take frames sequentially then attacker can doubt. In edge detection techniques, to hide data at edge pixels of image.
One of the most serious mistakes of web designers is the lack of prior analysis of users' needs to create a website. These sites may look interesting and well designed by their authors, but they are complex and of little use to many visitors. Web designers need to know that they are creating websites for their users that do not show off their web technical knowledge. Therefore, it is best to interview users to make the right choice of their wishes, which can be unrealistic for some of them. Web designers need to decide if they want their users to be happy. Because the designer needs to have complete control over the situation at every moment, which is very important. After its publication, the user's opinion on the website should be continuously monitored.
Digital Design course at the Technical University is offered around the world. However, the best way to search beyond the larger organization still exists. As a general rule, it uses part of the introduction of the practice, and practice in the laboratory. In most cases, the only simulation method is used. Some universities offer the possibility of establishing a genuine VLSI prototype, but it is still a rare practice, because of the costs involved. This is the FPGA technology which is affordable. The FPGA-based development board is a low-cost digital prototyping and system development provides a powerful educational tool. It enables reprogramming the FPGA, so that not only verify the complete design itself, but also the establishment of an early prototype of the sub-circuit board using the same development.
