As the traditional manufacturing industries recede and new technology-oriented industries emerge, it is becoming increasingly important for local economies to maintain the strong presence of technology-oriented research universities. These universities directly transfer technology to local firms, supply highly skilled workers to local economies, and thereby attract new businesses in relevant sectors to their regional locations. These benefits may generate a virtuous cycle by inducing agglomeration economies in cities and boosting local economic growth.
In this paper, I studied the role of a technology-oriented university in inducing local agglomeration economies by analyzing a unique case from South Korea, the opening of the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2009. There are two main reasons this case provides an ideal setting in which to examine the role of a technology university in shifting a traditional local economy to a technology-driven one. First, one of the explicit goals of UNIST is to foster cooperation between local firms and the university regarding technological innovation, which is an important channel for a technology cluster. Second, UNIST has opened in a large manufacturing cluster, the Ulju County of Ulsan in South Korea.
To examine the industrial specialization impacts from UNIST, I compared Ulju County with a counterfactual version of itself constructed by the synthetic control method. The method constructed a weighted average of the actual control cities, where the weights were chosen to ensure that the “synthetic” control units closely matched those of the comparison group. Furthermore, in selecting the donor pool, which was a group of candidate cities to be included in the synthetic control, I applied k-means clustering, a simple unsupervised machine learning algorithm that provides a collection of data points aggregated together to have certain similarities. This method ensures that the treated and comparison units share “common support” and allows me to select a more appropriate set of comparison units (Billmeier and Nannicini, 2013). The control groups from these procedures closely followed the pre-trends of the Ulju area.
Armed with this synthetic control unit, I first estimated the employment effects from the opening of UNIST. Since 2009, local employment in the Ulju area has gradually increased, particularly after 2012. Specifically, in the period 2013–2016, the employment of Ulju County was on average 18% larger than its synthetic control. To investigate the mechanisms of the employment effects, I distinguished employment into tradable (manufacturing) and non-tradable (service) sectors. Employment effects proved to be heavily concentrated in the manufacturing sector, whereas the effects on the service sector were relatively small. The positive effects in the tradable sector suggest that the estimated effects were different from the standard multiplier effects that explain job creation effects in the non-tradable sectors due to the increased demand for local services.
The employment effects in the tradable sectors were mainly driven by the increase in number of firms. To test whether a technology university leads to industrial churning in a local area, I divided the manufacturing sector into the industries that were closely related to the university’s research activities and those that were less closely related, using the information on collaborating firms from UNIST. In the closely related industries, there were significant increases in the number of firms since the opening of UNIST. In contrast, there were no significant changes in the less-related sectors. These results were robust to a set of placebo tests and alternative definitions of closely related sectors.
The industrial agglomeration effects were mainly due to specialization at the university but not skill enhancement. When the subsectors of manufacturing were classified into highly and less-educated, both highly and less-educated sectors experienced an increase in number of firms. The industrial specialization that is independent of skill composition was further confirmed by the results on change in share of college graduates. Since the opening of UNIST, there were no noticeable increase in share of college graduates during 2009–2016 in both the manufacturing and service industries. However, these results should not be interpreted as indicating that universities are not effective in shaping high-skill agglomeration. As I focus on relatively short-term effects (2009–2016), it might be the case that an endogenous increase in demand for skill from universities takes substantial time (Carneiro et al., 2018). In fact, significant industrial specialization, along with the supply of highly skilled workers from universities, may generate positive local spillovers (Glaeser and Saiz, 2003; Moretti, 2004; Ciccone and Peri, 2006; Diamond, 2016) in the long term and, thus, grow faster than comparable cities.
Lastly, I also find that the industrial specialization from UNIST spread out to regions that were close to the treated unit, Ulju County. Four years after the opening of UNIST, other Ulsan areas (excluding Ulju County) also experienced an 8% increase in number of firms in subsectors that were close to UNIST’s research focus, whereas firms in less-related sectors decreased by about 10%. While the industrial specialization effects are certainly weaker in other Ulsan areas, these results explain that spillovers from universities could propagate over space, as documented by Kantor and Whalley (2019) and Li et al. (2020).
Most studies on the role of research universities have focused on patents or local inventions (Adams, 2002; Furman and MacGarvie, 2007; Andrews, 2019a). However, recent research has begun to study the effect on local labor markets. Since Andersson et al. (2004) found enhanced output per worker in local economies from the decentralization policy of postsecondary institutions, researchers have found positive effects from research universities on the wages (Kantor and Whalley, 2014), productivity (Liu, 2015; Andrews, 2019b), and employment of service sectors in the short term (Lee, 2019). There are also studies that find no significant effects from research universities. For example, Bonander et al. (2016) found that a 1999 Swedish university reform had no noticeable improvements for the regional economy. While these studies explain the importance of universities on local economies, analyzing the effects of a technology-oriented university in a manufacturing-intensive region can provide added value in understanding the role of research institutions in local development. Furthermore, by exploring various channels to the technology cluster, I describe how technology-oriented universities could lead to agglomeration economies in the long term.
This paper is also closely associated with the literature on local labor demand shocks. Since Bartik (1991) examined how local policies affect job growth, researchers have studied how regional shocks have affected the local labor market. For example, Black et al. (2005) examined the impact of the coal boom and bust. Autor et al. (2013) analyzed the effect of rising Chinese import competition on U.S. local labor markets. Finally, Moretti (2010) summarized that a significant number of additional jobs are created in the non-tradable sector when a local economy generates a new job in the tradable sector. My work views the opening of a technology-oriented university as a local labor demand shock and shows how it affects local tradable industries as well as local skill composition and amenities.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background of the establishment of UNIST. Section 3 introduces the empirical framework and the synthetic control method. Section 4 presents the industrial specialization effects from UNIST. Section 5 explains the impacts on other outcomes and other regions, and Section 6 provides the conclusion.
