There is an ever-going conflict between pieces of information that compete for our critical attentional resources. While navigating the world around us, we must allocate attentional resources to both our external environment and to our internal thoughts and feelings (Smallwood, 2013, Smallwood and Schooler, 2015) as we seek out meaning from the stimuli around and within us. Indeed, an essential part of our human interaction with the world involves the constant interplay between externally-oriented attention and internally-oriented attention, commonly referred to as mind wandering (Mills et al., 2018, Smallwood and Andrews-Hanna, 2013). Often conceptualized as a decoupling of attention from the here and now towards internal thoughts and feelings (Smallwood & Schooler, 2015), mind wandering has proven to be important for planning and goal-setting (Klinger, 2013), creating an integrated sense of identity (Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna, 2013) and fostering creativity (Baird et al., 2012). However, it can also be detrimental to performance in a wide variety of contexts.
From a population point of view, the inability to regulate adaptively both the frequency and content of mind wandering thoughts under different contexts has been associated with a variety of disorders (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014, Watkins, 2008). Such disorders of content tend to have negative consequences for cognitive functioning and well-being in both clinical and non-clinical populations. Excessive negative thoughts are characteristic of depression (Marchetti, Van de Putte, & Koster, 2014), while excessively grandiose and positive thoughts may be characteristic of mania(Watkins, 2008). Forms of thinking that are too focal could be indicative of autism, while forms of thought that are too scattered could be reflective of Attention Deficit Disorder (Franklin, Mooneyham, Baird, & Schooler, 2014).
With respect to the activities during which mind wandering episodes may occur, they seem to be particularly frequent during tasks that require sustained attention and engage working memory (Mrazek et al., 2012, Randall et al., 2014, Unsworth and Robison, 2016). Individual differences in working memory have been found to predict performance on a wide range of measures, from low-level attention
tasks to higher level reasoning (Cowan et al., 2005). A distinction is made between resource limited tasks – in which using focused attentional resources is necessary for performance, versus data – limited tasks, in which investment of attentional resources is irrelevant for performance (Randall et al., 2014). Very easy or very difficult1 , as well as highly practiced, well learned tasks would be data-limited and leave more room for mind wandering than resource-limited tasks do. According to this view, individuals with higher working memory capacity would be better able to regulate their attentional resources, such that in more demanding, complex tasks, they would mind wander less; while in easier tasks, they would mind wander more (Randall et al., 2014, Smallwood, 2013). As such, there is a U-shaped relationship between mind wandering and task demands, as mind wandering occurs more frequently in low-demand and in high demand tasks than in moderately demanding tasks, with higher levels of working memory being associated with a reduced likelihood to mind wander as task demands increase. Intuitively, mind wandering is more harmful to performance of high- relative to low-demand tasks, and more so for individuals with lower working memory capacity.
The negative association between mind wandering and performance, particularly on demanding tasks, warrants the need to develop technologies that are able help individuals to down-regulate the content and frequency of their thoughts whenever necessary (Faber, Bixler, & D’Mello, 2017). In order to reduce the negative effects of mind wandering, it is important to be able to identify when individuals are mind wandering. The challenge in studying mind wandering, however, stems from the fact that it cannot easily be induced in laboratory settings (Dias da Silva et al., 2018, McVay and Kane, 2013). Moreover, its detection relies on self-reports, by means of experience sampling methods such as thought probes and retrospective measures, which are inherently subjective (Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). Compared to thought probes, retrospective measures are useful in that they do not interrupt the natural flow of the task. However, retrospective measures are only able to make general estimations about the total frequency of mind wandering on a task, while thought probes are better at pinpointing specific instances of mind wandering within a task. Past studies show that to a certain degree, both are subject to incorrect estimations from participants (Seli, Carriere et al., 2013, Smallwood and Schooler, 2006). Because of this, additional behavioral measures such as reaction times (McVay & Kane, 2009), reading speed (Mills, D ’mello, Bosch, & Olney, 2015), fidgeting (Carriere et al., 2013, Seli et al., 2014), and (neuro)physiological responses such as brain activity and eye movements (Faber et al., 2017, Franklin et al., 2013, Mittner et al., 2014, Smallwood et al., 2011), have been explored to distinguish periods of focused attention (FA) from periods of mind wandering (MW). These neuro(physiological) approaches, however, interfere with the natural performance on a primary task (Grimes & Valacich, 2015) in that they require additional measuring instruments, which introduce a certain level of discomfort for the participant. In this paper, we examined mouse movement behavior as a method that could be used to detect the occurrence of mind wandering unobtrusively.
1.1. Mouse movements as a behavioral measure of mind wanderingIt has been shown that in relation to various domains, including decision making, attention, and learning (Freeman et al., 2011, Grimes and Valacich, 2015, Lins and Schöner, 2019, Papesh and Goldinger, 2012), computer mouse tracking effectively traces the evolution of internal cognitive processes through action execution. As a natural and practiced visuo-motor response, various populations, from young children (Hermens, 2018) to older adults (Seelye et al., 2015) can easily perform mouse-based tasks. In a typical mouse tracking paradigm, alternative choices can be represented in front of a participant, and the evolution of reach trajectories towards a target can be visualized as a representation of how competing cognitive states are resolved over time (Song & Nakayama, 2009). A mouse is a primary means of interacting with computers in everyday tasks, ranging from writing email to navigating a page while reading an article. As almost all computers are equipped with mice, measuring mouse movements is affordable and widely accessible, and can be effectively run as a background process during mouse-based tasks.Can computer mouse movements predict the occurrence of mind wandering? Previous research was able to predict engagement – a concept often contrasted with mind wandering – from mouse features in an unsupervised manner (Arapakis, Lalmas, & Valkanas, 2014). There is also evidence of a direct link between changes in hand movement behavior during mind wandering. Kam et al. (2012) found increased tracking errors during periods of mind wandering relative to periods of focused attention in a simple visuomotor ball tracking task. They describe such errors to be a consequence of attenuated sensory processing. Alternatively, changes in hand movements during mind wandering may be explained by embodied cognition theory, which suggests a variety of cognitive activities are reflected in bodily states, such as posture, arm and hand movements (Barsalou, 2008). In particular, the situated action view of embodied cognition assumes a close coupling of perception and action during goal achievement (Barsalou, 2008). It posits that the way we move our body, how we are standing, or what we are touching or holding can both provide information about and also influence the way that we feel, think about or evaluate a situation. Thus, from an embodied cognition perspective, bodily movements can be viewed as extensions of cognitive and attentional processes. As such, mind wandering can be better described as an embodied experience which is shaped by movements.As extensions of attentional processes, it is plausible that hand reach movements with a computer mouse may be able to reflect episodes of mind wandering. Research on mind wandering and attention indicates that periods of off-task thought are associated with changes in arousal (Robison and Unsworth, 2019, Unsworth and Robison, 2017), that is, changes in physiological activation which indicates responsiveness to sensory stimulation (Eysenck, 1982). More specifically, both high or low levels of arousal are related to lower attentional control, more lapses in attention, and consequently, a greater susceptibility to mind wandering. Meanwhile moderate levels of arousal are associated with optimal task engagement and task performance (Cohen et al., 2004, Kahneman, 1973, Lenartowicz et al., 2013, Mittner et al., 2016, Yerkes and Dodson, 1908). Differences in the arousal associated with mind wandering and the accompanying physiological signature likely reflect distinct stages of the experience. For example, mind wandering may begin during an underarousing, monotonous circumstance. As we try extricate ourselves from this, arousal levels rise, reaching a peak when our efforts to engage in stimulating activities fail, accompanied by feelings of restlessness (Danckert, Hammerschmidt, Marty-Dugas, & Smilek, 2018). In line with this, pupillary measures suggest mind wandering to be associated with changes in arousal states (Unsworth and Robison, 2017, Unsworth and Robison, 2018).Interestingly, high arousal has been associated with decreased fine motor control and increases in neuromotor noise during hand reach movements (Grimes, Jenkins, & Valacich, 2013), while low arousal has been associated with automatism (Kahneman, 1973, Morsella et al., 2010). Considering the relationship between mind wandering and arousal, and the influence of arousal on motor control, we could expect that mind wandering episodes would be associated with changes in motor behavior necessary to move the computer mouse. We consider two models in order to describe changes in motor control with computer mouse movements during mind wandering: the stochastic optimized submovement (SOS) model and the response activation model. According to the SOS model (Meyer et al., 1988, Meyer et al., 1990) mouse movements towards a target are described as having two parts — an initial high-velocity phase, which although fast, tends to be imprecise, and a subsequent deceleration phase, which is corrective in nature, where speed decreases, but accuracy increases (Graham and MacKenzie, 1996, Grimes and Valacich, 2015). When a target is approached, a tradeoff in speed is necessary to increase precision of movement, as there is limited information capacity for motor control (Fitts, 1954). The mind attempts to minimize the total movement by optimizing the velocity and number of submovements towards the target; however, as neuromotor noise (i.e., from high arousal) is introduced into the model, there are fewer resources available for the intended corrective movements, leading to slower and less precise movements (Meyer et al., 1988, Meyer et al., 1990, van Beers, 2004).Complementary to the SOS model, the response activation model describes what happens to motor movements as additional alternative targets are introduced. It proposes that motor movements represent an aggregation of all potential movements that could arise from all potentially actionable cognitions (Welsh & Elliott, 2004). When competing cognitions are introduced, motor movements become less precise and response times slower, reflecting disruptions in fine motor control as necessary cognitive resources are consumed (Hick, 1952).While the SOS model describes what happens during movements towards one particular target, the response activation model also takes into account the influence of competing cognitions (for instance, debating whether to choose between two or more answers to a question). Both the predictions concerning the speed–accuracy trade off and arousal introduced by the SOS model and predictions concerning competing cognitions introduced by the response activation model are relevant for predicting changes in motor control during mind wandering. As competing cognitions are introduced by mind wandering, mouse movements would likely change depending on the state of mind wandering. They could reflect an underaroused state, or alternatively, a restless state. As such, consequent changes in arousal likely increase the amount of noise and uncertainty during a task, potentially leading to slower, less precise, more complex and more variable computer mouse movements.To sum up, the challenge in studying mind wandering arises both from the over-reliance on self-reports as well as in intrusive neuro(physiological) measures which interfere with the natural performance of a task. As such, it is important to find objective measures for the detecting mind wandering that corroborate self-reports and do not interrupt the flow of a task. Used to continuously track a variety of cognitive processes, mouse-tracking seems to be a promising candidate for objectively detecting mind wandering.
1.2. Current studyThe focus of the current study is to explore if mind wandering during a complex cognitive task (a working memory test, i.e., an operation span task) can be detected from mouse movements. Due to their ability to capture cognitive processes in real time, computer mouse movements may actually provide valuable insight into the temporal cognitive dynamics underlying mind wandering. Research has shown that the adverse consequences of mind wandering are greater in tasks with higher cognitive demand (e.g.working memory tasks; McVay and Kane, 2012, Mrazek et al., 2012, Rummel and Boywitt, 2014, Smallwood and Andrews-Hanna, 2013). During the task (Fig. 1), participants need to shift between an unrelated processing task while updating contents of working memory (Conway et al., 2002, Engle et al., 1999, Unsworth and Engle, 2005, Unsworth et al., 2010). Specifically, the evolution of mouse trajectories can be traced during the processing portion of the operation span task. Consolidating previous research on mind wandering and arousal, as well as mouse movements and arousal, we will explore whether various mouse movement measures can be indicators of mind wandering. In this paper, we will examine how computer mouse movement features are related to distracted thought. We will train various classifiers to predict differences in participants’ locus of attention. Previous mind wandering studies have distinguished between focused attention (FA), task-unrelated thought (TUT), and task-related interference (TRI). During task-unrelated thought, thought content is irrelevant to the task at hand. During task-related interference, thought content involves a preoccupation with performance on the task at hand (Matthews et al., 1999). The latter two categories reflect different types of self-generated thought and involve a decoupling of attention from the external environment towards internal thoughts and feelings. Assuming that mouse trajectories towards a particular response on the screen are continuously updated by cognitive processes, we expect that mind wandering will be evident in computer mouse movements during a working memory task. Building on the SOS model, we propose mind wandering to be a source of neuromotor noise, leading to slower and less precise corrective mouse movements. According to the response activation model, computer mouse movements should become slower and more erratic as more choices are introduced into the model. Building on this, we would expect that during mind wandering, additional internally oriented cognitions would also compete with external choices. Changes in arousal and consequent disruptions in motor control would lead to slower, less precise, more complex and more variable hand reach movements.Download : Download high-res image (422KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Operation span task.
