Pace of change is fast in our world. Our information & knowledge society demands new ways to transmit and manage knowledge. Higher education is seeking to address these challenges at the international, national and institutional levels. Curricular reforms should lead to high quality, flexible and lifelong education. The European Bologna Process (EURASHE, 2009; Zahavi, 2019) drives new teaching-learning approaches based on student-centred models which are more active and connected to real life. They should guide higher-education graduates towards greater adaptability to change by means of constant knowledge update and course adjustments. In such a way, future professionals don't stop learning after university. They need to be engaged in their own education throughout their life.
In this way, future-education implies more than just content assimilation. It involves the mobilisation of knowledge, new skills, attitudes and other values to meet complex demands (OECD, 2018b). Due to increasing competitiveness and a changing industrial environment, adaptability and creativity is even more crucial to learn to seize opportunities that can arise especially in the context of research, technology development and industrial engagement (Egan, Maguire, Christophers, & Rooney, 2017; Juhl & Buch, 2019).
Recent studies indicate that higher education still plays a minor role in innovation (OECD, 2017b). Moreover, this is a process that needs knowledge production and, above all, using it in the right way to resolve our current challenges (Silvestre & Ţîrcă, 2019). Governments and public administrations want education systems to be more relevant to the needs of society and industry. Although the shape of future labour market needs is uncertain and depends on numerous factors which are difficult to predict (OECD, 2010; Lloret-Climent et al., 2018), it is a fact that there are not enough qualified people to fill increasing numbers of jobs related to new technologies and social change that is taking place all over the globe. In this way, most demanding knowledge and skills are in new technology areas (Petrone, 2019). Disruptive technologies are changing the world and new skills need to be added to education curriculums to make the best use of their possibilities (Mora, Pujol-López, Mendoza-Tello, & Morales-Morales, 2018; OECD, 2018a). Students not only need to be well-trained in knowledge and skills appropriate to their area, but also they should be creative in their proposals to provide valuable and disruptive solutions in a changing environment. New teaching-learning approaches are required; they must be more active and connected to real life, they should guide higher-education graduates to more capability of adaptation to variable circumstances by means of constant knowledge revision and course-correcting.
It is not easy to identify the skills required for innovation, creativity and entrepreneurship, and for enabling students to better exploit the new technologies capabilities (Keinänen & Kairisto-Mertanen, 2019).
Recent recommendations by IEEE and ACM (IEEE & ACM, 2016) propose a solid foundation in technical skills, in-depth knowledge of technology, and other valuable behavioural and academic skills beyond contents. These include leadership and collaboration, oral and written communication skills, project -based learning and design thinking (Dias & Soares, 2018) as well as analytical and critical thinking. Other reports stress the importance of adaptative education policies and promoting collaboration between employers and high education institutions in order to match emerging labour market needs (OECD, 2017a).
These abilities are especially important to address in the academic curricula of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) so that engineering graduates learn to exploit opportunities created by technological innovation.
These issues motivate our current research: taking up the challenge, we propose a learning methodology aimed at placing students in a better position to compete in a global world. Thus, the aim of this work is to help engineering students acquire new capabilities. Our objectives focus on educating students in the following areas: (i) new ways to access knowledge, (ii) collaborative learning, and (iii) developing critical thinking. Consequently, expected results obtained from the proposed methodology are mainly the understanding and application of the scientific method, a higher standard in end assignments, enhanced access to knowledge, and the production of collective intelligence instead of multiple individual intelligences. The concept of ‘collective intelligence’ refers to the contribution of collaborative efforts of members of a group to the global intelligence and outcomes (Jeng & Huang, 2019).
It is especially important to exploit collective intelligence in the field of engineering, because it helps students increase their potential and achieve more creative technological solutions in answer to the significant challenges in society. These students not only have technological competences linked to new knowledge, but they also need to acquire competences linked to new ways to access and use knowledge (Meza, Monguet, Grimón, & Trejo, 2016). Moreover, practicing the scientific method leads to greater rigor in the writing style and a capacity to understand scientific and technical documents. These are very important skills for engineering students.
The way in which these results are obtained is described and discussed in this work. The basic idea consists in implementing a blind-review of classroom assignments by students themselves. This means that students review the work of other students in a collaborative way. Thus, the results achieved are consequence of collaborative work of the author and the reviewers, who propose suggestions and changes to improve the final work. Collective intelligence can arise from the student's collaboration in solving the same issue.
To properly implement the method in an educational environment, an interactive web platform able to handle a large amount of students is required. The design of a web-based environment as a collaborative platform where users can share information and take advantage of the interactions of other users to enhance their own experiences has come to be known as Web 2.0 (Lytras & Ordonez, 2009; Mata, Panisoara, Fat, Panisoara, & Lazar, 2019). This web paradigm allows developing user-centred applications sharing the common characteristic of being more interactive and participative.
The main contribution of this work is the classroom implementation of a review process to assess academic work with the aim of evaluating whether this proposed review process is efficient in developing engineering student capabilities as referred to above. The research framework basically consists in implementing a case study in a subject of the Computer Engineering Degree at the University of Alicante. Within this framework, we have defined several variables of interest to be analysed and three research questions. They have been selected and designed according the specific aims of this work.
The novelty of this work lies in using the review process as a teaching/learning methodology to address interesting open academic issues such us how access to knowledge can be improved, how critical thinking can be developed, and when and where collective intelligence emerges. The analysis conducted and the answers provided was mainly qualitative since most of the improvements achieved come from personal insights of the outcomes and require a qualitative analysis.
First, we describe previous research on peer reviewing, we summarise findings and formulate our research questions; second, we introduce different aspects of the collaborative assessment model. We then present a case study to show how our method unfolded and the results obtained. Finally, we draw conclusions on the answers to our research questions obtained and the main advantages and limitations of this methodology.
