The world population, according to a statistical collection of the web site We Are Social [48], was, as of January 2019, more than 7.676 billion people. Of this population more than 4.388 billion are internet users, 3.434 billion are asset users of social media, 5.112 billion are cell phone users and 3.256 billion are users of mobile social media. As social media users represent a vast portion of the world population, they are a cohort subject to frequent analysis in the field of opinion mining, based on the content they publish on social networks.
Furthermore, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) close to 800,000 people in the world death by suicidal each year, while many more attempts to do it [52]. In consequence, the WHO recognizes suicide as a global public health priority, which affects not only rich countries but poor and middle-income countries as well [51]. Suicide is a serious public health problem, affecting all age groups, and in 2015 was the second leading cause of death in the world for the age group of 15–44 years, and while in Europe, suicide has become the leading cause of violent death [15].
However, suicide is a problem that is preventable through timely interventions when these are based on trustworthy and often inexpensive data. At the same time, efficient solutions require a multi-sector and integrated strategy of suicide prevention [32]. In the report, “Suicidal prevention: A global imperative”, in the Mental Health Action Plan 2013–2020, published in 2014 [32], the WHO highlights how each suicide is a tragedy that affects families, communities, and countries, and has a lasting effect on the relatives of the victim. Faced with these realities, the member states of the WHO have committed to reducing national rates of suicide by 10% before the year 2020, to accomplish this they agreed to elaborate and put into practice comprehensive national strategies of suicide prevention, to improve their information systems, update their scientific data, and perform collaborative university research on mental health [32].
Before taking the fateful decision to end their own lives, suicide victims generally pass through a period of deep personal suffering, frequently endured in silence, and therefore to predict whether someone is going to commit suicide has been an all but impossible task [14, 20, 23, 24, 36]. It is nonetheless possible to detect factors that contribute to the risk of suicide, through standard clinical tools operated by well-trained doctors [4, 5, 39].
In this framework, the science offers the opportunity to understand the biological markers and psychological markers, related to suicide, while computer science, specifically Natural Language Processing, offers the opportunity of understanding the indicators of suicidal thoughts [25, 39] when these are expressed in written and spoken forms.
In fact, in 2008 Pestian and Matykiewicz [40] showed that the algorithms of automatic learning could better distinguish between, notes written by people who subsequently died by suicide and simulated suicide notes, compared to mental health professionals by a score of 71% vs 70%.
Furthermore, social networks have provided researchers with new platforms to deploy automated methods for the analysis of language to better understand the thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and personalities of each person [44], even mental illnesses like depression or Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder [42]. For example, some projects have used data from microblogs to build automatic learning models to identify suicidal bloggers at a level of precision of approximately 90% [55].
In this work, a series of systematic experiments have been carried out with all possible combinations of textual feature from the Life Corpus, and machine learning algorithms. The main objective is to find out what features of the corpus and which classification algorithms are the most suitable to carry out the detection of messages with suicidal ideation and depression. As we can see in Section 2, a whole range of different approaches to the problem are available. However, these approaches have been developed using corpus without quality measures nor suitable to solve this task. The contribution of this research to the state of art is an exhaustive analysis of different techniques and features for text classification applied to the suicide ideation detection using a scientifically validated corpus. Furthermore, this corpus was specifically built to be used for supervised machine learning approaches of messages which express suicide ideation [9]. Another advantage of this corpus is that it is available with a Creative Commons license.
Therefore, this document is organized as follows: Section 2 describes a review of researches on the use of technology for suicide prevention or suicide ideation detection. Next, Section 3 explains the methodology and resources used for developing this work. Later, in Section 4 the results are presented for discussion in Section 5, Section 6 Limitation. Finally, in the Section 7 conclusions are made, and future works are proposed.
