NOx emission is still an environmental problem to be solved. NOx emission from land-based sources has been reduced in recent years, while NOx emission from marine transportation sector has been increased, about 30% NOx emission came from ships (European Environment Agency, 2013). International Marine Organization (IMO) has enacted very strict MARPOL NOx Tier III regulation, it has been adopted in emission control areas (ECA) of US, and it will take effect on January 1, 2021 in ECA of Europe (IMO, 2017). EB technology has been applied to remove SO2 and NOx from flue gas emitted from coal-fired power plant Pomorzany Power Station, Poland (Chmielewski et al., 2004). The principle of this technology to remove NOx is that under EB irradiation, NO has been oxidized into NO2 and some of them into NO3, with the presence of ammonia, ammonia nitrate/nitrite has been formed which can be removed from gas phase using electron static precipitator (Zwolinska et al., 2019). Due to the limited space in the ships, this technology with ammonia addition is not practical to be applied in NOx removal from diesel engine off-gas emitted from ship. Sea water might be a good candidate to replace NH3. It is easily to be obtained and it scrubs NO2 from gas phase due to NO2 good solubility in water. This assumption has been roughly verified by our experimental results (Chmielewski et al., 2018). Currently, two separate technologies have been implemented on board, wet scrubber is for removal SO2 and SCR (selective catalytic reduction) is for NOx removal from off-gases, and good removal efficiency of SO2 (99%) and NOx (90%) are achieved using these two separate technologies. However these two separate technologies possess of number of drawbacks: high installation cost, high maintenance cost, and a large space needed for two separate installations and ammonia storage (EGCSA, 2012; Jurgens et al., 2012). Moreover, high temperature (300–400 °C) is needed for NOx reduction using the SCR method, so the flue gas after the wet scrubber for SO2 reduction needs to be reheated. Otherwise, the catalyst might be deactivated in a short time when the temperature is below 250 °C, especially when a high concentration of SO2 and PM (particle matter) are present in the off-gases (Magnusson et al., 2012).
In this work, computer simulation of NOx reduction using electron beam (EB) followed by a water scrubber system has been studied. It consists of two stages. The first stage was to calculate NOx removal versus dose under EB irradiation. The model has been improved based our previous work (Zwolińska et al., 2015) by removing ammonia and related species generated therefore, and by adding some reverse reactions which are formation of NOx. The revised model better simulated NOx removal under EB irradiation without ammonia addition. The second stage was to simulate NOx absorption in water using computer program MATLAB. Microwave plasma has been reported to a good method for waste management due to its’ many potential advantages, including energy savings and overall cost effectiveness (Schulz et al., 1993), high removal efficiency of organic pollutants, such as trichloroethylene,1,1,1-trichloroethane (Krause and Helt, 1993) and HFC 134a refrigerant from air (Jasinski et al., 2009) was reported. In order to find out whether there is a more energy efficient method for removal NOx, we simulated NOx removal from flue gas using microwave plasma.
