The correct three-dimensional (3D) implant position represents a crucial factor to obtain predictable and reliable long-term clinical results. To minimize implant malposition, advances in 3D digital implantology have made it possible to introduce computer-guided implant surgery.1 Surgical and prosthetic phases can be virtually simulated by importing 3D data into implant planning software. Ideal implant positions are therefore planned before surgery according to bone quality and quantity, location of anatomical structures such as nerves, vessels, sinuses, prosthetic demands, and aesthetic evaluations.2,3 Computer-guided implant placement techniques may be advantageous compared to conventional protocols when it comes to patients with limited amount of bone. Theoretically, bone augmentation procedures may be avoided or reduced by optimizing implant positioning in accessible bone.4,5 On the other hand, the current evidence still lacks information concerning the use of computer-guided implant protocols to rehabilitate resorbed edentulous ridges. The use of an image-guided system in severely resorbed posterior maxillae has been proposed as a viable option to place implants in limited amount of bone.6 Unfortunately, according to the latest systematic reviews,7, 8, 9 only the aforementioned study answered the question whether computer-guided surgery can be used as an alternative to bone augmentation. Obviously, not all residual ridges allow achieving a compromise with respect to the position of the implant. This is particularly true in case of severe horizontal and vertical bone defects where the position of the implant is further limited by anatomical structures.
The fact that bone tissue is becoming part of the treatment plan is extensively corroborated by the concept of prosthetically-guided bone regeneration10 as a direct evolution of the restoration-driven implant placement. In order to insert implants in the correct prosthetically-guided position, optimal conditions of the recipient bone in terms of quality and quantity are mandatory in the first instance. In this context, guided bone regeneration (GBR) has shown successful outcomes in the augmentation of alveolar bone width and height.11
The rationale of the present study was to merge together prosthetic-guided bone regeneration and implant placement within the same surgical phase with a full digital workflow, so as to exploit the advantages of both procedures simultaneously. This aspect constitutes an innovation since the combination of virtually-aided GBR and computer-guided implantology is, to the best of our knowledge, extremely under-explored so far. The aim was to evaluate the effectiveness of virtually-aided GBR and simultaneous computer-guided implant placement applied in critical clinical situations presenting an inadequate amount of bone, from clinical, radiological, and patient-centered outcomes.
