With the revolutionary advance in network infrastructure and information technologies, the cybersecurity threats are also consistently increasing in number and intricacy [1]. For instances, in 2018, the MCAFee's report on economic impact of cybercrime states that malicious activities are quite astounding with 80 billion malicious scans each day [2]. Also, the 2018 Cybersecurity breaches survey states that 43% of high profile businesses across the world have fallen victim to cybersecurity breaches in the last 12 months [3]. Furthermore, according to annual cybercrime report of 2017 its estimated that the financial losses by cybercrime activities will cost $6 trillion per year by 2021 [4]. This high cost has necessitated an urgency need for developing new cyberattack defense methods and techniques [5], [6].
Although several antivirus software, firewalls and IDS exist to detect and protect IT infrastructures from many known kind of cyberattacks, cybercriminals in turn have become more skilled in developing new advanced and more complex techniques to gain access and damage critical IT infrastructure [7]. Recent annual Cisco security of 2018 has point out that application of machine learning will pave a way to develop cyberdefense methods that can automatically detect any unusual new patterns in network traffics [8]. In this line of direction, recently hot research topics are to develop a new effective and adaptive defense methods than ever before [9]. Traditionally, Cyber defense products such as firewalls were considered as the first line of security defense against cyberattacks in most business networks but fail to identify the attacks on allowed services. Under such situations, second line of security defense is mandate by products like anti-virus and IDS [10]. But, anti-viruses are delimited to protect network only from those malwares whose signatures are available in the database. Also, the update schedule for signatures is either on daily or weekly basis [11]. Therefore, the network is unsafe against malicious activities in the time between the updates. Hence, IDS are considered as a key asset to protect IT infrastructure against threats and enhance network security in almost all organizations.
In this line, many researches are being carried out to develop intelligent IDS and achieve better network security [12]. For instances, Yang Jia et al. attempted to build an intelligent IDS applying deep neural network and succeeded with promising results [13]. Similarly, a new intelligent IDS was presented in [14] applying ensemble and unsupervised machine learning techniques specifically to combat the security challenges in software-defined 5G networks. Saurabh Dey et al. in [15] proposed a multi-layered IDS for mobile clouds involving heterogeneous client networks. In this approach, they have applied machine learning methods such as DBScan and K-means to observe the incoming traffic pattern and detect potential attacks. Also they have indicated that the complexity of this approach can be customized according to the requirement of the client network. Also in [16], the authors have attempted to design an IDS combining learning, case-based reasoning and reactive behavior for acquiring knowledge from past solutions and support the evolution of case-based reasoning to reactive behavior in enhancing the performance of the IDS. In [17], Vajiheh Hajisalem et al. investigated to develop intelligent CART classifier for IDS by optimizing rapidity and accuracy. To achieve this, they have combined artificial fish swarm and artificial bee colony to choose effective If-then rules for the classifier CART and achieved a DR of 99% with FAR of 0.01%. Approach proposed in [18] successfully applied machine learning to design an intelligent IDS that are capable to learn and update incrementally the detection engine and maintain good detection rate with low FAR over long time period.
While numerous work has been devoted in the past decade on devising IDS applying machine learning techniques [1], the success of these methods depends on the quality of data used. Unfortunately, the current real-world network traffic is characterized by huge volume of high dimensionality data. This may negatively impact on the detection accuracy of IDS due to the presence of irrelevant/redundant information in network traffic. Also, it may slow down the entire detection process due to high computational complexity required to handle such data. Therefore, it is of paramount importance in the intrusion detection process to identify or propose an effective method to handle the reduction of data dimensionality as recognized by great body of scientific literature.
Further, the high dimensionality is not the only challenge presented to IDS. Another important issue that may worsen the detection accuracy of IDS, but is often ignored in this domain, is imbalance in class distribution [19], [20], [21]. This occurs when the data contain different numbers of observations for the different classes which is a common situation in intrusion detection process as the attack traffic tends to be only a small portion of overall traffic. The class with dominate number of observations than other classes is called majority class, while the class with smallest amount is called minority class. The class imbalance causes the classifier to bias towards majority class and tends IDS to generate many false alarms. In this situation, sophisticated attackers are encouraged to create minority attack types to reach their targets. Despite, misclassification of minority attack types leads to severe loss in practical applications, the class imbalance problem has not received substantial attention as it would deserve in the field of IDS.
The solutions crafted to combat the class imbalance problem, fall under two main categories namely, data level and algorithmic level [22]. The data level focuses on changing the original data distribution and includes many different resampling techniques. Whereas algorithmic level adjusts the existing learning algorithm to strengthen their ability and optimize their classification accuracy towards minority class. Recently, the importance of feature selection for class imbalance problem is realized and has received much attention in the field of machine learning [19], [22]. In general, feature selection aims to improve the quality of the dataset by selecting the most informative features and eliminating the features that are irrelevant or redundant. With an imbalanced dataset, the key idea of employing feature selection is to find the optimal subset of features that can optimize the contrast of minority class from other classes in the data and reduces the risk of misclassifying minority class samples. Hence, this notion forms the initial impetus for this research work.
To date, very few studies are reported in literature to illustrate the significance of feature selection in handling high dimensional class imbalance problem. Further, most of these studies are conducted on biological data. Therefore, we believe it would be of unique contribution if the significance of feature selection for high dimensional imbalanced intrusion dataset is investigated.
Accordingly, the objective of this work will be to give guidance for researchers not working in feature selection field but searching out for the best feature evaluation measure to build efficient IDS. In this direction, the work here investigates the performance of different feature evaluation measures based on their correlation with intrusion detection accuracy and recommends the most appropriate measure to consider for use while building an IDS. Here, KNN, RF, SVM and DBN was used as a classifier to demonstrate the quality of the recommending feature evaluation measure. The standard intrusion detection datasets NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15 which are high dimensional and imbalanced was employed to prove the recommending feature evaluation measure in terms of higher DR and lower FAR. Finally, statistical analysis was conducted to confirm the recommending feature evaluation measure for building efficient IDS.
