In the healthcare domain, operational research (OR) methods are used to support service commissioners, health planners and service provider organisations. OR often uses computer simulation to better understand the behaviours of complex systems and the interactions between system elements, allowing exploration of the impact of different policy options and service scenarios. OR has been used to understand, evaluate and plan interventions and service delivery in a number of healthcare domains.1 This article describes the application of OR simulation methods to support planning of care services for people with dementia, by informing decision makers about the variability of severity of dementia progression.
In ageing populations, healthcare policymakers and provider organisations face many challenges to meet the increasing need for care services for older people with dementia; increasing dementia prevalence will be an important driver for demand for care services. Care needs are complex, individualised and progressively more intensive depending on the age of onset, comorbidities, different pathologies and risk factors underlying dementia,2,3 eventually resulting in considerable and profound dependence on care providers.
Currently available medical and clinical interventions for dementia rely on symptomatic treatments. These are licensed only for Alzheimer and Parkinson disease,4 and there is currently no known dementia cure or preventative treatment.5 Nevertheless, clinical benefits are widely regarded as modest, inconsistent and short-term.6, 7, 8, 9 In comparison, a healthy lifestyle is reported to improve outcomes, with delayed onset and fewer years with dementia (YWD).10, 11, 12, 13 The computer simulation model reported here allows benefit comparisons to be explored over time, capturing the interplay of competing risks and benefits.
Review of modelling studiesPrevious modelling work has addressed various aspects of dementia care service planning. This includes modelling treatment effects in a simulated randomised controlled trial (RCT),14, 15, 16, 17, 18 strategic planning based on dementia prevalence,19,20 diagnosis,21 risk factors22 and impact on long-term care provision.23, 24, 25 State-based models stratify care needs based on severity ‘compartments’, but this approach assumes homogeneity within health states and cannot address individual variability in progression. More recently, microsimulation models26, 27, 28, 29, 30 have attempted to overcome these issues; however, this approach can be computationally intensive and do not include potential interventions.We therefore modelled individualised decline trajectories for people with dementia in our computer simulation and assessed intervention benefits in the presence of individual decline variability. We describe the results from a computer simulation model using population-level ageing, incidence and mortality in a hypothetical age cohort, hybridised with individual-level variability in onset, progressive decline, lifestyle and treatment effects. The results were used to assess the likely impacts on survival and total costs (health, social and unpaid care) at the population level over a 45-year cohort lifetime.
