The outbreak of the novel coronavirus epidemic in the world has gotten everyone’s attention. This new coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2 can cause serious infectious diseases which are also termed as Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Many patients develop novel coronavirus pneumonia and progress into serious acute respiratory illness Guan et al. (2020). The pandemic has propagated fast due to person-to-person transmission Phan et al. (2020) and has resulted in around 17,023,229 cases all over the world with over 667,106 death till July 30, 2020, which is a great threat to the global human health. Therefore, the early recognition of COVID-19 risk factors is critical for not only the cure of individual infected patients but also public disease containment.
Currently, a reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is a gold standard for SARS-CoV-2 confirmation. However, the laboratory test may take up to days because of the limited supply and strict condition requirements, which may delay the diagnosis of suspected patients. While chest computed tomography (CT) is not so accurate as RT-PCR test in virus detection, it may be more efficient and sensitive for clinical evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia and is better for quantitative measurement of the severity of lung involvement (Ai et al., 2020). The significance of chest CT manifestations in the diagnostic procedure has been shown in several recent reports (Chung, Bernheim, Mei, Zhang, Huang, Zeng, Cui, Xu, Yang, Fayad, et al., 2020, Lei et al., 2020, Song, Shi, Shan, Zhang, Shen, Lu, Ling, Jiang, Shi, 2020). The combination of CT scans and clinical findings can make a quick and effective diagnosis possible.
Recent advances in the applications of artificial intelligence (AI) Shi et al. (2020) have inspired the development of AI-based computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system (Esteva et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2020, Xie, Ma, Robson, Chung, Bernheim, Mani, Calcagno, Li, Li, Shan, et al.) in many healthcare areas. As one of the important techniques of AI, deep learning has shown significant diagnostic accuracy in disease detection of medical imaging (Ardila et al., 2019, Suzuki, 2017). Previous works have reviewed the effectiveness of quantitative models of chest CT in lung disease diagnosis (Chen et al., 2020).
Although deep learning can make an accurate diagnosis, the performance of deep neural networks depends on large numbers of labeled CT scans. However, the labeling work of chest CT scans requires not only lots of time and effort but also the domain expertise of medical professionals. Due to the fast spread of the COVID-19, large scale annotation of CT scans is impossible because of limited time and heavy burden on the healthcare system. To meet this challenge, the active learning method is introduced to effectively cut the cost of labeling by actively selecting the most informative samples according to certain strategies. The effectiveness of deep active learning methods is shown in early studies (Zhou, Shin, Gurudu, Gotway, Liang, Yoo, Kweon, 2019, Yang, Zhang, Chen, Zhang, Chen, 2017, Smailagic, Costa, Gaudio, Khandelwal, Mirshekari, Fagert, Walawalkar, Xu, Galdran, Zhang, et al.,). What’s more, large scale lesion annotation of COVID-19 is also impossible because of the fast spread of the disease. Thus, a better choice is performing weakly-supervised COVID-19 detection. To train a deep neural network with fewer labeled data and patient-level labels, we propose a weakly-supervised deep active learning framework called COVID-AL to interactively diagnose COVID-19. The proposed COVID-AL is validated on the CT scans constructed from cohorts from the China Consortium of Chest CT Image Investigation (CC-CCII). The experimental results demonstrate that COVID-AL can greatly cut the annotation cost for training a deep neural network and consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art active learning methods in the diagnosis of COVID-19.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
•We propose the COVID-AL framework that can simultaneously consider the data diversity and data uncertainty to improve the efficiency of active learning methods. Furthermore, a discretization method is also proposed to map the values of different scales to scale-free ranks. Thus the problem of sampling efficiency in active learning methods is addressed from the basic principle of data infomativeness.•We tailor-design a 2D U-Net for the lung region segmentation and a 3D residual network for the diagnosis of COVID-19.•We perform weakly supervised active learning with patient-level labels in the proposed COVID-AL framework, which outperforms the state-of-the-art active learning approaches in cutting the labeling cost and achieves effective diagnosis of COVID-19.
The remaining parts of this paper are arranged as follows. The related studies are discussed in Section 2. The detailed description of the experimental materials, proposed framework, and algorithms will be shown in Section 3. Section 4 demonstrates the experimental results and corresponding empirical evaluation. Section 5 presents a discussion about the motivation and originality of this work. This paper is concluded with future work in Section 6.
