1.1. BackgroundGlobally, there are insufficient primary care psychology resources to meet the needs brought about by the growing prevalence of low mood and anxiety in children (McGorry et al., 2013). One of the most effective interventions for such psychological difficulties is cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) (Ebert et al., 2015). CBT examines the often-complex relationship between one's thoughts, feelings, and behaviours that are theorized to be related to maintaining psychological difficulties (Beck, 1963). Increasingly, CBT has been adapted using a range of technology-assisted formats. These include: internet-delivered or computerised CBT (cCBT) (Spek et al., 2007; Gilbody et al., 2015), serious games (Fleming et al., 2016, Fleming et al., 2017); and more recently, blended CBT (Titzler et al., 2018). Technology-assisted CBT has been recognized as both an evidence-based and cost- efficient approach to address the unmet needs across different settings for children (Pennant et al., 2015; Stasiak et al., 2016).
1.2. The challenges of applying technology-assisted CBT in real-world settings for childrenDespite the supporting evidence base and cost- effectiveness of technology-assisted CBT, significant challenges have emerged. Firstly, there are considerable research-to-practice gaps such that evidence-based interventions often struggle to achieve effectiveness when transferred from clinical trials to service settings (Grimshaw et al., 2012). Secondly, high attrition rates are reported across the literature (Vigerland et al., 2016) – for reasons that are poorly understood. Thirdly, CBT requires careful adaptation for children due to different developmental needs (Carr, 2008); and without effective tailoring, CBT may be inappropriate for some children (Stallard, 2019; Grave and Blissett, 2004). Indeed, while the body of evidence for technology-assisted CBT is strong for many populations (Hofmann et al., 2012), the research on its effectiveness for children has less weight due to lower numbers of studies (Arnberg et al., 2014; Fleming et al., 2014). Fourthly, to achieve effective implementation, technology-assisted interventions require complex collaborations between psychologists, politicians, industry-based technologists, and service provider management – these cross-disciplinary collaborations have often produced sub-standard intervention outcomes (Blandford et al., 2018). A final challenge relates to a lack of understanding regarding the potentially.novel factors that may impact children's (digital) therapeutic alliance (Henson et al., 2019; Torous and Hsin, 2018; Knowles et al., 2014) – how, and to what extent, do new technologies help or hinder the therapeutic process?To address the above challenges, a variety of both interdisciplinary and adaptive methods have been proposed to ensure interventions are implementable (Mohr et al., 2017). This includes understanding the journey of clinical stakeholders (Mohr et al., 2015); and a recognition of the role of the deployment environment of interventions (Ben-Zeev et al., 2015; van der Meulen et al., 2019). Additionally, alongside quantitative outcomes, the use of qualitative research is recognized as an integral part of understanding how an intervention works and why (Noyes et al., 2018). When considering technology-assisted CBT for children, it is important to factor in the unique characteristics of this intervention. At present, a variety of approaches are commonly utilized for the successful adaptation of CBT for children, including: computer games (Linehan et al., 2015), and the use of child-friendly narratives, metaphors and characters therein (O'Reilly, 2018; Coyle et al., 2011). Moreover, the use of staff with differing levels of psychology qualifications – namely graduate students, assistant psychologists (APs), or primary care mental health workers – is increasingly common in the provision of low-intensity CBT interventions (Ekers et al., 2011; Bower, 2002).
1.3. Prior research on technology-assisted CBT for children – the role of assistant psychologistsDespite the abundance of quantitative research on technology-assisted CBT, the field is lacking in comparatively high-quality qualitative evidence concerning effectiveness and implementation. This is particularly the case for clinical stakeholders in primary care services, where there is limited qualitative understanding on the experiences of staff providing such interventions. Due to unmet needs in primary care, stepped models of care continue to explore the provision of cost-effective interventions using staff with various levels of psychology qualifications (Kakuma et al., 2011; Kohn et al., 2004). This approach proposes that staff without professional psychology qualifications can be efficiently trained in structured CBT programs, for which there is some evidence of effectiveness (Richards et al., 2016; Mead et al., 2005). Nonetheless, variable definitions as to what constitutes this type of staff (such as APs) have limited the generalizability of research heretofore. Additionally, despite the high job satisfaction and competency development reported by APs, there are potential risks for systemic exploitation and elitism within a competitive field (Byrne and Twomey, 2011).As more service providers turn to APs to provide technology-assisted CBT, concerns have been highlighted regarding the aforementioned risks; but also the proliferation of unpaid positions leading to financial hardship in some settings (such as Ireland, Hughes et al., 2015). Notably, this is occurring in already resource-depleted environments; where some staff believe that face-to- face therapy is superior to technology-assisted CBT (Stallard et al., 2010; Perle et al., 2013; Vigerland et al., 2014). Moreover, it has been found that there is often a lack of staff knowledge about technology- assisted interventions and their underpinning research (Donovan et al., 2015; Du et al., 2013).However, within the available qualitative research, much of the focus has been on service users. A recent qualitative synthesis of children's experiences of technology-assisted CBT found that it: was mostly helpful, assisted the therapeutic process, transferred into everyday life, provided a gameplay experience; but had some limitations for a minority (McCashin et al., 2019). Of the perceived advantages and disadvantages of blending technology with CBT from the staff perspective, there have been mixed results reported. In relation to advantages, many studies have found that: most mental health workers acknowledged the usefulness of technology-assisted CBT for mild to moderate psychological difficulties, but not for more severe problems (Stallard et al., 2010). Furthermore, many are optimistic and positive about the increased use of technology as an adjunct to traditional approaches (Sinclair et al., 2013). However, there were perceived disadvantages related to: displacing human contact, reducing the therapeutic relationship, variable beliefs in technology, mixed stakeholder buy-in, time restraints and external factors (Fleming and Merry, 2013; Stallard et al., 2010; Du et al., 2013).There are three key limitations to the extant qualitative literature. Firstly, the studies are typically restricted by small sample sizes. Secondly, there is disproportionate coverage from UK, New Zealand and Australian systems. Thirdly, there is very limited research that focuses exclusively on APs that work directly with children aged 12 and under. Thus, the applicability to other settings is unknown. These limitations are especially relevant due to the importance of understanding staff experiences with interventions, as they are associated with effective uptake and sustainability over time (Du et al., 2013).
1.4. The current studyThis study addresses the lack of qualitative research on AP experiences of providing technology-assisted CBT to children. Notably, the context for this study is primary care psychology in Ireland – itself a country where substantial challenges have been documented regarding long waitlists for children with psychological difficulties (McGorry et al., 2013; Malla et al., 2016). Notably for Ireland, in 2017, an unprecedented 114 APs were recruited with the remit of providing technology- assisted CBT for children – a first for primary care services (National Service Plan – Health Service Executive, 2016, Health Service Executive, 2017). This service development provides an opportune time to examine the experiences of APs from training through to routine practice. Primary care in Ireland is defined as all of the health and social care services one finds in their local community (outside of hospital settings). Therefore, the aim of this study is: to use qualitative methodology to examine the overall experiences of APs in Ireland providing technology-assisted CBT.
