Statistics from the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) [1] show that 11% of the bridges in the United States are rated as “structurally deficient” and over 30% of existing bridges have exceeded their 50-year design life, meaning that condition assessment and repair/rehabilitation programs will require substantial budget allocations in the near future. Common bridge inspection methods like chipping, drilling, and coring consist largely of time-consuming and subjective measures for quantifying deterioration of bridges [2]. Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) has been successfully used in a wide range of applications including capture and quantification of deterioration progression in concrete bridge decks, evaluation of the deck thickness, measurement of the concrete cover, predicting deck repair quantities, void localization in concrete, underground utility tracing and mapping, land mine detection, optimization and assessment of railway ballast, and tunnel assessment [[3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]].
Although GPR data collection is fast and efficient but interpretation of GPR data is a very time-consuming task and relies on the operator's decisions to provide accurate information and reliable results. Detecting reflection hyperbola-patterns which represent objects in GPR data is a necessary first-step in GPR data processing systems, with the purpose of localizing, extracting, and characterizing the rebar in GPR data. Extensive literature exists regarding processing GPR data for automatic localization of buried objects, but here just a few relevant and recent studies is mentioned. Asadi et al. [12] proposed a method based on combination of image processing, machine learning (ML) data classification, data filtering, and spatial pattern analysis for quantification of deterioration and creating a 3D deterioration map in concrete bridge decks. The authors implemented decision stumps for classification of feature descriptor vectors. Decision stump is a one-level decision tree with one internal node which is immediately connected to the terminal nodes. The value of F-measure was found to be 86.20%. The limitation of the proposed method is accuracy in highly deteriorated bridges. Dinh et al. [13] proposed an algorithm consisting of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for hyperbola signatures and then implementing a CNN to locate potential rebars by retain the likely true positive, and to discard likely false positive rebar detections. The overall accuracy of the method was found to be 99.60%. The main limitation of the proposed algorithm is that it requires a large amount of data for the training of the model [13], and that those data need to be representative for bridge decks that will be surveyed in the future. Furthermore, there is no information about the condition of the bridge decks studies in this work and the provided pictures in the paper are easy to detect. Xu et al. [14] focused on the problem of segmenting echogram radar data collected from the polar ice sheets, which is challenging because segmentation boundaries are often very weak and there is a high degree of noise. The authors proposed a multi-task spatiotemporal ANN that combines 3-dimensional CNNs and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to estimate ice surface boundaries from sequences of tomographic radar images. The authors show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art on this problem by avoiding the need for hand-tuned parameters, extracting multiple surfaces simultaneously, requiring less non-visual metadata, and being faster. Ajithkumar et al. [15] studied effectiveness of five different classifiers namely: Hidden Markov Model, Support Vector Machine, Artificial Neural Network, Gradient Boosted Decision Tree and Adaptive Boosted Decision trees for addressing robotic landmine detection problem. Two GPR based datasets have been used both of which are open source and contain data for foliage and dry, desert type soils respectively. Based on the obtained results, a selection table has been designed which allows the practitioners to select the classifier that is most likely to give the best performance with respect to a preferred metric. Khalaf et al. [16] presented a new feature for detecting landmines at various depths. The proposed approach can be described mathematically by applying Prony's method, to calculate the complex resonance frequencies (CNR), which are considered as suitable features to discriminate different objects. The authors evaluated performance of different classification methods: artificial neural network (ANN), K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN), Multi-Class Support Vector Machine (MC-SVM) and Decision Tree (DT). Noreen and Khan [16] presented a machine learning approach to detect hyperbolic patterns using a support vector machine (SVM) with the histogram of oriented gradient features (HOG). For this purpose, the reported results showed that HOG feature-based classifier achieve a high detection rate of 0.758 with a low false positive rate of 0.394. The authors evaluated the proposed model is tested on both real GPR field data and synthetic GPR data. Synthetic GPR data is created on an open source software gprMax. Bralich et al. [17] applied transfer learning method for training a CNN based detector to overcome the problem of lack of GPR data. The authors trained two CNN on large datasets (Cifar10 and a dataset of high-resolution aerial imagery for detecting solar photovoltaic arrays) for feature extraction and training parameters of models. The authors performed experiments on a large collection of GPR data. The obtained results showed that these approaches improve the performance of CNNs for buried target detection in GPR data. Qiao et al. [19] developed a general hyperbola pattern detection algorithm based on a novel method called multi-resolution monogenic signal analysis for processing GPR B-scans data. The reported F-measure for the method was 75%. Bouzerdoum et al. [10] focused on reducing background clutter in GPR data. The authors proposed a method to reduce the background clutter to improve object detection. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) is computed to measure the detection accuracy of the proposed method. AUC for large and small targets was found to be 98% and 97.9%, respectively. Cui et al. [20] proposed a feature recognition method based on center-surround difference detecting and implemented the Fuzzy Logic approach to classify computed hyperbolic signatures. The proposed method is sensitive to GPR data collection system settings. Pasolli et al. [21] approach for identification of buried objects in GPR data is based on localizing hyperbolic patterns using Genetic Algorithm for data classification which due to computationally complexity is a slow method, especially when employed with high-dimensional input data. The overall accuracy of the method was found to be 80%.
The authors proposed a dataset of 8000 labeled GPR images cropped from bridge deck GPR images, named URIGPRv1.0 [22]. The proposed dataset allows researchers to develop and evaluate the performance of novel approaches in identification and labeling of objects in GPR B-scan images. The authors proposed a novel computer vision (CV)-based method for automatic detection of rebars in complex GPR images in highly deteriorated concrete bridge decks. The proposed method consisting of a fine-tuned Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) feature descriptor, a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) for data classification, a multi-scale pyramid sliding window object detector, and a post processing algorithm developed for reducing false detection rate and labeling exact location of rebar in Region of Interest (RoI). Overall, the contribution of this work includes:
•Proposing a novel detection chain yields a new state-of-the-art result in rebar detection in concrete bridge deck GPR B-scan images•Optimizing HOG/LBPH feature computation and MLP model parameters for maximizing F-Measure in classification task•Developing a post-processing algorithm for minimizing false RoI detections, removing non-top layer RoI, and extracting coordinates of rebar in RoI•Introducing a GPR dataset with 8000 hyperbola/hyperbola-free images, named URIGPRv1.0, was cropped from real concrete bridge deck GPR B-scan images.•A computer program, named URICAB, is developed based on the proposed rebar detection chain for automating interpretation and quantification of GPR data
