Terrorist attack on World Trade Centre on September 11, 2001 was an eye opener not only for United States but also for the entire world towards the security of their critical infrastructures (CIs). In the 21st century, almost all nations depend on CIs and this dependency is constantly increasing as it is directly related to the development of the nations. CIs can be termed as lifeline of a nation as they include all major sectors like energy, transportation, information and communication, banking and finance, water supply and waste water treatment, healthcare, agriculture, manufacturing, defense, emergency services and so on [1]. Due to the rapid development of Information and Communication Technologies, CIs are relying heavily on the Internet for their operations and services. Therefore, computer systems and communication systems are integral part of any CI which connects it to open networks and in this process makes it vulnerable towards cyber attacks as well. Cyber attack on entire CI or on selected resources of the CI such as supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems, process control systems (PCS), distributed control systems (DCS) are very frequent [2]. Cyber attack has a potential to jeopardize the security, integrity, confidentiality, availability and continuity of CIs of any nation and not only that, it may even leads towards cyber warfare [3], [4]. Cyber attack on one CI may also affect many other CIs due to their interdependencies [5], [6]. Not only that, some countries are interdependent on shared critical infrastructure [7]. Therefore, every nation must ensure the security of their CIs against all threats including cyber attacks.
Cyber domain has brought drastic changes in the society. But currently it is admonished by the attack of malevolent objects. Among various types of cyber attacks, distributed attack is more common to CI. If an attack on a CI is performed through a large number of nodes, then it is termed as distributed attack. Distributed denial of service attack (DDoS) is a very popular distributed attack that first builds a zombie army by inserting a zombie code or Trojan horse on the infected nodes in a variety of ways, such as installed inside free games or media files or as attachment to e-mails. A Trojan horse then creates a way like open a connection to communicate back to its master. Finally, upon receiving a command from master through this backdoor, the entire zombie army lunches a massive attack on attacker’s victim [8]. Another important observation says that in fourth quarter of 2015, 75 percent of DDoS attacks were through wireless networks [9]. Probably the reason behind this is their poor security features in compared with wired networks. On April 27, 2007, a series of DDoS attacks on Estonia’s targeted resources like websites of Estonis’s parliament, ministries, leading banks and newspapers were conducted [10]. Similarly, on August 7, 2008, DDoS attacks on Georgia’s targeted resources like military and defense institutions, IT systems were also conducted and as a result these CIs were proved insecure and vulnerable to disruptions of any kind of online activities [11]. Above said DDoS attacks on Estonia and Georgia’s CIs were so devastating that they fall in the category of cyber war. Similarly, a successful targeted attack through Stuxnet on CI closed down around 1000 uranium hexafluoride centrifuges at Iran’s Natanz nuclear in 2010 [12]. It significantly delayed the progress of Iran’s nuclear weapons program [13]. In 2016, a new Internet of Things (IoT) based DDoS attack known as Mirai attack, was in limelight which peaked maximum at 1Tbps. These past records throw a great challenge to security professionals to safeguard vulnerable CIs.
Electronic mails, net-surfing and downloading, and sharing of secondary devices are the major sources for the transmission of spiteful objects in the computer network. In accordance with their contagious behaviour and characteristic, malicious objects spread in different way [14]. To hinder the spread and impact of these dangerous objects, it is vital to study about their propagating characteristics, pros and cons etc. Malicious objects can spread throughout the network very quickly and are a great security threat. To function effectively, CI network must be robust. Isolation may be a very pivotal and simple to obstruct the spreading feature of these hateful objects. Constant quarantine strategy is a defensive measure against malicious objects. The word quarantine has evolved as a forced isolation or stoppage of interactions with others [15], [16], [17], [18]. From the physiological aspect, quarantine has been adopted to reduce the transmission of human diseases, such as leprosy, plague, smallpox, tuberculosis, measles and AIDS/HIV and so on. Same concept has been adopted in the cyber domain. Here the most infected nodes are isolated from the computer network till they get recovered. The involvement of a quarantine strategy has brought drastic changes in the solution of infection, and thus consequently adapted to defend a system against distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks. Several attempts have been made mathematically to understand and analyse such attacks [19], [20]. It has been verified that the epidemic models are useful methods for understanding the transmission of malicious objects affected network in cyber space domain. Classical epidemic theory and its extension are widely used to understand these transmissions of malicious objects in computer networks as they are analogous to biological diseases [21], [22]. Epidemic models are dynamic in nature where the entire population of nodes is divided into different compartments like susceptible, vaccinated, exposed, infected, quarantined, and recovered and so on [23]. Movement of nodes from one compartment to another can be easily represented by ordinary differential equations. The system of ordinary differential equations for such derived epidemic model is then normally analysed for equilibria and finally local and global stability is achieved in most research papers. Evaluation of epidemic threshold (R0) helps us to decide whether the epidemic will persist or the infection will die out. In 2018, a new epidemic model on Mirai based DDoS attack have been proposed by Mishra and Keshri [24]. In this paper they shows how vulnerable IoT devices can be easily compromised and using them how a powerful botnet attack on CI can be taken place. A predator–prey based epidemic model on wireless nano-sensor network (Susceptible – Vaccinated – Infected - Terminally Infected - Recovered model) was also proposed by Keshri et al. in 2018 to evaluate the criteria, where the functionality of the network prolong without interruption against cyber attack [25].
In this paper, we have proposed an e-epidemic model for DDoS attack on targeted resources in a computer network of CI. The effect of quarantine in the defense of CI is critically analysed. The subsequent materials of this paper are structured as follows. In Section 2, based on our assumptions a two-fold epidemic model is developed. In Section 3, basic reproduction number for both the population is calculated. In Sections 4 Stability analysis, 5 Global stability of endemic equilibrium, local and global stability analyses are discussed, respectively. Section 6 analyses the simulation performed. Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section 7.
