The process of purchasing expensive agricultural machinery and vehicles is an important and strategic investment. The consequences of a wrong decision are usually long-lasting and severe. The risk of wrong decisions can be minimised by using proven systems supporting these processes in a situation of uncertainty and risk.
For many years drivers have been supported by such systems. In Europe, ADAC, DEKRA, TÜV, and GTÜ from Germany and Warranty Direct from the United kingdom are the most reputable automotive associations. Every year they publish rankings of reliability or failure rate, which are mainly based on obligatory roadworthiness tests. However, even these rankings are not convergent. The position in the ranking depends on a passed or failed roadworthiness test. The percentage of these tests related to the whole population of vehicles surveyed enables reports on individual brands and models in different age categories.
In Poland, for several years there has been an Internet portal “Wybór kierowców” (Drivers' Choice), which is the first independent information service. The automotive industry research programme was inspired by the world-famous programmes: J.D. Power, Driver Power and Consumer Report. It is supposed to help drivers make the right choices when they need to buy a car or select products and services. The programme participants evaluate cars, automotive products and services by completing an online survey in one of the categories. The participants of the Drivers' Choice programme rate car brands and models as well as automotive products and services according to several criteria (e.g. spaciousness, performance, fuel consumption, service costs, failure rate) and then give an overall rating. Thus, user satisfaction rankings are created. Since 2013 there have been over 144,000 questionnaires collected in 9 categories: car models (brand-new and pre-owned), car brands, brand-new car showrooms, authorised services, insurance companies, engine oils, tyres, petrol station chains and cosmetics. Drivers' Choice is the only survey of this kind that provides information about the satisfaction of customers of the automotive industry on the Polish market. As it reflects Polish reality better, it complements German reliability rankings.
There are well-functioning systems which support decisions about purchasing a brand-new or pre-owned car. It is also a good idea to help clients make the right purchase decisions about farming equipment. The farming machinery market is as large as the automotive market. Apparently, there are more farm tractor manufacturers than automotive concerns around the world. The farming machinery market is also characterised by fluctuations, which are determined by the economic and political situation in a particular country, Europe and all over the world. Agricultural machinery and vehicles stand out from other products due to specific features related with the work environment and the manner of use. These are mainly (Gazzarin, 2019):
-particularly difficult working conditions (dust, stones, work at night, etc.),-minimal use of the potential working time and the resulting need for storage, e.g. the annual use of a tractor amounts to 600 h (in Switzerland even 1,000 h – method developed by FAT Tänikon, currently Agroscope Reckenholz-Tänikon),-seasonal work (the harvest time may be as short as 2 weeks),-heavy-duty service and reliability are required,-field work (e.g. on slopes),-long operating periods (even 20÷30 years),-service activity.
A system supporting decisions to purchase agricultural machinery and vehicles must allow for the specific nature of this group of products as well as a large number of different types. It is estimated that a modern farm uses about 150 different devices. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a multi-criteria system, which will enable comprehensive assessment of the quality of agricultural machinery and vehicles. This approach is in line with the american Multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) and solves the problem of Multi-objective optimisation (MOOP).
MCDM (or Multiple-criteria decision analysis MCDA) is a sub-discipline of operations research that explicitly evaluates multiple conflicting criteria in decision making (Almeida, 2019; Greco et al., 2016; Hemmati et al., 2018; Majumder, 2015; Okokpujie et al., 2020; Schaefer and Thinh, 2019).
MOOP (also known as Multi-objective programming, Vector optimisation, Multi-criteria optimisation, Multi-attribute optimisation or Pareto optimisation) is an area of multiple criteria decision making that is concerned with mathematical optimisation problems involving more than one objective function to be optimised simultaneously. In a multi-objective optimisation problem, the goodness of a solution is determined by dominance Burke and Kendal (2013); Deb (2001); Deb and Deb (2014); Ehrgott (2000); Li et al. (2020); Marler and Arora (2004).
The authors of publications on agricultural engineering have already made attempts to evaluate the quality of some agricultural machinery and tractors. So far they have presented few innovative methods, which quantify the quality of machinery with different results. Only this form enables rankings (Durczak, 2011).
Supporters of the linguistic approach adopted the thesis “people act through language”. It is important to assess agricultural machinery, because it gives a possibility to specify criteria. However, the number of applications of speech acts makes it difficult to identify clear communication patterns. The descriptive form of assessment makes it difficult to rank the global quality of machinery. Therefore, quantitative methods of quality assessment are more valuable for agricultural practice. The need to evaluate the quality of agricultural machinery is especially noticed by farmers, who are users of this equipment.
A method based on graphic symbols to rate the quality of machinery is an indirect method between the descriptive and numerical one. Apart from detailed descriptions of technical operational, and economic data as well as the potential of machinery, the authors of tests rate machinery by means of graphic symbols. These pictorial symbols are unambiguous for the recipient. Individual traits, grouped into characteristics, are usually rated according to a five-point scale by means of pluses and minuses. Here are examples of symbols used to evaluate agricultural machinery and tractors.
Additionally, the symbols have appropriate contrasting colours, e.g. green (for a plus or zero) and red (for a minus), which enhance the positive or negative nature of a specific trait.
The quality of machinery can be rated more precisely with points, which were also used to rate tractors. A score ranging from 1 (unsatisfactory rating) to 5 points (very good rating) is based on values measured and subjective data collected by four test teams. Additionally, the rating multiplier, which functions as a weight, is used in the final point-based ranking.
The analysis of reference publications shows that quality is the basic assessment criterion in all areas of human activity. Extensive scientific research on this issue can be divided into two groups. The first group includes studies on the perception, definition, and valuation of quality, which have universal nature. The other group includes the studies which attempt to construct quality evaluation systems for individual sectors. This division results from the specific traits that are characteristic of each group of products.
Available publications do not provide a tool allowing objective quantitative assessment of the quality of agricultural machinery. The construction of a rating system is necessary because it meets the expectations of agricultural machinery users and manufacturers, who need to compete on the market.
