Developing new smart cities requires to integrate several smart solutions in different fields together and to put all these solutions into practice in the best way. As a part of this global scene, many studies were published in the last few years introducing the new term “smart grids” into our life. This new generation of power systems should be able to keep an optimal performance for all stages of power generation including the last stage of power consumption, as well as the transfer stages. This highly desired performance requires a lot of creative ideas. Hence; new smart self-maintenance scenarios could be suggested in such cases to provide a robust healing performance and to reduce the associated time and costs compared with the classical maintenance methods. The most popular ways to inspect power grids equipment are performed by foot patrol or helicopter-based investigations (Xie et al., 2017, Katrasnik et al., 2010, Liu et al., 2019). The first way is mainly slow and mostly ineffective. Helicopter-assisted inspections are faster, but as they are unable to stay hovering a short distance from the power systems their visual systems or any other sensor will not be able to get reliable measurements. Therefore an unmanned aerial vehicle-based robot design is suggested here to investigate and perform some urgent maintenance procedures for different components of power systems. Some other studies (Luis et al., 2014, Jones and Erap, 1996, Jingjing et al., 2012, Jiang et al., 2013, Li and Chen, 2018, Bhola et al., 2018) also employed a UAV, only to inspect high voltage power lines without performing any maintenance scenario if a defect was detected, while some other researchers (Besada et al., 2018) tried to define the mission of the drone to improve its planing efficiency and to simulate the inspection in advance. In Luis et al. (2014) they used some primitive digital image processing-based techniques like background subtraction as well as morphological operations to localize the joints of transfer lines, this technique seems unstable when successive images are captured, of the same scene, from different scales or orientations. The Kalman filter and Hough transform were utilized in Jingjing et al. (2012) to track the power lines depending on a video sequence flow. In Jiang et al. (2013) a UAV of multi-path ground matching system that relies on 2D plane laser radar was introduced. Both last studies were interested in the surrounding of the transfer lines but they ignore the state of the lines themselves. A climbing robot was suggested by some studies as in Paulo et al. (2008), this robot can move along cables to get a near reading of the electrical components state and to achieve the required maintenance. This type of platform is usually slow and mostly showing a lot of mechanical inconveniences when moving along cables in forested environments.
In this paper, we design a flying robot called the Butterfly as illustrated in Fig. 1, to repair the damaged or disabled parts of transfer or distribution power lines especially in remote locations or high mountains. This robot is also invited to continuously check the entire parts of a power system using different types of visual and thermal sensors in order to rapidly detect any problem that could affect its functionality. Fig. 2.Download : Download high-res image (76KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. a front view of the flying robot called the Butterfly.Download : Download high-res image (44KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. a top view of the flying robot; a laser sensors-based device is mounted on top.
It could be thought that any of the commercial-off-the-shelf (COST) quadcopters may represent a practical solution to investigate the state of the power system. We have to notice that these available platforms don’t support heavy payloads. A quadcopter can rely on its batteries to fly up to 2 continuous hours if the maximum payload (including its own weight) doesn’t exceed 10 kilos. In this project, our objective is to build a flexible platform that could be modified to satisfy a variety of requirements to perform different self-maintenance scenarios, as well as to travel very long distances without the need to any stop, the actual weight of our design exceeds 31 kg, our flying robot will recharge its batteries near to the power lines by using power harvesting-based system (Yuan et al., 2015). Besides, the next step of this project is to perch and stabilize the robot over its local maintenance area by using some techniques inspired by nature, especially the spider (Braithwaite et al., 2015). Hence, we are not sure that any of the available models of the (COST) quadcopters can satisfy our desired future design.
The organization of the paper is as follows; in the next section, we discuss the different types of sensors and actuators that are required to perform some specific maintenance procedures of electrical lines. The most important technical specifications of this robot are depicted in the third section. Some essential computer vision techniques are used in the fourth section to take some measurements and readings from the flying robot’s environment. In the fifth section, a new region proposal technique that relies on a Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) is explained. The electrical components which were extracted in the last step, are classified by using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Finally, we conclude with a summary of the main characteristics of this design, then we describe some future works which should be carried out soon.
