There are various Monte Carlo computational codes developed to simulate particle transportation in mediums, such as FLUktuierende KAskade (FLUKA), Monte Carlo N-Particle eXtended (MCNPX), and GEometry ANd Tracking (Geant4) [1], [2], [3]. Geant4 is a general-purpose Monte Carlo toolkit written with a modern program language (C++) as an open source code [1], [4]. It is widely used and supported in medical physics community. As compared to the other Monte Carlo codes, Geant4 is more flexible in handling highly complicated geometry, motion and time-dependent fields. Given these features, it has been widely used in proton therapy community for a long time. Based on the Geant4, the computation tool TOol for PArticle Simulation (TOPAS) code was developed using a well-structured computation architecture as a user-friendly Monte Carlo tool in proton therapy [5], [6]. The built-in proton beam lines and related facilities in TOPAS are especially useful for computer simulation without the access to the prohibitively expensive proton treatment equipment. The TOPAS has been validated its usability and accuracy in many proton treatment facilities.
The impact of tissue heterogeneities on proton therapy due to the proton beam range uncertainties is significant [7]. Due to the sharp distal falloff, Monte Carlo computer modeling and simulation therefore are particularly useful in proton cancer treatment than conventional X-ray photon therapy [8]. Although the analytical computational algorithm are typically employed in most treatment planning system, even the most comprehensive deterministic dose computational algorithms produce errors in highly heterogeneous geometries, such as air-tissue inhomogeneity [9], [10]. In particular, the analytical algorithm fails to model the existing uncertainties during the course of proton therapy [10], [11], [12]. Monte Carlo computer simulation has shown a potential to reduce uncertainties in treatment planning in proton therapy [7].
In this study, we investigated a framework to efficiently compute and merge Monte Carlo computer modeling and simulations with new technique development in cancer treatment. A newly designed 3-D prompt gamma (PG) camera system was developed using Monte Carlo computer simulation method to validate the utility of the camera simulated for in-beam proton range verification during cancer treatment. The effectiveness of the Monte Carlo computer simulation in the system modeling was demonstrated through evaluating the performance of PG camera system simulated by the TOPAS computation tool proposed.
Since the proton beam was first employed to treat tumors in humans in 1946, proton therapy has experienced a tremendous progress in the last several decades in terms of beam delivery technique and clinical implementation [13]. According to the Particle Therapy Cooperative Group (PTCOG) 2018 report, at least 190,036 patients had been treated using proton beam worldwide by the end of 2018 [14]. Currently, there are 78 proton therapy centers worldwide, mainly in United States with 31 proton therapy centers and Japan with 15 proton therapy centers in operation [14]. The number of proton center worldwide has increased every year due to the increasing interest in exploiting the advantageous sparing of normal tissues and dose distribution and therefore reduced radiation-related complications on patients of proton therapy.
The steep distal dose gradient of proton beams is particularly helpful in protecting the organs at risk during the course of proton therapy for cancer patients. However, the locations of these gradients within patients are subjected to significant uncertainties due to changes in tissue and tumor anatomy during the intrafraction and interfraction of treatment [7], [15]. Reduction of proton beam range uncertainty offers a great medical advantage and improved personalized treatment accuracy in patients.
Prompt gamma (PG) camera has the capability of real-time proton beam range monitoring during the beam delivery without wash-out effects from well-perfused tissues due to the prompt feature of the gamma emission (less than 1 ns after excitation) [16]. This prompt property particularly facilitates the time-resolved acquisition of multiple beam spots in pencil beam scanning mode that increasingly implements in many proton therapy centers worldwide [16].
There are previous studies investigating the use of scintillator-based PG slit cameras for in-beam proton beam range verification based on Monte Carlo computational methods. Smeets et al. proposed and simulated a PG camera based on a slit collimator to measure proton beam range through 1-D projection of beam footprint on a LYSO scintillator detector [17]. Using the Monte Carlo computer simulation, the concept of using a scintillator-based PG slit camera to estimate proton beam ranges was demonstrated to be feasible in a homogeneous target with millimeter accuracy. Xie et al. reported a physical PG slit camera system accommodated in a proton treatment room and assessed the performance of the camera with the first clinical case of the treatment of brain cancer patient [16]. The camera was built with a LYSO scintillator detector and a slit collimator. Through comparing with the simulated detection profiles computed from the Monte Carlo simulation of the camera, the shifts of the proton beam ranges measured were determined with millimeter accuracy. In this study, we proposed semiconductor-based PG slit cameras and assessed the feasibility of the cameras proposed for verification of proton beam spots within phantoms in three dimensions through using the Monte Carlo computational simulations.
The scintillator-based PG slit camera has already been demonstrated for proton beam range verification, wherein the gamma-ray energy deposition in scintillators is converted into visible light and further converted into electronic signals by photo-detectors (such as silicon photomultipliers) [16]. The cost-effectiveness of such systems is limited due to a large number of photomultipliers needed. Furthermore, the indirect conversion of the energy deposition inevitably compromises the energy resolution of the detectors, which is critical for energy-related measurements. Moreover, the current slit camera-based PG camera systems hardly provide 3D spatial information of the proton beam spot. Only the 1D proton beam range monitoring along the beam axis is available with the current PG slit cameras, the lateral position of the beam spot is still unknown, which results in an extra source of error for treatment accuracy.
As such, there is a critical need for a cost-effective, direct-conversion PG slit camera system with requested 3D imaging performance for proton beam spot monitoring. With the Monte Carlo computer simulation method used, the direct-conversion semiconductor detector was designed in this study with compact camera structure and the reduced cost without the need for photomultipliers, thus potentially improving the energy resolution and detection efficiency of the camera.
In this study, a 3-D prompt gamma slit-camera system based on a pixelated cadmium zinc telluride (CZT) semiconductor detector with photon counting function was simulated using the TOPAS Monte Carlo computer simulation. By placing the slit-cameras surrounding patients in treatment position in the computational environment, the lateral position as well as the range of a proton beam spot can be obtained to verify the proton beam delivery during the course of proton therapy, thus greatly improving the accuracy of proton treatment beam delivery and therefore treatment outcomes.
