Conventionally, research examining factors contributing to creation of scientific research-based startups and academic entrepreneurship has specifically examined factors other than scientific research itself. One example of a generally accepted notion about commercialization from advanced technology research is the technology readiness level (TRL) concept. In the mid-1970s, NASA introduced TRL: a criterion to evaluate the maturity of technologies derived from science based on a scale of 1–9, with 1 being the most basic technology and 9 being the most mature technology. The criterion has been used to explain why some new technologies engender industrial transitions. However, it has been used for project management at stages of performance assessment to schedule to budget without addressing the emergence of the research itself [1]. Actually, TRL has been expected to facilitate transdisciplinary expertise between academia and practitioners by supporting the analysis and design of an industry's transition [2].
Patents, which represent practical applications of technology concepts that are classified as TRL 2 according to the TRL concept, have been regarded as an important antecedent for academic entrepreneurship in life sciences [1, 3]. University scientists who appear as inventors on patents presumably have more opportunities to enter the private sector than other scientists. Such might be the case also for biotechnology startups. By contrast, a research paper itself has not been regarded as a precursor for academic entrepreneurship because the purpose of a research paper has been regarded as communicating research findings to the relevant scientific community and to the general public. Moreover, patents are legal documents used to prevent others from commercializing what research papers describe, thereby facilitating commercialization by patent holders of their intended applications.
The “startup readiness” concept developed in our earlier study [4] was proposed as a criterion to be applied earlier than TRL, focusing on individual scientists. Whereas TRL is used to assess the maturity of a technology, startup readiness is the state at which a researcher is ready to participate in a startup. Given the growing interest in academic startups among increasing stakeholders, academic startups have recently been gaining easier access to venture capital and managerial talent. Long before TRL matures, research topics and researchers show startup readiness, which might later beget important firms by leveraging their scientific strengths. These research topics and researchers are investment opportunities for venture capitalists. They represent career opportunities for managerial talent as well. An earlier report of the literature has described that biotechnology research paper publications linked to patents are cited more than publications without a patent link [5], suggesting that research papers citations signal commercial value. We hypothesized that “startup readiness” of research topics and researchers, in contrast to “technology readiness,” can be signaled by research papers. This study presumes the resource-based view of firms (Barney (1991); Kogut and Zander (1992); Conner and Prahalad (1996); Grant (1996)) and its extended literature related to academic startups (Landry et al. (2006); Knockaert et al. (2010); Rasmussen and Borch, (2010); Huynh et al. (2017); Corsi et al. (2019)) to assume that, as with entrepreneurs, startup readiness by academic researchers will increase when either the resources or their coordination will be appropriate or sufficient [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Specifically for factors contributing to new academic firm creation, researchers have assessed individual and non-individual determinants of academic entrepreneurship using surveys of scientists classified according to their research protocols. For instance, Rothaermel et al. (2007) report that university policy, faculty, technology transfer offices, investors, founding teams, networks in which a firm is embedded, and other external conditions affect new firm creation [15]. Bercovitz and Feldman (2008) examine faculty members' backgrounds and work environments and their subsequent academic entrepreneurship activities. They find that participation of researchers, if they had accepted the new initiative and had been active in technology transfer, is more likely at institutions where they trained [16]. Jain et al. (2009) investigate the sense-making process accompanying university scientist participation in academic entrepreneurship and potential modification of their role identity. They suggest that scientists participate to preserve their academic role identity [17]. Clarysse et al. (2011) examine how academic professionals’ opportunity recognition capacity and their prior entrepreneurial experience affect the likelihood of their involvement in starting up a new venture and shape the social environment and roles of university technology transfer offices [18]. Abreu and Grinevich (2013) analyze determinants of academic engagement such as demographic factors (seniority and gender), research type, entrepreneurial experience and training, and institutional support [19]. Aldridge et al. (2014) examine motivations for scientists to start companies, specifically examining roles of scientist characteristics including academic rank, experience, networks and industry ties, access to human and financial resources, and supportive university conditions [20].
The earlier literature of resource-based theory describes the commercialization of academic research: resources that enable startup creation include knowledge assets, intellectual property assets, financial assets, social capital assets, personal assets, and organizational assets as discussed above. Except for organizational assets that are environmental factors, these assets are individual factors. However, for the biopharmaceutical domain, which is a particularly user-inspired, intense science-based technology commercialization field, we assume that the scientific prominence of researchers is more important than their other attributes. That point has not been explored in earlier studies of this field. This report describes our study assessing the notion that researchers’ standing in the biopharmaceutical academic community, which signals their scientific prominence, is a factor indicating their “startup readiness,” while supporting the basic view of resource-based theory.
Furthermore, earlier studies examining factors leading to the creation of startups commercializing scientists' research make little or no reference to any of the following: (1) collection of real-time data related to intended entrepreneurial researchers’ academic and startup activities in broad disciplines in a scalable manner (although earlier studies survey past data of scientists in specified academic organizations or regions); (2) selection of specific research topics that entrepreneurial researchers are pursuing (although Abreu and Grinevich (2013) introduce life sciences as research fields with greater commercialization activity) [19]; and (3) bibliometric analyses of those researchers specifically in terms of their research topics in their research communities (although Rothaermel et al. (2007) and Aldridge et al. (2014) assess academic titles such as professor) [15, 20].
The industry segments presented herein highlight case studies in life sciences, specifically the biopharmaceutical domain. The classic definition of “biopharmaceutical,” both in science and industry, is pharmaceuticals (medicinal products, therapeutics, prophylactics, and in vivo diagnostics) with active agents that are inherently biological in nature and which are manufactured using biotechnology (products manufactured by or from living organisms, usually involving bioprocessing). In addition, “drug” is defined as a pharmaceutical that is inherently chemical (not biological) in nature and which is manufactured using chemical methods. Biopharmaceuticals are distinct from drugs, most of which are composed of small molecules or other synthetic chemical substances. The inherent differences between these two classes include product and active agent sources, identity, structure, composition, manufacturing methods and equipment, intellectual property, formulation, handling, dosing, regulation, and marketing [21]. The biopharmaceutical domain is selected for our case studies here for several reasons. (a) Much of life sciences such as biopharmaceutical research can be characterized as situated in Pasteur's quadrant, a classification of scientific research projects that is aimed at fundamental understanding of scientific problems and at providing immediate benefits for society. Many studies associated with that quadrant have revealed evidence of greater commercialization activities through academic entrepreneurship [22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. In addition, (b) biopharmaceutical science has expanded considerably in terms of both commercialization and entrepreneurship since the beginning of the 21st century. Of the top 10 selling pharmaceutical products worldwide in 2017, 9 were biopharmaceutical; also, 6 had origins in startup companies (Table 1). By contrast, 2001 had only one biopharmaceutical drug without a startup origin [27].Table 1. Top 10 pharmaceutical products by Global sales in 2017 (million U.S. dollars).RankProductTherapeutic SubcategoryVendor CompanyOriginator2017 Sales ($m)1HumiraOther anti-rheumaticsAbbVie, EisaiKnoll18,9232EnbrelOther anti-rheumaticsAmgen, Pfizer, TakedaImmunex, acquired by Amgen8,2343RevlimidOther cytostaticsCelgene, BeiGeneCelgene8,2114RituxanAnti-neoplastic MAbsRocheIDEC Pharmaceuticals, merged with Biogen7,5285RemicadeOther anti-rheumaticsJohnson & Johnson, Merck & Co, Mitsubishi Tanabe PharmaCentocor, renamed Janssen Pharmaceutical7,1726HerceptinAnti-neoplastic MAbsRocheGenentech7,1267AvastinAnti-neoplastic MAbsRocheGenentech6,7958EyleaEye/Ophthalmic preparationsRegeneron Pharmaceuticals, Bayer, Santen PharmaceuticalRegeneron Pharmaceuticals6,2919OpdivoAnti-neoplastic MAbsBristol-Myers Squibb, Ono PharmaceuticalOno Pharmaceutical5,76110Prevnar 13VaccinesPfizerWyeth5,693Source: Evaluate Ltd. "Top 100 Products in 2024″
This study explores the proposition that, in user-inspired fundamental research such as that in the biopharmaceutical domain, specific knowledge regarding academic entrepreneurship can be attained as follows: (1) Global databases of startup finances and academic research papers can yield real-time data that are useful to analyze and predict academic entrepreneurship in broad disciplines on a global scale. (2) Data of startup finances and keyword analyses both of the data of startup finances and academic research papers can elucidate trends indicating which scientific topics are becoming active areas of research that enhance “startup-readiness.” (3) Bibliometric analyses of research papers related to the scientific topics above can reveal potentially entrepreneurial scientists with high startup readiness in industry segments related to the scientific topics.
Results of this study contribute to a rich, convenient, and dynamic understanding of academic entrepreneurship. The computational approach used herein can be useful to assess the startup readiness of researchers in emerging research topics because names of research topics and authoring researchers are identifiable easily in real time. Better scalability and adaptability are obtainable using these names instead of published paper titles, personal interviews or field projects. Consequently, our method can be useful even for practitioners including venture capitalists and managerial entrepreneurs who are unfamiliar with science fields, but who aspire to engage in research-based startups. Our approach is also unique because it directly bridges authors in citation networks to a startup financing database, which enables us to relate citation network analysis to the startup and investment contexts. described above.
Concretely, our bibliometric analyses first require construction of author citation networks derived from biopharmaceutical research paper citation networks. Then we refer the author data to the startup database to analyze whether the authors are biopharmaceutical startup participants such as a founder, chief scientific officer, or director. Herein, we present this method of evaluating researchers' startup readiness of biopharmaceutical startups. Then we measure the degree centrality of such authors’ nodes in author citation networks and co-authorship networks. Centrality represents the degree to which an author is central in terms of the position in the author citation network. Degree centrality can be ascertained using several methods: often, network analyses are conducted among actors (i.e. network nodes), as some earlier studies have done [28, 29, 30, 31, 32]. Our similar approach measured a centrality index with respect to targeted nodes and others to explain causes of their performance or activities. For an earlier study that analyzed author citation networks, Ding applied PageRank and weighted PageRank algorithms in author citation networks to assess the popularity and prestige of scholars [33]. Our approach differs: Ding analyzed only first authors, whereas we analyzed all co-authors comprehensively in their research field. An earlier study by Cainelli et al. (2015) analyzed co-authorship of economists and co-authorship effects using social network analysis and economic analysis to assess co-authorship structures and to explain researcher productivity in terms of variables including cooperation and two centrality indexes: betweenness and closeness [34].
