Due to the limited lifetime of electronic instruments, they are turned into electronic waste (e-waste), contaminating the environment and causing major concerns around the world. In 2018, 49.8 million tons of e-waste was generated worldwide (Baldé et al., 2015). The United Nations University's (UNU) 2017 report estimated that the total e-waste production would reach 52.2 million tons in 2021 (Baldé et al., 2017). Countries with a higher gross domestic product (GDP) produce higher levels of e-waste; however, populous countries with low purchasing power and low GDP may not necessarily generate a high amount of e-waste (Kumar et al., 2017). The printed circuit boards (PCBs), parts of e-waste, organize the main electronic components, whether by soldering or by the use of fixing aids such as screws, and the means by which the electronic components are electrically connected to form the required electrical circuit, using metal tracks patterned onto the PCB and solder joints (Grout, 2008). The average annual production of PCBs has grown by 8.7% (Huang et al., 2009). PCBs are the core part of e-waste (Zhang et al., 2018). They contain a wide range of metals, including valuable metals (such as Au, Ag, and Pt), base metals (such as Cu, Al, and steel), and toxic metals (such as Hg and Pb), as well as ceramic and plastic compounds (Arshadi et al., 2018b). Traditional methods for recovering metals from PCBs are environmentally hazardous and consume a great deal of energy. Nonetheless, they are able to recover about 30–35% of metals from PCBs with a purity of 85% to 95% (Kumar and Shah, 2014). Traditional methods, including mechanical separation, pyrometallurgy, and hydrometallurgy, are not economical for the recovery of metals from e-waste; mechanical separation is at best useful as a pretreatment method. The foregoing methods are deleterious to the environment and cause air pollution (Kumari et al., 2014). Biohydrometallurgy is a new environmentally friendly technology, due to the metabolic activities of microorganisms, which associate with the enormous secretion of numerous exometabolites, the interactions of them with solid waste with metals occur in significant changes in their toxicity, mobility, and distribution in the environment. Heterotrophic bioleaching is proceeding in biogeochemical cycles of enormous macro-and micronutrients. It is based on redox reactions, complexation, and acidification that can be used in the bio-hydrometallurgical recycling of metals from waste materials (Kolencik et al., 2014). Fungal leaching – a vital branch of bioleaching – has some advantages over bacteria: it utilizes various fungi that grow over a wide range of pH 1.5–9.8, produces different organic acids, and has a faster metal recovery rate (Santhiya and Ting, 2005; Xu et al., 2014). Among fungi, Aspergillus niger and Penicillium simplicissimum have been effectively employed in different types of research to extract metals from miscellaneous solid wastes such as power plant residual ash (Rasoulnia and Mousavi, 2016), spent refinery processing catalyst (Amiri et al., 2011), cellular phone PCBs, computer motherboards (Madrigal-Arias et al., 2015), and spent lithium-ion mobile phone batteries (Horeh et al., 2016).
In both fungal and bacterial leaching, there are quite a few factors influencing the bioleaching process, so much so that insignificant changes in these parameters create a recognizable difference in the responses (Willner, 2013). Finding the optimal amount of the factors is principal in bioleaching processes (Amiri et al., 2012). Moreover, maximum metal leaching efficiency can be achieved thorugh operating the system under optimal conditions. Optimizations using statistical methods have some important advantages over conventional methods because they are accurate, rapid, identify the factor interaction, and decrease the total number of experiments. RSM, a well-known global optimization software, is useful for improvement, development, and optimization of the multivariable process. It is used to analyze and model processes, in which an interest response that is influenced by various variables is optimized. It can evaluate the interaction of independent factors in various chemical, geotechnical engineering, animal science researches, nutrition studies bioenvironmental, and biochemical processes (Arshadi and Mousavi, 2015).
Narayanasamy et al. (2017) studied the extraction of metals from e-waste using an isolated microorganism identified as Aspergillus niger. They concluded that pH plays an indispensable role in the bioleaching process, and higher efficiency is more probable at lower pulp density. In their study, although the quantities of Hg, Br, and Si decreased from the respective initial concentration, the amount of Ag, Cu, and Fe increased (Narayanasamy et al., 2017). Santhiya and Ting (2005) used an adapted A. niger to extract Ni, Mo, and Al from a spent refinery processing catalyst—the adaptation of which was performed utilizing the metal ions of the mentioned metals. Their results showed that the fungus tolerated a mixture containing up to 100 ppm Ni, 200 ppm Mo, and 600 ppm of Al. They reported that in the presence of 1% of the spent catalyst, about 78.5%, 82.4%, and 65.2% of Ni, Mo, and Al were extracted, respectively (Santhiya and Ting, 2005). Jadhav et al. (2016) investigated the bioleaching of PCBs using A. niger and hydrogen peroxide. By the unification of culture medium and hydrogen peroxide, all metals were completely solubilized (Jadhav et al., 2016).
Leaching of Zn, Cd, Pb, and Cu from e-waste (including mobile phone and desktop computer) using A. niger were examined by Kolencik et al. (2013). After 42 days, 69% of Cu and 28% of Pb was recovered by A. niger. Citric acid was recognized as the most efficient leaching chemical agent (Kolencik et al., 2013). Amiri et al. (2011) studied the recovery of metals from spent refinery hydrocracking catalysts using A. niger; the maximum amount of metals was extracted in the one-step bioleaching process and 3% (w/w) of pulp density. As a result, W, Fe, Mo, N, and Al were leached 100%, 77.8%, 90.9%, 65.8%, and 14.2% respectively (Amiri et al., 2011). Xu and Ting (2004) optimized the bioleaching of incinerator fly ash by A. niger using central composite design (CCD); they concluded that sucrose and fly ash concentration are more influential than spore concentration and time. They reported that the concentrations of Al, Fe, and Zn were 12.3, 12.3, and 77.6 ppm in the leached liquor, respectively (Xu and Ting, 2004).
The gap of the literature is that the application of fungal bioleaching in e-waste, particularly CPCBs, was studied in a few articles. In the current research, the fungal leaching was studied in detail. The gap of knowledge is that it did not identify the most important parameters affecting the fungal leaching of e-waste. In the study under consideration, the parameters with the maximum effect on the fungal leaching process of the e-waste were discussed and recognized. The optimal condition for maximum recovery of Cu and Ni was further introduced.
This study aimed to discuss the bioleaching of heavy metals from CPCBs. The main objective was to optimize Cu and Ni extraction from CPCBs using a pure culture of A. niger. Through adapting the RSM approach, pH, number of spores, the sample adding time, and pulp density were optimized in 30 °C and shaking rate of 130 rpm. To testify the bioleaching progress, we investigated certain characteristics of CPCBs, three of which are compositions, phases, and components of the examined polymer, and conducted micromorphology analyses – mapping, EDAX, and scanning electron microscope (SEM)– of the sample before and after bioleaching.
