Online Social Networks (OSNs) are consistently growing, with 2.3 billion users on Facebook alone, with 74% of respondents reporting they are visiting Facebook sites daily (Smith and Anderson, 2018). Despite OSNs being commonly used (Smith and Anderson, 2018; Tsay-Vogel et al., 2018; Perrin, 2015), users are still very concerned about possible implications of using OSNs, and specifically about implications relating to their privacy and online disclosure. An indirect indication for these significant concerns can be deduced from the raise of privacy-preserving methodologies in OSNs (Praveena and Smys, 2016). Furthermore, privacy concerns increase, and the negative relationship between privacy concerns and self-disclosure weakened across time (Tsay-Vogel et al., 2018).
The behavior of OSNs users has undergone dramatic changes in recent years. Users can now control the information they share with their peers to a large extent (and to a lesser extent, the information they share with service providers.) Privacy norms have shifted over time towards a more restrictive access (Stutzman et al., 2013; Stutzman and Hartzog, 2012), with a higher reliance on privacy settings and on other boundary-regulation mechanisms (Altman, 1975). The literature around privacy behaviors had looked at measures of self-disclosure (Cheung et al., 2015; Saeri et al., 2014; Wisniewski et al., 2014; Hargittai and Marwick, 2016; Dienlin and Metzger, 2016; Gruzd & Hernández-Garcı́a, 2018) and the effects of a variety of perceptions and attitudes on information disclosure, for example, the perceived risk in sharing (James et al., 2017). Perceptions and attitudes have been extensively examined, including privacy attitudes (Malhotra et al., 2004; Preibusch, 2013; Tan et al., 2012), trust (Wilson and Valacich, 2012), and privacy management controls and architecture (Li et al., 2015). However, navigating sharing on social networks becomes more complicated, for example, because of context collapse, in which people from different social relationships will see the same information about a single person (Skeels and Grudin, 2009). Users need to make nuanced decisions on who they share their information with and in which context. Existing constructs and research methods do not adequately capture and understand how and why people change and update their privacy settings.
In this study, we explore users' behavior with regard to the way they actively share, and not only the amount of shared information or the intention to share. Our approach offers a quantitative multi-dimensional view of people's information sharing behaviors based on Facebook server logs and perceptions in OSNs. Following Altman's Boundary Regulation Theory (Altman, 1975), we adopt a view of privacy as an ongoing dynamic, feedback-oriented process in which individuals continually manage their boundaries to optimize their disclosure goals, balancing between openness and closeness. Therefore, we capture the dynamics of privacy behavior and measure Agility using existing variables (e.g., bridging, bonding, trust etc'.) as well as openness and publicness.
Our study contributes to the existing literature in two ways. First, it provides a model for selectivity in sharing information in OSNs instead of other forms of information disclosure behaviors. Second, our model offers new insights into the relationship between perceptions and actual behaviors. Our model can be useful to scholars, designers, policymakers, and users who can use our privacy marker to understand users' online privacy behavior better and to improve the profile settings and the users' interaction in OSNs.
