Breast cancer is one of the most common cancer types among women and has the highest percentage among cancer-related deaths [1,2]. The prevention and early diagnosis of cancer gain importance day after day to decrease the number of cancer-related deaths and the budget for breast cancer researches. There are three modalities; ultrasound, mammography, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) mainly used for breast cancer diagnosis. Mammography is the first breast cancer screening method suggested by the World Health Organization (WHO) [3]. But it uses radiation and it is inapplicable for women whose age is under 40 years old. MRI attracts attention from the radiologists and also from the researchers in other disciplines, in recent years. MRI is preferable for scanning women who may have asymptomatic breast cancer. Also, the anomalies detected by using mammography can be studied in detail with MRI. Recently, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems are developed to help the detection of cancerous lesions and evaluate the success of the complete diagnosis. These systems analyze the data (i.e. MR images, mammography images, and ultrasound scans) through improved deterministic algorithms.
Dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) is a well-established clinical imaging technique detecting the sequential changes in contrast enhancement [4]. CAD systems support the MRI system to make the examinations easier by eliminating artifacts and decrease the amount of data. These systems analyze data in a well-defined and deterministic way. In this way, inter- and intra-observer variabilities diminish. CAD systems try to reach two targets: the first target is to detect suspicious regions as sensibly as possible and the second one is to classify detected regions according to their inherent properties. The purpose of the presented study is to develop a computer-aided algorithm for lesion segmentation and classification by using histogram, shape, and texture based features.
The main objectives of the studies in this field can be grouped as i) lesion detection, ii) segmentation, iii) feature extraction, and iv) lesion classification. While most studies perform one of these objectives, some focus on more than one goal. In [5], the authors use a CAD system to evaluate whether preoperative breast DCE-MRI kinetic features can predict survival outcome and tumor aggressiveness in patients with invasive breast cancer. For this purpose, 301 women who underwent preoperative DCE-MRI were analyzed. Two features: peak enhancement and volumetric analysis of kinetic patterns are offered to predict tumor aggressiveness. It is proven with statistical analysis that higher peak enhancement is significantly related to a higher tumor stage. In [6], an automatic breast region of interest detection method is proposed. In this system pixel-wise adaptive filtering, k-means clustering and morphological operations are applied to MR images for 15 different cases. According to the results, the proposed system can be used as a preliminary step in breast cancer diagnosis. In another study, independent component analysis (ICA) based nonmass-enhancing (NME) breast tumor detection and segmentation system is developed for DCE-MR images. In this study ICA is applied to voxel data and according to the calculated scores feature vector is constructed. The support vector machine (SVM) is used as a classifier and the location of SVM’s hyperplane is controlled to solve the false-positive rate problem. Promising results for challenging NME breast lesion detection in DCE-MRI are obtained [7]. The authors design a CAD system to detect breast lesions in DCE-MRI in [8]. They compensate motion artifacts and segment potential lesion voxels. Region growing, Fuzzy C-means (FCM) clustering, and vesselness filter are used to segment lesion regions. According to the given results, the proposed CAD system accurately detects 94% of the breast lesions. In [9], Marrone and his friends propose a fully-automatic geometrical based breast mask extraction method in DCE-MRI. They combine 2D FCM clustering with geometrical breast anatomy characterization to segment breast lesions. The median segmentation accuracy was 97.86 (±0.49)%. In the study given with [10], co-occurrence matrix-based texture analysis is carried out for non-invasive lesion subtype classification. The authors emphasize that the texture analysis of breast cancer potentially provides information for decision making. During the analysis, 75 breast lesions were identified in 57 women. The obtained classification accuracy is around 75% for all histological subtypes. The watershed-based breast lesion segmentation approach is given in [11]. The study aims to segment cancerous areas in breast MR images by using watershed and region growing (RG) algorithms. It is shown over 20 images that the automatic segmentation results agree with the manual detection results. In [12], the target is to improve breast cancer diagnosis performance in DCE- MRI by integrating background parenchymal enhancement (BPE) features into the decision making process. For this purpose, 115 DCE-MRI examinations that depict one identified suspicious breast lesion were used. The study shows that the BPE features provide valuable information to diagnose breast lesions via DCE-MRI. The purpose of the study given in [13] is to distinguish benign breast lesions from malignant ones by exploiting representative parameters extracted from the kinetic curves of DCE-MRI. In this study, only pre-operative DCE-MR images of 26 histopathologically approved lesions are investigated. The images are reviewed by an expert radiologist and the regions of interest (ROI)s are selected on the most solid part of the lesion. Segmentation is performed using ImageJ software. The accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity values obtained by the SVM classifier are 97.5%, 96.49%, and 100%, respectively. The major shortcomings of the study are i) the need an operator to select the tumorous areas, and ii) the small database which does not include different tumor subtypes. The authors used 15 features including 11 objective image features of masses and 4 features related to the dynamic changes of signal intensity in [14]. The quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) method is used to separate benign and malignant masses. The classification accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity values are 85.6%, 87.1%, and 82.1%, respectively. However, in this study, a rectangular ROI for the segmentation of the mass region is selected manually.
In recent years deep learning based approaches are used to investigate breast lesion malignancy. In [15], the authors investigate the deep learning techniques to distinguish benign breast lesions from malignant breast lesions on DCE-MRI. They used a convolutional neural network (CNN) after transfer learning with ImageNet and then SVM for performing the given task. The presented system provides an area under care (AUC) value of 0.85. In reference [16], human-engineered radiomics, transfer learning from deep CNNs, and fusion methods are compared for breast MRI tumor classification tasks. According to the discussion given in the study, there are two major limitations of CNNs. The first one is the need for a very high number of images (on the order of millions) to learn what features may be useful for various classification questions. The second one is the computational load of performing algorithms that require high-capacity computers. The needed collection of a large number of images in medical imaging classification tasks is difficult to acquire. However, a practice called transfer learning can be an alternative approach to overcome the first limitation. In this study, the performances of the seven scenarios are compared by using AUC values. These scenarios are human-engineered radiomics, CNN feature extraction, CNN fine-tuning, and four hybrid methods using both CNNs and human-engineered radiomics. For human-engineered radiomics method AUC value of 0.89 is achieved in the task of distinguishing between malignant and benign lesions across all lesions. The AUC values of CNN feature extraction and CNN fine-tuning methods for the same task are 0.85 and 0.89, respectively. Four fusion methods assessed in the study achieve higher AUC values (max. 0.91). As a result of the performed experiments in the study, using fusion techniques compared to using either human-engineered radiomic features or features extracted from CNN transfer learning improves the performance of the classification. Also, the size of the data set directly affects the performance of the deep learning based approaches for given specific tasks. In another investigation reported by Truhn et.al., the diagnostic performance of radiomic analysis and CNN is compared to radiologists for classification of contrast agent-enhancing lesions as benign or malignant at multi parametric breast MRI. The database of the study consists of 1294 lesions (787 malignant, 507 benign) obtained from 447 patients. Lesions are manually segmented by one breast radiologist. Radiomic analysis is carried out by utilizing L1 regularization and principal component analysis. CNN used a 34-layer deep residual neural network. AUC is used as a comparison criterion. According to the study, CNN is superior to radiomics algorithms (Pyradiomics toolbox) for the classification of enhancing lesions at multi parametric breast MRI. However, CNN is inferior to breast radiologist. In this study, a relatively low number of cases is sufficient to achieve a relatively high diagnostic accuracy of the CNN. This is likely because the authors used high-quality annotated data for training, provided by an expert radiologist. Besides, the MR examinations are acquired with a standardized protocol, whereas across different institutions pulse sequence protocols vary. So, the trained algorithms may not provide the same accuracy on data from other acquisition protocols [17]. In [18], a machine learning approach for differentiating malignant from benign enhancing foci on breast MRI is introduced. The goal of the study is achieved through radiomic signature. The database of the study includes 12 malignant and 33 benign lesions. One three dimensional T1-weighted unenhanced and four dynamic sequences are used in the study. Enhanced foci are segmented by an expert radiologist. 35 of 200 features are selected and the classification task is performed by utilizing the k-nearest neighbor (KNN) technique. Features are calculated by using the software. According to the results, a radiomic based approach provides an 87–100% sensitivity, a 77–97% specificity, and an 86–98% accuracy with 95% confidence interval for characterization of enhancing foci on breast MRI [18].
The most similar studies, that are used to evaluate the performance of the study in comparison, can be summarized as follows: In the study given with [19], the authors introduce a fully automated lesion detection system that works in three dimensions. The goal of the study is the only detection. The database of the study includes 2064 contrast enhanced breast MR images of 19 women. Breast regions in the images are extracted by a segmentation scheme based on CNNs. The performance of the automated breast segmentation is quantified using relative overlap and misclassification rate. Ninety-seven percent of the breast are segmented properly and all the lesions are detected correctly. But 31% of the lesions are misclassified. In [20], kinetic and morphological features are extracted from DCE-MRI to detect and identify focal tumor breast lesions. The database of the study includes 95 biopsy proven lesions (28 benign and 67 malignant) from 54 women. To perform breast region segmentation, three segmentation lines are determined at the middle transverse slice and then modified when applied to the other slices. The proposed computer-aided detection system provides a detection rate of 92.63% (88\95) of all tumor lesions, with 6.15 false positives per case. According to the discussion given in the study, time intensity curves based kinetic features can be used to detect tumor lesions and 3-D morphology can effectively reduce the false positives.
In [21], the authors introduce breast lesion automatic detection and diagnosis system (BLADeS). The performance of the study is evaluated on 42 patients with histopathologically proven lesions. The main steps of the system are volume extraction, breast mask extraction, motion correction, ROI detection, and ROI classification. In this study, local binary patterns on three-orthogonal plane (LBP-TOP) descriptors based approach is proposed for feature extraction. RF method is utilized for classification. Sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy percentages of the system are 95.14%, 66.67%, and 83.33%, respectively. In [22], the authors analyzed a set of 68 DCE-MRI breast tumors from 50 patients. The clustering algorithm is performed on each tumor to determine the most suspect region. Then, the features that are used to train classifiers are derived. The number of correctly classified instances is used as an evaluation criterion. The maximum correctly classified instances percentage is 78%. The authors express that simple rules of thumb are not adequate to distinguish benign lesions from malignant lesions on their database.
In this study, a comprehensive and fully automatic decision support system, that provides valuable information to the radiologist for breast lesion detection and classification via MR images, is designed. Noise reduction, segmentation, feature extraction, feature selection, cross-validation, and classification are the main steps of the system. The designed system includes several popular techniques in each step. In Section 2, a block diagram of the proposed system and the applied techniques are introduced. The results of the experiments are given in Section 3. The performed analysis is discussed in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
