According to the 2017 National Report Card (NAEP, 2017), the mathematics performance of fourth-grade students who are at the 10th and 25th percentile showed a decreasing trend from 2005 to 2017. The gap between these students and their high performing peers is getting wider rather than closing. There is a serious shortage of intervention programs that focus on building conceptual understanding of fundamental mathematical ideas--concepts that are essential to enabling struggling students to understand and solve mathematics problems. In particular, little research has been done on identifying and nurturing multiplicative reasoning and problem solving for students with learning disabilities (LD). Multiplicative reasoning (MR), a foundational skill from which students proceed to more advanced mathematical thinking, is developed through students’ conceptual understanding of multiplication (Carrier, 2010).
Based on existing literature, two indicators can be used to evaluate students’ developmental level of multiplicative reasoning: (a) students’ counting schemes, and (b) their cognitive levels of operations (Carrier, 2010; Clark & Kamii, 1996; Steffe, 1988; Steffe & Cobb, 1988). A counting scheme in multiplication refers to students’ counting acts while solving multiplicative word problems. According to the constructivist point of view, students undergo numerous adjustments to re-establish their counting acts through their personal experience of counting (Steffe, 1994). According to Steffe and Cobb’s study (1988), elementary students undergo several stages of number sequence development as they encounter various numerical situations. Particularly, students continually refine the notion of units from singletons: “1, 2… 3, 4… 5, 6” to iterable units: “2, 4, 6” (one iterated two times leads to one two's, that can also be broken down to two ones) to forming composite units (CU): “2 × 3 is two units of three” (Steffe, 1992). Students in this stage can mentally understand that three ones are taken as one three (Steffe, 1992). Composite unit (CU) can be defined as a set of equal quantity of singletons (1 s) (Carrier, 2010; Clark & Kamii, 1996; Steffe, 1988; Steffe & Cobb, 1988). Students who have acquired multiplicative reasoning will be able to identify units of one (singletons) and units of units (composite units) and understand the relation between the two quantities (Steffe & Cobb, 1988). In particular, to understand multiplication and division, a child would need to view a collection or a group of individual items as one thing (the composite unit) and be able to coordinate a number of equal sized groups (Sullivan, Clarke, Cheeseman & Mulligan, 2001). Acquisition of an equal–grouping structure is at the core of multiplicative reasoning (Downton, 2008).
On the other hand, cognitive levels of operation indicate students’ different levels of representation when engaging in intellectual work. In the case of mathematics learning, prominent educators (Bruner, 1996; Inhelder and Piaget, 1958) believed that mathematics is learned by going through a sequence of concrete, semi-concrete, and abstract stages (Miller & Mercer, 1993). According to Olive (2001), students also undergo concrete, semi-concrete, and abstract stages (CSA) stages as they continue to internalize their counting acts. Students would represent their counting acts by using the concrete manipulative (e.g., unifix cubes) and gradually progress to semi-concrete (e.g., drawing, pictures) and to abstract level (e.g., math sentence).
To meet current challenging high academic standards such as mathematics Common Core, it is important for students to establish the concept of CU, coordinate the units between the CU and 1 s, and move and beyond the concrete level of operation to symbolic representation of mathematical relations for generalized problem-solving skills. To date, little is known about how the counting scheme-focused multiplicative reasoning instruction affects students with LD on their mathematics word problem solving.
Through the support from the National Science Foundation (NSF)1, PGBM-COMPS, a computer tutor by Xin, Tzur, and Si (2008) along with the research team, was developed to nurture multiplicative reasoning (MR) of students with learning disabilities (LD). The PGBM-COMPS computer tutor draws on three research-based frameworks: a constructivist view of learning from mathematics education (Steffe, 1994), data (or statistical) learning from computer sciences, and Conceptual Model-based Problem Solving (COMPS, Xin, 2012) that generalizes word-problem underlying structures from special education. Rooted in guided constructivist perspective (Mayer, 2004) on learning, we focused on how a student-adaptive teaching approach (Steffe, 1990), which tailors goals and activities for students’ learning to their available conceptions, can foster advances in multiplicative reasoning.
The PGBM-COMPS computer tutor approaches the fundamental MR concepts in an explicit manner. The Please Go Bring Me (PGBM) component engaged students with mathematics activities where they manipulated the unifix cubes to form same-sized towers. These activities provided students the chance to build their understanding of CU. On the other hand, the Conceptual Model-based Problem Solving (COMPS) component (Xin, Wiles, & Lin, 2008;​ Xin, 2012) emphasized modeling the multiplicative concept through translating the mathematical relation within a word problem into an algebraic model equation.
This study attempted to investigate the effect of the PGBM-COMPS computer tutor on multiplicative reasoning and problem solving of students with LD. Specific research questions were: (a) was there a functional relationship between the PGBM-COMPS computer tutor and students’ multiplicative word problem-solving performance? and (b) how did the computer tutor affect participating students’ multiplicative reasoning, measured by their counting schemes and cognitive levels of operation?
