The common approach to the synthesis of heat transfer systems assumes that the total surface of heat transfer and heat duty are fixed. Distribution of contacting surfaces between individual heat exchangers is to be determined [1], [2], [11].
Minimum entropy generation in such system corresponds to such distribution that the heat duty is maximum, when the total heat transfer coefficient is fixed. If the heat duty is fixed, minimum entropy generation corresponds to the minimum heat transfer coefficient or minimum contacting surface. This shows that the entropy generation minimization is the useful method of heat transfer design [14], [15], [16] aside from methods that use economic criteria [12]. Overview of thermodynamic criteria is given in Kakaç [13].
Problems of minimum irreversibility for heat transfer with contacting flows were solved in Boikov et al. [8], Sieniutycz et al. [15] using the approach of the finite-time thermodynamics [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. It was shown in Sieniutycz et al. [15] and Andresen and Gordon [10] that for a linear heat transfer law minimum dissipation of the heat exchange between two flows corresponds to the counter-flow heat exchanger. Tsirlin [15] had also obtained the minimum dissipation conditions for an arbitrary heat transfer law.
The problem of optimal cooling is also very important problem. It differs from the problem of heat transfer. Every device being cooled has fixed temperature and power output that needs to be taken from it. The natural cost function in this case is not the dissipation but the surface of the heat transfer. Usually minimum surface of the heat transfer corresponds to the minimum total heat transfer coefficient.
One of the most important example of such system is a computer cooling system. The problem of cooling computers were solved by various methods during the last decades. The cooling was performed either by air flow or by liquid one. Air cooling can not dissipate large heat fluxes due to the low heat capacity of air, low heat transfer coefficient on the interface between air and device being cooled and the problem of concentration of the air flow in the region of maximum heat production. Nowadays, air cooling is used only for low power computers, such as personal ones. Industrial machines and supercomputers require high power and density of CPUs per computing node. Such systems are cooled using either variant of liquid cooling:
•spray or drip cooling, when the liquid is being sprayed on a CPU and evaporates here,•liquid cooling of heat conducting surfaces that are tightly bound to computing devices; liquid circulates within the channels engraved on the conducting surface,•immersion cooling, when the whole computer is being immersed into the dielectric liquid; the liquid itself is being cooled in another place.
The immersion cooling is now the most popular kind of cooling systems. The efficiency of an immersion cooling system could be improved using boiling liquid. In this case heat transfer coefficient is four times greater than for the case of simple immersion cooling, but only is the boiling is of nucleate type. Boiling liquid does not require the control of temperature, because boiling point depends only on pressure and the process of cooling of the saturated vapor is much simpler than cooling of liquid. However the nucleate boiling is not stable and its transition to film boiling dramatically decreases the efficiency of the cooling system and even can damage the computer.
The amount of heat that every device on some board dissipates could vary significantly. The largest contribution to the total dissipation is brought by CPUs. This means that for many cases it is useful to cool only selected devices on the board. Jet impingement systems solve this problem. In this case devices with the largest dissipation are enclosed in special casings with flowing jets of dielectric liquid. Other devices are being cooled by the air stream [17]. The heat transfer coefficient increases when devices is cooled by the jet of liquid. The largest increase in heat transfer coefficient is obtained, when the cooling liquid has the temperature corresponding to its boiling point. The nucleate boiling now can be controlled by maintaining the fixed fraction of vapor in the cooling flow. For jet impingement process one must determine the distribution of cooling liquid flux and contacting surface. This paper is dedicated to the solution of such a problem.
Below, variables corresponding to the cooling flow will have indices “−”, ones corresponding to the computer will have indices “+”.
