Detection of consciousness in non-responsive patients (NRPs) due to severe brain injuries remains challenging. Particularly difficult is differentiating individuals with a real disorder of consciousness (DoC), such as coma, vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome (VS/UWS) or minimally conscious state (MCS) [1], from those who preserve full consciousness but cannot express voluntary actions or speak because of lesions in the motor pathways, such as people with locked-in syndrome (LIS). The American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine defined the LIS as the:
•presence of sustained eye opening with persistence of vertical eyelid and eye movements;•preservation of cognitive skills;•severe hoarseness or hypophonia;•quadriplegia or quadriparesis, and;•a primary mode of communication using eye movements or blinking [2].
Three types of LIS are described on the basis severity of motor deficits:
•classical LIS, whereby individuals are unable to move, except for eye movements or blinking, and enable to speak;•incomplete LIS, in which residual voluntary movements in addition to eye movements can be present and;•total LIS, with total immobility, including eye movements [3].
A variety of LIS cases with multisensory deafferentation have been recently described [4]. Clinical differentiation between these entities may be difficult, for example, between total LIS and coma (eyes closed without any sign of voluntary behavior) [5] and with VS/UWS (eyes open but without evident voluntary responses). Other types such as cognitive-motor dissociation, in which individuals show command-following in mental imagery (MI) tasks evidenced by neuroimaging or neurophysiologic methods without showing behavioral signs of such mental activity, should be also considered [6]. Thus, new diagnostic tools are needed to detect signs of consciousness in the absence of explicit movement or language of the individuals. Besides, once the diagnosis of LIS has been established, we must provide individuals with communication methods independent of muscular control. This can be done through brain-computer interface (BCI) techniques.
A BCI allows for recording brain activity and translating this signal into an output for controlling an application without motor or peripheral nerve pathways [7]. BCI has been found useful for evaluating possible voluntary brain activity in individuals with DoC and instantiated communication with those unable to move or speak due to cerebral or peripheral lesions affecting the motor system. One remarkable example for a BCI used to evaluate the state of consciousness of an NRP was described by Owen and colleagues [8]. By using an MI task registered with functional MRI (fMRI), voluntary brain activity, indistinguishable from that of healthy people, was found in an individual clinically diagnosed with VS. An essay for communication through this paradigm was realized later by Monti et al. [9]. Taking into account some limitations with the use of fMRI (motion sensitivity, contraindication in people with metallic prostheses, high costs), different tasks have been developed to detect voluntary cerebral activity in NRPs by using a low-cost and easy-to-use technique such as EEG [10], [11].
The task established by Owen et al., which requires imagining playing tennis (motor task) and navigation through one's own apartment (spatial task), led to 100% accuracy in the recognition of the associated brain activation. Hence, we aimed to transfer this paradigm to EEG. Furthermore, we extended the task by adding a third motor imagery task: the movement (dorsiflexion) of feet intended to evoke the beta-rebound phenomenon. This activity has a high signal-to-noise ratio for identifying feet movement and has been tested in healthy subjects as a possible BCI-based brain switch [12].
To assess the results of this experiment, we followed the user-centered design (UCD) for BCI applications [13]. This approach establishes 3 aspects to be evaluated for the optimal adaptation of a BCI system to end-users: effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction with the device. Effectiveness is a measure of how accurate and complete an end-user can accomplish the task. Efficiency relates the invested costs (effort and time) for effectiveness. Satisfaction informs the comfort and acceptability while using the product, here the BCI to estimate the level of consciousness and to communicate. In our clinical context, results provided by BCI-controlled applications must be executable by individuals with severe brain damage (effectiveness) and reliable, because otherwise the costs invested for communication are too high (efficiency) and no meaningful communication is possible. High satisfaction with the device ensures its repeated use by the primary end-users (i.e., patients) for communication and by secondary end-users (i.e., medical and paramedical staff) to evaluate the level of consciousness.
In this paper, we report on the evaluation via the UCD of an EEG-adapted MI task to be potentially used for detecting consciousness and communication with NRPs. We included individuals with LIS because they can still communicate and thus provide us with feedback, and the presence of consciousness is ascertained. Good acceptance of the protocol by participants and easy implementation by the professional staff/caregivers was also assessed with the UCD. Factors that might influence BCI performance such as mood, motivation [14] and quality of life (QoL) were also addressed.
