To understand fatigue behaviours of metallic compounds, fractographic studies are always the primary experiments carried out before any further investigations are done [1]. By examining the fracture surface, the manner of crack growth (e.g. transgranular fracture, intergranular fracture or mixed fracture modes) can be identified and correlated to fatigue crack growth curves or stress-life curves of materials. The results can be due to several influential factors such as, temperature, stress level and environment. For a typical fatigue fracture surface, three distinctive zones, which are the crack initiation site, the fatigue crack growth zone and the fast fracture zone, can be identified to reveal the loading history of a fatigue test [2]. Among these zones, the origins of fatigue cracks, sometimes interchangeably described as crack “initiation”, “nucleation” or “formation”, are primarily considered by engineers as they are directly associated with the fatigue threshold concept in a damage-tolerance design approach [3].
For experienced fatigue engineers and material scientists, it is not a challenging task to recognize fatigue crack initiation sites (FCISs) from fracture surfaces. This is due to several features that can be used to easily identify fatigue crack initiation sites: (1) they are surrounded by progression marks, such as striations or beach marks [2], [4]; (2) fatigue cracks usually initiate from obvious microstructural weak points which are notably different from surrounding microstructures, such as the interface of lamellar structures or embedded defects (holes, inclusions); (3) the fatigue cracks often nucleate at or near the surface due to internal and external reasons, such as machining damage, oxidation or corrosion pits, residual stress [5].
It is well known that the identification of FCISs in metallic compounds requires relevant knowledge, educational background and practical experience. However, people who are not in the field of material science may encounter fatigue incidents as well; for example, orthopedic implants that failed due to a low magnitude of fatigue load [6]. They will also need to make preliminary judgements before acquiring assistance from material scientists or taking any further actions. Also, in many alloys, such as titanium aluminides and stainless steels, the identifying features listed above are not clear, especially under low magnifications. Additionally, searching FCISs at low magnifications is usually time consuming, especially in large samples, as a result of poor resolution and unclear features at low magnifications. Intersectional progression marks of multi FCISs could also interfere with judgements concerning initiation sites. Therefore, automated methods which can learn fractographic knowledge and identify fatigue features will not only help non-experienced people to understand the reasons why metallic components fails, but also save time for materials experts.
Computer vision and machine learning methods have been recently applied in order to characterize microstructural features in materials [7], [8] with accuracies of microstructure classification greater than 80% [8], and even as high as 97.37 ± 3.33% [7] according to the features and dataset scales. However, only a limited number of investigations have been published on computer vision and machine learning based approaches for material microstructural characterization, and nearly no articles have been devoted to image-driven analysis for fracture surfaces. Therefore, this work aims to establish a precursory study on employing computer vision and machine learning techniques for the challenge of FCIS recognition.
Normally, for object recognition using machine learning methods, a large dataset of labeled images is required in order to ensure high performance and to subsequently prevent overfitting and underfitting problems [9]. However, it is an onerous task to collect such a large dataset of fatigue fracture surfaces and label them manually. Hence, a machine learning approach with superior learning capacity is required to compensate the shortcomings. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) comprise a class of deep neural networks which exhibit preeminent performance in computer vision tasks [9], [10], [11]. The capacity of CNNs can be controlled through altering their depth and breadth, thus they are independent from prior knowledge and human efforts [9]. It has been shown that CNNs can achieve excellent accuracy on visual object recognition tasks with appropriately trained datasets [10], [11], [12], [13].
Despite the CNNs showing competitive performance and high efficiency in many visual object recognition fields, their efficiencies are sacrificed in recognizing complex objectives. Large training sets and optimized model initialization values are required to compensate their efficiency. Pre-trained and fine-tuned parameters, along with the transfer learning based on ImageNet [14], are introduced to create models that can converge in short order. Although, these methods can improve the efficiency of CNNs, domain mismatches still cannot be avoided for unusual domains, such as fatigue fracture surfaces in this study (i.e. no pre-trained dataset is available) [15]. In terms of the above problems, the solution is inspired by a new detector: Deeply Supervised Object Detector (DSOD), which is modified from a Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD) [16] by combining it with the DenseNet [17] algorithm. DSOD can achieve a state-of-the-art performance from a limited training dataset, or even from scratch [15]. The above reasons for using DSOD are summarized shown in Fig. 1. As seen in Fig. 1, there are several features that allow DSOD to train on models from scratch, such as a proposal-free SSD framework, with the introduction of DenseNet for deep supervision, and utilization of dense concepts for design.Download : Download high-res image (216KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. From CNNs to DSOD: reasons for using DSOD for the FCISs recognition task.
The primary contribution in this work is to establish an explorative image-driven approach for recognizing FCISs utilizing the DSOD method. Hopefully, based on this work, more possibilities and higher accuracies of analogous interdisciplinary investigations can be inspired and realized. Further works could make this technique more generalized for different types of materials rather than only metallic compounds, and thus achieve the expected transformation from a theoretical idea to practical applications that can be embedded in material characterization instruments.
