Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD henceforth) are often characterized by deficits in social communication (Wetherby, Watt, Morgan, & Shumway, 2007) that disturbs their social functioning and their potential to earn their own livelihood. The problem becomes prominent given the high prevalence rate of ASD (with 1 in 59 children in USA (Data and Statistics, 2014), 1 in 100 in UK (The National Autistic Society, 2017, p. 40) and 1 in 68 in India (Dalwai et al., 2017)). Difficulties in social communication can be attributed to this target group having deficits in Joint Attention (JA) skill (Charman, 2003). The JA skill can be considered as one in which an individual can triangulate gaze with a social partner towards a target of interest (as cued by the partner) resulting in a triadic relationship (Bakeman & Adamson, 1984, pp. 1278–1289). This skill is important since joint focus (by an individual with his/her partner) towards the cued target immersed in a visual space or context can provide one with an insight to the experiences of the social partner (Shin, 2012). Additionally, the JA skill plays an important role in the development of cognitive processes related to social motivation (Mundy & Crowson, 1997) along with language development during later stages in life (Dawson et al., 2004). The JA skill can be broadly categorized as Response to Joint Attention (RJA) and Initiating Joint Attention (IJA) (Meindl & Cannella-Malone, 2011). The RJA refers to the type of JA skill in which an individual follows the cue offered by his/her social partner while attending to a stimulus (Bruinsma, Koegel, & Koegel, 2004). For example, a father might be cueing his child using finger-pointing to look towards a balloon in the visual space. In this case, if the child follows his father's pointed finger and in turn looks towards the balloon, then the RJA is considered to be established. The Initiating Joint Attention (IJA) occurs when an individual initiates an intentional cue to get the attention of his/her social partner towards a stimulus in the shared environment (Bruinsma et al., 2004). Children with ASD face milestones, both with respect to RJA and IJA skills (Jones, Carr, & Feeley, 2006). Though IJA is also important, in our present work, we have focused on RJA (referred to as JA henceforth) since this is related with one's ability to reciprocate during social interaction (Jones et al., 2006) .
Given the importance of JA, intervention services incorporate JA skill training as an important component. A conventional JA skill training setup comprises of targets of interest and a therapist who uses different types of cueing for administering the JA tasks (Taylor & Hoch, 2008). The purpose of using different types of JA cueing is to attract the attention of an individual towards an object of interest, thereby facilitating the administration of the JA tasks. Again, a therapist's decision on the type of cue to be delivered often depends on the individual's ability to pick up a cue. For example, often, the therapist starts with the gaze-based cue in which the therapist changes the orientation of his/her gaze to point towards the target of interest (Leekam, Hunnisett, & Moore, 1998). A child with ASD might be unable to pick up the gaze-based JA cue since these children often exhibit atypical looking pattern (Frazier, Strauss, Klingender, Zetzer, Hardan, & Eng, 2017) in which they tend to demonstrate gaze avoidance while interacting with a social partner. In such a scenario, the therapist might increase the information content in his/her prompt since adding more information to a cueing prompt might make it easier for the child to track the cued target in the shared visual space. Thus, the therapist might use head turn (along with gaze orientation) to point towards the target of interest. In case the child is unable to pick up this cue, the therapist might decide to add more information to his/her cueing prompt. For example, the therapist might add a pointing finger (gesture) along with the head being turned and gaze being oriented towards the target of interest (Leekam et al., 1998). Though administration of JA tasks using conventional techniques is powerful, yet such techniques require long hours of repetitive one-on-one sittings with the therapist that is often costly (Chasson, Harris, & Neely, 2007) given the restricted availability of adequately trained interventionists particularly in developing countries like India. Additionally, bringing in variations in the training environment through the use of different objects (that can be used as targets of interest) physically in the clinical setup might not always be feasible.
Given the importance of JA skill training and the limitations faced by conventional intervention settings, experimenters have been exploring alternative techniques such as robot-assisted and computer-based techniques. For example, researchers have implemented some of the aspects of JA-based cueing (similar to that used in conventional techniques) that were delivered through the robotic agent. Specifically, researchers (such as Esubalew et al., 2012) have implemented a robot-assisted JA task paradigm in which the robot was programmed to demonstrate JA-based cueing prompts with a gradual increase in the cueing information. Subsequently, an individual's (child with ASD undergoing therapy) JA skill-related functional outcomes such as task performance was studied. Though powerful, robot-assisted techniques often suffer from some limitations such as safety issues, high cost, power constraints, etc. Thus, experimenters have been exploring the use of other alternatives e.g., computer-based techniques (Billeci et al., 2016) for administering JA tasks. With an increase in computational power coupled with rich graphics, researchers are augmenting computer-based systems with Virtual Reality (VR henceforth) platforms (Bernardini, Porayska-Pomsta, & Smith, 2014). Specifically, the research study (Caruana, McArthur, Woolgar, & Brock, 2017) has reported the power of using VR-based interfaces while designing Human-Computer Interaction (HCI henceforth) based tasks. Also, computer-based platforms are becoming cost-effective, more accessible, etc. Additionally, VR provides a space for training where individuals can afford to make mistakes in the process of learning a skill without facing the negative consequences (Bozgeyikli, Raij, Katkoori, & Alqasemi, 2017). Also, VR can feature human-like facilitators (important for administering skill training (Amaral, Simões, Mouga, Andrade, & Castelo-Branco, 2017)) as 3-D humanoid characters (Avatars) embedded in the VR space making the training sessions realistic. For example, use of VR-based social environments such as a gaming room, shopping mall, classroom, etc. coupled with avatars (Schroeder, 2012) used for imparting social communication skills has been reported. In spite of the several advantages offered by VR-enabled HCI-based platforms, only a limited number of studies (Pfeiffer-Leßmann et al., 2012; Bernardini et al., 2014; Courgeon, Rautureau, Martin, & Grynszpan, 2014; Little, Bonnar, Kelly, Lohan, & Rajendran, 2016; Amaral et al., 2017; Andrist, Gleicher, & Mutlu, 2017; Caruana et al., 2017; Caruana et al., 2018; Mei et al., 2018) have used HCI-based platform to address deficits in one's JA skill while exploring the use of various cueing strategies. Mostly, these studies have used either gaze-based cueing (Caruana et al., 2018), or head turn cue along with finger-pointing (Bernardini et al., 2014) to direct one's attention towards an object of interest followed by studying some of the functional outcomes. Given the importance of using different types of cues (having varying information content) and VR-enabled HCI-based platforms as far as JA skill training is concerned, further exploration to study the comparative potential of the different types of JA cues (delivered through the VR-enabled HCI-based JA task platform) to have implications on one's JA skill-related functional outcomes is warranted.
Motivated by this, in present research work, we have designed a VR-enabled HCI-based JA task platform for administering JA tasks for children with ASD. Our system was equipped with a virtual agent (a 3-D humanoid character referred to as avatar). The JA-based cueing used was of two types, namely avatar-mediated and environment-triggered. The avatar-mediated cueing prompts were (i) gaze-based cueing (that is gaze orientation), (ii) head turn (with gaze orientation) and (iii) pointing finger (along with head turn and gaze orientation) towards the objects of interest. The environment-triggered cueing involved sparkling of the targeted objects (cued by the avatar). We added the environment-triggered cueing since literature indicates a preference for sparkling/shiny objects among individuals with ASD (Coulter, 2009). Here, we wanted to understand the potential of each JA cue (in isolation rather than delivering these sequentially) to have implications on one's JA skill-related functional outcomes irrespective of the order in which these cues are delivered. Thus, instead of offering the JA cues sequentially with gradually increasing prompt information, we offered the JA cues in a randomized manner to the participants. The randomization of the order of the JA cues was controlled in the manner (referred as randomized controlled manner) so that same type of JA cue should not offer consecutively and also any two consecutive delivery of JA cues should not satisfy hierarchical increasing prompt protocol (Jyoti & Lahiri, 2019). Additionally, we also wanted to understand the ease with which an individual can pick up a JA cue. Thus, added to the functional measures, we wanted to study physiology while an individual interacted with our VR-enabled HCI-based JA task platform. This is because children with ASD often possess communication deficits and physiology (e.g., cardiac activity and electrodermal activity) can offer an undiluted measure (independent of the communication vulnerabilities) of the ease (Kushki et al., 2013) with which a JA cue is picked up. In our present research, we have chosen one's cardiac activity and electrodermal activity that was recorded using non-intrusive methods e.g., Pulse Plethysmogram (PPG) (Selvaraj, Jaryal, Santhosh, Deepak, & Anand, 2008) and Electrodermal Activity (EDA) (Critchley, 2002), respectively.
Thus, the objectives of our research were three-fold, namely to (i) design a VR-enabled HCI-based interactive JA task platform offering avatar-mediated and environment-triggered JA cues (ii) carry out a study with both typically developing (TD) children and children with ASD and (iii) study the comparative potential of different types of JA cues to have implications on one's JA skill-related functional and physiological measures when delivered in randomized controlled manner.
The rest of the paper is organized as: Section 2 presented materials and methods, section 3 discussed results of our study and section 4 covers detailed discussion and finally section 5 concludes our study with future scope.
