To permit mobile network operators (MNOs) to explore and rationalize their business processes, especially from resource performance and service quality perspectives, the New Generation Operations Systems and Software (NGOSS) standard [1], which has been renamed Frameworx, provides the Business Process Framework (eTOM) [2, 3, 4] that is a global framework abstracting many operational process groupings. This loose coupling allows MNOs to manage operations quickly and enable these processes to develop independently of each other. Typically, each process grouping is defined to reach a specific goal and consists of a collection of processes that work together.
In parallel with the development of eTOM, virtualization technology has positively impacted the information and communication technology sector in recent decades. It was the principal enabling technology for cloud computing approaches first and then was the central pillar of the emerging network paradigms [5], network functions virtualization (NFV) [6] and software defined network (SDN) [7, 8]. In effect, the virtualization of infrastructure and operations is one of the considerable actions that MNOs could exploit to lower costs, either capital expenditure or operational expenditure and then maximizing benefits.
In recent years, a novel abstracted framework termed NFV architecture [9] has been developed by network professionals besides the eTOM business process standard [10, 11]. Its main purpose is to allow MNOs to virtualize the entire telecommunication system and rationalize the delivery of mobile services. This framework brings together many functional blocks, among which is the operations and business support systems (OSS/BSS) functional block that already exists in current deployments. eTOM is an integral part of these building blocks, as it properly belongs to the OSS/BSS functional block which collaborates closely with the element management system (EMS) block whose responsibility is to perform the fault, configuration, accounting, performance and security (FCAPS) network management capabilities for virtual network function (VNF) building blocks.
eTOM, NFV, and SDN are key enablers for the development of the four generation/long term evolution (4G/LTE) technology toward a virtualized, orchestrated architecture intended to be termed the five generation (5G) technology. But, for reasons of performance and quality of service (QoS) management [12] related to the 5G network technology, few research studies have been published to implement eTOM, NFV, and SDN based frameworks so as to take part in that development.
In this article, we present our contribution in two constituent parts. These two parts represent enhancements of our earlier work published in [13] and [14] respectively. Effectively, the new enhancements do not affect the simulation results made in the previous publications [13, 14] and which are also reported in this study, because of the fact that all those enhancements have no relationship with the implemented parts of our approach – we implement part of our eTOM to NFV mapping approach, and then we validate part of our SFC proposal for static signaling service chaining –, except for two improvements – the inclusion of the Resource Trouble Management (RTM) process and the inclusion of the VNF Manager (VNFM) – which were implicitly included in the previous publications and are explicitly included in the current work, as will be shown later.
In the first part of our contribution, we put forward a new virtualized business process mapping approach by combining two frameworks, eTOM and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) NFV framework, for dynamic service delivery with improved resource performance and quality of service in order to meet some of the purposes of the 5G technology with reference to a virtualized mobile environment managed and orchestrated by the mixture of the aforementioned frameworks.
In contrast to our former publication [13], this first part of our contribution includes many enhancements in terms of the function mapping between eTOM and NFV by defining only three subfunctions instead of four and by making corrections to some preceding false statements about the reasons for defining each new mapping subfunction – new mapped elements. Furthermore, we suggest an approach towards the mapping between the 5G network's domains and the ETSI NFV framework's functional blocks so as to introduce the 5G centric function mapping of the level 2 eTOM model upon the ETSI NFV framework through resource management and operations mapping as well as through service management and operations mapping. In addition, during simulations, we include a new eTOM level 2 process, the RTM process, in the process interactions diagram to validate our proposal through the implementation of a VNFM based on a computer script in order to dynamically manage the lifecycle of signaling service resource instances, including IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) VNF instances, according to predefined thresholds related to virtualized signaling resource performance indicators in the case of the delivery of video on demand (VoD) services over the IMS network.
In the second part of our contribution, we present our proposed approaches regarding service function chaining (SFC) [15, 16, 17] through probable designs and analyses of dynamic mobile service chain provisioning [18, 19, 20] to support end-to-end (E2E) network slicing [21, 22] inside virtualized mobile networks – the 5G network – in considering data and signaling traffic flows, respectively, for the SGi Local Area Network (SGi-LAN) and for the packet data network (PDN), which incorporates application platforms such as the IMS [23, 24] core network. Effectively, we base this dynamic implementation of the traffic into disparate technology domains on a paradigm that segregates the control plane from the forwarding plane by introducing new controller interfaces and functions.
In effect, compared to our previous publication [14], this second part of our contribution includes five main improvements: First, correlating network slicing and SFC for the delivery of E2E services within 5G in an automated fashion; secondly, enhancing the NFV orchestration layer of the proposed SFC centered mobile network design for the 5G network by splitting it up into two NFV orchestration sublayers – a multi-domain NFV Management and Orchestration (MANO) sublayer and a domain-specific NFV MANO sublayer; thirdly, improving the suggested IMS based dynamic and static SFC designs; fourthly, highlighting the role of the VNFM during the simulations in managing the lifecycle of the IMS VNFs composing the signaling service chain allowing for the signaling session establishment conforming to virtualized signaling resource performance thresholds while providing VoD services through the IMS network; and finally, detailing in the Benchmark Results subsection the signaling service chain delivery context, including signaling service chains – one signaling service chain and then two signaling service chains.
As discussed in Sections 4, 5 and 6, the two parts of our contribution are closely related for the reason that the NFV orchestration layer's components – the ETSI NFV MANO's components –, which are mapped to Resource Management and Operations (RMO) – part of the eTOM level 1 model –, contribute through SDN controllers to the application of our SFC approach in each of the 5G operator's technology domains for delivery of end-to-end services in an automated fashion by selecting the efficient available path. In effect, the activation of SFC mechanisms is conducted by Service Management and Operations (SMO) – an eTOM level 1 model's element –, which is mapped to NGOSS – an ETSI NFV framework's element –, by interacting with the MANO functional block, especially its management function, the NFV Orchestrator (NFVO), through its exposed APIs. Taking into account the above considerations, the second part of our study – the SFC proposal – depends mainly on the first part – the eTOM mapping onto NFV approach. Additionally, this relationship between both of the parts is obviously established in the case of dynamic SFC. In effect, the experimental validation of our study was limited to static SFC, whereas dynamic SFC is planned for future research.
In this article, we regard the IMS core network as a use case for flexible signaling service chaining. Thus, we study, in connection with this signaling network, two approaches, static and dynamic SFC approaches, for effective steering of the signaling traffic with respect to load balancing [25, 26] specifications.
At the end, we implement part of our eTOM to NFV mapping approach, and then we validate part of our SFC proposal for static signaling service chaining through two signaling service chains in a virtualized, distributed IMS network using a testbed setup.
Indeed, our implementation was carried out within the OpenStack ecosystem [27, 28]. Within the Benchmarks section, we pinpoint our proof of concept and discuss resource performance and IMS performance indicators in this extended, virtualized business process context regarding the service delivery of media streams – VoD services – on top of signaling services through the signaling service chains in question, in the context of the IMS.
