Coal chemical industry produces a considerable amount of organic wastewater. The conversion of 1 ton of coal produces approximately 0.8–1.1 tons of wastewater (Gai et al., 2016). The typical pollutants contained in coal chemical wastewater, i.e., phenols, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and nitrogen heterocyclic compounds (NHCs), are those that present oncogenicity, teratogenicity, mutagenicity and protein denaturation. Some of them are persistent organic pollutants (POPs), resulting in poor biodegradability of the wastewater. The chemical oxygen demand (COD) value of coal chemical wastewater is between 630–43,000 mg L−1, and the content of phenolic pollutants is about 50–6600 mg L−1 (Ganczarczyk and Benedek, 1983; Maranon et al., 2008; Ji et al., 2016). These pollutants are, therefore, needed to be removed to a certain lower level by pretreatment units in order to make the subsequent biodegradation process operates stably (Wei et al., 2012; Herbes et al., 1976; Zhang et al., 2012).
Organic solvents, such as methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) (Yang et al., 2006), diisopropyl ether (DIPE) (Yang et al., 2006), mesityl oxide (Feng et al., 2017), octanol (Jiang et al., 2003), ethyl acetate (Yang et al., 2006; Pintoa, 2005), ethylbenzene (Pintoa, 2005), and blended solvents, toluene-MIBK (Liao et al., 2014) and methyl propyl ketone-n-pentanol (Guo et al., 2018a, 2018b), have been studied as de-phenol extractants in the pretreatment of coal chemical wastewater. The commonly used de-phenol extractant MIBK presents considerable extractant loss, and DIPE shows poor extraction rate in removal of polyphenols (Yang et al., 2006; Guo et al., 2018b). The co-extraction of phenolic, PAHs and NHCs pollutants is a challenge in pretreatment of coal chemical wastewater, due to the visible differences in molecular structures and interactions between extractant molecule and those of phenols, PAHs and NHCs. Development of blended extractants is, therefore, considered as an important approach to realize co-extraction.
Normally, screening the blended extractants by experiment may cause extreme high cost and time consumption. In the practice of chemicals development, computer aided molecular/mixture design (CAMD) is expected to be a method of lowering the cost and time consumption. Gani and Brignole (1983) proposed the idea of generating new molecular structure candidates by functional groups for computer-aided molecular design. Odele and Macchietto (1993) proposed the mathematical description of connection rules for the chemical feasibility of generated molecular structures. Liu et al. (2018) improved the structural constraints presented by Odele (1993) and proposed the modified constraints for generating single-ring and double-loop structures. In most cases, the generation of candidate molecular structures is achieved by combining the selected functional groups with satisfying a set of structural constraints (Gani and Fredenslund, 1993; Liu et al., 2018). Besides the combination of molecular fragments, Searching compounds from chemical databases is another option to obtain target molecules. Gmehling et al. (2014) developed an extension package of the Dortmund Data Bank (DDB, 2019) for selecting extraction solvents or solvent mixtures using measured or predicted data in DDB. Xu et al. (2018) proposed a generation strategy of single-component de-phenol extractant candidates by searching the Existing Commercial Compounds Database (ECCD).
Further design and screening of the blended extractant is to select the components and to optimize their compositions to obtain the extractant candidates with expected performance. As Gani (2004) described, it is always a complex mixed integer non-linear programming (MINLP) problem. It concerns the establishment of optimization model and the improvement of optimization efficiency. The progress has been made in high throughput screening of target chemicals by reducing the scale of MINLP problem. Karunanithi et al. (2005) and Cignitti et al. (2015) proposed decomposition strategy of CAMD, and Jonuzaj et al. (2017) integrated the generalized disjunctive programming (GDP) into CAMD framework in order to obtain the optimal blended extractants.
Computer aided blended extractant design and screening for co-extraction of the phenolic, PAHs and NHCs pollutants from coal chemical wastewater is studied in this work. Different from the design and screening of specific reaction or product separation solvents, such as extractants (Gebreslassie and Diwekar, 2015; Shankar et al., 2019), absorbents (Marcoulaki and Kokossis, 2000), azeotropes (Hostrup et al., 1999) and reaction (Wang and Achenie, 2002), this paper is focused on the synergistic extraction of hundreds of organic pollution components, mainly phenolic, PAHs and NHCs pollutants, at concentration of μg∙L−1 ∼ mg∙L−1 in coal chemical wastewater. The binary extractants, therefore, become the choice of co-extracting phenolic, PAHs and NHCs pollutants from the coal chemical wastewater.
The discussions focus on the following aspects. (1) The binary extractant candidates were formed via traversal inter-combinations between two single-component extractant candidate sets. These two extractant candidate sets were obtained by data searching of ECCD (Xu et al., 2018), presenting better extraction potentials to the phenolic and PAHs/NHCs pollutants. (2) The screening of binary extractant candidates was presented as a series of non-linear programming (NLP) problems, which were defined to optimize the composition of each binary extractant with the objective of maximizing extract performance. By solving NLPs and comparing their objective values, the target binary extractant list was obtained. (3) In order to realize high throughput screening, miscibility examination of binary extractant candidates at certain temperature and pressure, the pseudopollutant modelling of extreme complex pollutants for simplifying the LLE predictions and parallel solving of the optimization model to reduce the time consumption, were applied in this work. (4) Case study of the binary extractants screening was presented for co-extraction of phenolic, PAHs and NHCs pollutants from the coal gasification and coking wastewater. The co-extraction performances, as well as impacts of the concentration of pollutant and operating temperature, were also discussed.
