A brain computer interface (BCI), sometimes called a brain machine interface (BMI), is a direct communication pathway between an enhanced or wired brain and an external device. BCIs are electrode computer constructs that extract and decode information from the nervous system to generate functional outputs, which are often directed at researching, mapping, assisting, augmenting, or repairing cognitive or sensory-motor functions of the brain [1]. Nowadays, BCI technology is developing rapidly, where many scientific research institutions and researchers focus on this field. A great number of findings resulting from related research have provided us with abundant information for understanding the function and operational mechanisms of the brain [1,2], and also create unprecedented opportunities for the diagnosis and treatment of neurological diseases such as Epilepsy, Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease [[3], [4], [5], [6]]. Different to non-implantable BCIs, the signals acquired by implantable BCIs, including local field potentials (LFPs) and the spikes, generally have higher spatial resolution, greater intensity and higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [[7], [8], [9]]. These advantages have resulted in implantable BCIs receiving more attention from researchers. However, compared with non-implantable BCIs, it is difficult to eliminate the influence of bad channels by equipment updates. So, bad channel detection is particularly important in implantable BCIs.
Multi-channel microelectrode array implantation technology allows us to obtain long-term neural signal recordings in designated brain regions. These recordings carry abundant neural coding information and are of great value for study [10,11]. However, influenced by the misoperation, electrode loosening or noise pollution in the process of electrode implantation and signal acquisition [12,13], there are still some unqualified signal components in the obtained multi-channel recordings, which are collectively referred to as, “bad channels”. Bad channels cause difficulties in providing precise quantitative descriptions and analyses of neural signals. Hence, the detection of bad channels is very important, especially for “big data” problems resulting from multi-trial experiments, long-term recordings, and multi-channel acquisition.
Recently, many researchers have proposed a series of bad channel detection or channel selection methods [[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]]. Dorothée et al. applied temporal and spectral parameters to develop an automatic procedure for whole-night polysomnographic electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings in 2015 by automatizing the job of bad channel and artifact detection [14]. Ozbeyaz et al. investigated channel selection algorithms on the classification performance of EEG data using multiple feature extraction methods [15]. Alotaiby et al. studied the recent developments up to 2015 in EEG channel selection methods along with their applications, and classified them according to an evaluation approach [16]. In 2016, Yang et al. proposed a novel subject-specific channel selection method based on a criterion called F score to realize the parameterization of both time segments and channel positions [17]. Peng et al. compared three effective channel sets obtained from Shannon entropy, differential entropy and 1st difference features respectively, and explored the similarity of the first 10 optimal channels [18]. In 2018, Tuyisenge et al. applied ensemble machine learning to automatically detect bad channels of intracranial EEG recordings [19]. Seven features specific to bad channels were selected and the bad channel classification accuracy was demonstrated to be excellent on a large data sample. Islam et al. presented a unique method that can map the probability of an EEG epoch to be artifactual based on four statistical measures to remove artifacts [20].
These studies extract features in different ways and combine machine learning methods for bad channel detection or channel selection. However, only one or a few machine learning methods have been used, and to the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of comprehensive comparative studies of multiple methods. What is more disappointing is that these studies mainly focus on the EEG channel selection problem. Similar research on implantable LFPs and spike signals are rarely mentioned.
Both spike and LFP signals contain neural information, and there are differences between them [21]. Spike-LFP joint encoding mode reveals its potential role in working memory tasks [22]. Holbrook et al. focused on the joint modeling of LFP and spike train data, and presented a novel Bayesian method for neural decoding to infer behavioral and experimental conditions [23]. Their studies indicate that multimodal features based on these two kinds of signals have complementary advantages. Combining them can characterize multiple kinds of information better, and achieve more comprehensive and reliable results.
In this study, a multimodal feature based automatic bad channel detection approach is presented. We acquire 2632 pairs of LFP and spike recordings from five pigeons (2293 good ones and 339 bad ones) in our neuro-electrophysiological experiments. A total of 12 multimodal features are then extracted to characterize each channel. Different machine learning methods are used to carry out the feature analyses and bad channel classification tasks. The results are evaluated in terms of predictive performance and stability. In short, our main contributions are summarized as follows:
1.To cope with the bad channel detection problem in today's “big data” age, an automatic approach is proposed to deal with multi-trial, multi-channel implantable electrophysiological recordings.2.We extract twelve LFP-spike combined features to quantify the temporal (correlation coefficient, variance, deviation, amplitude, gradient, kurtosis, skewness, Euclidean distance), frequency (coherence), phase (phase locking value, phase lag index) and firing rate properties of the channels. Feature visualization and importance analyses are carried out.3.The performances of various classifiers including k-Nearest Neighbors, Neural Networks, Extreme Learning Machine, Support Vector Machines, Classification and Regression Trees, Bagging, and Random Forests on bad channel detection are comprehensively compared. To solve the class imbalance problem, the typical synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) system and Fisher weighted Euclidean distance sorting (FWEDS) are used, and excellent bad channel detection accuracy is obtained.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our methods and introduces the performance assessment criteria. Section 3 then demonstrates the results of the multimodal feature visualization, feature analysis and bad channel detection performances. Finally, the conclusions drawn are discussed in Section 4.
