Emphysema is a form of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) that is defined as the permanent structural abnormality of lungs characterized by the condition of destructed alveolar walls with abnormally enlarged alveoli [1,2]. It results in expiratory airflow obstruction due to the dynamic compression of airways [3,4]. The fatal disease manifests itself and worsens the patient's condition, causing symptoms such as cough, dyspnea, disability, and weight loss. Epidemiological studies have proven that smoking is the root cause and an important risk factor of emphysema; additionally, the amount and for how long one smokes affects the intensity of the disease [5]. Further, being exposed to environmental tobacco smoke heightens the risk of developing COPD [6,7]. Pulmonary emphysema can be categorized into three subtypes based on the location of the pathology — namely, centrilobular (centriacinar) emphysema (CLE), paraseptal (periacinar) emphysema (PSE) and panacinar emphysema [2,8].
Centrilobular emphysema is common in patients and is a morphological subtype, which unevenly destroys the lung tissues. It originates around the airways of the lungs, followed by the destruction of the airways, predominantly occurs in the central or proximal area of the lung tissues, with lesions of 1 cm in diameter. This subtype of emphysema is associated strongly with cigarette smoking [9,10]. Paraseptal emphysema affects the periphery of the lung region evenly, which is located adjacent to the pleura and septal lines [8,10]. This subtype of emphysema shows multiple, small, and continuous subpleural airspaces, the size of which ranges from a few millimeters to 1 cm in diameter [9]. These airspaces produce no respiratory symptoms and are not recognized clinically [11]. Further, paraseptal emphysematous spaces that exceed a diameter of 10 mm and that have a wall thickness of less than 1 mm are categorized as paraseptal bullae or subpleural bullae [9]. Panacinar emphysema destroys the entire lung tissues evenly, and the disease is distributed more severely, predominantly in the lower basal zones. This subtype is usually observed in patients with α1-antitrypsin deficiency, which is a hereditary metabolic disorder [12]. The distinction between the subtypes of emphysema ultimately lies in the mechanism of pathogenesis and distribution of disease [13].
Emphysema is represented by the presence of abnormal holes in the lung tissues, which are detected pathologically by imaging modalities such as chest radiographs and Computed Tomography (CT) scans. The severity and presence of pulmonary emphysema are more evident in CT scans than in chest radiographs and appear as abnormal low attenuated regions less than −950 Hounsfield units (HU) [14]. Demonstrably, CT scans better represent lung tissues, and vascular changes are perceived more easily than in chest radiographs, which allows the severity and distribution of emphysema to be diagnosed more effectively [15,16]. High-resolution CT scans show the distribution, extent, and type of underlying abnormalities, allowing the specific subtype of emphysema to be identified [9]. A Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) system is an application that assists physicians in diagnosing the disease. When diagnosing lung disorders using CT slices (images), physicians can detect abnormalities in the slices using the CAD system, which helps them understand patients’ post-treatment response [17]. Further, The characteristics of an image that describe a pathology bearing region (PBR) can be represented as an image feature. The features extracted from the PBRs of the lung CT slice provide meaningful details that help physicians to describe and classify a disease. Each PBR can be identified by their inherent features shown in the image content, such as color, shape, texture, and run-length [18].
Feature Selection (FS) is a challenging research area involved in building a CAD framework that affects the diagnostic accuracy of the CAD system. FS is the process of finding the optimal subset of features from the original set of extracted features to promote accurate classification [19]. Four approaches of FS exist: filter, wrapper, embedded, and hybrid. First, the filter approach selects features by ranking them using a feature relevance score and discards low-scoring features using a suitable threshold. The commonly used feature relevance scores are the Gini index, the chi-square, information gain, and Pearson's coefficient [20]. Second, the wrapper approach identifies the relevant feature subset based on predictive performance, which is obtained by an intended learning algorithm that uses the classifier performance as the objective function [21]. Third, the embedded approach is similar to the wrapper approach, whereas the FS and tuning of classifier parameters are performed concurrently. Fourth, the hybrid approach utilizes the advantages of the filter and wrapper approaches: feature ranking is performed the same way as in the filter approach, and the filtered results are tuned further using the procedure from the wrapper approach [22].
Bio-inspired algorithms ascertain the behavior of an organism and are used frequently to solve various optimization problems. They imitate different strategies based on the social and combined behavior of an organism such as foraging, mating, and the selection of their habitat [22]. The algorithm searches all possible solutions to find the optimal one using the organism's biological characteristics. Bio-inspired algorithms tend to have simple initial conditions and rules to resolve complex problems that have an exponential set of possible solutions. The evaluation of each solution is associated with its fitness function, and the solution with the highest fitness is retained in the population based on the principle of “survival of the fittest” [22].
In this work, a CAD system with which to diagnose the presence or absence of pulmonary emphysema in chest CT slices was designed and implemented. The Spatial Intuitionistic Fuzzy C-Means (SIFCM) clustering method was used to segment the lung tissues and extract the regions of interest (ROIs). The ROIs that were considered in the work were the subtypes of emphysematous lesions — namely, centrilobular, paraseptal, and bullous lesions. Features based on shape, texture, and run-length were extracted from each ROI. A wrapper approach that used Moth–Flame Optimization (MFO), Firefly Optimization (FFO), Artificial Bee Colony Optimization (ABCO), and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) algorithms with the accuracy of the Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier as the fitness function was used to select the relevant feature subset. The selected features of each bio-inspired algorithm are used to train the Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) classifier independently.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the overview of the related work, Section 3 outlines the system framework, Section 4 presents the experimental results, and Section 5 presents the discussion. Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusion and the scope of the work.
