For some decades, information and communication technology has been seeing significant growth. This development has made it easy for people to transmit data between devices anywhere and anytime. Moreover, at present, limited devices such as smartphones can process data much more quickly than before. Nevertheless, this advancement may attract illegitimate users who actively attack the computer system [1], for example, by intercepting the transmitted data. This activity causes a security problem for secret and private information such as financial and medical data.
Some methods have been proposed to overcome this security issue that can be grouped into a network and information security, which complement each other. While the former can be implemented by designing a suitable intrusion detection system (IDS), honeypot, or other security tools; security tools can be designed to conceal the secret. This concealment can be achieved in some ways, including encrypting [2] or embedding the secret in a medium; this is called a data hiding method [3]. In this research, the terms hiding and embedding have the same definition.
In its design, data-hiding may use either image [4], audio [5], video [6], or even text [7], [8] to carry the secret. As predicted, each medium, called the carrier or cover, has its own characteristics. For example, an image concerns visual quality, while audio focuses on the voice. In the data-hiding terminology, quality is defined as the similarity level of the carrier between, before, and after the secret is embedded, regardless of the carrier being used. In fact, research in data-hiding is mostly carried out by using the image [3], [9]; on the contrary, that exploring audio is only a few, and even less than video. Furthermore, the embedding process can be performed either in the spatial domain, where the secret is directly hidden in the cover, or in the frequency domain, wherein the cover must be transformed before the embedding process, for example, by employing Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) [10] or Wavelet Transform [11].
Spatial domain-based data-hiding methods have been popular to protect secret data. Despite its limitation in generating excellent stego quality, this method may accommodate more secrets than that of the transformed-based algorithm. Therefore, improving the visual or audio quality is still a challenge. Additionally, those two algorithms may be implemented in a different environment, depending on the purpose of the required system.
In general, the previous algorithms can be classified in some groups, including [12]: LSB modification, histogram shifting (HS), pixel value difference (PVD), and difference expansion (DE). Two primary factors are still a challenge in the data-hiding field: the capacity of the secret being embedded in the cover, and the quality of the resulted stego file [13]. In this paper, we work on those two problems by focusing on the spatial domain and taking audio as the cover. Here, the embedding is implemented in the generated samples. Moreover, the difference between the stego audio and its corresponding file (cover) is reduced.
The remaining sections of this paper are structured, as follows. Section 2 describes the previous works of data-hiding. Section 3 explains the proposed method, followed by its experimental results and analysis in Section 4. The comparison of the method is provided in Section 5. Finally; the conclusion is presented in Section 6.
