Computational thinking (CT) is regarded as a key 21st-century skill (Voogt, Fisser, Good, Mishra, & Yadav, 2015; Wing, 2006). It may be a valuable resource for solving problems in a wide range of subjects and workplace settings (Buitrago Flórez et al., 2017; Barr, Harrison, & Conery, 2011; Yadav, Good, Voogt, & Fisser, 2018). Already used in the 1980s, the term CT experienced a revival due to Wing’s (2006) seminal article, which might be the starting point for the current discussion about CT (Angeli et al., 2016). Wing conceptualized CT as “solving problems, designing systems, and understanding human behavior, by drawing on the concepts fundamental to computer science” (Wing, 2006, p. 33). As a theoretical basis for CT, the framework of Brennan and Resnick (2012) is often utilized. It comprises three dimensions (Brennan & Resnick, 2012): Computational concepts, computational practices, and computational perspectives. Several literature reviews have aimed at identifying core facets of CT (Angeli et al., 2016; Hsu, Chang, & Hung, 2018; Shute, Sun, & Asbell-Clarke, 2017). Such core facets could be: abstraction, decomposition, algorithms, and debugging.
As a construct, CT may still be in its infancy (Shute et al., 2017). To contribute to a better understanding of the process, the purpose of our research is to predict (Newman, Ridenour, Newman, & DeMarco, 2007), i.e., we test the association of CT with variables that might explain the CT level and its development. In this vein, the paper at hand addresses four research desiderata. First, the available studies that aim at predicting CT often focus on selected areas, e.g., family background. Since predictors from different areas are likely to be interrelated, a study that more comprehensively captures potential predictors may be necessary to identify their unique effects. Second, research on predictors of CT is mainly cross-sectional; longitudinal studies to examine predictors of CT development are missing. The third research desideratum is the investigation of CT learning in naturalistic classroom settings (Ilic, Haseski, & Tugtekin, 2018; Lye & Koh, 2014). Interventions where students voluntarily participate may not accurately represent students in general. Fourth, high-school students are currently rarely studied in comparison to those from elementary and middle schools. However, no rationale suggests that elementary and middle schools represent the only critical stages of CT learning (Tang, Yin, Lin, Hadad, & Zhai, 2020). To address the four research desiderata, the paper at hand aims at answering the research question:
What are the predictors of high-school students’ CT level and CT growth on the individual level?
To this end, we develop hypotheses on predictors of the level and growth of CT. As we are focusing on the individual level, the classroom or school context is not considered. We test our hypotheses using a sample of 202 high-school students (11th grade) who we surveyed/tested at three intervals over one school year. A latent growth curve model acts as the method because it allows us to make inferences about the initial level of an outcome variable (CT), as well as its rate of change (Pakpahan, Hoffmann, & Kröger, 2017), and thus to answer our research question.
