A serious game that has too many fun domains but lacks learning goals is just a fun game. Vice versa, if there is no fun element it will not function as a game because it will lose the immersion domain. In other words, the game will lose the immersion domain and fail to engage the player (Hämäläinen et al., 2006). A data-based approach to designing serious games tends to focus on the purpose of the game, which is mimicking a real situation and including a significant difficulty. This allows the player to learn with data-based approaches and feel as if the game is realistic and pleasurable and also is able to teach them important information. Several studies have attempted to explain how to make learning interesting in serious games. Killi uses an experimental game model that approaches the "challenge" aspect of a specific learning flow and is divided into ideation loops and the experience loop (Kiili, 2005). Another approach is to expand the theme in the game and identify specific aspects of choice, control, collaboration, challenge and achievement to create motivational intrinsics in Massive Multiple Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs) (Dickey, 2007). Yet another approach, embodied in one of the pillars of Barab's Transformational Play theory (Barab et al., 2010), is that the actions of the players in the game must have a real impact on the game world, such as triggering changes in the landscape, changing the behavior of characters in the game, or changing the behavior of enemies and obstacles. Harteveld, in its educational game design, describes this as ‘exploration’ and argues that it is an important teaching tool (Harteveld et al., 2007). Freitas and Neumann also emphasize the use of exploration in serious games (Freitas and Neumann, 2009). This idea is supported by Squire's theory that games are 'designed experiences', where players learn by 'doing' and 'becoming' (Squire, 2006).
There are not many serious games that deal with land and agricultural processing, such as explaining the framework of the software design and simulation models for training agricultural driving machines. This is because the training for traditional driving depends on the actual engine, which means that training costs that are always high, inefficient and training can cause accidents (Ma et al., 2012). Realistic agricultural trainers that use historical simulations and game elements for crop cultivation and simulations in virtual reality breed, but they have not managed to balance the experience and entertainment elements (Yoo and Kim, 2014). Other research on serious games, such as research on the effect of an agricultural machinery trajectory on the land (Battiato et al., 2013), simulate the form of a moldboard and compare it with the existing model to find the optimal form of moldboard plowing (Jeshvaghani et al., 2013). The virtual simulation of agricultural machines uses 3D interactive technology, dynamic web technology and database technology (Jianjun 2012). European projects that aim to develop serious online games for agro-ecology. There are European projects that aim to develop serious online games for agro-ecology, in which the main characteristics of the game are presented, as well as their purpose. This serious game, as well as other pedagogical resources produced during the project, is expected to provide some useful material for learning more multidisciplinary and experiential agro-ecology in European universities (Godinot, 2018). Of the various studies that have analyzed serious games in agriculture, there are even fewer that discuss immersion and especially the engagement of players in the serious game.
In a serious game concept that has a learning domain, engaging players with strategies based on real situations can improve the experience of the players so that they can achieve their goals. In previous research based on experiments using soil bin, a serious game was designed to soil tillage using a moldboard plow. The polynomial function model has been proven to be close to the actual data on the speed in plowing and the angle of the plow's eye. The depth of the plow on soil porosity is produced in the 3rd order, and the plowing force in the 4th order (Adisusilo et al., 2018a; Adisusilo et al., 2018b).
This research aims to increase the involvement of players by using a data-based approach that is optimized based on Pareto so that in this study can design game strategies based on a scenario design using Hierarchical Finite State Machine (HFSM). The design of the scenario is based on the optimal area of the Pareto-based game, which is affected by the speed of plowing, the angle of the plow's eye, and the depth of the plow on the soil porosity as well as the plowing force. Designing game scenarios in the optimal area can increase the engagement of players based on actual data. This creates a game situation that is close to reality, allowing the players to achieve their learning objectives in serious games.
