With the development of informatization and intelligentization, aquaculture is also increasingly tending to intensive culture and even industrial culture. Automated monitoring and control is critical to the development of this field. Dissolved oxygen is one of the key parameters of water quality in aquaculture which must be detected and regulated, because maintaining the stability of dissolved oxygen and related parameters is of great significance for ensuring the safe and rapid growth of aquatic animals and plants [1], [2], [3]. The impeller aerator is widely used in China to ensure the stability of dissolved oxygen and related parameters due to their low-cost and high-efficiency features. Hence, real-time anomaly detection of aerators is crucial to avoid economic losses and ecological problems caused by rapid death of fish in large areas due to lack of oxygen.
Traditionally, the detection of anomaly condition of aerators mainly depends on manual inspection, and some researchers also try to use circuit detection method [4]. However, the former method is labor-intensive and inefficient, and the latter often suffers from error detection or short circuit, which also cannot detect equipment problems caused by mechanical failure, e.g., the machine is stuck due to lubrication or foreign matter. Besides, the circuit maintenance requires professionals to operate, which is dangerous and difficult for ordinary workers. These methods cannot find anomaly condition timely and accurately.
Recently, computer vision technology has been one of the most rapidly developing and mature subfields in artificial intelligence. Due to the characteristics of no human contact, high efficiency and high precision, this technology has been widely used in various fields and realized industrialization, such as face recognition [5], automatic driving [6], plant identification [7], etc. Furthermore, from the investigation in aquaculture, surveillance cameras are widely used as the visual perception module of the Internet of Things in a variety of applications, but they are only used to detect suspicious behavior of human being in aquaculture of China. The video-based method further extends the application scope of computer vision technology, which can not only use a single image processing technology, but also provide more information in the temporal dimension of the inter-frame connection. Computer vision technology based on video images is used to detect the change of motion state in traffic monitoring and security fields [8], [9].
Therefore, the use of existing surveillance cameras and computer vision technology can achieve real-time anomaly detection of aerator without any extra cost, which also can reduce labor intensity. Meanwhile, this methodology can realize real-time warning and recording of anomaly condition, providing useful reference and attempt for intelligent agriculture and agricultural expert systems. However, the methodology for robust object region detection and real-time working state detection of aerators using computer vision technology and existing surveillance cameras faces three major challenges, which have restricted the development of the methodology and application. The proposed system solves these practical problems:
(1)In the actual surveillance images, the height of the existing surveillance camera and its position relative to the target object are different, which results in a large difference in the size and shape of the object region, e.g., small object, long strip region, etc. To demonstrate the robustness of our method, the dataset is constructed from surveillance cameras of different positions and heights, which we call internal factors.(2)There are many interference factors caused by different weather, different time, and different scenes, such as occlusion, brightness changes, camera jitter, background interference including ripple, suspended matter, pedestrian interference, etc. The constructed dataset also contains various common interference conditions, which we call external factors.(3)For an application-oriented expert system, some system performance must be satisfied, e.g., stable, robust, fast, low-cost, easy to operate, etc. The proposed system is a real-time, accurate and automated expert system with existing surveillance cameras, which means no additional cost.
In short, this paper proposes the RF-KLT algorithm for robust motion feature extraction and presents a dimension reduction method for fast feature dataset establishment. The aim of this research is to provide a real-time and automatic expert system for anomaly detection of aerators with existing surveillance cameras. The study is conducted in two modules: (1) object region detection. For this purpose, the procedure of maximum contour region detection, candidate region detection, and object region detection is designed; (2) working state detection. The image feature of each frame is extracted by RF-KLT algorithm, and then the time series is converted into a two-dimensional feature dataset. Finally, the feature classification model established by SVM algorithm is used to detect the working state. The comparison between multiple foreground detection algorithms and machine learning algorithms shows that the proposed methods perform well in both modules.
1.1. ContributionsIn this paper, the research object is impeller aerator, which is the most widely used type of aerator. The research purpose is to detect the aerator anomaly automatically and in real time, and the aerator anomaly is defined as the closed state under non-human operation. The expected research result is to realize real-time and accurate detection of the object region and the two movement states of aerators (open or closed). Main contributions of our study are four-fold:(1)RF-KLT algorithm for motion feature extraction. To the best of our knowledge, we first propose a novel algorithm called RF-KLT algorithm combining with the reference idea and KLT algorithm [10]. Specifically, we assume that all motions are changes relative to a fixed reference frame, extending the conditions under which the KLT algorithm requires continuous inter-frame motion. We apply the RF-KLT algorithm to the object region detection and motion feature extraction of aerators, which proves that this algorithm can judge whether the current frame has a specific motion pattern relative to the reference frame.(2)Object region detection method. Based on the latest region proposal idea [11] and the proposed RF-KLT algorithm, we present a small object region detection method consisting of three steps, i.e., maximum contour region detection, candidate region detection, and object region detection. In our application scenario, the problem of small object region caused by long distance and high position of surveillance cameras is solved.(3)Time series dimension reduction method for feature dataset construction. We introduce a time series dimension reduction method for constructing feature dataset, i.e., we construct a two-dimensional dataset by using the average value of the window time series as another dimension based on the numerical distribution features of time series, thereby training a two-class classifier for detecting the working state of aerators.(4)Expert system in practical applications. We present an expert system for anomaly detection of aerators, which consists of object region detection and working state detection. The object region detection method refers to the procedure of selecting target region from candidate regions, and the working state detection method includes motion feature extraction, feature dataset construction, and classifier training. In the actual application scenarios, as well as the augmented videos with artificial noise and interference in multiple ways, the proposed expert system can realize real-time, stable and accurate anomaly detection of aerators.
1.2. Paper organizationThe rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents an overall review of traditional and state-of-the-art related works. In Section 3, we first introduce the raw video data and the artificially augmented video data. Then, we organize the introduction of all methods according to the technical flow of object region detection and work state detection. Notably, the RF-KLT algorithm and the dataset construction method of time series are both presented in Section 3.2.3. In Section 4, we show the comparison, discussion and experimental results of the proposed expert system. Finally, Section 5 shows the conclusions and the future work of this study.
