Predictive maintenance has become an effective approach for the maintenance of devices [1, 2] based on the concept that problems have to be anticipated and eliminated before they occur. These goals can be accomplished through the “Internet of Tings (IoT)” [3, 4]. Thus, various devices and sensors are connected to the network and communicate with each other in order to enhance the value of each device, and new services or functions can be created by these combinations of devices and sensors. By achieving predictive maintenance, sudden occurrences of problems can be suppressed and maintenance work can be executed in a planned manner. Thus, the reserve stock of repair parts and the labor costs to deal with sudden problems can be controlled, and will contribute the reduction of total costs.
The QUEST (Q-shu University experiment with steady-state spherical tokamak) has been built at the Advanced Fusion Research Center of Kyushu University, Japan [5]. Using QUEST (Figure 1(a)), steady state operation of plasma discharge [6, 7] and current drives by high frequency [8] are being studied, and many researchers from various facilities and organizations can visit the site and join experiments. For this reason, the situation whereby experiments cannot be performed due to device failure must be avoided. Hence, the concept of the predictive maintenance is important. Furthermore, it is also important to conduct operations safely in experiments involving many people.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. (a) Overall view of QUEST. Coils for confining plasma are installed around the vacuum vessel. (b) TF coil to generate a circular basic magnetic field.
The reminder of the present paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describe the configuration of overall control system of QUEST including networks. Section 3 describe the development of the diagnosis of power line deterioration as an example of predictive maintenance with the IoT. Section 4 describe the development of other peripheral sub-systems for safe operation with the IoT. Finally, our conclusions are presented in Section 5.
