In recent years, the scope of application of gas cluster ion beams (GCIB) in various fields of science and technology has been actively expanding [1]. GCIB were used for polishing substrates for mirrors of laser gyroscopes [2], for improving the quality of the surface of a solid-state laser crystal [3]. Irradiation with accelerated neutral atom beams (ANAB) which are generated form GCIB increase biocompatibility of medical implants [4,5]. It is obvious that the further development of new technologies based on the use of gas cluster ion beams is closely related to the detailed study of the processes accompanying the irradiation of solids by accelerated cluster ions.
One of the strongest effects observed under bombardment of solids with accelerated cluster ions is the target material emission (or sputtering). The study of the laws of this phenomenon can clarify mechanisms of cluster ions interaction with solid materials. An informative approach in such kinds of researches is to study the spatial distributions of the sputtered material. However, the processes of sputtered flux formation under bombardment by cluster ions have not been studied fully enough up till now. Only a few papers [[6], [7], [8]] published more than 20 years ago deal with this topic. It was demonstrated by using computer simulations [6] that the majority of sputtered from Au target material was ejected in lateral directions (so called “lateral” distribution). The results of this simulation were experimentally confirmed in the work [7], in which the Cu target was bombarded by 10 and 20 keV Ar cluster ions. Note that according to the authors of [8], the lateral distribution of sputtered material is one of the main reasons for the surface relief smoothing when targets are bombarded with cluster ions.
Recently, however, a high yield of the sputtered material along the normal to the sample surface was found in experimental studies of the angular distributions of material sputtered under GCIB bombardment of different polycrystalline targets (Cu, In and Mo) [9]. It was reviled that the directed yield of material sputtered along the surface normal increased with the increase of the elastic modulus of the irradiated material. In this research it was suggested that one of the mechanisms responsible for the sputtered flux formation may be one associated with a momentum transfer from atoms constituting clusters to target atoms and a further elastic stress relaxation of the surface layers. Development of the ideas about the new mechanism was continued in [9], where the angular distributions of the material sputtered from Cd and W polycrystalline targets, as well as from Ni-based alloys, were investigated.
Experimental studies of the angular distributions of ejected material were continued in the present work to clarify details of the new sputtering mechanism proposed in [9]. In addition, this paper presents the results of molecular dynamic (MD) computer simulations of the angular distributions of sputtered particles.
