Roughness of rock fractures is one of the important factors affecting fluid flow in fractures (e.g., Barton et al., 1985; Boutt et al., 2006; Jing and Hudson, 2004), fracture detection in subsurface reservoirs (Al-Fahmi et al., 2018), and stability of rock slopes and boreholes (e.g., Barton, 2013; Younessi and Rasouli, 2010). Rock fractures include a variety of classes such as veins, joints, and sheared fractures (faults). Veins include any fracture whose walls are bonded by mineral crystals or cements (Fig. 1). Joints include the tensile fractures that are barren of mineralization and typically bed-bound and bed-normal in bedded rocks. The terms of joint and vein were originally used on outcrops, but extended to the buried rock fractures of similar characteristics observed from industrial excavations such as tunnels and boreholes (e.g., Al-Fahmi et al., 2020; Barton, 2013) (Fig. 1). This paper is concerned with the roughness estimations of subsurface joints and veins, for both of which the general term “fracture” is used interchangeably in the text.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Examples of high-resolution-360° photographs of core exterior showing: (A) calcite veins (1-5) and (B) fractures (joints) (6-11), with a demonstration of extracted top and bottom traces of vein no. 1.
Fracture roughness has long been estimated by the JRC (Joint Roughness Coefficient), which was first introduced by Barton (1973), and ever since used extensively in geotechnical engineering. The JRC is based on visual inspection and comparison to ten typical profiles, which provide a scale for roughness from very smooth (0-2) to very rough (18-20) (Barton and Choubey, 1977; Barton, 2013). Several statistical procedures have been devised to complement the JRC scale, including the RMS (Root mean square), Z2 (first derivative RMS), structure function (SF), roughness profile index (RP) and variograms (e.g. Krahn and Morgenstern, 1979; Lianheng et al., 2018; Maerz et al., 1990; Tatone and Grasselli, 2010; Tse and Cruden, 1979; Wu and Ali, 1978; Yu and Vayssade, 1991). The statistical procedures are usually used to calculate a parameter as a precursor estimator of the JRC and find the empirical equation of the best fitting functional relationship to the JRC typical profiles (e.g. Yong et al., 2018).
The JRC measurements have been largely obtained from surface and near-surface rocks. Attempts to measure the JRC of fractures in deeply buried rocks are rare, perhaps because of the difficulty to obtain data of subsurface rock fractures. The only known joint roughness sampling from the subsurface, was the rare joint roughness characterization of the Ekofisk reservoir dated from 1985-87 (Barton et al. 1988, Barton 2014). The publication by Al-Fahmi et al. (2018) explored the same domain recently and can be regarded as a pioneer in several aspects. The authors measured roughness and wall mismatch of fractures and veins in viable petroleum carbonate reservoirs, whose fracture systems described in (Al-Fahmi et al., 2020).
JRC measurement from core (Fig. 1) can be accomplished by the following procedure: 1) identify naturally occurring fractures in core, 2) trace and digitize fractures using high resolution 360° photographs of core exterior, 3) calculate statistical estimators such as Z2 or RP, and 4) estimate the JRC from the estimators, using empirical functional relationships. Steps (1) and (2) are beyond the scope of this paper and their descriptions are included in (Al-Fahmi, 2018). Steps 3 and 4 of the procedure to measure fracture roughness from cores is outlined below. The calculations cannot be done manually. Therefore, FracRough was developed for this purpose using Visual Basic for Applications (VBA). In addition to the JRC calculation, FracRough includes a module to estimate the degree of mismatch between the opposing fracture walls. Measuring mismatches of fracture walls helps distinguishing shear and tensile fractures. The wall mismatch is an important indicator whether fractures are likely to remain open under the subsurface confining stresses (e.g., Zambrano et al., 2019). FracRough can be used to analyze several fracture profiles in a single batch from core samples of one borehole (equal circumference). An Excel spreadsheet with FracRough is uploaded to GitHub with a fork to AC&G website. The algorithm for FracRough is presented in Appendix 1.
