By December 2019, a novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, has been detected initially in China. The virus outbreak took place first in Wuhan city and continued to spread worldwide [1]. The world's attention has focused on the world out of our sight of viruses like never before, especially by causing 32,952,046 total confirmed cases till 26 September 2020 including 996,276 confirmed deaths all over 215 countries, areas, or territories as published officially on the World Health Organization website [2]. Being highly contagious, it has widely spread to every corner of the world [3].
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is causing severe respiratory syndrome in humans [4]. Its main protease (Mpro, 3CLpro) is approved to be an attractive drug target among coronaviruses, due to its very crucial role in controlling viral replication and transcription [5, 6, 7].
One of the most important and recent approaches to investigate the activity of a drug is the simulating nature through computational structure-based drug discovery. In this process, computer software test compounds into the selected binding sites in three-dimensional models of the protein targets. The interaction between the tested compounds and the binding site can be quantified using physics-based equations to calculate their binding affinities. The best compounds then tested experimentally on animal models to ensure their real binding and to confirm their effectiveness (such as stopping viral infectivity) [8].
Drug repurposing is the reuse of an existing drug for the treatment of a new disease that is outside the scope of the original intended or approved one [9]. It leads to fast drug reach at a lower cost and shorter time than de novo drug development [10, 11, 12]. The importance of drug repurposing is currently well-understood especially after the emergence of the pandemic COVID-19 [13, 14]. Drugs such as ivermectin, ribavirin, remdisivir, and sofosbuvir were tested in silico and in vitro for their potential as a treatment for COVID-19 [15].
However, most of the COVID-19 patients belong to elder stages with cardiovascular comorbidities such as hypertension, coronary artery disease, heart failure, or chronic kidney disease [16, 17, 18]. One of the most important classes for the treatment of such diseases are angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) [16].
Both ACEIs and ARBs have been approved to decrease the progression of pulmonary complications in susceptible patients and to decrease the risk of pneumonia [19]. Moreover, ARBs are known to antagonize the actions of angiotensin II by blocking AT1 receptors preventing vasoconstriction, apoptosis, and proinflammatory and fibrosis effects (Figure 1) [20].Download : Download high-res image (459KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. Drug repurposing of ARBs as COVID-19 inhibitors especially causing V.D. and preventing inflammation and fibrosis characteristic to pandemic infection.
Interestingly, Zhang et al. observed that hypertensive cases hospitalized with COVID-19, among them those treated with ACEI/ARB were at a lower observed risk of mortality compared with nonusers [21]. Furthermore, it was approved that COVID-19 patients were not affected by the use of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors and so should not be stopped to prevent a progression of COVID-19 [22].
Depending on the previously mentioned therapeutic effects of ARBs as vasodilators (to decrease the tendency for coagulation), antiapoptotic, anti-inflammatory, and antifibrotic (to decrease the tendency for pneumonia) caused by COVID-19, hoping to repurpose them effectively for the potential treatment of pandemic COVID-19 infection.
In this study, angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) drugs (Figure 2) were selected for molecular docking studies against Mpro. Furthermore, molecular dynamic (MD) simulations were passed out on the best-docked drug-protein complexes to acquire more acceptance of the affinity between the ligands and the COVID-19 main protease active site in the frank solvent model for 150 ns to evaluate the stability of the ligands within the binding site of the protein. These ligand-protein complexes were follower to the Molecular Mechanics/Generalized Born and Surface Area (MM/GB-SA) calculations to evaluate the consistent relative binding free energies.Download : Download high-res image (514KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 2. Chemical structures of Losartan 1, Candesartan 2, Valsartan 3, Telmisartan 4, Eprosartan 5, Irbesartan 6, Olmesartan 7, Fimasartan 8, Azilsartan 9 and N3 10.
