The ever-increasing digitalization in modern-day society represents a major challenge, and is capturing the attention of politics, industry and academia. The ubiquitous usage of technologies such as information communication technology (ICT) requires increasingly higher levels of technological skills in both the private and professional sphere. Studies have revealed that women and men differ regarding their interaction with technologies, for instance with women showing fewer capabilities and less interest in using computers compared to men (e.g., Hargittai and Shaw, 2015, Imhof et al., 2007, Van Deursen et al., 2015).
In line with these findings, some scholars have reported that technology acceptance depends on the user's gender and on the interaction of gender with the characteristics of a technology, such as the ease with which it can be used to accomplish a given task (Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003). While previous studies have yielded highly valuable findings for theory development and for practitioners, one methodological concern is that most studies do not consider users' actual behavior, but rather take the form of survey studies which gather general information about intentions to use a technology. However, intention to use and actual usage are only weakly to moderately correlated with one another (Schepers and Wetzels, 2007, Venkatesh et al., 2003, Venkatesh et al., 2016), making it difficult to derive assumptions about the actual interaction behavior of women and men. In this vein, various studies have revealed that men are more likely to use technology for fun and for exploration, while women strive more for facilitated task fulfillment, such as connecting with friends and family (Jackson et al., 2010, Liu and Baumeister, 2016, Venkatesh and Morris, 2000). Possible explanations for these differences have been suggested to lie in gender role beliefs, according to which technology usage is inherent in the gender role of men, but not in the gender role of women (Morahan-Martin & Schumacher, 2007). In addition, moderating factors with respect to different self-perceptions, such as lower self-efficacy, lower computer self-efficacy, and more computer anxiety in women, have also been discussed (e.g., Busch, 1995, Jackson et al., 2010, Saleem et al., 2011).
In times of continuous technological advancement and female empowerment movements, we wish to examine whether gender differences in self-perception and actual technology usage still exist. Moreover, we aim to foster the understanding of the impact of technological complexity, which is widely neglected in research on human-technology interaction. Specifically, we examine its interaction with gender regarding the effect on the user's experience (e.g., feelings), which may be decisive for future interactions with technology.
