The basic parts of all living organisms are cells. They give organization to the body, collects nutrients from food, translate those nutrients into energy, and carry out dedicated tasks [1]. Every human body possesses lots of cells. Each cell present in the human body contains a whole replica of the genome or in other words, the rule for generating the creature), which is encrypted in Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). The DNA is the natural thing available in all living organisms. Almost all the cells in a human body contain similar type of DNA [2]. Most DNA is situated in the cell nucleus and a small amount of it can be found in the mitochondria. The long molecules of DNA in cells are arranged into pieces called chromosomes. A gene is a part of chromosome that tells the procedure to build a protein.
The method of converting the instructions in the DNA into protein is called gene expression. In the protein creation process, there are two main stages involved, they are transcription and translation. The DNA in a gene is copied to make a messenger RNA (mRNA). This process is called transcription. The transcribed message is carried by mRNA from the DNA to ribosomes which are known as protein producing places of the cell; it is called translation [3]. The irregularities or deviations of the gene expression normally lead to death of cells. Sometimes it leads to uncontrolled growth of cells which causes cancer [4].
The expression level of genes can be derived by two different methodologies namely microarray or RNA Sequencing (RNA-Seq) [5], [6]. DNA microarrays were invented in the 1990 s. It is the widely used technology for the study of gene expression. By using microarray technology, we can monitor thousands of gene expressions in a single chip. This is the most important step in the progress of cancer classification. The microarray technology has several limitations. The accuracy of expression measurements is limited by background hybridization. The probes used in the process differ significantly in their hybridization features.
RNA-Seq is a transcript sequencing method based on high-throughput sequencing technologies. It possesses significant benefits for analysing transcriptome complete arrangement such as the finding novel transcripts, allele-specific expression and splice junctions. They do not rely on genome annotation for prior probe selection. This method avoids the biases originated during the process of hybridization in microarray technology. It depicts solid capability to become an alternate to microarrays. They also include certain computational challenges in the data analysis [7]. A common technique used to visualize the gene expression data is heat map. The gene expression datasets need improved predictive models for disease diagnosis and prognosis.
