Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) based on steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) was widely used because they reflect the natural response of the human brain's visual pathway and are appropriate for novices without any training [1]. The most common SSVEP-BCI stimulation paradigms is based on flicker which realized by graphic pattern reversal [2], [3], [4], [5], the number of target is related to the refresh rate of the screen. Recent studies realized the flicker-based stimulation by changing the luminance flux of the graphic in a sinusoidal mode [6,7]. This method has become the main visual stimulation paradigm for BCIs as it produces precise frequencies and achieves high pattern recognition accuracies and information transmission rates (ITR) [8], [9], [10]. However, flashing lights have negative effects on the human eye; thus, a SSVEP paradigm based on repeated visual stimuli (RVS) can induce fatigue and visual discomfort, which can decrease the recognition accuracy during frequent use [11].
Thus, a key issue of BCIs as a human-computer interaction system is not only the ITR but also the mental load and fatigue caused by the paradigm [2]. In order to alleviate visual fatigue in SSVEP-BCI based on the flicker paradigm, Xie et al. [3] developed the motion paradigm based on steady-state motion visual evoked potentials (SSMVEP), which replaces the flicker stimulation with motion stimulation and proves that any periodic motion can induce SSMVEPs. Based on the two-streams hypothesis of the visual system [4], the "what pathway" ventral stream is sensitive to the characteristics of the object, such as colour, shape, and pattern, whereas the "where pathway" is sensitive to the object's speed and direction of movement. Therefore, researchers believe that motion stimulation can evoke both pathways simultaneously, thereby introducing a stronger brain response than flicker-based SSVEPs, in which only the luminance of objects is changed. Heinrich et al. [5] proved that SSMVEP based on non-directional motion can cause lower visual fatigue, as it evoked the visual related potentials in brain without obvious adaptation phenomena.
Motion onset visual evoked potentials (mVEPs) is a kind of visual related potentials, when the visual stimulation is a moving object, there would be a response in brain at the beginning of the movement. Both horizontal or radial motions can induce mVEPs [6], especially radial expansion and contraction motions which changing distance along the visual axis can induce a stronger response than movement without depth change [7]. Chai et al. designed a zoom motion-based motion paradigm, which achieved high ITR and minimal decrease of recognition accuracy due to fatigue [8]. Moreover, various stimulus parameters can influence the response of SSMVEP; for example, stimulation with sharp edges may induce more sensitive response [9]. The stimulation size and colour in SSVEP-based paradigms have also been investigated [10,12]; however, these effects have yet to be determined for SSMVEP-based paradigm. The VEP response and visual comfort are both related to the colour, shape, pattern, and location or moving speed of the objects. In a previous study on SSVEP, no significant difference in recognition accuracy was observed between high-frequency and low-frequency stimulation [13]; however, other research has suggested that high-frequency SSVEP boasts lower eye discomfort [14]. Regardless, there has been no previous research on the frequency band of stimuli for SSMVEP paradigms.
Different patterns of motion paradigms, for example SSMVEP paradigms based on multiple motions such as swing, spiral, radial contraction-expansion, and rotation have been compared [15]. Additionally, a comparison of the Newton's ring motion and zoom motion-based paradigms revealed that the latter results in a lower decrease in recognition accuracy due to fatigue [8]. Other motion stimulus parameters for SSMVEPs have not yet been studied; however, previous studies have revealed that even a change in the refresh rate of the screen from 60 Hz to 144 Hz can affect the recognition accuracy [16]. Thus, the effects of the luminance, shape, colour, and size of the stimuli, as well as the stimulation frequency, stimulation frequency interval, and refresh rate of the screen, should all be considered in order to optimise the SSMVEP paradigm and achieve the best balance between recognition accuracy and visual fatigue.
According to the mechanism of the human visual system (HVS), this study designs eight zoom motion-based motion paradigms with a variety of stimuli colours, shapes, luminance values, and size. Paradigms with a higher stimulation frequency, a lower stimulation frequency interval, and a higher screen refresh rate are also compared with the standard paradigm. Each stimulation procedures were divided into four stages based on timeline to analyse the recognition accuracy decrease due to fatigue. Then, using the optimised stimulation parameters, paradigm performance is evaluated according to the recognition accuracy and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of SSMVEPs for different fatigue levels of the SSMVEP paradigm.
