Machine simulation of human activities remains as a field of challenging research since the inventions of modern computers. Tremendous enhancements are achieved in those areas that require the use of intelligence. For example, problems involving decision making like chess. Still human performs better even the super computers doing the relatively routine functions. Machine interpretation of human writing which is also known as Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is one of these areas that have been the subject of intensive research for the last few decades and still far from the perfection.
OCR is the technique used to convert the document files into digital format. This could be typed documents, computer printouts or documents written by hand on a paper. Based on this, recognition system is divided into two types: printed character recognition and Handwritten Character Recognition (HCR). Printed characters are very much similar in appearance for a particular language or script. Whereas, the handwritten documents are completely different in nature as they are written by hand. Different people are having different kind of writing style. This makes them the handwritten characters more difficult to be computer recognised. On the other hand, developing a technique for handwritten character recognition is considered as a more complex task than the techniques developed for printed characters.
HCR consists of three steps namely pre-processing step, feature extraction or feature selection step and finally the recognition or classification step. Pre-processing step is the initial step where the raw data is processed such as removing noisy data or incomplete data so that a clean input can be produced to be used directly by the feature extraction stage. Feature extraction stage involves the activities to find the unique properties or characteristics in the character image. It could be a single characteristic or a set of characteristics. These characteristics are used as input to the recognition process. This paper only concentrates in the feature extraction stage.
1.1. Feature extractionFeature extraction is a process to represents the input image in a miniature form keeping the properties of original image intact. In pattern recognition, feature extraction is considered as a form of dimensionality reduction. Both ‘feature extraction’ and ‘feature selection’ can be interpreted as the process of deriving the most active properties from the original input minimizing the within class variability and enhancing the between class variability. Another definition of feature extraction could be “the process of extracting distinguished features from the matrices of digital characters”. It is also expressed as “extracting from the raw data information that is most suitable for classification purposes, while minimizing the within class pattern variability and enhancing the between class pattern variability”. Feature extraction is “the process of looking for properties or behaviour of each character entrance and these properties are qualities with which to describe a particular character and distinguish it from another character”.Dimensionality reduction involves two different approaches. Feature extraction: Converting the features into a smaller dimensional space and Feature selection: Straight forward selection of a subset of the existing features. The pictorial representation for the above two is given in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (60KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) Feature selection (b) Feature extraction.In the Fig. 1 (a) & (b), X1, X2…XN are the elements of the original image. In feature selection, Xi1, Xi2….…XiM are the elements of the feature vector selected directly from the original set of elements where as in feature extraction, the ‘Y’ vector is derived from the ‘X’ vector by means of some calculation which is finally a function of ‘X’. Elements in a feature vector should be independent of the ‘size’, ‘orientation’, and ‘location’ of the input. This could be achieved by pre-processing or by extracting features that are ‘translation’, ‘rotation’, and ‘scale’ invariant. The main motive of considering small feature vector is to reduce the computational complexity and increased performance.Feature extraction and feature selection are two important aspects of character recognition. This is not only increase the recognition accuracy of the models, but also highly affect the processing time. In India, more than 20 different regional languages are used which are mostly different in shapes and appearance. The script and writing nature of no two languages are same. This makes it more difficult to develop a common character recognition system. Hence, the feature extraction methods come into play.
