Oil well-pad stations in Ecuador are complex facilities conformed by a numerous amount of infrastructural elements, machinery and control devices located in biodiversity hotspots. This demands to the maintenance workers to constantly perform inspection and maintenance tasks in order to maintain the production needs while reducing at the minimum the risk of failures which can severely damage the environment, the operators or the machinery and devices related to the station. To lessen the environmental impact caused by the building of this type of process oil station and their subsequent growth, its well-pads, buildings, and warehouses for machinery is constructed in reduced spaces. This results in greater difficulty for operators when they move through the facilities to perform inspection and maintenance tasks, that leads to a waste of time, effort and resources.
Daily oil production needs direct the industrial paradigm into a route where faster workflows and data exchange times are the main objectives. With this in mind, new industrial technologies and control schemes require a greater commitment of the station's workers for asset management [1]. One of the new concepts used to reach the objectives set the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) [2]. It is mainly referred to as an industrial framework where a large number of machines and intelligent devices are connected and synchronized through the use of software tools and specific hardware technologies [3]. Its implementation benefits the production scheme through the reduction of human errors, the increase in the overall efficiency and the cost of the final product in terms of time and money. The goal of the IIoT is not to fully replace human workers. Its final objective is to enhance and optimize it by reducing the amount of trivial and repetitive tasks performed by humans inside a manufacturing plant.
IEC-61499 takes advantage of the advanced features of intelligent devices to generate generic and modular automation elements meant to be easily implemented even in IEC-61131 control schemes. One of its main features is the generation of software elements using high-level programming languages. This allows a simple integration of complex algorithms or custom made libraries in the codification of the control functions.
The handling of large amounts of data generates an important concern surrounding the interoperability of the IIoT, the required speed of communications between devices and the number of resources they will take. The Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) data transfer protocol is based on publications and subscriptions to the so-called “topics”, whose low consumption of resources and speed of response make it suitable for the communication needs of the IIoT [4]. The methodologies of this protocol allow the data of an industrial system to be available to all the devices from the system and to the entire enterprise, without straining data bandwidth.
Intelligent Oil Fields (IOF) are the result of the integration of these new technological advances into the petroleum industry. They allow the monitoring, analysis and control procedures to be done in real time, achieving this way optimal management of deposits [5], [6]. In IOFs it is possible to visualize the totality of the operations that are being carried out, besides instantly accessing key data about assets, measures, and documents coherent and intuitive formats. This information provides a comprehensive and unified process vision, meant to be used in the decision making. Within this concept, the environment is proactive and oriented to action through alerts and events, allowing them to be modified as they occur [7]. The most representative advantages of IOFs are the effective management of resources, the improvement of production, the reduction of errors and the improved decision times.
The ease of IOFs to send and receive large amounts of information generates the possibility of integrating a wider range of technologies into oil companies. The following research work uses as base the guidelines depicted in the standard for distributed control applications IEC-61499 to generate a teleoperation system. It allows a human operator to interact with a virtual platform and remotely control in real-time a mobile robot to develop industrial assessment and maintenance duties in an oil extraction station. The main goal of the final product of this research project is to reduce the amount of time invested in the aforementioned operations caused by the difficulty which a human-sized being has while moving around the station facilities to reach the control and measurement elements. An indirect resulting benefit of this system is the reduction of labor risks to operators by carrying out their activities remotely.
The layout of the paper is as follows: Section 2 depicts some related previous academic literature, Section 3 describes some of the concepts used in this investigation, Section 4 illustrates the case study, Section 5 details the functions, applications, systems and virtual environments generated; Section 6 presents some results of the use of the proposed system, and finally in Section 7 some conclusions and ongoing work are discussed.
