Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a severe, progressive disease affecting 1 in 3600–6000 males worldwide (Bushby & Connor, 2011; Bushby et al., 2010; Flanigan, 2014). DMD is characterized by the absence of dystrophin in muscle biopsies (although residual dystrophin can be present) (Arechavala-Gomeza et al., 2010). Dystrophin is essential in maintaining the structural integrity of muscle membranes during contraction; its absence results in irreversible progressive muscle weakness and manifests itself in the first decade of life, in a symmetrical way initially in the proximal region of the body with evolution to distal regions. Weakness of the skeletal, respiratory and cardiac muscle produces severe physical incapacity and a reduced life expectancy (Snow, Anderson, & Jakobson, 2013).
Over the last five decades, the lifespan of men with DMD has increased from 20 to 35 years due to improvements in health services and the introduction of home care technology, such as artificial ventilators (Lobo-Prat et al., 2017). As a result, there is currently a considerable group of adults with DMD living with severe physical impairments and a strong dependency on health resources (Snow et al., 2013).
In the last few years there has been increasing focus on the assessment of upper limbs (Bartels et al., 2011; Berard, Payan, Hodgkinson, & Fermanian, 2005; Mattar & Sobreira, 2008b; Mayhew et al., 2013; Mazzone et al., 2012; Servais et al., 2013), especially considering that upper limb weakness in DMD generally occurs at a later stage compared to the lower limb (Janssen, Bergsma, Geurts, & de Groot, 2014; Mattar & Sobreira, 2008b; Wagner, Lechtzin, & Judge, 2007; Wagner, Lechtzin, & Judge, 2007). Although the distal performance is preserved, the prevalent muscular deficits that characterize the clinical profile of DMD may significantly affect performance of fine movements, particularly in those requiring motor execution such as writing tasks (Vuillerot et al., 2012; Wagner et al., 2007a). Therefore, in advanced stages of the disease upper limb activities, although limited are especially significant in daily life and require specific attention in rehabilitation programs and research with the aim of prolonging independence and functionality (Bartels et al., 2011; Mattar & Sobreira, 2008b; Wagner et al., 2007a).
An important factor that should be investigated when considering upper limb functional tasks is the relation between speed and accuracy of movement in order to plan and develop optimal assistive technology interfaces (Fernani et al., 2017). In typically developed (TD) individuals, movement speed and accuracy and their relationship are inversely proportional (Beamish et al., 2009; Boyd, Vidoni, Siengsukon, & Wessel, 2009). However, considering individuals with motor disability the mechanisms underlying the speed-accuracy tradeoff can be different, with individuals being able to utilize a speed-energy-accuracy trade-off for goal-directed movements as an alternative strategy to compensate for muscle contraction difficulties (Fernani et al., 2017).
Under this paradigm, skill improvement is concerned with improving the accuracy rate, or productivity in achieving a spatial task (Ashworth-Beaumont & Nowicky, 2013). In relation to human performance, Fitts and Radford (Fitts & Radford, 1966) considered the effect of movement rate on spatial variability with respect to a manual target for the upper limb. In general terms, for a standardized target of index of difficulty (ID) in an aiming task, a person must on average successfully commit sensorimotor control resources matching or exceeding the ID to achieve reliable targeting accuracy (Ashworth-Beaumont & Nowicky, 2013).
The relationship between speed and accuracy can be described by a mathematical equation, such that there is a log-linear relationship between movement time and task difficulty, with targets of smaller sizes requiring more time to reach due to the increase in accuracy requirements (Boyd et al., 2009; Lam, Hodges, Virji-Babul, & Latash, 2009). Due to the intrinsic information between the target size (W) and the distance between targets (D), the equation log2 (2D / W) provides an ID where by the higher the difficulty the slower the movement (Fitts, 1954).
Due to the motor alterations present in DMD, the evaluation of the relationship between speed and accuracy can be useful for the analysis of the motor control in pre-defined tasks, manipulating difficulty through the size and distance of the target. Thus, it is important to verify the relation between the execution time of the movement considering distance and size of the targets. These data can boost future research and enable better planning of interventions for individuals with DMD.
Considering the above deliberations, individuals with DMD and TD were engaged in a movement time task with different indices of difficulty (IDs) in the present study. The same ID was performed in different ways (considering the relation between widths and distances) similar to the proposal of Fernani et al. (2017), where tasks were performed with thicker sidebars and longer distances between them and thinner sidebars with shorter distances.
Thus, this study aimed to evaluate whether difficulty in movement performance in those with DMD was still present when there is a demand for speed (due to a greater distance between targets with larger sidebars) or accuracy (thinner sidebars with a small distance between targets). The aim was to also verify the differences in speed and accuracy performance between individuals with DMD and TD.
Hence, we can hypothesize that, due to muscle weakness and slowness of movement (i.e. more time required to perform motor activities) (Kinali et al., 2009; Smith, Dainoff, & Smith, 2006), individuals with DMD will present greater difficulty when the task demands speed (which requires a larger range of motion and more muscle strength) when compared with a task requiring accuracy. Also, when compared with their TD peers, individuals with DMD would require more time to complete the proposed movement activities.
