Similarity describes the relationships between conceptual or perceptual entities (Li and Liu, 2015). It has been evolved from different senses (Demirci, 2007), as given below:
a)Mathematical approach: A number of mathematical distance functions have been developed to calculate the similarity between pairs of numerical data, e.g., Hamming distance, Euclidean distance, and so on.b)Psychological approach: In terms of psychology, similarity has been studied by calculating the correlation between objects, human perceptual resemblance, and rule-like or theory-like semantic representations.c)Fuzzy approach: The similarity is measured through fuzzy logic by simulating the human perception of similarity. It has the benefit of being able to handle non-numerical quantities, degrees of similarity, and perceptual reasoning occurring due to human judgments.
In the field of image processing, similarity measures for image pixels are typically evaluated using Euclidean distance in color space. However, Wuerger et al. (Wuerger et al., 1995) demonstrated that proximity in color space – something that is perceptual rather than mathematical – cannot be evaluated using this distance measure. In other words, the measure that we get using the Euclidean distance will not be adequate for judging the similarity of image pixels (Demirci, 2007). Moreover, since the similarity of pixels involves an instinctive approach rather than a numerical one, it becomes necessary to consider human perception in its measurement. Based on the fuzzy sets (Zadeh, 1965), fuzzy logic (FL) has concerns with the degree of membership in a set. It differs from conventional logic and is an essential tool to handle the problems in which imprecise information is associated with data. Prof. Zadeh himself was the first to offer a way to judge similarity in terms of FL in (Zadeh, 1971), where he extended the theories of relations and equivalence to adapt for problems where the parameters are not well-defined.
In the modeling of a real-life system, the incorporation of uncertainties plays an essential part. The uncertainties arise or exist because of lack of knowledge of system experts and incomplete information regarding the system inputs. Such causes impreciseness and ambiguity and inconsistency in the modeling of the system. Another important reason that causes the uncertainty in the system is the differences in the opinions of experts. In fuzzy sets or type-1 fuzzy sets (T1 FSs), the single expert opinion is incorporated with the membership function that signifies the degree of uncertainty. However, due to the conflicts in the opinions of various experts and various resources of uncertainty, T1 FSs are insufficient for modeling those systems. To overcome this, Prof. Zadeh himself proposed the concept of type-2 fuzzy sets (T2 FSs) (Zadeh, 1975). Further, Mendel et al. pioneered the interval type-2 fuzzy sets (IT2 FSs) to reduce the burden of computation with general T2 FS (Mendel and Wu, 2010). Since then, a significant number of applications have been developed using IT2 FSs, such as machine learning (John et al., 2000), image processing (Castillo et al., 2007), pattern recognition (Melin and Castillo, 2013), reliability engineering (Ashraf et al., 2014, 2015; Muhuri et al., 2017), real-time system (Muhuri et al., 2020a, Muhuri et al., 2020b), similarity measures (Li et al., 2015), inventory system (Ashraf et al., 2017) etc.
Steganography is a technique of protecting information in such a way that it is not evident to unauthorized entities. Such a task has become increasingly more critical as the popularity of the internet as a medium of transmission increases. A steganographic method, therefore, aims to hide away secret data as unobtrusively as possible; this is typically done by fixing the data bits mentioned above deeply in another form of data. Both, the data to be embedded and the data needed for embedding, can be of several kinds: text, image, audio or video (Cheddad et al., 2010; Johnson and Katzenbeisser, 2000; Petitcolas et al., 1999). Steganographic methods consist of two parts: embedding and extraction. Embedding is the process of hiding the data in the pixels of the image, while extraction is the process of retrieving the hidden data from the image. The image used for embedding is called the cover image, and the output image after embedding is called the stego image. The overall objective of steganography – to hide the data so that it is indiscernible – can be achieved by ensuring a few things: the protected data inside the cover object must be transparently imperceptible; the method of embedding itself must be able to withstand various attacks; the stego object should have a high embedding capacity for hiding data bits; and the method used should be such that it can resist any damaging interference (Jafari et al., 2013; Jero et al., 2016; Kanan and Nazeri, 2014; Li et al., 2010; Subhedar and Mankar, 2014; Wu and Tsai, 2003).
In literature, there are several existing methods for steganography. These methods can be grouped based on their processing domain as follows: (1) spatial domain and (2) transform domain. The difference between these two domain techniques is that, in the spatial domain techniques, the embedding occurs directly in the pixels of the image, while in the transform domain techniques, the image is first transformed into the frequency domain and then the embedding is done. In image steganography, embedding in the plain or non-edge regions of the image has a significantly low effect on the human visual system. In other words, the pixel values in the plain (non-edge) regions of the image are similar, so they are good areas to embed. This is because the differences in the neighborhood pixel values of the plain region are very low (Melin et al., 2014). However, embedding in the textured region of the image is not advisable, since a slight change in the pixel values of that region can distort the image.
Additionally, the pixels, having integer values ranging between 0 and 255, are redundant to its neighbors and the levels of differences between them are almost negligible. Therefore, the corresponding differences based on numeric pixel values are not truly justified as similar or not similar. Thus, to perform image steganography in those regions, rule-based categorization is required to calculate the similarity value for any pair of pixels (Demirci, 2006). In other words, the perceptual reasoning of the similarity of the redundant pixels in the neighborhood should be assessed by human judgment (Hampton, 1998; Seaborn et al., 2005). Therefore, linguistic variables are the most appropriate for the modeling of perceptual similarity, and FSs have long been the best-recognized tool to represent these linguistic values.
One of the most fundamental issues in the linguistic variable representation by employing T1 FSs is the selection of the membership function (MF) that interprets the uncertainty in information. Additionally, there exists a need to justify the crispness of the membership value of the fuzzy set, as it seems to contradict the core idea of “fuzziness”. The type-1 membership function (T1 MF) is mostly recommended by the system expert to signify the degree of belongingness to a T1 FS. However, when there is more than one expert involved to provide the opinions regarding the MFs, T1 FSs risk being unable to capture the different kinds of uncertainties. The above situation can be resolved by considering the union of all the T1 MFs representing the various expert opinions. This causes the generation of interval type-2 membership functions (IT2 MFs), leading to IT2 FSs (Ashraf et al., 2018a; Muhuri et al., 2017). Therefore, we propose that the linguistic terms be portrayed as IT2 FSs. The IT2 MFs of IT2 FSs are able to capture higher uncertainty compared to T1 FSs. In IT2 MFs, the Footprint of Uncertainty (FOU) depicts a degree of uncertainty caused by the differences of human judgment (or expert opinion) regarding the T1 MFs. The FOU offers more flexibility in the adjustment of the decisive parameters, i.e., the IT2 MFs of linguistic variables. As a result, the FOU of IT2 MFs are bounded by lower and upper membership functions representing the uncertainty of the linguistic terms . Hence, a significant improvement has been made in shifting from a type-1 fuzzy logic system (T1 FLS) to interval type-2 fuzzy logic system (IT2 FLS) by the researchers in recent years. IT2 FLSs have been effectively applied in the various applications of image processing systems such as classification (Majeed et al., 2018; Rubio et al., 2017), filtering (Singh et al., 2018), segmentation (Dhar and Kundu, 2019; Zhao et al., 2019), and edge detection (Castillo et al., 2017; Gonzalez and Melin, 2017; Gonzalez et al., 2016; Martínez et al., 2019; Melin et al., 2014).
In this paper, we propose a novel steganographic procedure using an IT2 FLS based similarity measure to measure the similarity between the pixels in a digital image. For doing so, a (3×3) window of pixels is selected to find the similarity of the central pixel to its neighboring pixels. We calculate the difference of all the three color components, i.e., red (R), green (G), and blue (B), which are assigned linguistic terms. The result from the IT2 FLS is a similarity matrix which contains values in the interval [0, 1] indicating the level of similarity of each pixel of the image to its neighbors. This similarity matrix is used to select pixels to perform the least significant bit (LSB) method for hiding the secret message. We have not found any previous work of similarity measure or steganography which has used an IT2 FLS. Cover images, namely, Lena, Baboon, Jet, Barbara, Boat, Peppers, Earth, House, Sailboat and Splash, have been chosen as the dataset, upon which the proposed steganographic method was applied to generate the corresponding stego images. Quality index metrics are used to assure the visual quality of the stego images. We have also demonstrated the high payload capacity of our proposed method.
The significant contributions of this paper are summarized as:
1)A new algorithm based on IT2 FLS was developed that calculates the perceptual similarity of an image.2)Linguistic variables represent the color differences between pixels as {Low, Medium, High} and degree of similarity as {Not Similar, Slightly Similar, Moderately Similar, Quite Similar, Exactly Similar}. These variables are formulated as IT2 MFs in the IT2 FLS.3)IT2 FLS takes the IT2 MFs of the linguistic variables as inputs and provides the output describing the similarity between a pair of pixels.4)Mamdani inference engine using fuzzy-rules operates on the IT2 MFs to achieve the similarity. Consequently, the type-reduction and defuzzification generates the similarity value of a pixel in an image.5)Similarity matrix depicting the similarity of each pixel in an image is evaluated based on a set of fuzzy-rules.6)The embedding and extraction procedures of steganography are performed on the image using the least significant bit (LSB) method.7)A pixel of an image is selected for embedding if the corresponding similarity value (in the similarity matrix) is greater than a particular threshold value, which indicates the degree of similarity to its neighbors.8)To show the efficacy of our proposed method, type-1 fuzzy logic system (T1 FLS) based and Euclidean distance based similarity measures were also implemented to perform steganography.9)The experimental simulations were performed on a dataset consisting of ten different cover images, and the corresponding stego images are obtained. The whole procedure with the three methods: (a) proposed, (b) T1 FLS based, (c) Euclidean distance based, was repeated for different numbers of bits (k={1,2,3,4}) hidden in the LSBs of the pixels and for different thresholds.10)A thorough comparison has been done by investigating the perceptual transparency and visual quality of the stego images. These were measured by using three quality index metrics: peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), structural similarity measure (SSIM), and universal quality index (UQI).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, a literature survey is presented, detailing past works relevant to this paper. Mathematical definitions of T2 FSs, IT2 FSs, and IT2 FLSs are explained in Section 3. Steps of the proposed IT2 FLS based similarity measure technique and consequent steganographic method is elaborated in Section 4. Details of the experimental simulations and results are reported in Section 5, which also includes a comparative discussion. Finally, we conclude in Section 6.
