With the global outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, almost every country is facing problems concerning the shortage of medical and healthcare resources, and people have become more aware of the importance of following a healthy lifestyle and incorporating physical exercise into their daily lives. As the most downloaded type of mobile health applications (mHealth apps), fitness apps can help people manage their nutritional intake, assist their participation in fitness and physical activities, and promote a healthy lifestyle. Therefore, these apps are gradually occupying the commercial mobile app market (Beldad and Hegner, 2018).
Nowadays, fitness apps are rapidly developing in the commercial application market and are attracting the attention of academia (Beldad and Hegner, 2018). Numerous studies have implemented empirical protocols to verify the results of using fitness apps for improving the level of physical activity and/or diet in users (Schoeppe et al., 2017). However, from the academic side, it is still a novel and young area of research.
As a diverse field of research that is related to an emerging phenomenon, and with the integration of new technologies, the research available on fitness apps is still scarce. Both empirical research and theoretical orientation reviews, mostly focus on summarizing the functions and features of fitness apps and user perspectives. As a result, there appears to be a lack of more macro and objective quantitative research in this field. And the various types of literature are not as substantial or abundant compared to other mature areas of research. It is necessary to carry out a bibliometric study to know the main empirical and theoretical orientations in this case. The data obtained from the bibliometric analysis will be essential to assess the intensity and orientation of new lines of research (Bartoli and Medvet, 2014). Moreover, it is essential to classify the existing research in the research field to track the research progress and research trends in the field (Gaviria-Marin et al., 2019). Bibliometrics study can achieve this objective. It helps display past academic research activities and achievements visually.
To our knowledge, there is no bibliometric study in the field of fitness app research, even though this type of literature has been used widely in other fields in recent years (Zanjirchi et al., 2019). Bibliometrics can supplement existing experiments and review studies, help researchers identify hidden research lines, hot issues, and research methods in the field, and reduce the problems of neglecting certain excellent articles due to the deviation of researchers' subjective judgments (Zanjirchi et al., 2019, Veloutsou and Mafe, 2020).
Therefore, this study offers a bibliometric study of the advancements in research on the mobile-fitness app. It is based on data from a bibliometric analysis. It seeks to assess the intensity and research topics dominant in the scientific community when it comes to this emerging phenomenon, focusing explicitly on the fitness segment of mHealth. This study also aims to provide relevant data and bibliometric indicators for the initial stage of fitness application research and provide primary data for advancing future research in this field. The data used in this study is obtained from two leading databases for scientific research: Scopus and Web of Science.
The research is organized as follows. First, a research background is provided. Second, the research methods and the sources of research data are outlined. Third, the results are presented and discussed. Finally, the main conclusions, limitations, and further opportunities for research are stated.
