Following the design of the long period fiber grating’s (LPFG) Mach-Zehnder interferometer structure [1], which is a LPGP, the application of LPGP in the field of sensing has attracted significant attention. LPGP has also been used in different sensing applications in the recent years, for example, in the measurement of parameters such as curvature [2], external refractive index [3], strain [4], and temperature [5]. At present, LPGP optical fiber sensing is mainly limited to discrete optical fiber sensor devices or single-point optical fiber sensing systems, which restricts the development of integrated and networked optical fiber sensing applications. It is an important research direction to study the implementation of a distributed LPGP sensor system with high integration and simultaneous measurement of multiple sites. The three classic forms of fiber grating multiplexing, namely wavelength division multiplexing [6,7], time division multiplexing [8,9], and space division multiplexing [10,11], have been extensively studied in the last 20 years, as has their mixed multiplexing [12,13].
LPGP is a same-directional coupling between the core mode of a fiber core and multiple cladding modes. It works in the transmission mode and has a large loss peak bandwidth. Owing to the lack of reflection characteristics, the time-division multiplexing scheme that measures the reflection delay of pulsed light is unsuitable for LPGP arrays, and the multiple broad-spectrum loss band characteristics of the transmission spectrum of LPGP render the wavelength-division multiplexing scheme impossible. These factors cause difficulties in multiplexing and modulating LPGP sensor signals. A potential solution was proposed by connecting a single LPFG through a circulator to form a star network, and multiplexing the long-period fiber grating [14]. Another approach was the plating of two LPFGs with diamond-like carbon films of different thicknesses and connecting a diffraction grating to form a simple quasi-distributed LPFG system [15]. A subsequent study connected four LPFGs in series on an optical path. The LPFGs had different grating pitches, which led to the introduction of different phases. The superimposed spectra collected from the spectrometer were decomposed by Fourier transform [16]. In a 2017 study, three LPFGs were engraved onto a single-mode fiber, and multiple parameters were detected by multiplexing in the wavelength region [17]. The phases of LPGPs, the relationship between the phases of each LPGP, and the applied stresses are obtained through a stress sensing experiment. These multiplexing technologies, which are still in the laboratory development stage, have opened a new research direction for LPGP multiplexing.
The present study proposes a new distributed LPGP multiplexing demodulation system wherein the influence of the parameters on the LPGP are investigated in detail based on its working mode. Space division multiplexing technology is combined with computer technology and spectrometer demodulation to design the distributed LPGP multiplexing demodulation system.
