Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of malignant diseases are organized by international expert panels. For example, the first edition of the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) recommendations for the diagnosis and management of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in adults was published in 2010 (Döhner et al., 2010) and recently revised in 2017 (Döhner et al., 2017). Based on recent DNA sequencing results, such as those derived from The Cancer Genome Atlas, AML can be subdivided into multiple subclasses (Arber et al., 2016, Ding et al., 2012, Ley et al., 2008, Ley et al., 2010, Loriaux et al., 2008, Papaemmanuil et al., 2016, The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (TCGA) et al., 2013, Welch et al., 2012, Yan et al., 2011). Leukemias are characterized by strong transcriptomic signals, as seen in a pioneering study almost two decades ago by Golub et al. (Golub et al., 1999) and a rich body of subsequent work (Debernardi et al., 2003, Kohlmann et al., 2003, Ross et al., 2004, Schoch et al., 2002, Virtaneva et al., 2001). These findings led to the suggestion that gene expression profiling (GEP) could be utilized to define leukemia subtypes and derive useful predictive gene signatures (Andersson et al., 2007, Bullinger et al., 2004). Nevertheless, according to the ELN recommendations primary diagnosis still relies on classical approaches including assessment of morphology, immunophenotyping, cytochemistry, and cytogenetics (Döhner et al., 2017). Although undoubtedly effective in detecting disease, these existing diagnostic approaches rely on large investments in human expertise (training and employment of specialists) and physical infrastructure, whose costs scale with the number of samples. This has implications for accessibility (e.g., in rural areas or outside developed regions) and on cost and logistical grounds alone limits the scope to consider alternatives to the overall decision pipeline. In contrast to classical diagnostic pipelines that are centered on interpretation of results by human experts, artificial intelligence- (AI) and machine learning- (ML) based approaches have the potential for low marginal cost (i.e., cost per additional sample once the system is trained) (Esteva et al., 2017), and this key aspect of AI and ML is widely appreciated in the economics literature (see, e.g., Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2014).
The potential of GEP for leukemia diagnosis has been recognized. A decade after the pioneering work of Golub et al., the International Microarray Innovations in Leukemia Study Group proposed GEP by microarray analysis to be a robust technology for the diagnosis of hematologic malignancies with high accuracy (Haferlach et al., 2010). The utility of GEP by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has been also demonstrated for other tumor entities, for example, breast cancer (Ciriello et al., 2015, Kristensen et al., 2012, Parker et al., 2009), bladder cancer, or lung cancer (Hoadley et al., 2014, Robertson et al., 2017). Furthermore, in AML research large RNA-seq datasets have been described in the meantime (Garzon et al., 2014, Lavallee et al., 2016, Lavallée et al., 2015, Macrae et al., 2013, Pabst et al., 2016).
In parallel, a series of advances in ML, AI, and computational statistics have transformed our understanding of prediction using high-dimensional data. A variety of approaches are now an established part of the toolkit, and for some models (including sparse linear and generalized linear models), there is a rich mathematical theory concerning their performance in the high-dimensional setting (Bühlmann and van de Geer, 2011). In a nutshell, the body of empirical and theoretical research has shown that learning predictive models over large numbers of variables is often feasible and remarkably effective. In applied ML, there has been a deepening understanding of practical issues, e.g., relating to the transferability of predictions across contexts (Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2009), that is very relevant to the clinical setting.
Based on these developments in the data sciences and the increasing availability of GEP data derived from peripheral blood including AML, we sought to develop near-automated approaches in which ML tools automatically learn suitable patterns directly from the global transcriptomic data without pre-selection of genes. To this end, we built the probably largest reference blood GEP dataset comprising 105 individual studies with, in total, more than 12,000 patient samples. We applied high-dimensional ML approaches to build genome-wide predictors in an unbiased, entirely data-driven manner and tested predictive accuracy in held-out data. We emphasize that our goal was not to outperform classical diagnostic methods, but to ask whether we could match human annotation in a near-automated and scalable manner. This aim is common to a number of recent efforts to use ML and AI advances in the diagnostic setting (see, e.g., Esteva et al., 2017) wherein human-derived labels are used to guide learning. We did not address the question of subclassification of leukemic disease, where the mutation status of the leukemic cells is currently the dominant approach (Arber et al., 2016, Heath et al., 2017, Papaemmanuil et al., 2016, The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (TCGA) et al., 2013), but rather focused on primary diagnosis, which continues to rely mostly on classical approaches (morphology, immunophenotyping, cytochemistry). We carried out extensive tests designed to address specific concerns relevant to practical use, including the case of transferring predictive models between entirely disjoint studies (that could be subject to batch effects or other unwanted variation) and even between transcriptomic platforms. Our results show that combining ML and blood transcriptomics can yield highly effective and robust classifiers. This supports the notion that transcriptomic-based ML could be used to assist AML diagnostics, particularly in settings wherein hematological expertise is not sufficiently available and/or costly.
