Prostate cancer is ranked second in the list of most commonly occurred types of cancer among the male population of United States. According to estimates of the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Result (SEER) program of National Cancer Institute, 164,690 new cases of prostate cancer will be registered while 29,430 deaths will result because of prostate cancer in the year of 2018. The common screening methods for prostate cancer detection are checking for elevated Prostate specific antigen (PSA) in blood and looking for abnormalities in digital rectal examination (DRE). If abnormalities are found in these tests, the patient may be referred to undergo a transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) guided biopsy procedure of the prostate gland. However, many prostate cancer lesions are either isoechoic in nature or have appearances similar to that of some non-malignant prostate pathologies in ultrasound (US) images [1]. Due to these reasons, the prostate gland is systematically sampled to collect the tissue specimen in TRUS guided prostate biopsy procedure and even after sampling the complete prostate gland following an efficient protocol, there is still chance of incorrect diagnosis [2,3]. Although some researchers have tried to implement US based imaging technologies such as contrast enhanced ultrasound imaging or real time elastography for improving prostate cancer detection, these techniques could not efficiently detect prostate malignancy [1,4,5]. Researchers have found that multiparametric magnetic resonance (MR) imaging as well as MR-US fusion guided biopsy can potentially improve the prostate cancer detection as well as reduce overdiagnosis which is associated with TRUS guided biopsy [6]. However, high cost of the MR imaging units as well as the fusion software along with the variable availability of the suitable MR units among different countries, may restrict the use of MR imaging for targeted prostate cancer biopsy [7,8]. These facts indicate that a new imaging modality is required to detect prostate cancer lesions with high accuracy.
Photoacoustic (PA) imaging is one of the potential imaging modalities which can be used for efficient prostate cancer detection. It is a hybrid imaging modality which uses pulsed laser light in near infrared wavelength [NIR] region to irradiate soft tissue and detects US wave emitted by the tissue specimen. The light absorbing tissue elements absorb the pulsed light to produce localized heating at the sites of absorption which subsequently result in rapid thermal expansion followed by pressure increments. These pressure increments release in the form of wide band US waves, also known as PA waves. These PA waves are detected using US transducers and based on the application, different 2D grayscale images or 1D signals are formed using the detected PA waves. Amplitude of the PA waves depend on the amount of light absorbed by the tissue elements which in turn depend on the optical absorption property of the tissue. PA images formed using the detected PA waves, depict the spatially varying optical absorption property of tissue. Imaging modalities, in which the image contrast depends on the optical properties of soft tissue, can be potentially used for obtaining functional information of the tissue specimen. Spatially varying blood content of tissue is one such functional information which can be used to detect angiogenesis i.e. the production of new blood vessels. Angiogenesis is a primary hallmark of malignant lesion. PA imaging as well as pure optical imaging can potentially be used to detect angiogenesis by probing the tissue with pulsed laser lights at NIR wavelength region. However, in case of pure optical imaging, resolution degrades significantly as the depth inside the soft tissue increases, whereas PA imaging offers reasonably good spatial resolution at considerable depths inside soft tissue. Yaseen et al. [9] developed a PA imaging system for prostate cancer detection and tested its performance on phantoms and a surgically exposed prostate in a live dog. In an in vivo study conducted with mice injected with prostate tumor cells, Bauer et al. [10] utilized PA imaging to detect tumor vasculature and hemorrhaging. Horiguchi et al. [11] conducted a pilot study to evaluate the efficiency of PA imaging for the visualization of periprostatic microvessels and neurovascular bundle. Harrison et al. [12] conducted a phantom experiment to find that PA imaging could be utilized for effective visualization of brachytherapy seed inside soft tissue. In an in vivo study with mice, Tomaszewski et al. [13] demonstrated that oxygen enhanced PA imaging could be used to reveal different tumor vascular function between two different prostate cancer models. Horiguchi et al. [14] conducted an in vivo study to investigate the possibility of visualization of tumour vasculature using PA imaging. Tang [15] designed and optimized a PA endoscope for detecting prostate cancer. Using multiwavelength PA imaging where instead of using single wavelength laser light, PA imaging is performed at multiple wavelengths, concentration of specific chromophores i.e. light absorbing tissue elements inside the tissue element can be found out. The wavelengths corresponding to the peaks in the optical absorption spectra of specific chromophores, are generally used for acquiring multiwavelength PA images of a tissue specimen. Spatially varying concentration of specific chromophores can provide significant information regarding particular tissue pathologies. For example, angiogenesis as well as hypermetabolism in malignant lesions can be detected and characterized using concentration and oxygen saturation of haemoglobin [16]. In a clinical study with prostate tumour injected mice, Olafsson et al. [17] acquired multiwavelength PA imaging before and after injecting gold nanorods to evaluate the efficiency of PA imaging with exogeneous contrast agents.
For the last two decades, computer aided detection (CADe) has been becoming a major player in radiological detection, diagnosis and management of diseases. Utilizing the ability of modelling complex relationship between input data and labels as well as handling a lot of data in a small time, CADe systems can potentially reduce the workload as well as improve the decision making process of a radiologist [18,19]. In a conventional CADe workflow, region of interests (ROI) are identified in the images, features/markers corresponding a particular disease are extracted from the ROIs and then the extracted features are analysed using a classifier to differentiate between normal and diseased organ [20]. There are few studies which demonstrate CADe application in the photoacoustic imaging paradigm. For example, the studies in [[21], [22], [23]] are concerned with the detection of ovarian cancer in which the features extracted from coregistered ultrasound and photoacoustic images are fed to the classifiers like linear model, support vector machine and neural networks. The performance of the classifiers are greatly affected by the nature of extracted features. Good classification requires the extracted features to be discriminant in nature.
Inspired by the success of convolutional neural network (CNN) [24] for natural image recognition, researchers have started using it for improving the performance of the state of the art CADe systems. CNN, which can autonomously learn hierarchical features, eliminates the need of dedicated feature extractors. Over the last decade, several research studies implemented CNN successfully for different applications using different modality medical images [[25], [26], [27], [28]]. In some research studies, performance of CNN has been tested for prostate cancer detection. Song et al. [29] implemented a deep CNN architecture on multiparametric MR images of 194 patients to differentiate between cancerous and non cancerous prostate tissue. In this study, we implemented CNN based classification framework on 1D RF (radio frequency) PA data acquired at multiple wavelengths to differentiate between malignant, BPH and normal prostate tissue. Compared to the large number of studies where different CNNs were implemented on 2D biomedical signals, including different modality medical images, number of studies containing results of CNN implementation on 1D biomedical signals is less. Researchers employed CNNs for classification of 1D physiological signals including electrocardiogram (ECG) signals [[30], [31], [32]] and electroencephalogram (EEG) signal [[33], [34], [35]].
For tissue characterisation using Photoacoustic imaging, researchers use hand crafted features like pixels of grayscale PA images reconstructed using RF PA data, power spectral parameters, wavelet domain-based parameters etc. These features are used with different classifiers in supervised learning framework for computer aided diagnosis of different tissue pathologies. Inspired by the success of CNN to autonomously learn features, we intended to evaluate the performance of features, learned by CNN from raw PA data for tissue characterisation in this study. Our hypothesis was that, features learned by the convolutional layers of CNN from raw PA data, would be equally, if not more, efficient to the handcrafted features for tissue characterisation. As the convolutional layer in CNN would be specifically trained to generate distinctive feature maps from raw PA data corresponding to different tissue pathologies, we proposed that autonomously learned CNN features would be able to provide efficient tissue characterisation. To compare the performance of features learned by CNN with those of handcrafted features, we selected two commonly used classifiers. Performances of these classifiers trained using handcrafted features were compared with the performance of the same classifiers trained with features learned by CNN. We selected raw PA data which are equivalent to PA image pixels as the handcrafted features in this study. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to perform prostate tissue characterisation with PA data using automatic feature extraction capability of CNN based classifiers.
