The experience and interpretation of pain does not take place in a vacuum but rather is known to depend also on the social, physical, and emotional context in which physical adversity occurs (e.g., Arntz & Claessens, 2004; Levine & de Simone, 1991; Montoya, Larbig, Braun, Preissl, & Birbaumer, 2004; Rocha, Prkachin, Beaumont, Hardy, & Zumbo, 2003). Amongst other social contextual factors, the manner in which pain and painful procedures are communicated is of particular interest in a clinical context. For example, the quality of patient-practitioner communication has been found to contribute to pain ratings, patient satisfaction and treatment adherence (Mistiaen et al., 2016; Muñoz Alamo, Ruiz Moral, & Pérula de Torres, 2002; Ong, de Haes, Hoos, & Lammes, 1995; Ruben, Blanch-Hartigan, & Hall, 2017). In patient-practitioner communication, both the information that is being provided (i.e., the content) and the style and form in which communication takes place are considered crucial elements (Mistiaen et al., 2016). Furthermore, non-verbal behaviors (e.g., facial expressions) during face-to-face communication are known to influence individuals’ perception of the interaction as pleasant, supportive, or hostile (Ong et al., 1995).
Providing information about diseases and treatments influences various treatment-related outcomes, such as symptom management and treatment adherence (e.g. Falvo & Tippy, 1988; McPherson, Higginson, & Hearn, 2001). Importantly, the use of technical language (vs. plain language) to provide information is reported to reduce both the level of satisfaction with the received information and the capability of understanding and recalling information in patients (Jackson, 1992). Positive suggestions and preparatory information regarding painful treatments reduce patient's pain while the usage of negatively loaded words to introduce a painful procedure is associated with higher pain ratings (See review Mistiaen et al., 2016; Lang et al., 2005; Koban, Jepma, Geuter, & Wager, 2017). In healthy participants, the use of technical language and threatening examples to describe an upcoming painful procedure was found to increase distress and threat expectancy for the upcoming pain procedure, and to lead to increased pain intensity reports and reduced tolerance for experimentally induced pain (Boston & Sharpe, 2005; Jackson et al., 2005; Karsdorp, Ranson, Schrooten, & Vlaeyen, 2012; Todd, Sharpe, Colagiuri, & Khatabi, 2016).
In addition to the content and language in which information is provided, both verbal and non-verbal reactions of others to the person in pain influence the pain experience (e.g., Flor, Kerns, & Turk, 1987; Cano, 2004; Hurter, Paloyelis, de C. Williams, & Fotopoulou, 2014). A promising communication strategy in this light is validation, which is characterized by the communication of understanding and legitimacy towards another person who reports personal experiences (Linehan, 1997). Validation has been found associated with a decrease in negative affect and increased treatment satisfaction in chronic pain patients (Shenk & Fruzzetti, 2011; Vangronsveld & Linton, 2012) and has been proposed as a valuable therapeutic tool to reduce pain (Edmond & Keefe, 2015). Nevertheless, empirical evidence for a direct effect of validation on the experience of pain is inconsistent. Experimental studies in which validating versus invalidating feedback was provided by the experimenter to healthy participants undergoing a bucket-lifting task found no effect on pain reports (Edmond, 2015; Linton, Boersma, Vangronsveld, & Fruzzetti, 2012). In contrast, healthy participants who felt highly validated by their romantic partner during the cold pressor task reported lower pain (Leong, Cano, Wurm, Lumley, & Corley, 2015). Correspondingly, young cancer patients reported higher pain during treatment procedures when they were invalidated by their primary caregiver (Cline et al., 2006). Possibly, these diverging findings between studies result from differences in perceived threat of pain and painful procedures. Indeed, cancer patients undergoing treatment procedures experience high levels of fear and anxiety, indicating increased threat perception, in relation to the treatment (Kuppenheimer & Brown, 2002). Along the same line of reasoning, the bucket-lifting task (Edmond, 2015; Linton et al., 2012) might be perceived as less threatening than the cold pressor task (Leong et al., 2015), often employed in experimental research as a stress-inducing procedure (e.g. Santa Ana et al., 2006; Speirs, Herring, Cooper, Hardy, & Hind, 1974). So, it could be that the effects of validation on pain are dependent upon threat perceptions.
The current study aimed to examine the unique and combined effects of information language and validation on subjective pain reports. Using recent advances in virtual reality technology, we designed a controlled computer simulation (CCS) paradigm to manipulate validation (validation vs. invalidation). Two CCS scripts were created in which an avatar (virtual human) either validated or invalidated participants’ reports about their experience with experimentally induced thermal stimuli. Before engaging in the CCS interaction, participants read a description of the thermal stimulation procedure that was formulated in either technical or plain language. We hypothesized that higher pain intensity and pain unpleasantness would be reported in the invalidation compared to the validation group, and in the technical language group compared to plain language group. Based on the premise that effects of social contextual factors on pain are largely dependent on threat appraisals of pain (Corley, Cano, Goubert, Vlaeyen, & Wurm, 2016; Karos, Meulders, Goubert, & Vlaeyen, 2018; Vlaeyen et al., 2009) and the assumption that technical language increases threat expectancies (e.g. Boston & Sharpe, 2005), we furthermore expected the effect of validation to be especially pronounced when technical language was used to introduce the thermal stimulus.
