In this paper we advertise a method that is well-known in statistical physics and computer science, but is less known is combinatorics. Roughly speaking this method enables one to transform a counting problem to another one that might be easier to analyze. In computer science this method was introduced by L. Valiant under the name holographic reduction [15], [16], [17], [18]. In statistical physics it was developed by M. Chertkov and V. Chernyak under the name gauge transformation [8], [9]. Wainwright, Jaakola, Willsky had a related idea under the name reparametrization [19], but it is not easy to see the connection. In the different cases the scope was slightly different, L. Valiant used it as a reduction method for computational complexity of counting problems. This line of research was extended in a series of papers of Jin-Yi Cai and his coauthors, see Jin-Yi Cai’s book [2] and the papers [1], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] and references therein. M. Chertkov and V. Chernyak [8], [9] studied the so-called Bethe–approximation through gauge transformations. In this paper we mainly adopt the notations of gauge transformations, but we will give pointers to the other papers too and we also give the alternative names of certain concepts.
This paper is written primarily for combinatorists, so the main objects of this paper will be orientations and subgraphs. From a mathematical point of view this method can be considered as an application of invariant theory to graph theory, but no knowledge of invariant theory is assumed in this paper. Below we collected these applications. In each case we give a theorem for regular graphs and its generalization for non-regular graphs. To keep the arguments simple we will mainly prove the theorems for regular graphs, and then we explain how to modify the arguments to be valid for non-regular graphs. We will also give various examples.
1.1. Applications in graph theoryRecall that a graph is called Eulerian if all degrees are even. It is often assumed in the literature that an Eulerian graph G is also connected too, but in this paper we do not require connectedness. An orientation of an Eulerian graph is called an Eulerian orientation if the in-degree and out-degree is the same at each vertex. Counting Eulerian orientations has triggered considerable interest both in combinatorics, computer science and statistical physics. Probably, the best known result is due to Lieb [12] who determined the asymptotic number of Eulerian orientations of large grid graphs. Welsh [20] observed that for a 4–regular graph the Tutte-polynomial evaluation |TG(0,−2)| is exactly the number of Eulerian orientations since nowhere-zero Z3-flows and Eulerian orientations are in one-to-one correspondence for 4–regular graphs. Mihail and Winkler [13] gave an efficient randomized algorithm to sample and approximately count Eulerian orientations.Our first result will be a new proof of a lower bound on the number of Eulerian orientations due to A. Schrijver. First we give it for non-regular graphs, then for regular graphs.Theorem 1.1 A. Schrijver [14]Let G be a graph on n vertices with degree sequence d1,d2,…,dn, where dk are even for all k. Let ε(G) denote the number of Eulerian orientations of the graph G. Then ε(G)≥∏k=1ndkdk∕22dk∕2.Corollary 1.2 A. Schrijver [14]Let G be a d–regular graph on n vertices, where d is even. Let ε(G) denote the number of Eulerian orientations of the graph G. Then ε(G)≥dd∕22d∕2n.In our proof of Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.2 we will improve on the lower bounds by a multiplicative factor 2. Practically, we will give a formula for the number of Eulerian orientations with only non-negative terms and two main terms corresponding exactly to Schrijver’s lower bound.Next we compare the number of Eulerian orientations with the number of certain subgraphs.Definition 1.3Let G be an Eulerian graph. A graph H is a half-graph of G if it is a spanning subgraph of G, and dH(v)=dG(v)∕2 for all vertex v.Theorem 1.4Let G be an Eulerian graph. Let ε(G) denote the number of Eulerian orientations of the graph G, and let h(G) denote the number of half-graphs of G. Then ε(G)≥h(G). Equality holds if and only if G is bipartite.Corollary 1.5Let G be a (2k)–regular graph. Then it has at least as many Eulerian orientations as k–regular subgraphs. Equality holds if and only if G is bipartite.Next we study random orientations.Theorem 1.6Let G be a connected 3–regular graph on n vertices. Let us choose an orientation O of G uniformly at random, and let n+(O) be the number of vertices with out-degree 3, and let n−(O) be the number of vertices with in-degree 3. Then the probability that n+(O)−n−(O)=k is exactly nn∕2−2k2n−1.
1.2. Subgraph counting polynomialThe main object that we will study in this paper is the following multivariate graph polynomial. We will call it the subgraph counting polynomial. First we introduce it for regular graphs, and then for non-regular graphs.Definition 1.7Let G be a d–regular graph. Then the subgraph counting polynomial of G is defined as FG(x0,x1,…,xd)=∑A⊆E(G)∏v∈V(G)xdA(v),where dA(v) is the degree of the vertex v in the subgraph (V,A).Example 1.8FK4(x0,x1,x2,x3)=x04+6x02x12+3x14+12x0x12x2+12x12x22+4x0x23+3x24+4x13x3+12x1x22x3+6x22x32+x34.This polynomial naturally encodes certain counting problems. For instance, FG(0,1,0,…,0) simply counts the number of perfect matchings of the graph G. Invariant theory comes into the picture by the observation that FG(x0,…,xd) is invariant under some group actions. For instance, FG(0,0,1,0,0)=FG32,0,−12,0,32 for any 4–regular graph G.The reason why we first introduced the subgraph counting polynomial of a regular graph G is that for non-regular graphs the useful generalization is not the natural one. The natural one would be to keep the definition with d being the maximum degree. The useful or correct generalization is to first introduce dv+1 variables for each vertex v, namely, x0v,x1v,…,xdvv and we denote by x̲ the collection of all variables xkv for all v and k. Then we can define the multi-affine polynomial FG(x̲)=∑A⊆E(G)∏v∈V(G)xdA(v)v,where dA(v) is the degree of the vertex v in the subgraph (V,A).
1.3. Organization of the paperThis paper is organized as follows. In the next section we review the concept of normal factor graph and gauge transformation. Then in Section 3 we specialize the partition function of a normal factor graph to get the above defined subgraph counting polynomial. Then in Section 4 we show how to express a summation to orientations by the subgraph counting polynomial. Utilizing this new observation we prove Theorem 1.1, Corollary 1.2, Theorem 1.4 and Corollary 1.5 in Section 5.
