The recent years have witnessed the ever growing cyber threats against individuals, organizations, and governments. Previously, most countermeasures against these cyber threats are mainly about developing technical tools such as firewalls, intrusion detection systems, and anti-virus software. However, without well-trained and well-experienced cyber security experts who can efficiently utilize these tools, such technology-oriented approach is known to be limited as cyber attacks are getting more complicated and adversaries attempt to avoid existing defense perimeters during recent years [1], [2]. For that reason, cultivating those experts or professionals in IT security area becomes more important than ever in order to cope with the emerging cyber incidents and related crisis. It is well-known that Cyber Defense eXercise (CDX) is a very useful method to educate and train cyber defense workforce for securing various organizations in both private and public sectors, and the demand for CDX is high as of today [3], [4], [5], [6], [7].
In most cases, each of the participants in such CDX is either in the red team, which is in charge of launching cyber attacks over a controlled exercise environment such as a closed industrial control system for a virtual nuclear power plant, or in the blue team, which is in charge of protecting the environment against the cyber attacks by the red team members. Generally, the members of the red team are trainers (event organizers with expert knowledge and experience on the state-of-art cyber offense and defense), and the members of the blue team are trainees who are less likely to have expert knowledge on cyber security and experience in cyber defense and wish to learn necessary cyber defensive skills for the organizations they are working for [5]. Due to the high demand on CDX, it is getting harder to employ sufficient number of experts for the red team, especially when organizing a large scale CDX.
In order to meet the ever growing demand for the CDXs, the modern CDX platform has departed from a centralized structure to a more decentralized structure, in which various edge computing concepts are used to mitigate the overhead caused by the massive blue team members [5]. Still, the opportunities to participate proper CDX in a timely manner can hardly catch up the ever growing demand as the number of qualified trainers who are the member of red teams and are with cyber attack expert knowledge and experience. Thus, it is of great urgency to develop a new approach which can prepare qualified cyber defense trainers in a timely manner to meet the demand. However, preparing sufficient number of cyber security experts for these CDXs will take long time as well as cost is high too, and thus, no short-term solution is in sight. In this paper, we rather tackle this problem by proposing an intelligent recommendation system for cyber offense strategy for the red team members on edge computing powered massive CDX platform so that any personal even with insufficient level of cyber attack/defense expert knowledge/experience can be an effective red team member.
In the literature, attack graphs are widely used to represent the abstracted network topology with a directed acyclic graph; each route in an attack graph represents a potential route that an attacker can use to reach a given host (node) or the root of the system also known as attack path. Generally speaking, during the course of creating an attack graph, each network state is abstracted into a single vertex, and an edge from one node to another node represents an attack action to make a progress in cyber attack. Fig. 1 portrays an attack graph of only a 7-machine subnet with seven unique exploits. The concept of attack graph was initially introduced by Swiler et al. [8]. In many recent studies, attack graphs are used to illustrate the ways for an adversary to exploit system vulnerabilities and get into the system in various literature [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22].
Meanwhile, Chen et al. [23] defines attack path as routes that specify scenarios that result in compromising organization values in terms of how an attacker gain access to the victim computer, which vulnerability on which software on which computer can be taken advantage by attackers and how technical damages can impact organization values. During recent years, various attack path computation problems in attack graph models have been investigated in the literature under various assumptions and circumstances [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33]. However, none of these researches have investigated an attack path computation problem for the red team in the context of CDX.Download : Download high-res image (159KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Example of a Simple Attack Graph.
In the real world, system administrators, who have the full knowledge of the network and system infrastructure, are likely to have the full idea on the attack graph. Therefore, many of the existing literature studied how to use such attack graphs to understand where their system’s weaknesses lie and to help decide which security measures will be effective to deploy. Unlike this common circumstance, in CDX, the full version of the attack graphs for the target system is given to the red team only for the training purpose and the members of the blue team do not have an access on this. This situation is very unique in contrast to the existing attack path computation problems in the literature, and thus none of the existing studies are useful to identify the best attack strategy for the red team members for an advanced CDX. That is, in all of the related studies, the defense team always have the full knowledge of their system and the offense team tends to have none or partial knowledge of the target system, which is completely opposite to the CDX situation of our interest.
To fill this gap, in this paper, we introduce an intelligent recommendation algorithm for the red team members to launch the proper offense actions corresponding to the responses from the members of blue team in CDX. In each round, our algorithm assumes the best possible defense actions taken by the blue team based on the expected capacity and the full knowledge on the attack graph and suggest the best course of attack actions for the red team given the attack capacity limit. In practice, our algorithm can be easily integrated into any CDX to improve the performance and uniformity of red team even though the members of the red team are not domain expert.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces important notations and definitions, including the problem of our main interest, the Victory Subgraph Computation Problem (ViSCP). Then, we introduce a simple coloring algorithm for a simplest case of ViSCP in Section 3, and how to use the output of this algorithm to provide a strategy for the red team under limited situations. In Section 4, we discuss how to reduce the complexity of attack graph for the problem of our interest, and in Section 5, we study how to use our results from Section 3 and Section 4 to deal with more general case of ViSCP and corresponding general strategies for the red team members. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section 6.
