During the past few years, electroencephalogram (EEG) based brain computer interface (BCI) has been widely investigated with different kinds of evoked potentials. This technology is being used as a medium for communication for people affected with severe cerebral palsy, head trauma, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral scleroses (ALS) [1]. It is a non-invasive technique; the brain signals are acquired using electrodes placed on the scalp of the subject. The typical pattern recognition based BCI system constitutes data acquisition, signal processing and classification. The signal processing and classification is necessary to translate the hidden information in signals into commands for communication/control application. In the past, various electrophysiological signals such as steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEP), slow cortical potentials, P300 evoked potentials and μ and β rhythms have been considered for BCI applications [2]. SSVEP are brain signals, a response of fundamental frequency and its harmonics to frequency of repetitive visual stimuli. Herrmann, studied the effect of flickering lights stimuli frequency 1–100 Hz and has observed resonance at frequencies 10, 20, 40 and 80 Hz. The results matched with the study of cat visual cortex and revealed that SSVEP’s were caused due to resonance in the visual cortex [3]. Russo et al. in their study have shown that the major sources of SSVEP are located in the primary visual cortex (V1) and in the MT/V5 area [4].
The SSVEP based BCI is preferred due to (i) easy setup of the instruments, (ii) minimum training requirement for the subjects, and (iii) high information transfer rate (ITR) [5]. The visual stimuli play an important role in SSVEP based BCI systems. A variety of stimuli of different colors, shapes and frequency have been studied in the past [2]. Kelly et al. studied 4 × 4 checkerboard pattern reversal, flickering at a rate of 17 Hz and 20 Hz, and suggested more focus on the improvement in stimulus generation rather than developing sophisticated feature extraction methods [6]. Liu et al. have studied P300 with visual odd ball based stimuli by changing one of the properties of the stimulus such as color, zoom in/out, sharpening translational motion and swinging motion between 300 and 900 in clock wise and counter clock wise [7]. Yan et al. have proposed new stimuli based on swing, angular rotation, spiral and radial contraction -expansion for SSMVEP based BCI systems. It is observed that the spiral type stimuli achieved the highest accuracy [8]. Embrandiri et al. have analyzed stimuli of various shapes and color and their combinations at frequency of 12 Hz. The signal to noise ratio have been computed. The authors claimed the response of SSVEP is a subject specific [9].
Recent studies on SSVEP based BCI have attempted to design effective stimuli based on the mapping between the images formed on the retinal surface to the neurons in the visual cortex known as retinotopic mapping [10]. Vanegas et al. have studied the geometry of the V1 area of the visual cortex and the retinotopic organization to design an effective stimulus. In this, circular stimulus divided into eight octants, which flickers such that there is constructive interference between the oppositely facing regions of visual cortex, thereby boosting the SSVEP response [11]. Maye et al. designed a single large clock faced shape flicker (15 Hz, visual angle of 27°) stimulus, different targets are created at different spatial areas to generate different areas of the retina with respect to the central area (called fovea). Each spatially separated target resulted in a different spatial distribution of the SSVEP on scalp [12]. Zhang et al. attempted to design an EEG eye tracking synchronous data recording system, to detect failed trials from the eye tracking feedback. The topographic and retinotopic maps are used to analyze the SSVEP and suggestions have been made for optimal parameters for effective stimuli design [13].
Visual adaptation refers to the decrease in the response of the neurons in the visual cortex to a constant visual stimulation [14,15] to study SSVEP [16,17]. In order to reduce the effect of adaptation on the SSVEP response, researchers attempted to design motion-based stimulus, such that the stimuli image on the retina changes with time. The researchers attempted expansion/contraction type rings [18], pattern reversal stimuli [19] to study the effect of adaptation on SSVEP. Therefore, it is clear no extensive analysis on rotating stimuli for SSVEP based BCI systems with varying speed and direction has been conducted in the past.
Therefore, authors attempted on a rotating stimulus, for time varying image on the retina, to stimulate different regions of the retina with respect to the fovea due to the retinotopic organization, and to overcome the visual adaption of the visual system to improve SSVEP response.
Researchers attempted the identification of visual stimuli with different channels. Chubuda et al achieved an average accuracy of 96 ± 4 % accuracy and a information transfer rate (ITR) of 47 ± 5 bit/min for 7 letter speller with eight electrode EEG [20]. Lin et al. used 40 flashing stimuli frequencies, and have achieved a maximum average ITR of accuracy of 92 ±7.5% and a maximum ITR of 136.6 ±19.8 bit/min for nine electrode EEG data [21]. Another recent study on phase based SSVEP showed a high ITR of 82.7 bit/min with a 7 stimuli protocol using nine EEG electrodes [22].In this work, authors attempt to find optimum number of channels, suitable stimuli and frequency recognition technique to improve the SSVEP based BCI performance.
Signal to noise ratio (SNR) is one of the parameters, to determine the characteristics of the acquired signal. Yijun et al. used SNR for analyzing high frequency SSVEP responses and selected optimal channel based on spatial SNR ratio mapping of multichannel EEG to contrast the SNR of SSVEP in different frequency bands [23]. Friman et al. have presented an analysis on distribution of SSVEP response at different scalp locations. Many strategies of extracting information from multiple channels have been analyzed. It is observed that the minimum energy method is the best among all [24]. In addition to SNR analysis, discrimination of signals is one of the important tasks in BCI system and researchers have attempted various algorithms. The frequency recognition based algorithms, namely power spectral density analysis (PSDA) and canonical correlation analysis (CCA) have been widely attempted to discriminate the signal [[25], [26], [27]].
In this paper, the authors have attempted to study on 360° rotating flickering stimulus in clockwise direction and counter clockwise direction at different speed/phase of rotation at frequencies of 3, 7.5 and 10 Hz. The authors have considered 6 different stimuli. The stimuli have been generated using the conventional frame-based approach. The SNR analysis has been used to evaluate the performance of each stimulus independently. In addition, PSDA and CCA have been used to perform classification along with information transfer rate (ITR) for varying channel combinations to identify the optimal number of channels for discrimination of signals.
