The area of mobile computer-supported collaborative learning (mCSCL) has been developed over the past few decades by leveraging knowledge from the well-established field of CSCL, bringing new tools, methods, and ideas used with mobile technology into the classroom environment. Among the most important ideas that mCSCL borrows from CSCL are the design and implementation of mobile collaborative activities, and the advantages of social interaction while working on a joint task, which combined with the advantages of mobility, support interaction, and enhance learning outcomes (Alvarez, Alarcon, & Nussbaum, 2011; Hall, 2014; Järvelä, Kirschner, Panadero, Malmberg, Phielix, Jaspers et al., 2014; Looi & Wong, 2018; Szewkis, Nussbaum, Rosen, Abalos, Denardin, Caballero et al., 2011). In mCSCL, mobile technology allows students to move freely around the classroom (Zurita & Nussbaum, 2007), and offers opportunities for creating friendly, creative, and pleasant learning environments, even for younger students (Papadakis, Kalogiannakis, & Zaranis, 2016).
The study presented in this paper was contextualized within the SCOLLAm project, a three-year mobile learning project which explores how mobile learning activities are designed and seamlessly integrated into everyday classrooms, with no standard fixed technological infrastructure apart from a computer and a projector, and no advanced skills in teaching with digital technologies on behalf of the teachers. During the SCOLLAm project, digital learning materials for several subjects in early primary school have been co-designed in collaboration with the teachers so that the standard curriculum is supplemented with novel learning tools, rather than being merely changed to fit novel technologies. This project was based on the educational premise that students need to acquire knowledge and skills in basic concepts in mathematics as a foundation for the development of mathematic literacy, which will help students deal with problems in real-life situations (Attard, 2017; Cheung & Slavin, 2013; Haara, Bolstad, & Jenssen, 2017).
Although the advantages of integrating technology in teaching and learning of mathematics are particularly evident in the case of automation of the drill and practice method (Papadakis et al., 2016), numerous research studies have explored the use of CSCL activities (Dillenbourg, 1999) for learning with mobile devices in primary schools (Looi & Wong, 2018) and in young learners' informal learning spaces (Looi, Lim, Pang, Lay, Koh, Seow et al., 2016). These studies examined the effects of mCSCL on students' learning of mathematics concepts, such as fractions (Boticki, Looi, & Wong, 2010, 2011), practicing addition, subtraction, and multiplication (Zurita & Nussbaum, 2007), or learning geometry using the virtual tangram puzzle or similar game-based approaches (Chiu-Pin, Shao, & Lung-Hsiang, 2011; Delić, Domančić, Vujević, Drljević, & Botički, 2014).
In this study, a process-oriented approach was used that emphasized a level of pre-structuring of group interactions in mCSCL activities. By leveraging the potential of synchronous CSCL in creating a dynamic classroom environment in early primary school, this study explored how different interaction designs of mCSCL activities affect the collaboration process and its outcomes. The overarching project methodology was Design Based Research (DBR), where the system and activity designs are adapted throughout a sequence of DBR cycles (Barab & Squire, 2004). A custom mobile learning platform allowed for more flexibility in designing and deploying the design solution for mobile collaborative learning, through the cycles of DBR involving co-design and re-design processes with the teachers. The design of the mCSCL solution evolved from a structured approach using roles and a clear division of work to a less structured solution. In this design, we adopted a systematic approach to designing computer-supported group-based learning that focused on supporting the expected interaction process by varying the degree of the support provided by the technological solution (sometimes referred to as the degree of the process structure; Strijbos, Martens, & Jochems, 2004). Such an approach should contribute to better understanding of how different structures relate to the interaction processes and outcomes in mCSCL.
