Cyberinfrastructure (CI) is everywhere in diverse forms. The growth of new processors and networked computing innovations led the way to a diverse set of applications using machine learning on top of distributed non-traditional hardware. From IoT to extreme scale computing, data and computing has never been as distributed with potential for real-time integration in dynamic data-driven applications.
The new data science era started under these influences making a number of dynamic data-driven applications a possibility. Our lives as well as any field of business and society are continuously transformed by our ability to collect meaningful data in a systematic fashion and turn that into value through translational data science and cyberinfrastructure. The common theme across these applications, mostly composed of artificial intelligence (AI) workloads integrated with traditional scalable computing and data management is their need for integration and their focus on problem solving. Although some key methods and technologies enabled demonstration of standalone applications as examples, these applications require expertise from a large multidisciplinary team in very specialized settings. The usefulness of any application today depends on the effective collaboration not only between humans but between interrelated systems and services in a use-driven architecture to translate the newest advances into impactful solutions. Existing CI provides powerful components that can be utilized as building blocks in solution architectures that can transform science, society and education. However, as depicted in Fig.1, collaboration is needed not just for translational innovation, but also to turn that innovations into impact. The solution integration must apply a rigorous translation process from the beginning for the generated solutions to be useful, usable and used in a sustainable way. Focusing on community collaboration and communication from the beginning of any activity is critical to enabling many translation scenarios on top of CI and expertise including data management, data science, domain science and computing.Download : Download high-res image (260KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Translational Cyberinfrastructure integrated with community programs leads to innovation and impactful solutions.
There are still many challenges for streamlined, scalable, repeatable, responsible, explainable and sustainable translational applications. This paper discusses the lessons learned from an example translational science CI, called WIFIRE [1,2], and describes the methodology, process and technology that enabled effective bridging of science and technology innovations with communities who can benefit from these innovations. WIFIRE is an end-to-end CI for real-time and data-driven simulation, prediction, and visualization of wildﬁre behavior. WIFIRE’s real-time data products and modeling services are routinely accessed by fire research and emergency response communities as well as by the public for situational awareness. In this paper, WIFIRE’s approach to community-integrated innovation, product development and operationalization is summarized. Existing sustainability methods and public/private partnerships as a result of WIFIRE’s translational efforts is also discussed.
WIFIRE: A Translational CI for Community-Driven Wildfire Innovation
Wildland fires and related hazards are increasing globally. In 2018 California had the deadliest and most destructive fire season on record. The 2020 fire season in Australia saw the destruction of 45 million acres, 2,750 homes, and an unprecedented loss of wildlife. A common observation across these large events is that fire behavior is changing to be more destructive, making applied and data-driven fire research time critical. Modeling of the extent and dynamics of such wildfire-related hazards, and their socio-economic and human impacts, is a data-driven discipline with a vibrant multidisciplinary scientific community, driven by the urgent societal need to mitigate the rising frequency and severity of wildfires.
Fire behavior is dependent on weather and other environmental factors that evolve rapidly. Data-driven fire models that integrate remote sensing and multimodal data dynamically can help capture and predict the changes in wildfire behavior. However, data and data-driven fire behavior modeling used operationally can be significantly improved through intelligent integration of modern data and modeling technologies with current techniques for wildland fire risk and fuels management, fire mitigation and response. Unfortunately, such integration of data, modeling needs, and the actual sensitivities of fire behavior is challenging, providing opportunities for new advancements in artificial intelligence techniques to be utilized through smart integration frameworks and cyberinfrastructure. CI that enables cataloging, curating, sharing and discovering data and models, and their scalable execution is potentially the biggest enabler for further progress in data-driven fire science.
The NSF-funded WIFIRE project [1,2] took the first steps to tackle this problem. Originally started under a multi-year National Science Foundation (NSF) grant, WIFIRE successfully created an integrated system for wildfire monitoring, simulation, and response. Today, WIFIRE provides an end-to-end management infrastructure with integrated data collection, knowledge management and modeling, and couples it with a design-thinking approach to enable scientific, municipal and educational use. In particular, the project resulted in:
•A Commons System and RESTful Services to catalog, manage, curate, integrate and serve data and models for fire science in a FAIR manner [3];•Data Science Methods for learning from and assimilating real-time data into fire modelling [4,5];•Workflows for machine learning and fire behavior modeling at scale using existing open source and community-developed software packages [[6], [7], [8], [9]];•Web-based Real-time Data-Driven Fire Modeling Interfaces developed in collaboration with fire science and response communities [10]; and•A Growing Community of fire science, response and education professionals.
The sustained continuation of the research, development and operational efforts for WIFIRE continues within the WIFIRE Lab at UC San Diego with a mission to turn data and computing into a translational utility for advancing fire science. The WIFIRE Lab conducts research and development towards systems, services and tools for artificial intelligence integrated fire science and response. Towards this mission, the WIFIRE Lab aims to create new methods and systems related to intelligent infrastructure for data fusion and knowledge frameworks, artificial intelligence with application to fire science, automated data-driven fire modeling using scalable workflows, and science integration in operational activities. Next, we discuss the translational process the WIFIRE Lab applies from prioritization of research and development towards innovation to product development and operationalization.
