Computer-aided molecular design (CAMD) is a technology that enables the systematic identification of molecular structures that improve the performance of a desired application (Gani and Brignole, 1983; Achenie et al., 2003). CAMD is based mainly on the use of group contribution (GC) models to calculate properties of chemicals, by representing them as a composition of functional groups (Fredenslund et al., 1975; Joback and Reid, 1987; Constantinou and Gani, 1994). Conventionally, GC models can be used to calculate the properties of a pre-specified chemical. In CAMD, properties are employed as performance criteria in a reverse problem formulation which addresses the synthesis, out of a set of functional groups, of a molecular structure that maximizes or minimizes the desired property criteria (Achenie et al., 2003; Austin et al, 2016; Papadopoulos et al., 2018). In this form, CAMD has found numerous applications in the design of solvents that enhance separations and reactive separations, of working fluids that enable efficient heat extraction for power generation in thermodynamic cycles, of components that improve the properties (e.g., solubility, stability at higher temperatures) of formulated products and polymers, to name but a few (Gani, 2004; Ng et al., 2015; Martin et al., 2016; Austin et al., 2016; Papadopoulos et al., 2018). In all existing applications the criteria employed in CAMD include properties that link structural molecular features with thermodynamic, operating or even economic performance of a chemical or material.
While these types of criteria are clearly necessary, the consideration of performance indicators that are associated with broader sustainability measures is equally important. For example, early evaluation of the hazards associated with the toxic release of particular chemicals used in a process could enable their replacement with benign alternatives, hence preventing incidents and minimizing harmful impact to human health and environment. This was realized in early CAMD implementations, where notable efforts were recorded to account for properties that reflect the impact of chemicals on health, safety and the environment. For example, Duvedi and Achenie (1996) proposed a CAMD approach for the design of environmentally benign refrigerants, with ozone depletion potential being among the employed performance criteria. Pistikopoulos and Stefanis (1998) and Buxton et al. (1999) proposed an approach for integrated solvent and process design considering process-related environmental impacts that result from considering different solvents and process designs. Indicators for the solvents themselves included ozone depletion potential and toxicity using GC models. Hostrup et al. (1999) further proposed a CAMD approach where flash point was used as a constraint in order to design a safer chemical for a particular separation. Marcoulaki et al. (2000) proposed the use of toxicity as an additional performance criterion to identify alternative separation solvents with lower health impacts. Kim and Diwekar (2002a) further proposed a systematic approach for integrated solvent and process design under uncertainty considering optimization of solvent recovery, process flexibility and reduction of environmental impacts. The latter pertain to minimization of solvent losses to the environment and of health impacts represented through fathead minnow lethal concentration and oral rat lethal dose (LC50 and LD50). The authors noted that additional environmental impact indicators should be considered like global warming, ozone depletion, photochemical oxidant formation etc., but the lack of GC models prohibits their use. A multi-objective Simulated Annealing algorithm was used, which is suitable for this type of problems as environmental and process performance may exhibit trade-offs. This work was extended by Xu and Diwekar (2007) who proposed a Multi Objective Efficient Genetic Algorithm (MOEGA) and added the process reboiler energy consumption and bioconcentration factor (BCF) as an environmental impact in the previous objective functions. Uncertainties in LC50, LD50 and BCF were considered, while BCF was calculated for seven solvent candidates.
While there are several approaches reported in published literature using similar performance criteria and constraints, in recent years efforts have been reported to account for more extensive indices such as environmental, health and safety hazard assessment (EHS) and life cycle values. The majority of recent studies include EHS due to the availability of estimation methods that can be easily incorporated into the automated CAMD procedure (Chang et al., 2018; Neoh et al., 2019; Ooi et al., 2017; Vanderveen et al., 2015). It is more challenging to include life cycle analysis (LCA) constraints due to the lack of models consistent with the CAMD framework for estimating cradle-to-gate LCA impacts for the production of molecules; therefore the number of works that include LCA constraints in CAMD is very limited. For instance, Mehrkesh and Karunanithi (2014) only included downstream impacts of LCA related to the emissions associated with the release of the chemicals during their production and use. A more comprehensive sustainability framework was proposed by Heintz et al. (2014) and Weis and Visco (2010) who integrated several sustainability indicators such as environmental waste, environmental impacts, heath, safety and single LCA score calculated by quantitative - structure property relationships (QSPRs) created on the basis of 46 frequently used solvents.
Almost all work reported to date considering sustainability-related performance of chemicals during CAMD is based on indices such as toxicity, flammability, emissions and so forth. Systematic sustainability assessment requires, however, a holistic view of the chemical life-cycle, considering at a minimum all the upstream processes employed for chemical production together with the potential hazards associated with its use. This calls for the use of much more comprehensive performance indices including resource depletion and requirements, energy demands, emissions and so forth, to achieve a reliable differentiation over a certain, typically large, number of molecules. To date, such an approach has been reported only by Papadopoulos et al. (2016) and Papadokonstantakis et al. (2015) who considered the cradle-to-gate LCA of chemicals together with EHS impact end-points for the selection of novel and conventional solvents exhibiting vapour-liquid phase-changes in CO2 capture systems. Papadopoulos et al. (2016) employed this framework as a post-design sustainability analysis step of a set of candidate solvents designed using thermodynamic criteria in the course of CAMD. Papadokonstantakis et al. (2015) further analyzed the gate-to-gate sustainability performance of few solvents considering process modifications. The results obtained from these works were useful in that novel CO2 capture solvents were identified, and the sustainability performance of both conventional and novel solvents was assessed within an inclusive framework for the first time.
However, by not considering sustainability criteria in the initial design of the set of solvents, the candidates identified may be limited to low sustainability performance. On the other hand, solvents that may be of reduced performance in respect of few thermodynamic or other properties but of improved sustainability may be prematurely excluded. It would therefore be desirable to use sustainability indicators during solvent design in CAMD and to identify potential solvents that are both inherently suitable for CO2 capture and of improved sustainability performance. The latter is important because the amine-based solvents used in CO2 capture may have detrimental sustainability effects. For example, the release to the environment of amine degradation products is associated with increased terrestrial ecotoxicity (Veltman et al., 2010) and health concerns, as products such as nitrosamines are known to be carcinogenic (Gjernes et at al., 2013; Badr et al., 2017). Although it is clear that better trade-offs between sustainability and technical performance can be achieved by embedding sustainability in the earliest stages of CAMD, the extent of the improvements that can be achieved has never been quantified.
In order to consider sustainability indices simultaneously with the other constraints during CAMD, all indices need to be calculated on-line. Previously, Papadopoulos et al. (2016) predicted such indices off-line for a finite set of molecular options designed in CAMD, with missing data obtained from databases or predicted by structure-specific models. On-line implementations require availability of empirical and analytical predictive models for all the molecular structures and properties involved in the calculation of the indices, as no data gaps can be allowed. The estimation of molecular properties for the commonly used EHS indices such as acute toxicity, bioconcentration, or permissible exposure limit is possible by means of GC methods and QSPR models with acceptable level of certainty (10–20% of error). However, the reliability of such methods is often limited in terms of the applicability domain of the model, i.e., the specific chemical space on which the model has been developed and for which predictions for the new compounds are applicable (Combes, 2012).
In this work we integrate a holistic sustainability assessment framework consisting of both LCA and EHS indicators. To this end, previously developed LCA, short-cut FineChem models (Wernet et al., 2009), are integrated into CAMD. This allows a rapid, on-line calculation of the cradle-to-gate impact of solvent production based on the structure of the molecule, with respect to life cycle impact assessment metrics such as cumulative energy demand (CED), global warming potential (GWP) and eco-indicator EI99 score. Additionally, a comprehensive EHS hazard assessment framework is enhanced by a similarity method based on a data mining algorithm, namely local lazy learning (LLL) (Chen, 2014), to estimate EHS-relevant properties where GC methods are not available and/or perform worse than the similarity method. This is tested in this work for the first time by carrying out a detailed comparison of CAMD results with and without the integration of the sustainability framework. Furthermore, the employed test-case addresses a new class of solvents for CO2 capture, the so-called phase-change solvents (Jessop et al., 2005; Agar et al., 2008). Phase-change solvents are receiving increased attention in post-combustion CO2 capture as they are able to reduce the high regeneration energy requirements of conventional solvents by up to 50%, providing significant incentives for their wider deployment. Existing works have explored such solvent options using trial-and-error approaches (Vanderveen et al., 2015; Papadopoulos at al., 2019), which limit the potential for identification of highly performing options. With growing interest in phase-change solvents (Bui et al., 2018; Papadopoulos et al., 2019), it is timely to investigate their design and selection via CAMD, including the consideration of environmental, health and safety performance.
