Inflammation has been reported to happen via multiple mechanisms and by varying mediators resulting in a wide variety of deleterious effects including necrosis, degeneration and different types of exudation (Medzhitov, 2008). However, analgesic drugs are used to manage the pain, inflammation and categorized as opioids (morphine, fentanyl), NSAIDs and some newer approaches (gabapentin, carbamazepine, ketamine). Besides, glucocorticoids exert response by binding with receptors resulting in increased transcription of anti-inflammatory proteins (e.g., IL-1 antagonist) along with inhibition of activated transcription factors (e.g., NF-κB) (Barnes, 1998). NSAIDs also inhibit cyclooxygenase enzymes (COX-1 and COX-2) which are responsible for the biosynthesis of various inflammatory mediators. Though various NSAIDs are commercially available, they exhibit few major side effects including GI ulceration, liver toxicity, kidney disease etc. after prolonged uses (Sostres et al., 2010). Thus, new phytochemicals may be investigated to establish better alternatives (Liu, 2007).
Diarrhea is a familiar disease associated with an increased incidence of liquid defecation along with abdominal pain (Tadesse et al., 2014). It is the leading cause of malnutrition and mortality, particularly in poor countries (Zhao et al., 2018). Diarrhea is another disease leading to more than 5,000,000 child deaths per year (Agbor et al., 2014) although simple treatments like oral saline and antibiotics are available to manage diarrhea. Plant extracts have been reported to deliver antidiarrheal properties through stimulation of water reabsorption, decreasing electrolyte loss and reducing gastrointestinal peristalsis (Agbor et al., 2004, Shifah et al., 2020)
Antioxidants are molecules that can quench reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Hosaka et al., 2005). In addition, plant extracts also have been identified to display prominent antioxidant activities which are of special importance in inflammation, atherosclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, parkinsonism, hypertension, psychological disordesr and diabetes mellitus (Digiesi et al., 2001, Mittler, 2002, Joseph et al., 2015). Infectious diseases are of another class of clinical conditions causing 25% of the hospital and 20% of the total deaths every year (Thabit et al., 2015). Bioactive phytoconstituents also have been found to have auspicious roles against these infections (Rios, 2005, Heinrich et al., 2004). Though a lot of antimicrobial agents are available commercially, increased resistance and associated mortality are forcing the researchers to discover new drugs continuously (Roberts et al., 2010). Besides, increased healthcare cost and mortality rate are forcing researchers to discover newer antimicrobials with fewer side effects to reduce the death rate (Roberts et al., 2009).
Due to the diverse pharmacological roles, medicinal plants have been appeared as potential sources of life-saving therapeutic agents worldwide. In line with this, Millettia peguensis has been taken for this study and evaluation was done for the analgesic, antidiarrheal, antioxidant, cytotoxic, thrombolytic and antimicrobial activity from the leaves. However, several phytoconstituents were isolated, most notably flavonoids including pongamol, lanceolatin-B, kanjone, milletenone, ovaliflavanone-A, ovalitenone, pongaglabol and other bioactive phytoconstituents (Ganapaty et al., 1998) and as the extended study an in silico study was done to get an overall idea of the binding interaction. The observations have been reported here.
Computational biology is reflecting a mammoth role as enormous data can be generated and validated by molecular and experimental biologists nowadays through this approach. To establish and investigate drug designing of a newer molecule, execution of computer-aided drug discovery (CADD) techniques and molecular docking has been proven as time-efficient as in silico process. An efficacious molecular docking should possess the ability to identify the native ligand pose with the binding site of the three-dimensional protein structure along with physicochemical interactions (Guedes et al., 2014).
Millettia is a genus of legume in the Fabaceae family. This genus has about 150 species, which are abundant in the tropical and subtropical regions of the world (Manikandan et al., 2017). Millettia peguensis is commonly called Moulmein Rosewood (Packiyalakshmi et al., 2017b) and known as Tuma found in Bangladesh which is native to lower Burma and Siam, but cultivated in Burma, India and Pakistan too. It is planted for ornamental purposes, and showed eye-catching beauty during full bloom. This blooms with racemes of mauve pea-like flowers along with pinnate leaves and oval-shaped leaflets. From Millettia peguensis several phytoconstituents were isolated, most notably flavonoids including pongamol, lanceolatin-B, kanjone, milletenone, ovaliflavanone-A, ovalitenone, pongaglabol and other bioactive phytoconstituents (Ganapaty et al., 1998). In addition, pongamol has been reported to have larvicidal activity against Aedesaegypti (Narkhede et al., 2016) and pongaglabol for antioxidant activity (Rao et al., 2020); lanceolatin - B has shown antibacterial and anti-inflammatory activity (Rao et al., 2020), whereas pongaglabol has shown antiulcer activity (Ahmad et al., 1999, Huo et al., 2015). Millettia peguensis is reported with other versatile phytochemicals too in a different report including 9-methylheptadecane, eicosane, heneicosane, dodecyl hexyl ester, 2- bromododecane and other phytoconstituents (Ganapaty et al., 1998, Packiyalakshmi et al., 2017). Moreover, the genus of Millettia plants has shown the potentiality to work as insecticidal and pesticide agents along with antimalarial and antioxidant candidates (Abiy et al., 2003). This study was conducted to evaluate the analgesic, antidiarrheal, antioxidant, cytotoxic, thrombolytic and antimicrobial activity of the leaves extract of M. peguensis by biological and computational approaches.
