In general, a brain tumor is a collection of abnormal brain cells [1]. The uncontrollable division of abnormal cells can increase the intracranial pressure and thus damage the normal brain tissues [1]. Since the brain is one of the most vital organs [1], brain tumors that can damage normal brain tissues are among the most dangerous diseases. It has been reported that brain tumors result in 3.24 deaths per 100,000 persons on average [2]. To improve the survival rate of patients, brain tumors need to be accurately detected at an early stage. Generally, brain MRI images are analyzed manually in most hospitals. However, radiologists must analyze thousands of images per day, and such tedious reading work can lead to misdiagnoses [3]. As a result, manual diagnosis is inefficient and inaccurate [4]. In fact, normal MRI slices occupy the majority of the brain images. Thus, an automatic system that labels the 2D MRI slices with “normal” and “abnormal” can improve the efficiency and accuracy of the brain tumor diagnosis process since radiologists need only to be concerned with abnormal slices.
To improve the performance of the brain tumor diagnosis process, numerous automatic systems based on machine learning methods have been proposed [[5], [6], [7], [8]]. In 2016, Subashini et al. developed an automatic brain tumor grading system. Shape, intensity and texture features were firstly extracted from 200 brain MRI images; then, a support vector machine (SVM) was adopted as the classification model, and this study reported an accuracy of 91% [1]. In the same year, Yang et al. developed an automatic brain tumor screening system. Wavelet-energy features were firstly extracted from 90 T2-weighted brain MRI images; and then biogeography-based optimization was combined with an SVM to train the classifier; this method can detect abnormal brain MRI images with excellent performance [5]. In 2017, Gupta et al. proposed a non-invasive computer-aided diagnosis system for brain tumors. Textural and shape features were extracted from 1100 brain MRI images, and an SVM was applied to construct the classifier. More than 98% accuracy was reported in this research [6]. In 2018, Mohsen et al. proposed an automatic system to classify 66 brain MRI images into 4 categories, namely, normal, glioblastoma, sarcoma and metastatic bronchogenic carcinoma tumors. Fuzzy C-means (FCM) was firstly utilized to segment the brain regions [7], and then a discrete wavelet transformation (DWT) and principal component analysis (PCA) were implemented for feature extraction and reduction, respectively. Finally, a deep neural network was applied for classification; the accuracy of this system reached 96.97% [8]. Although automatic brain tumor diagnosis systems based on traditional machine learning methods can achieve excellent performance on test samples, these systems rely on manual feature extraction, and the generalization of these systems is not ideal [8]. Over the past decade, deep learning technologies have been widely researched. Compared with traditional machine learning methods, deep learning technologies are more efficient because deep learning technologies can automatically extract features. Moreover, numerous studies indicate that the generalization of deep learning technologies is more excellent than machine learning methods [9]. To further improve the performance of the brain tumor diagnosis process, numerous automatic systems based on deep learning technologies have been proposed for efficient brain tumor detection. In 2019, Talo et al. proposed an automatic system to detect brain abnormalities. First, data augmentation techniques, including flipping and rotation, were applied to enlarge the dataset; then, a ResNet-34 was utilized to train the classifier. The recognition rate of this model reached 100% on 613 brain MRI images [3]. In the same year, Anaraki et al. developed an automatic system for glioma grading. 1600 original brain images were employed in this system, and a convolutional neural network combined with a generic algorithm was applied to construct a classifier; the accuracy of the proposed system reached 94.2% [10]. In addition, Han et al. proposed a conditional PGGAN-based data augmentation in 2019 to improve the performance of the brain metastases detection task, and the results indicated that this data augmentation technique can boost the diagnostic sensitivity by 10% [11].
To some extent, existing systems based on deep learning technologies can contribute to improving the efficiency of the brain tumor diagnosis process. However, some limitations remain. (1) Due to the expensive labelling cost and lack of brain MRI images, small databases are employed in most current systems. Generally, no more than 5000 original MRI images are employed in most current systems; thus, the generalization of these systems is not ideal. (2) Most current systems ignore the structural characteristics of the brain and regard the task of brain tumor diagnosis as just a simple pattern recognition application. In fact, a normal brain image is approximately bilaterally symmetric, and this characteristic of the brain can contribute to detecting brain abnormalities.
To overcome the drawbacks of current systems, an automatic computer-aided diagnosis system that can classify the brain images into two categories, namely, normal and abnormal, is proposed. The main contributions of the proposed system are as follows:
(1)A large database consisting of more than 10,000 brain MRI images is employed to construct a classifier for the first time. Therefore, the experimental results of the proposed system are convincing, and the generalization of the proposed system is excellent.(2)Inspired by the symmetrical structure of brain MRI images, a DFM block is proposed to magnify the tumor characteristics and thus improve the performance of deep neural networks.(3)To generate an adaptive response for each feature map, the DFM blocks are combined with SE blocks to form a DFNN that can further improve the performance of the brain tumor diagnosis process.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces an automatic image rectification method and the proposed DFNN in detail. Section 3 describes the experimental results. Finally, the conclusions and a discussion of future work are presented in Section 4.
