During the last years, the continuous advancements in Information and Communications Technology (ICT) have positive impact on human daily life, and many improvements in different fields, like economy, society, medicine and education, have been noticed (Jeno, Vandvik, Eliassen, & Grytnes, 2019). Especially in the field of education, schools, universities and educational organizations for lifelong learning tend to use technological advances in order to facilitate the instructional process and improve learning outcomes (Crompton & Burke, 2018). Such technological advances include the development of educational web-based environments and mobile applications, and the utilization of personal computers and mobile devices as learning tool. Nowadays, mobile devices, such as smartphones or tablets, have intruded our everyday life surpassing the use of personal computers (Chen, 2018). In particular, the global mobile population has amounted to 3.7 billion unique users, whereas the mobile internet traffic as share of total global online traffic in 2018 is 48.2%.1 People of all ages, and especially young people, tend to invest a bid deal of their personal time using their smartphones (Chen, 2018). This fact is accentuated by the capability of using smartphones without place and time barriers and due to their usability.
The proliferation of the smartphones leads to the exponential development of mobile applications, being mainly targeted to the entertainment (Pimmer, Mateescu, & Grohbiel, 2016; Crompton & Burke, 2018). Young people invest a great deal of their personal time using their smartphones and playing electronic games. Given that electronic games play such a prominent role in young people's lives, researchers and educators hope to exploit the intrinsic motivation that students show towards electronic games that contain a summary of the topic of the lesson and objectives, to make learning more fun and enjoyable. The incorporation of mobile learning into gaming has been gradually increasing in an educational context (Hakak et al., 2019). The development of mobile educational games is known with the term “Mobile Game-Based Learning” (MGBL), which amalgamates mobile learning (m-learning), i.e. education through applications in mobile phones (Chung, Hwang, & Lai, 2019), and game-based learning. MGBL refers to the use of games embodying educational value or various software applications using gaming for educational purposes through mobile devices. The idea of playing a mobile game assumes that the player is engaging in that activity by choice, but not solely for leisure pursuits; it can also include the desire to learn a skill, connect with other gamers (social interaction), and spend time in a chosen assessment unit (Nikou & Economides, 2018). According to the related scientific literature, MGBL can provide academic benefits, but it has not been used extensively in higher education settings (Anikina & Yakimenko, 2015; Roy & Zaman, 2018; Lamb, Annett, Firestone, & Etopio, 2018).
Towards promoting a student-centric learning experience, personalization techniques and intelligent methods are employed in digital learning environments, including MGBL ones (Roy & Zaman, 2018). The learning needs of students should be taken into consideration by tutoring systems in order to help them advance their knowledge level, achieve their learning outcomes and have a pleasant and effective learning experience. In the pertinent scientific literature, tutoring systems mainly focus on the adaptive presentation of the learning material and navigation in the learning environment (Lai & Bower, 2019). However, the delivery of dynamic advice tailored to learners' misconceptions during the assessment process (Nikou & Economides, 2018), and personalized recommendation of peers for collaboration (Chen & Kuo, 2019) are essential components for enriching individualized learning environments with the intention of improving the students' learning outcomes. Despite the pedagogical affordance of these personalization techniques, they have not been applied yet extensively in the field of MGBL in higher education (Papadakis, Kalogiannakis, & Zaranis, 2018). Thus, there is scope for a lot of improvement to this direction.
In view of the above, the research questions emerged by the ongoing bibliography and answered in this paper are the following:RQ1Does personalized mobile game-based learning foster student learning in higher education?RQ2Does the incorporation of personalized cognitive advice in MGBL improve higher education students' learning outcomes?RQ3Does personalized group recommendation enhance collaborative learning in MGBL environments for higher education students?
In order to address the aforementioned research questions, this paper investigates whether and how mobile game-based learning can improve and enrich the knowledge assessment, including knowledge acquisition through modern game-based activities, in universities, colleges and educational institutes. In particular, it reports the MGBL potentials for helping students to achieve their learning goals and highlights its role in higher education settings regarding learners' effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction. Furthermore, this paper tackles the pedagogical potential of the development of assessment units which do not solely focus on the students' grade ranking, but also on the diagnosis of learners' misconceptions and the delivery of personalized advice reporting their strengths and weaknesses. In computer supported collaborative learning environments, the group formation is a critical task; thus, this work examines how the group recommendation towards constructing adequate groups can lead to better peer interaction, improve student engagement and boost students' learning outcomes though effective collaboration.
As a testbed for our research, we have designed and implemented Quiz Time!, namely a mobile game-based learning application for assessing the learners' knowledge in the programming language C#. Quiz Time! holds several modules for assessing effectively the knowledge of learners and creating a fertile ground for adopting MGBL in higher education. More specifically, it employs an assessing knowledge module for testing the knowledge of learners, a module for providing personalized recommendations for collaboration in group playing based on vectorial representation of learner players, and a dynamic advice generator using fuzzy logic for providing adaptive assistance to learners based on learners misconceptions and their profile. The advice generator provides cognitive advice to learners, namely descriptive feedback for improving the learning strategy. Furthermore, a learner modeler is incorporated in order to support the aforementioned modules, consisted of important learners' characteristics, such as prior experience in programming, current knowledge level, and the frequency of misconceptions occurred in the testing process. Moreover, Quiz Time! promotes collaborative learning and incorporates motivational strategies, like an integrated badge system. The motivational effects of badge systems include the achievement of students' learning goals (Facey-Shaw, Specht, & Bartley-Bryan, 2018; Pombo, Garcia, & Alves P, 2019). Quiz Time! was used for an academic semester and evaluated by learners of the Department of Informatics in a Greek University. It was also evaluated by computer science experts serving as faculty member in Greek Universities. The evaluation was conducted using an established framework and the statistical hypothesis test (t-test) with promising results. A major conclusion is that MGBL can assist students in higher education towards advancing their knowledge level, as well as personalized recommendation for collaboration and tailored advice to students can further improve the students' engagement and the educational process in general.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related scientific work is presented. Sections 3 Quiz Time! overview, 4 Quiz Time! modules include an overview of Quiz Time! and presentation of its integrated modules respectively. In Section 5, representative examples of operation are shown. In Section 6, the evaluation results are presented and discussed. Finally, in Section 6, conclusions are drawn and future steps are presented.
