The ability to construct complex and diverse linguistic structures is one of the main features that set us apart from all other species. Despite its ubiquity, some language aspects remain unknown. Topics such as language origin and evolution have been studied by researchers from diverse disciplines, including Linguistic, Computer Science, Physics and Mathematics [1], [2], [3]. In order to better understand the underlying language mechanisms and universal linguistic properties, several models have been developed [4], [5]. A particular language representation regards texts as complex systems [6]. Written texts can be considered as complex networks (or graphs), where nodes could represent syllables, words, sentences, paragraphs or even larger chunks [6]. In such models, network edges represent the proximity between nodes, e.g. the frequency of the co-occurrence of words. Several interesting results have been obtained from networked models, such as the explanation of Zipf’s Law as a consequence of the least effort principle and theories on the nature of syntactical relationships [7], [8].
In a more practical scenario, text networks have been used in text classification tasks [9], [10]. The main advantage of the model is that it does not rely on deep semantical information to obtain competitive results. Another advantage of graph-based approaches is that, when combined with other approaches, it yields competitive results [11]. A simple, yet recurrent text model is the well-known word co-occurrence network. After optional textual pre-processing steps, in a co-occurrence network each different word becomes a node and edges are established via co-occurrence in a desired window. A common strategy connects only adjacent words in the so called word adjacency networks.
While the co-occurrence representation yields good results in classification scenarios, some important features are not considered in the model. For example, long-range syntactical links, though less frequent than adjacent syntactical relationships, might be disregarded from a simple word adjacency approach [12]. In addition, semantically similar words not sharing the same lemma are mapped into distinct nodes. In order to address these issues, here we introduce a modification of the traditional network representation by establishing additional edges, referred to as “virtual” edges. In the proposed model, in addition to the co-occurrence edges, we link two nodes (words) if the corresponding word embedding representation is similar. While this approach still does not merge similar nodes into the same concept, similar nodes are explicitly linked via virtual edges.
Our main objective here is to evaluate whether such an approach is able to improve the discriminability of word co-occurrence networks in a typical text network classification task. We evaluate the methodology for different embedding techniques, including GloVe, Word2Vec and FastText. We also investigated different thresholding strategies to establish virtual links. Our results revealed, as a proof of principle, that the proposed approach is able to improve the discriminability of the classification when compared to the traditional co-occurrence network. While the gain in performance depended upon the text length being considered, we found relevant gains for intermediary text lengths. Additional results also revealed that a simple thresholding strategy combined with the use of stopwords tends to yield the best results.
We believe that the proposed representation could be applied in other text classification tasks, which could lead to potential gains in performance. Because the inclusion of virtual edges is a simple technique to make the network denser, such an approach can benefit networked representations with a limited number of nodes and edges. This representation could also shed light into language mechanisms in theoretical studies relying on the representation of text as complex networks. Potential novel research lines leveraging the adopted approach to improve the characterization of texts in other applications are presented in the conclusion.
