1.1. Topological data analysis and machine learningComputer-aided diagnosis, especially using artificial intelligence, is rapidly growing in the field of medical imaging, as the analysis of medical images is an exacting task that must be performed by diagnostic doctors with extensive training and experience [1], [2]. Despite this training, intra- and inter-observer variations in the accuracy and interpretation of images leading to a diagnosis occur across pathologists. In addition, the extent to which the scoring system can be accurately used in a single biopsy is limited by potential sampling error, so that histological assessments by biopsies must be regarded as approximations that are dependent to some extent on the size and quality of the sample [3].Enhancements to the amount of biopsy data are needed to achieve high accuracy and reproducibility in a diagnosis. From the viewpoint of evidence-based medicine, a systematic method for processing big data efficiently and extracting accurate quantitative measurements has become a focus in pathological diagnostics. Such a method can fall within the category of classification problems in the field of pattern recognition and machine learning [4], [5]. With the assistance of data science techniques, we can objectively detect patterns in immunohistochemical data and improve the accuracy of examining a biopsy or surgical specimen tissue under uncertainty. In supervised learning problems, the training data comprise the tissue images as the input vectors that are assigned to one of a finite number of discrete categories. One of the main issues in data science is how to exploit this training set in order to classify the target variable for some new tissue images within the test set. Most machine learning methods have a preprocessing or feature extraction stage used to make the subsequent classification problem easier to solve. The combination of preprocessing with topological data analysis has attracted much interest, and to date, persistent homology has become the standard method for quantifying the topological features of geometrical objects [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19].Convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithm, including deep learning (DL), was becoming increasingly popular and forms the basis of many successful commercially available systems in medical image analysis. It allows non-experts in machine learning techniques to effectively make high level performance for their own applications [1], [2], [20], [21], [22]. However, the method requires a huge computer resource with graphic process units (GPUs) to handle the large amounts of data more than thousands, in some cases a million, to make a reliable performance. However, for medical applications to the patients, we usually have a very limited number of images, less than hundreds images.In this study, we focus on the topological features of medical images obtained from pathological observations in a clinical diagnosis. The original tissue images are transformed into a finite-dimensional vector of the persistence image, which is a stable descriptor of persistent homology to be applied in the machine learning algorithms (see Fig. 1). This greatly reduces the variability in the classification problem within each tissue image, because the location and scale of the holes are the same in terms of persistent homology, allowing robust topological features to be extracted against noise in the data sets. The computational costs of our presented method is much cheaper than doing the DL based models.Download : Download high-res image (238KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Schematic picture of topological data analysis demonstrated in this study, which is composed of three steps: data imaging by biopsy, feature extraction by persistence homology, and analysis (diagnosis) by machine learning.
1.2. Histological assessment for NAFLD in liver biopsyIn the 2010s, the incidence of liver cancer and the associated number of annual deaths in Japan started to decrease. This is because occurrences of chronic hepatitis due to hepatitis B or C virus infection and the resulting liver cancer were greatly reduced by remarkable advances in antiviral therapy. In contrast, non-B and non-C liver cancers have increased and account for more than 50% of primary liver cancers. In particular, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) has been attracting attention as a progressive liver disease [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28].Fatty liver disease is a general term for diseases in which neutral fat is deposited on hepatocytes and causes liver damage. In pathological diagnosis, fatty liver is defined for when fat droplets are deposited on 5% or more of the liver cells. Fatty liver affects more than 30% of Japanese adult men, so the accurate diagnosis of NAFLD (non-alcoholic fatty liver disease) is an essential issue. NAFLD is divided into two categories: NASH and non-alcoholic fatty liver (NAFL). Nearly 20% of NAFLD cases are NASH, which tends to progress to cirrhosis and causes liver death with advanced liver diseases including hepatic failure and hepatocellular carcinoma. The definite diagnosis of NAFLD is characterized by fat accumulation, lobular inflammation, ballooning degeneration, and either Mallory-Denk body or fibrosis as seen in liver tissue imaging. However, the evaluation criteria for these tissue diagnoses may be dependent on each pathologist. In addition, when cirrhosis or liver cancer occurs, hepatic steatosis often disappears. This often makes the diagnosis of NASH inaccurate.In the Matteoni classification used to distinguish between NASH and NAFL (fatty liver), NAFLD is classified into four subtypes, from type 1 to type 4, depending on the evaluation of findings such as ballooning, Mallory-Denk body, or fibrosis. Types 3 and 4 are categorized as NASH. Ballooning degeneration is a finding of cell degeneration due to impaired metabolic circulation and inflammation. Mallory-Denk bodies are irregular aggregates in the cytoplasm of intermediate radius filaments, one of the cytoskeletons [29], [30]. Type 1 is fatty liver alone; type 2 is fat accumulation and lobular inflammation; type 3 is fat accumulation and ballooning degeneration; and type 4 is fat accumulation, ballooning degeneration and either Mallory-Denk body or fibrosis, with all findings included. By unifying these objective diagnostic criteria, it is expected that the classification based on pathological findings and the comprehensive evaluation will be used as a follow-up of the prognosis and as an indicator of the treatment policy in a clinical setting.Computer-aided diagnosis of the histological features in liver biopsies has attracted much interests [31], [32], [33]; for instance, Vanderbeck et al [31]. proposed a classification algorithm to identify steatosis, veins, sinusoids and bile ducts. In these previous analyses, digital images of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained slides of liver biopsies from patients were transformed into black-and-white images with respect to a threshold value for the binarization, as fat droplets and their accumulation appear as white regions in the images. Recently Salvi et al [33]. demonstrated high accuracy performance for the detection of steatosis using a CNN based method.Our study is the first attempt to extend the scope of topological data analysis based method to cover the classification problem between NASH vs non-NASH patients, by focusing the morphological characterization of ballooning degeneration, which could be a key feature of the progressive form of fatty liver diseases. Such ballooned hepatocytes appear in the gradation of the gray-scale levels when comparing with the normal fat droplets in liver cells (see Fig. 5). By counting the number of white holes of fat droplets deposited on liver cells, persistent homology enables us to locate the holes in the image data set across multiple levels of gray-scale. This point is the advantage of our method, and the limitations or drawbacks comparing with the DL models, which requires only a set of raw image data with minor preprocessing if necessary. However, they can be basically seen as black boxes that turn input image into output without explanations of their classification for the features like “holes” that humans can understand [22].In the next section, we begin with a description of the tissue image data set obtained by liver biopsies. We also discuss a mathematical framework for the classification based on the persistent homology and machine learning model. In Section 3, we apply this framework to classifying the data set of liver biopsies in patients with NASH and obtain a high performance classification with considerable accuracy. We conclude our discussion with a summary in Section 4. The potential benefits associated with our methodology include both improved accuracy and reproducibility for pathological diagnoses in liver biopsies.
