Intrusion detection systems (IDS) have been utilized in the field of computer science since 1970, especially for attack detection and network security monitoring [1]. An IDS in its basic form consists of a data acquisition unit which monitors the flow of data within the premises of a network and processes it to decide on the status of the network flow. This kind of anomaly detection requires a good quality dataset for training and testing all of the possible scenarios and making accurate and precise decisions for new network flows [2]. There are two main types of IDS. The first is a signature-based IDS that uses a predefined set of rules and patterns to detect attacks. The second is an anomaly-based IDS that uses a pre-collected dataset with either normal or malicious behavior data and uses it to train and test a detection model. Therefore, any network flow that deviates from the model threshold is marked as an anomalous entry and reported as an attacker. The key component for a good IDS system is a well-structured dataset that reflects a realistic real-world scenario. A popular dataset designed for an IDS in 1998 is the KDDCup 99 dataset, which is part of the DARPA intrusion detection evaluation program. The KDDcup99 was considered the golden standard for IDS evaluation [3], however many studies such as [4], [5], [6] criticized it, citing problems such as inconsistencies in the ratio of normal and attack data and a high number of duplicates. Therefore, several research efforts have attempted to construct a new dataset for IDS evaluation in traditional network, however to our knowledge, no attempt has been made to build a new dataset for the emerging Internet of Things (IoT). Although the KDD Cup 99 dataset is outdated and was designed for a different set of protocols and applications, many researchers have tried to apply the same dataset to an IoT-based architecture but most of these studies failed to report the applicability of such solutions in a real-world implementation. Furthermore, the lack of IoT datasets that have various kinds of IoT attack segments reflecting the different attack patterns is a critical issue that must be addressed to further enhance the quality of research in this field. We believe this paper can serve as the basis for future work that adddress different security issues in the Internet of things.
In this paper, we explore the limitations associated with the existing IDS datasets and propose new framework for generating an IoT dataset for IDS evaluation. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explores the related literature and existing datasets. In Section 3, the proposed framework is explained, including feature engineering and selection. The datasets are analyzed in Section 4. In Section 5, we compare the results of the produced datasets and compare them with several existing datasets. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6 with suggestions for future work.
