Knowledge of spatial housing characteristics in an area has implications and applications in many domains including public and environmental health, utility and urban planning, and emergency or humanitarian disaster response. For example, the spread of airborne infectious diseases such as Tuberculosis (and Covid-19 is a good example too) is closely associated with human overcrowding in many kinds of places including homes. High population growth rates and rapid urbanization are causing housing shortage in many developing country cities. For example in Uganda, the housing shortage in major urban areas is estimated at over two million units and, is expected to reach three million by 2030 if not addressed. To put that into context, 47 per cent of households in Uganda comprising an average of 5 persons shared a bedroom in 2014, according to the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics (Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 2016). The housing shortage coupled with economic deprivation has led to sprawling of informal settlements with squalid living conditions in urban centers, posing serious public health risk (Ezeh et al., 2016; Elsey et al., 2016; Lilford et al., 2016; Riley et al., 2007).
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) goal number 11 urges cities to address existing housing inadequacies if they are to ever become sustainable (United Nations, 2015). We believe that a first step to addressing the problem of poor quality urban housing in developing countries is to understand how extensively it is spread across geographic space. To this end we propose the use of Deep Neural Network (DNN) methods and remote sensing imagery to identify patterns in urban housing quality. In this work, the phrase "housing quality" refers to the extent of building congestion (or crowding) per unit geographic area.
DNN are increasingly being applied for classifying remotely sensed land use scene imagery and have achieved high accuracy levels. Most of the existing literature in this area however, is focused on classifying scenes based on class definitions that may be considered semantically low-level. Secondly, majority of the remote sensing data sets used for this purpose relate to developed country settings where land use is generally carefully planned and regulated. In most developing countries however, a large proportion of land use for human purposes (for example, residential and commercial use) is informal and poorly regulated. A consequence of this is that scenes constituting semantically similar land use types vary significantly across developed and developing country settings. Figure 1 shows example images taken from two existing remote sensing land use data sets. In the top row are images from UC Merced data set (Yang and Newsam, 2010) and in the middle row are images from NWPU-RESISC45 data set (Cheng et al., 2017). In the bottom row are example images from our data set. As can be seen there are stark differences in what is considered, for example, dense residential or high density housing in the three data sets.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. Example scene images taken from three remote sensing data sets. Some differences can be seen between scenes constituting semantically similar land-use types across geographic regions. See, for example, images for the class Dense residential/High density.
Two important questions arise from the scenario described in the previous paragraph. First, we think that classifying land use scenes comprising multiple geographical features using low-level semantic class definitions does not render the output to many relevant applications in certain domains. For example, classifying remotely sensed scene images as building, airplane, road, etc such as in (Cheng et al., 2017; Kang et al., 2018; Castelluccio et al., 2015; Basu et al., 2015) may not be of much relevant application in identifying neighborhoods at high risk of infectious diseases associated with indoor overcrowding. Secondly, existing DNN techniques have not been benchmarked on representative remote sensing scene image data sets. In particular, data sets from developing country settings have not been considered for benchmarking DNN algorithms due to absence of such data sets in the public domain. It is demonstrated in (DeVries et al., 2019) that the performance of machine learning algorithms will generally degrade when trained using geographically unrepresentative data sets.
In the current work we employed DNN methods for land use scene image classification in a developing country context to address some of the gaps identified above. Specifically, we used Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and satellite imagery for identifying housing density patterns in urban areas based on high-level semantic class definitions. Housing density is used here to mean the extent to which building units are congested or crowded. A method is also proposed for quantifying spatial extent of urban housing classes that provides useful insight into settlement patterns. The method involves computing the ratio between area covered by a particular urban housing class and total area occupied by all classes. In the current work we computed this ratio based on grid count whereby we divided the number of grids predicted by the CNN model as belonging to one class by the total number of grids for all classes. Results from the proposed method were validated against building density data computed on OpenStreetMap data. Our results for scene image classification are comparable to current state-of-the-art, despite focusing only on most difficult classes in those works. We also showed that estimating spatial extent of urban housing classes using our method is at par with an alternative approach based on OpenStreetMap buildings data. A new satellite scene image data set that captures some general characteristics of urban housing in developing countries has been proposed. The data set has similar but also some distinct attributes to existing data sets. The contributions of our work therefore includes,
1.Our experimental results demonstrate that CNN are useful for identifying housing density patterns in developing country urban settings.2.An end-to-end deep learning workflow based on fine-tuning pre-trained CNN models is proposed for identifying housing density patterns in urban areas of low-income countries.3.A method for quantifying spatial extent of identified housing density classes has also been proposed. The method is comparable to an alternative approach based on OpenStreetMap buildings data.4.We also contribute a first of its kind, relatively large satellite scene image data set based on a sub-Sahara Africa land-use for building. This high resolution data set is suitable for analysis of phenomena such as high resolution population distribution mapping. It will also be of benefit for benchmarking new machine learning algorithms.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sections 2, 3, and 4 present related work, materials, and methods, respectively, while results are found in section 5. Discussion and conclusion and future work are provided in section 5, 6 and 7, respectively.
