Pharmaceutical creams are one of the common types of topical formulations, used as a means of delivering an active ingredient directly to the skin. Generally speaking, they are oil-in-water semisolid emulsions.
According to the gel network theory [1,2], these formulations consist of at least four phases: (i) crystalline/hydrophilic gel phase is composed of bilayers of surfactant and fatty amphiphile and water molecules are inserted between the bilayers (i.e. interlamellarly fixed water); (ii) water molecules bound as free bulk water are in equilibrium with the interlamellarly fixed water in the gel phase; (iii) lipophilic gel phase is built up by the excess of the fatty amphiphile, which is not part of the hydrophilic gel phase; and (iv) dispersed oil phase (i.e. inner phase) is mainly immobilized mechanically from the lipophilic gel phase. In practice, surfactant-fatty alcohol-water ternary systems could be used as representative models of the continuous phases of the corresponding semisolid o/w emulsions. Previous works on the characterization of semisolid oil-in-water emulsions containing pure and mixed homologue fatty alcohols (i.e. cetyl, stearyl and cetostearyl alcohols) and cetrimide [[3], [4], [5]] have shown that the oil-in-water emulsions increased in consistency and remained stable on the addition of cetostearyl alcohol, whereas the emulsion stability decreased markedly to mobile liquid when cetyl or stearyl alcohol was added individually on the preparation. This is demonstrated in the phase diagram, Fig. 1, where it is shown that the α−gel is stable down to lower temperature for mixed cetyl and stearyl alcohol as compared to either of them individually.Download : Download high-res image (185KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (Color online) The phase diagram of the mixture of stearyl and cetyl alcohol at various temperature and mixing ratio. The α−gel (liquid crystal) exists to relatively low temperature while for pure cetyl or stearyl bilayers, the Lβ crystal phase exists at higher temperature [3]. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Although the above-mentioned studies partially showed the correlation between various fatty alcohol combinations and their influence on the microstructure and consistency of the corresponding oil-in-water emulsions prepared with them, no comprehensive studies at the molecular level has been carried out. Numerical simulations has been employed at various scale to investigate oil-in-water emulsion system. Coarse−grain models have been useful to study mesoscopic properties of lipid interfaces and emulsions [[6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]] with reasonable agreement with experiments on surface tension, shear viscosity, lipid concentrations, …. For atomistic models, various systems have been simulated in computational pharmaceutics [[13], [14], [15]]. The atomistic models are important in providing atomic structures and interactions of these systems as well as the molecular mechanism of drug delivery systems. Results of atomistic computational studies show good correlation with experiments and are very important in assisting in the formulation design and simplify the formulation screening procedures [13].
For the ternary systems of fatty alcohols investigated computationally in this work, only coarse−grain models are available for some alcohol types [9]. More work needs to be done at the atomistic level in understanding experimental results on the structural properties of these systems as well as their mechanism of stability. This in turns can provide better understandings for computational pharmaceutic research of these formulations. This is especially true for drug delivery purpose where atomistic interactions (using quantum mechanical calculations) are very important. As a first step in this direction, this study aims to elucidate the molecular mechanism for the higher stability of the mixed cetostearyl bilayer α−gel network as compared to each component used separately using atomistic molecular modeling and dynamics simulation. Previous experiments [3,16] suggested this is due to the alkyl chain length mismatch in the mixed system. As a result, the alkyl chain tip of C18OH has a high degree of freedom, and, in this part gauche coordination increases. Our computational study supports this hypothesis at the molecular level. We also show that upon mixing the alkyl chain of C16OH becomes stiffer and the C18OH alkyl chain tip becomes more flexible. Also, the in−plane area per molecule fluctuations is more pronounced for mixed systems. This explanation provides further insights into the molecular mechanism of the stability of mixed system.
The paper is organized as follows. After the Introduction section, in Sec. 2, the model of our system and various physical parameters used in the simulation are presented in details. In Sec. 3, the results are presented and their relevance to available experimental data is discussed. We conclude in Sec. 4.
