Linear consumption models, overconsumption by first-world populations, and societal pressures to purchase new products contribute to significant waste management and resource scarcity problems across the globe. For instance, the Pacific ocean's garbage patch is estimated to be twice the size of the US state of Texas and negatively affects the marine eco-system in many ways (Rice, 2018). In addition, electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) waste poisons drinking water and soil if not properly handled after disposal (Ellis-Petersen, 2018; Dissanayake & Sinha, 2015). At the same time, natural resources are becoming scarcer, especially those used to produce many high-tech products like computers and mobile phones (Bell et al., 2013; Xu & Wang, 2017). To this end, some propose circular economy as an alternative consumption model (Jabbour et al., 2017; Gupta et al., 2019).
Although circular economy has become a popular topic of discussion, its actual implementations are proving to be difficult for a variety of reasons (Ghisellini et al., 2016, Levoso et al., 2020). Circular economy is defined as “a regenerative system in which resource input and waste, emission, and energy leakage are minimised by slowing, closing, and narrowing materials and energy loops. This can be achieved through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing, and recycling” (Geissdoerfer et al., 2018, p.759). In addition, new business models, environmental regulations, stakeholder collaboration, environmental foot printing and installed base management are also success factors often mentioned in the literature. To exemplify the broad scope and complexity of the circular playing field, Krikke (2020) presents a framework describing how approaches like cradle-to-cradle (product eco design), product stewardship (regulations), closed-loop supply chains (value creation by take back and recovery) and circular economy (servitization) interconnect, complement and partly overlap.
Remanufacturing, refurbishing, reuse and similar value recreation processes represent the supply chain engines that drive circular economy. For supply chain professionals, these processes fall under the realm of what is referred to as closed-loop supply chain management. Closed-loop supply chain management is defined as the “design, control, and operations (of a system) to maximize value creation over the entire life cycle of a product with dynamic recovery of value from different types of return over time” (Guide & Van Wassenhove, 2009; Yuan et al., 2020). A closed-loop supply chain is essentially the operationalization of remanufacturing and related supply chain processes, as described by Guide & Van Wassenhove (2009).
Remanufacturing refers to a specific process that entails disassembling, repairing, replacing, and reassembling a part or product to restore it to a like-new condition (Hazen et al., 2017a), which denotes that the final product will be just as good as the new version on every measure. Remanufacturing is especially prevalent in China and other Asian economies where both regulation and consumer expectation dictate that remanufactured products are produced to be just as good as new products. Conversely, refurbishment is defined as a process where used products are collected and restored in order to resell these products to new consumers (Van Weelden et al., 2016), which suggests that the products are produced similar but nonetheless subpar standards as compared to new products on one or more dimension. This approach is more common in Western markets like the European Union and United States, where laptops, cellular phones, and other items are commonly refurbished and re-offered to consumers by original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and third parties. Reuse is a more tenuous term and denotes the recirculation of previously used products, which might or might not be repaired or cleaned in some way. Although the literature streams on remanufactured, refurbished, and reused products share many similarities, differences remain. One key difference might be found in the influence of process knowledge and product history on consumer perceptions. For instance, Ackerman & Hu (2017) and Mugge et al. (2018) found that more information about prior use can actually harm consumer perceptions of reused products. Conversely, Wang & Hazen (2016) found that more information about quality, cost, and greenness improved consumer perceptions. As such, it is important to both consider and differentiate these literature streams. In this research, we focus exclusively on remanufactured products.
To support circular economy development, consumers must be willing to switch from buying new products to buying remanufactured, refurbished, or otherwise reused products. Unfortunately, this can be a difficult decision for consumers who might perceive potential risks involved in trying alternative products, especially those that might be perceived as “used” or “dirty” (Abbey et al., 2015, Singhal et al., 2019). A primary challenge for remanufactured products lies in the need to signal to consumers that they are indeed as good as new. Indeed, ambiguity and information asymmetry can lead to more negative perceptions of remanufactured products, whereas signaling in the form of product knowledge might be able to allay such concerns for some consumers (Hazen et al., 2012; Wang & Hazen, 2016). Research speaks to the impact of providing information about specific quality attributes of remanufactured products themselves (Hazen et al., 2017a), which raises the question of whether or not other kinds of information might also be important to consumers. In particular, we propose that information about the provenance of the product as well as the actual circular recovery processes that firms use to recapture, remanufacture, and remarket these products may also affect consumer perceptions.
In many cases, the circular recovery processes through which remanufactured products are brought back to market represent a black box for consumers. First, the recapturing process includes all activities surrounding product returns management. Second, the remanufacturing process transforms the used product into a like-new product and includes operational processes such as reverse logistics, testing, and disassembly. Third, the remarketing process deals with developing and sustaining markets for remanufactured products. In this paper, we refer to these processes as “circular recovery processes” to denote their support of circular economy. We argue that when consumers obtain more information about these processes and of the product's history, they will have a more favorable attitude toward the remanufactured product.
While extant research examines the roles of other types of information, to the best of our knowledge, the impact of both product history and circular recovery process information on consumer perceptions of remanufactured products have not been researched. This gap is unfortunate because although managers might now understand that certain information is important to consumers, the specific type of information that might make the greatest impact is unclear. Even worse, signaling certain types of information has been shown to actually negatively affect consumer reactions to certain types of reused products (Ackerman & Hu, 2017).
The purpose of this research is to examine how product history and process knowledge might affect consumer attitudes toward remanufactured products, and how this attitude affects intention to switch from purchasing a new product to one that is remanufactured. We operationalize circular knowledge as information on product history and the three circular recovery processes (recapturing, remanufacturing, and remarketing). Additionally, research has shown that a consumers’ perceived ambiguity surrounding circular recovery processes might result in reduced levels of consumers’ perceived quality and willingness to pay for remanufactured products (Hazen et al., 2012). Willingness to pay for remanufactured products largely depends on the price point of new products (Abbey et al., 2015). Indeed, price is a significant consideration in any consumer decision. As such, we include high perceived price of new products as an important moderator of the effect of circular knowledge on attitude toward remanufactured products.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the literature on signaling theory, its application in supply chain management and how it informs this research. Hypotheses are also presented in Section 2. Section 3 discusses the survey-based data collection method and sampling procedure. We present results of the structural equation modeling in section 4. In section 5 we interpret and discuss the results to provide implications for research and practice, and also discuss limitation and future research directions.
