Structure determination of uniaxially aligned membrane proteins [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9] and liquid-crystalline materials [10], [11] by solid-state NMR is based on the measurement of multiple heteronuclear dipolar couplings (DC’s). Recent work has demonstrated that spectral measurements of 1H-15N and 13Cα-1Hα DCs, complemented with 15N chemical shift anisotropy (CSA), can yield low RMSD backbone folds in oriented protein samples [12], [13]. The promise of this method for structure determination depends on the ability to obtain high-resolution NMR spectra that permit unambiguous assignments and subsequent structure calculations. High-resolution separated local field (SLF) experiments have long been utilized in oriented sample NMR [14], [15], [16]. These experiments typically consist of a series of short rf pulses (<20 μs) on both the low/dilute and high/abundant spins, e.g. 15N and 1H nuclei. The main goal of the pulses is to cancel all homonuclear interactions in the time-average Hamiltonian, allowing for the measurement of just the heteronuclear couplings. Traditionally the above problem was treated analytically by using the average Hamiltonian theory (AHT), but this method becomes increasingly difficult while attempting to design better-performing pulse sequences involving larger numbers of pulses (subdwells) and non-quadrature phases.
Computer modeling has long proved useful for simulating NMR spectra [17], [18], [19] and producing new NMR pulse sequences [20]. A recently proposed method determines pulse sequences (PS) in a fully automated fashion [21]. This method, termed ROULETTE (Random Optimization Using the Liouville Equation Tailored to the Experiment), is based on optimizing a scoring function for the calculated spectra using a Monte Carlo simulated annealing (MCSA) protocol. In optimizing the scoring function, ROULETTE determines the optimal pulse phases and durations that selectively evolve the desired DCs while yielding the narrowest possible linewidths. The calculation can in principle include numerous pulses or sub-dwells, non-quadrature phases, and a discrete application of rf irradiation. Exhaustive MCSA sampling ultimately allows for the determination of optimal PS parameters, i.e. pulse phases, durations, and an rf irradiation scheme. Moreover, such a strategy does not rely on AHT, but considers realistic many-spin density-matrix simulations in order to predict PSs capable of yielding best experimental outcomes. Ultimately ROULETTE produced over a dozen of new PS’s with superior linewidths to the SAMPI4 PS when run on an NAL crystal. The best of these PS’s can be easily refined to further improve the score, or to adapt the parameters to different rf field amplitudes. ROULETTE is also applicable to lossy biological samples, which was previously demonstrated for selectively Leucine-labeled Pf1 coat protein [21].
In spite of the demonstrated performance of ROULETTE, the results have also showed that false positive sequences, i.e. sequences having sharp linewidths in silica but failing experimentally, were also rather common. Therefore, the generated pulse sequences should be screened experimentally in order to find a reliable PS that can be used for structure determination. While for single-crystals such as NAL this can be achieved by running short experiments, the screening of PSs may not be feasible for biological samples, which naturally take longer times to run (by orders of magnitude). Furthermore, previous work was applied only to a single type of SLF experiment, i.e. for 1H-15N DC’s. It would be of interest to apply this strategy of PS optimization to other types of NMR experiments. Naturally, optimizing for different NMR observables necessitates alterations to the simulated spin system, interaction parameters, and model Hamiltonians.
The present work is aimed at accomplishing the following goals: (1) improving on the optimization 1H-15N DCs, (2) increasing the reliability of NMR experiment simulations to predict experimental results, and (3) generalizing this method to computer optimizations of other NMR experiments, namely for 13Cα-1Hα DC’s. Specifically, we present updates to the fit function, which selects far more reliable and superior PSs when run experimentally. This has allowed us to generate a new PS that provides an even greater improvement over the SAMPI4 sequence. Furthermore, the approach was extended to design a novel sequence for measuring 13Cα-1Hα DCs, which improves upon the PISEMA sequence. Taken together, the results demonstrate generality of the ROULETTE approach to optimizing various types of NMR experiments.
