Complexity sciences have always been ambivalent about the possibility to foretell the future. The founders of this heterogeneous field of research have often hyped their nascent domain describing it as the ‘science of the XXI century’ (IXXI, 2005; SFI, 2009), capable of transforming the nations who will be able to master it into ‘the economic, cultural, and political superpowers of the next century’ (Pagels, 1989). In 1988, some of them even launched an interdisciplinary program of research and simulation in order to predict the geopolitical and environmental future of the planet in the Cold War context (SFI, 1988). As Fig. 1 shows, this group of scientists worked at a huge and complicated model which openly recalls the Club of Rome’s ‘World 3’ model (Meadows, Meadows, Randers, & Behrens, 1972). But this kind of initiatives remain rare in the field. Indeed, one of the leitmotivs of complexity specialists has rather aimed at highlighting the intrinsic uncertainty and unpredictability of ‘multi-scale,’ ‘non-linear’ and ‘evolutionary’ systems (Sardar & Ravetz, 1994). The specialists who consider impossible to anticipate the future of non-linear systems adduce the extreme sensitivity of the latter to their initial conditions: small events can lead to huge effects on the long run (Homer-Dixon, 2011).Download : Download high-res image (753KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Please write under the image: Interactive elements of a global security system, Santa Fe Institute archives, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
If some complexity exponents do not even face the question of foresight in their research (for they are interested more in understanding than in predicting) (Camazine et al., 2003), others tackle the issue almost daily but show different postures toward it. Some scholars find easier to foretell the long run evolution of a system, but only in a coarse-grained manner (Samet, 2013). Others propose to follow and predict the agents of a modeled system almost individually, thanks to their fine-grained computer simulations (Del Valle, 2016). In this article, I propose to explore five anticipation communities among the complexity scientists I have studied in my PhD doctoral research conducted between 2014 and 2018 (Li Vigni, 2018). The present text relies upon different materials: more than one hundred semi-directive interviews of two hours and a half average length, which I essentially conducted with European and American complexity scientists – most of whom have pioneered the field internationally –; some short ethnographies and laboratory visits in seven complexity institutes in Europe and the United States; as well as a bibliographic analysis of my interviewees’ scientific publications.
Let us start with a definition of our object. ‘Complex systems sciences’ are an interdisciplinary and transnational domain of research that emerged in the 1980s. While some French, Belgian, Italian, and American scholars used the term of complexity back in the 1970s, the label of ‘complexity science’ appeared in 1984 with the foundation of the American private research center ‘Santa Fe Institute.’ Since its inception, this field gathers a set of natural, social and engineering sciences under the study of ‘complex systems.’ These are canonically defined as systems ‘in which large networks of components with no central control and simple rules of operation give rise to complex collective behavior, sophisticated information processing, and adaptation via learning or evolution’ (Mitchell, 2009). Some examples of them are genetic networks, ecosystems, cities, financial markets, and epidemics.
It is important to specify two things. Firstly, that complexity is – according to this community – a property of natural and social systems themselves (and not of models or of the relationship between models and the study objects). Secondly, that complexity science is but one of the complexity theories that exist out there: Andrei Kolmogorov’s complexity, computational complexity (NP problems), Edgar Morin’s complex thought, integrative complexity (in psychology), or Robert Rosen’s biological systems complexity are just some examples of alternative notions of complexity, which are covered by groups of scientists other than the community that makes the object of this article (Li Vigni, 2018).
It is also important to remind that considering complexity science as a discipline is not sociologically appropriate. Around sixty complexity institutes exist in the world (Stephen Wolfram blog, 2012), but scientific societies, journals, conferences, and pedagogical supports are rare; moreover, within the label of complexity many different subcommunities exist, who know each other but collaborate only occasionally for institutional reasons with the aim of building the field or keeping it alive (Li Vigni, in press). Besides this, complexity specialists mainly stick to their particular discipline and never use the label of ‘complexity scientist’ as their unique professional qualification. Sometimes, this does not even appear in their official documents and research articles.
Within complexity science, a certain homogeneity is nevertheless observable, since the people claiming to belong to this field generally share the same tools of inquiry, as well as the same physics and informatics culture (Li Vigni, 2020). Its representatives offer indeed to study different kinds of complex systems through computer, physical and mathematical tools, such as network theory (Newman, 2018), agent-based modeling (Railsback & Grimm, 2019), cellular automata (Wolfram, 2002), genetic algorithms (Holland, 1996), statistical physics (Tsallis, 2009) and dynamical systems theory (Katok & Hasselblatt, 2005), among others.
Despite its fame both in academia and in the popular culture, complexity science is poorly understood under an historical, an epistemological and a sociological viewpoints. If both best-selling books (Levin, 1999; Waldrop, 1992) and scholar works (Li Vigni, 2018; Williams, 2012) have shown that the most important actor in the field is the Santa Fe Institute, few social scientists have seriously studied complexity theory in a thorough manner and with an outside perspective (Helmreich, 1998). On the other hand, many social scientists have used complexity science in their own work to renovate their approaches and theories (Castellani & Hafferty, 2009; Urry, 2005) – the field, as the readers of this journal know, is also well known in Futures Studies. The aim of this article is to describe five types of anticipation activity that seem to be operational within the vast international community of complex systems specialists. If this list is not exhaustive and can of course be amended by future papers, its vocation is not normative but descriptive. This is not an article about the evaluation of complexity science for an ‘application’ in future studies or in social sciences in general: others have tackled this issue in this journal before (Derbyshire, 2016; Kovacic, 2017; Lo Presti, 1996; Samet, 2011).
In order to study complexity scientists’ ways of dealing with future, I will take into account at the same time their epistemic, ontological, and axiological assumptions and practices (Lincoln, Lynham, & Guba, 2011). To expound them in a coherent fashion, I will use – with some adaptations – the concept of ‘anticipation communities’ introduced by French sociologist Céline Granjou to analyze environmental experts’ field diversity (Granjou, 2016). I propose to name the five detected groups as follows: the ‘high-frequency prediction,’ the ‘open-ended evolution,’ the ‘decentralized prediction,’ the ‘future co-construction,’ and the ‘centralized anticipation’ communities.
