Praise is defined as “positive evaluations made by a person, of another's products, performances, or attributes, where the evaluator presumes the validity of the standards on which the evaluation is based” (Kanouse et al., 1981). Praise can boost self-efficacy (Bandura, 1977) and positive feelings such as competence and autonomy (Blumenfeld et al., 1982; Deci and Ryan, 1985), strengthen the association between responses and their positive outcomes (O'Leary and O'Leary, 1977), and provide incentives for task engagement (Madsen et al., 1977). In motor skill learning, praise has been hypothesized to be feedback on the level of a participant's competence (Catano, 1975) that serves as an incentive to enhance practice efforts (Steers and Porter, 1974). Thus, praise accelerates motor skill performance by increasing motivation (Adam, 1972; Catano, 1975; Henderlong and Lepper, 2002). This is reasonable because motor skills are initially acquired by repeatedly performing an action during practice, i.e., “practice makes perfect.” However, recent studies have indicated that praise following motor training directly facilitates motor performance as the enhanced offline skill consolidation overnight (Sugawara et al., 2014, 2012)—raising the possibility of direct feedback onto the neural substrates of motor learning, i.e., motor engram.
Motor learning is based on the information available during and after practice; that is, the action plan and feedback (Hamano et al., 2020). The action plan consists of inverse (motor predictor) and forward (sensory predictor) internal models of motor control and learning (Sasaki et al., 2012; Wolpert et al., 2001). The processing system uses pairs of inverse and forward internal models to generate output signals, with feedback as the input signal, resulting in a plastic change in the nervous system called engram (Josselyn et al., 2015). Thus, engram-formed areas should receive feedback signals. A previous functional neuroimaging study of humans indicated that the primary motor cortex and other motor cortical areas are where the motor engrams are formed (Hamano et al., 2020).
Neural substrates of the effect of the social signal on procedural learning are poorly understood. Recently, Doppler et al. (2019) showed the age-dependency of the effect of social reward on procedural learning improvement: social reward especially improved motor sequence learning in elder participants, and the consolidation of motor sequence knowledge was improved by social rewards only in young participants. Their neural correlates based on the gray matter volume-change by voxel-based-morphometry were the left striatum of the younger group and the medial orbitofrontal cortex of the elder group. However, the functional neural pathways of feedback of the social signal to the motor system are unknown.
Previously, we found that the contingent positive responses of others relevant to self-action are recognized as a social reward through social contingency detection, which is mediated by the anterior rostral medial prefrontal cortex (arMPFC) (Sumiya et al., 2020, 2017). Here, we hypothesized that the social feedback to the motor system is modified by the top-down effect of the social contingency valuation system, such as the arMPFC (Sumiya et al., 2017). To test this hypothesis, we developed a task that simplified a conversational student-teacher interaction to induce a modest degree of rejection and acceptance in the ecological situation, and conducted a functional MRI study with 33 participants. In this task, the participant inside the scanner uttered a pseudo-English word to an English teacher outside the scanner (SELF condition). According to the English-likeness of the pronunciation, feedback was given to the participant with a short video the teacher was in, by either gestures or words of acceptance or rejection. As a control condition, the pseudo-word was read aloud by the computer instead of the participant (PC condition). Our expectation was that the teacher's response would elicit valence-dependent activation, which affects the motor system in a social contingency dependent manner.
