The wood pith is located roughly at the centre of the cross-section of a wood stem. It has two main uses. First, the wood quality can be evaluated using pith location (Fallah et al., 2012). High quality wood tends to have the pith at the centre. Second, it is used to locate regions of soft wood with low quality along the wood stem that must be removed. It has been experimentally shown that the knot within a stem, whose surrounding regions are soft, can be completely removed by locating the pith locations at both ends of the stem and pushing it through a vertically aligned bandsaw. The soft region of the wood is likely to be within a single board at the centre of the wood stem. This technique is used in several small to medium-sized sawmills in South and Southeast Asia for processing parawood (Hevea brasiliensis) to produce wood parquets and other wood products. Locating the wood pith in the cross-section of wood stems originating from Europe is fairly easy because they are cultivated under controlled conditions to make them grow vertically (i.e. by removing their branches). Their pith locations are likely to be at the centre of the stems. Parawood is very different because it is cultivated to produce latex, and several branches and leaves are required for sufficient photosynthesis. Only after about 20 years, when the tree begins to produce insufficient amounts of latex, is it cut down and replaced. Thus, parawood is considered a by-product. Because of the way it is grown, its pith location tends to deviate from the cross-section centre. However, parawood has been successfully used as an alternative to other tropical woods extracted from natural forests (Joerg Balsiger and Bahdon, 2000). Furthermore, parawood has proven to be very versatile in furniture manufacturing and the wood-based panel industry. Where forests are scarce, particularly in South and Southeast Asia, the use of parawood as fuel continues to increase pressure on natural forest resources. Yield increase from efficient processing could significantly improve parawood utilization and prevent natural forests from being cut down while reducing pollution caused by use of the waste as low-cost fuel.
Many studies have proposed using the geometric relationships of the annual rings within the cross-section of wood stems to locate the pith (Krähenbühl et al., 2012; Boukadida et al., 2012; Kurdthongmee et al., 2018; Kurdthongmee and Suwannarat, 2019). Once the boundary of an annual ring has been extracted from an image, image processing routines are used to create segments from neighbouring pairs of pixels that form the boundary. The normal lines of the segments are then generated. This procedure produces a set of normal lines, and their intersection points can be used to approximate the pith location. Several algorithms have been presented to effectively extract annual rings or a wood stem boundary and approximate the pith location. Some algorithms require sophisticated and expensive image capturing instruments (e.g. CT or X-ray scanners). Others are suitable only for images with imperfection-free cross-sections; rot, dirt, snow, or defects from the cutting process must first be removed (Hanning et al., 2003; Longuetaud et al., 2004; Österberg et al., 2004). Unfortunately, using these algorithms and instruments to analyse the cross-sectional surface of parawood is complicated. Its surface is likely to contain several imperfections, mainly caused by diffused latex, mounds, or defects from the cutting process. Removing them to make the pith clearly visible for computer vision methods requires labour intensive mechanical or chemical pre-processing stages.
Deep neural networks (DNN) have been successfully applied in many application domains to either classify (Canziani et al., 2016) or detect objects (Cheng et al., 2016a, 2016b, 2019) in an image. Regarding wood manufacturing and processing, it has been successfully used for defect classification, including the wood pith classification, in lumber images (Hu et al., 2019). The RestNet18 network (He et al., 2015) was investigated using an 80:20 ratio of training to test images. Four datasets that consist of two common lumber defects (cracks, insect defects, sound knots, and unsound knots), wood textures, and wood species were used and classification accuracies of 98.16%, 93.32%, 96.64%, and 99.50% were obtained. Here, the classification result only indicates the existence of defects within the image. This is in contrast to a detection result that additionally identifies the regions around the defects. To our knowledge, no studies have been published on the topic of wood pith detection.
The main objective of this study is to investigate the effectiveness of applying DNN to detect parawood pith within a cross-sectional image captured using a normal camera. None of the samples were treated to remove defects from the cross-sectional surface. Additionally, all trained weights of the model, for both SSD (single shot detection) MobileNet and YOLO (you-only-look-once) are provided for transfer learning.
