As an offshoot of the growing rate of industrialization across the world, noise exposure has turned into a typical phenomenon in industrial contexts (Zare et al., 2018). In fact, occupational health is nowadays blamed as a widespread harmful agent and a critical risk factor among industrial workers. Employees in a variety of settings, such as food, fabric, drug, printed material, and metal product manufacturing firms as well as mining, forestry, and construction operations, are commonly exposed to high noise levels (Thepaksorn et al., 2018). Noise exposure is believed to undergo an even faster growth as a result of economic development and urbanization (Lin et al., 2018).
The number of people who are in contact with excessive noise levels (>85 dBA) worldwide is estimated to be over 60 million. Additionally, around 22 million American workers are annually exposed to superfluous noise in their working milieu (Safari Variani et al., 2018; Zare et al., 2019). On the other hand, following conservative estimations, more than one million healthy people began to develop some form of disease each year as a result of exposure to traffic noise in Western Europe (Miedema et al., 2011). Moreover, the results of a study carried out among 30,000 lumber mill Canadian workers indicated a positive association between employment duration and noise level, on the one hand, and increased risk of fata acute myocardial infraction, on the other hand (Davies et al., 2005).
Exposure to excessive noise is a worldwide occupational health issue with various social and physiological repercussions like anatomical, nonauditory and auditory consequences (Nassiri et al., 2017, 2016). Exposure to high noise levels may lead to noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL), an auditory syndrome that causes changes in hearing threshold and deterioration of speech perception. Excessive contact with high noise levels can further have nonauditory impacts on workers’ health. The nonauditory consequences may damage the autonomic nervous system, lead to heightened skin temperature and pulse rate, increase blood pressure, and cause abnormal secretion of hormones, constriction of blood vessels, and muscle tenseness (Fouladi et al., 2012; Nassiri et al., 2016).
According to the latest research findings, circadian rhythm of cortisol – a health biomarker that has been extensively investigated – is controlled by a SCN-PVN (suprachiasmatic nucleus-periventricular nucleus) and a SCN-adrenocortical pathway. Due to the daily rhythm of cortisol, researchers have found it difficult to run an assessment of cortisol levels or diurnal rhythms. Cortisol circadian rhythm is believed to grow within the first hour after waking up and reach its pinnacle around 30–45 min after wake-up. It will then gradually dwindle during the day and will fall to its minimum at midnight. Subsequently, it begins to rise again over nocturnal sleep until the time the individual wakes up during the next morning. The connection between cortisol and various diseases among people from different age groups has attracted a lot of research attention over the past years. Research findings have demonstrated that both physical and mental health are negatively influenced by dysregulation in the secretion or diurnal rhythm of cortisol. Patients suffering from Alzheimer have also been diagnosed with cortisol dysregulation (Barca et al., 2019; Lai et al., 2018).
At night, the synthesis of melatonin is induced by a neural output signal, which is produced by the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), followed by its release into the third ventricle and blood circulation (Zisapel, 2018). Melatonin is generated by the pineal gland and other tissues and enjoys a 24 h oscillation, hence a well-conserved circadian rhythm. The level of melatonin goes up at night (80–120 pg/mL) and measurably drops over the day (2–20 pg/mL). A body of research findings have indicated that there is a direct association between declined melatonin levels and development of various cancers like breast, prostate, colon, lymphoma, liver, etc (de Almeida Chuffa et al., 2019).
Data mining (DM), which is an interdisciplinary subfield of computer science, entails a process pattern extraction from large data through methods that originate from artificial intelligence, machine learning, statistics, and database systems. In other words, DM aims to collect necessary information and transform it to an understandable structure for further use. Accordingly, the extracted data may be classified to predict outcomes after an intervention or the pattern construction may entail studying the association, group, or detection of variable deviation (Zare et al., 2019). Different steps should be taken in data mining: (1) selection of focal variables. (2) Data processing. (3) Exploitation of a range of data mining techniques. (4) Information extraction, and (5) data interpretation. Different DM techniques are used for consecutive classification, prediction, association, clustering, and analysis (Han et al., 2011).
Neural networks constitute tools that are employed to analyze and stimulate nonlinear and uncertain systems, i.e. systems in which the associations between the components and parameters are not easily deciphered (Kohzadi et al., 1995). In the brain, neural networks are trained through processing experimental data. That is, they learn the rules by carrying out calculations on numeral data and examples. Therefore, neural networks are regarded as smart systems. A benefit of neural networks is that they can directly learn from the data without any requirement to estimate their statistical characteristics. Neural networks have the capability of detecting an association between a series of inputs and outputs to run estimations of other outputs without considering any type of primary assumption or prior knowledge about the connection between the examined parameters (Golabi et al., 2013).
It is highly critical to protect the workforce's health and prevent disease or profession-related accidents. Moreover, few studies have focused on the changes in cortisol and melatonin level by examining the weight of various factors. Thus, the current research aimed to:
1.Determine the concentration of serum cortisol and melatonin (target factors) in the three exposure groups in three various times during the night shift.2.Run a comparison of the average serum cortisol and melatonin concentration of the three exposure groups in three different times during the night shift.3.Identify the predictor factors for the purpose of weighing and modelling factors that influence serum cortisol and melatonin concentration among workers.4.Weigh and model factors that influence serum cortisol and melatonin concentration among workers.
