Many people will be exposed to a traumatic event during their lifetime (WHO, 2013), a significant minority of whom eventually go on to develop conditions such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; Kessler et al., 2005). Although there are effective treatments for established PTSD (administered at least 1 month after experiencing a traumatic event; NICE, 2005), only a minority of patients receive such treatment, leading to suffering and societal costs (Kessler, 2000). It is possible that symptoms such as intrusive memories can develop after an even wider range of events than those we currently classify as trauma (Mol et al., 2005). Further, evidence-based treatments to prevent the development of intrusive memories or future PTSD after a traumatic event are lacking; new methods to ameliorate psychological distress soon after a trauma are therefore needed (Iyadurai et al., 2018; Roberts, Kitchiner, Kenardy, & Bisson, 2010; Rose, Bisson, Churchill, & Wessely, 2002).
A core clinical symptom (Kupfer & Regier, 2011) of PTSD and acute stress disorder (ASD) is the “recurrent, involuntary and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s)” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Intrusive memories are experienced as sensory-perceptual (typically visual) mental representations of the traumatic event(s) (Brewin, 2014; Ehlers & Clark, 2000). It has been argued that emotional memory is perceptual (Arntz, de Groot, & Kindt, 2005) and likewise that mental imagery has a powerful impact on emotion (Holmes & Mathews, 2005).
Image-based intrusive memories as a symptom post-trauma may offer a translational treatment target in their own right.
Cognitive models of PTSD suggest that intrusive memories arise due to the differential processing that can occur during the encoding of a traumatic event: There is a shift towards enhanced perceptual processing (associated with a focus on sensory-perceptual information, sometimes termed data-driven processing), and reduced ‘conceptual’ processing, associated with a focus on information related to reasoning, organizing information, creating meaning from an event (Brewin, 2014; Ehlers & Clark, 2000; Holmes & Bourne, 2008). The predominance of perceptual processing at encoding is thought to lead to the subsequent involuntary triggering of sensory-perceptual image based memories by perceptual cues (both external and internal) in the environment (Brewin, 2014; Ehlers & Clark, 2000; Holmes & Bourne, 2008).
We need to find novel ways of working with emotional mental imagery (Arntz, Tiesema, & Kindt, 2007; Holmes, Arntz, & Smucker, 2007). Recent advances in memory research, concerning memory reconsolidation, open up hypotheses about new techniques that could be used to modify emotional memories. Following an event, new memories undergo a time-dependent process of stabilization, involving molecular and cellular processes, termed memory consolidation (Davis & Squire, 1984; McGaugh, 2000). During this discrete time-window new memories are fragile and vulnerable to interference, before becoming gradually resistant to change (Shadmehr & Holcomb, 1997; over approximately 6 h; McGaugh, 2000).
Insights into the neuroplasticity of memory suggest a consolidated memory may be rendered malleable following its reactivation via a retrieval cue (Alberini, 2005; Nader & Einarsson, 2010), necessitating restabilization in order for the memory to persist. During memory reconsolidation, a labile memory can be disrupted or enhanced via an intervention (Misanin, Miller, & Lewis, 1968; Nader, Schafe, & LeDoux, 2000b). Animal studies have shown successful weakening of conditioned fear memories with pharmacological agents (the protein synthesis inhibitor anisomycin) when applied during reconsolidation (Nader, Schafe, & Le Doux, 2000a). Recent studies conducted in humans provide initial evidence that conditioned fear memories (Kindt, Soeter, & Vervliet, 2009; Schiller et al., 2010) and episodic memories (Kroes et al., 2014) can also be modified in line with the idea of reconsolidation update mechanisms.
Cognitive models of working memory and dual-task studies suggest additional strategies to reduce intrusive memories of trauma. Working memory (WM) is a limited capacity system which temporarily maintains and stores information (Baddeley, 2012; Baddeley & Hitch, 1974) to “… support human thought processes by providing an interface between perception, long-term memory and action” (p. 829; Baddeley, 2003). Such WM models assume some form of limited-capacity “central executive” that oversees two types of storage systems: one for visuospatial information and one for auditory-verbal information.
Dual task experiments demonstrate reduced information processing when similar cognitive tasks compete for shared resources. For example, performing a visuospatial task selectively interferes with actively holding a sensory-perceptual mental image in mind. Research has shown that visuospatial dual-task interference can result in a visual image being held in WM becoming less vivid and, consequently, less emotional (e.g. Andrade, Kavanagh, & Baddeley, 1997; Baddeley & Andrade, 2000; Engelhard, van Uijen, & van den Hout, 2010; Engelhard, van den Hout, & Smeets, 2011; Van den Hout, Muris, Salemink, & Kindt, 2001).
Within experimental psychopathology, the trauma film paradigm (Holmes & Bourne, 2008; James et al., 2016), has long been used to investigate the generation of emotional intrusive mental images after trauma, and their modification – for example with imagery rescripting (Hagenaars & Arntz, 2012). Arntz and colleagues have argued that stimuli used in traditional experimental psychopathology approaches such as fear conditioning are too simple to model the learning/unlearning of complex emotional memories, and thus alternative approaches are needed to evolve novel therapeutic interventions concerning trauma memories (Kunze, Arntz, & Kindt, 2015).
Using the trauma film paradigm has allowed the investigation of the impact of engaging in visuospatial cognitive tasks on subsequent image-based intrusive memory development. Volunteers view a film with distressing content in the laboratory (an experimental trauma) and then over the following days keep a diary in which they record any intrusive memories of the film. Visuospatial tasks administered either during (e.g. undertaking a complex sequence tapping task; Holmes, Brewin, & Hennessy, 2004) or soon after (e.g. playing the computer game ‘Tetris’; Holmes, James, Coode-Bate, & Deeprose, 2009; Holmes, James, Kilford, & Deeprose, 2010a) an experimental trauma have led to significantly fewer intrusions during the following week compared to no-task (control). Further, a study by Holmes et al. (2010a) suggested that these effects may be modality specific: A task (Tetris) supposedly taxing visuospatial WM (Lau-Zhu, Henson, & Holmes, 2017) reduced intrusive memory frequency compared to a no-task control, whereas a verbal-based task (the general knowledge computer game Quiz) did not. While a review of the literature by Brewin (2014) suggests that, on balance, visuopatial tasks more consistently lead to a reduction in intrusions than do so-called verbal ones, it is important to note that in some studies verbal tasks have also been shown to reduce intrusions (Hagenaars, Holmes, Klaassen, & Elzinga, 2017; Krans, Näring, & Becker, 2009).
Thus far, most studies investigating cognitive task interference on intrusive memory have focused on a time window of 24 h or less between experimental trauma exposure and intervention. For example, studies examined the effects of cognitive interference during or shortly after (e.g. up to 4 h) watching the trauma film (e.g. Holmes et al., 2009; 2010b). A recent study showed that a visuospatial interference task (reminder cue plus Tetris game play) reduced subsequent intrusive memory frequency after a longer time delay of 24 h (i.e. the experimental manipulation was administered 24 h after experimental trauma; James et al., 2015). However, from a clinical perspective there are still challenges associated with reaching people within 24 h of a traumatic event. Hence, an extension of the time frame of intervention delivery beyond 24 h post trauma within a secondary prevention approach could benefit greater numbers of individuals who have recently experienced a trauma.
In the current research we built upon the above-mentioned study (James et al., 2015), which had used a similar cognitive interference procedure 24 h after experimental trauma. James et al. (2015) compared four between-subject conditions, and found that only a memory reminder task in combination with Tetris game play (but neither task in isolation) led to a reduction in intrusive memories of a trauma film. Results appear to be in line with reconsolidation update mechanisms in that both memory reactivation (reminder cue) and a blockade (Tetris game play) were required. However, this study did not test modality-specific task effects during this time frame since no non-visuospatial control task was used (James et al., 2015). Here we extended the approach taken by this previous study and had three aims:
i)Can a visuospatial interference intervention (involving reminder cue and Tetris) reduce intrusive memories of a trauma film even if delivered 72 h (3 days) after the film? Were such an effect obtained, this might enhance the range of applications for this kind of secondary prevention intervention for people who seek help later than 24 h after a traumatic event.ii)Is such an effect of the “reminder cue and Tetris” condition reducing intrusions also apparent when compared not only to a reminder cue alone condition – as used in the James et al. (2015) study – but also to an active control condition (i.e. with an alternative task to Tetris game play, akin to a placebo group)?iii)Is any effect on reducing intrusions modality specific, i.e. would the non-visuospatial control intervention (reminder cue plus a Quiz game) also reduce intrusions when compared to the reminder cue condition?
Thus, the current study tested the hypotheses that a single session cognitive intervention (memory reminder task followed by 15 min Tetris gameplay) would reduce later intrusive trauma memories when delivered 3 days after experimental trauma (a film) compared to two control groups: (1) reminder only: a memory reminder task followed by no cognitive interference task (sitting quietly in the laboratory for an equivalent period of time to the computer gameplay); and critically (2) an active control group: the memory reminder task followed by 15 min Quiz gameplay (an active control for the computer game play component). Intrusions of the trauma film were recorded in a diary, both pre-intervention (days 1–3 after film viewing) and again post-intervention (days 4–6). We assessed recognition memory (voluntary recall) for the trauma film on day 7. We predicted recognition memory test scores would be comparable in all three groups in line with findings showing an interference task involving Tetris selectively impedes the intrusive nature of the memory and not the content of recall per se (Lau-Zhu et al., manuscript under review).
