Cryptocurrency is a new kind of currency based on blockchain technology, which is a hot topic and attracts readers from both academic and industrial communities (Tschorsch and Scheuermann, 2016; Böhme et al., 2015). Compared with other currencies, cryptocurrency has the listed advantages: decentralized transaction, anonymity, auditability etc. But cryptocurrency also has unique risks, such as out-of-control network operations. (Johnson et al., 2014). As an emerging research field, research on cryptocurrency began in 2008. With the development of cryptocurrency market, recent years have witnessed the rapid rise of literatures of cryptocurrency.
The current research of cryptocurrency can be divided into two categories: (1) Underlying technology of cryptocurrency, including blockchain technology applications, consensus mechanism algorithms, the risk and legitimacy of cryptocurrency. (2) Economic applications of cryptocurrency. This stream of research goes hand in hand with the emergence of the cryptocurrency market, including price prediction of cryptocurrency, correlation between cryptocurrency and other commodities, volatility of the cryptocurrency prices.
Bibliometric aims to quantitatively analyze the research hotspots and evolution trends through mathematical and statistical methods. All techniques in bibliometrics are mainly based on the cluster analysis, such as co-citation, co-word and co-author analysis. A large number of scholars have used bibliometric analysis to distinguish research hotspots of certain fields. For example, Li et al. (2017) used co-citation analysis to distinguish research hotpots of business model. Zhang (2019) used Citespace to conduct co-word analysis of green finance research. Firdaus et al. (2019) explored the characteristics and changes of literatures on blockchain by using co-word analysis.
Although bibliometric has been applied in many mature fields, the bibliometric analysis on cryptocurrency is almost blank. Ignasi and Bariviera (2019) conducted a statistical analysis on bitcoin, but no co-word of cluster analysis had been applied in their papers. In recent years, the topic of cryptocurrency is widely discussed and debated, and a large amount of papers has been devoted to this issue with diversified research perspectives and disciplines, which makes it beneficial to conduct a bibliometric analysis and systematically review cryptocurrency literatures. Therefore, we start from statistical analysis of cryptocurrency literatures. Then we conduct co-citation and co-word analysis. By visualized results, we conclude some specific characteristics and promising future directions of cryptocurrency research. The bibliometric results of this paper serve as a useful direction for innovation of cryptocurrency research theories and methods.
