Computer models are powerful tools to explore low-carbon transition pathways that have various strengths, e.g. an ability to combine scientific, engineering and economic information, capacity to make aggregate projections, and an ability to simulate different mitigation pathways and policy scenarios. Computer models are therefore widely used, e.g. by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Like any tool, however, computer models also have limitations (Ackerman et al., 2009; McDowall and Geels, 2017; Stern, 2016). Some of these limitations are due to the simplifying assumptions in bottom-up models (with detailed technical information) and integrated assessment models, which abstract away from real-world complexities of low-carbon transitions, focusing instead on quantifiable techno-economic variables.
Methodological reviews of dozens of low-carbon model-based scenarios have stimulated discussion of these limitations (Hughes and Strachan, 2010; Loftus et al., 2015; Winskel et al., 2014; Wiseman et al., 2013). Table 1 summarises the main limitations under three categories, supporting them with quotes from recent articles. The first limitation is that model-based scenarios pay limited attention to the actors, organizations and activities that ultimately bring about transitions. The second limitation is that model-based scenarios pay little attention to social acceptance, political feasibility, and institutional change. The third limitation is that model-based scenarios represent transition pathways as smooth diffusion curves, which policy-makers can steer from an outside position. This technocratic, expert-based view on policymaking ignores the fact that policymakers are embedded within systems and are influenced by other actors.Table 1. Three limitations of model-based low-carbon scenarios, based on a summary of recent literature.LimitationIllustrative quotes1) Lack of actors and agency“Actor-based approaches are rare in low carbon scenarios. Thus the low carbon scenario literature is rich in qualitative and quantitative descriptions of possible future low carbon systems, but much less rich in scenarios which connect such possible outcomes to the near and mid-term decisions by specific system actors, which would be necessary to bring these outcomes about” (Hughes, 2013:692).“Most UK scenario work has focused on the rates of adoption of low-carbon technologies needed and the additional energy system costs involved, with relatively little discussion of the motivations of the different actors involved, the interactions between them and the choices and actions needed to get from here to there” (Foxon, 2013:10).“More abstracted, quantified and output-oriented approaches tend to capture a high degree of complexity in terms of input factors, interdependencies and outputs, enabling systematic exploration of techno-economic interactions and trade-offs, but may neglect the processes, organizations, institutions and behaviours involved” (Winskel et al., 2014:101).2) Limited attention for social acceptance and political feasibility“The plethora of low-carbon scenarios, roadmaps and pathways developed in recent years by academia, businesses, governmental agencies and NGOs do not have a remote chance of becoming reality without conducive political and institutional conditions” (Nilsson et al., 2011:1127).“On the mitigation side, the range of carbon prices simulated in the literature is largely disjointed from the analysis of the institutional and social changes that would need to accompany any transition to a low-carbon world” (Scrieciu et al., 2013:160).“Peer-reviewed, transparently documented models (…) still have difficulty in capturing softer and subtler aspects (…) such as organizational and institutional changes needed to deliver a wanted transition, even if these elements are important for decision makers to envision and manage this transition” (Trutnevyte et al., 2014: 27).“The MARKAL model can envisage new technical configurations for the energy system but questions about the political feasibility of achieving such changes, and the institutional arrangements and political strategies necessary for this, are unaddressed” (Taylor et al., 2014:38).“As the question of how – rather than if – to implement a new energy system currently emerges, scenarios will have to find answers to how societal acceptance and political feasibility can be integrated within their methodology” (Schubert et al., 2015:53).3) Representation of transition process and role of policymakers“There is a strong tendency within scenario studies to treat policy as external to the analysis. (…) However, on reflection it is clear that policy (…) takes place within a societal context, and within the context of technologies and technological practices” (Hughes and Strachan, 2010:6064).“(…) the need to secure and sustain broad social and political support is the greatest obstacle to taking the actions needed to drive a rapid and effective transition to a post-carbon economy. While many strategies acknowledge this, the analysis revealed a lack of detailed steps for achieving broad social and political support and for driving transformational social change. This frequently reflects an implicit assumption of a rational policy-making process in which the objective merits of the strategy provide a sufficient basis for driving change” (Wiseman et al., 2013:88).“In giving the image of a clear, technology-based pathway, the model also provides some sense of control over the structure and evolution of the energy system. As such, it facilitates the (perhaps tacit) belief that it is possible to ‘plan’ an explicitly ‘optimal’ (in cost terms) transition to a low-carbon energy system” (Taylor et al., 2014:38).
The three limitations also have increasing real-world relevance for low-carbon transitions. The UK electricity transition, for instance, which is the empirical focus of this paper, is experiencing implementation problems with regard to onshore wind, biomass, CCS and nuclear power (further discussed in Section 4). A better understanding of agency, social acceptance, and political feasibility of low-carbon transitions is therefore rapidly gaining importance, as the Paris agreement shifted the climate change debate towards real-world implementation.
In response to the limitations, scholars have suggested that quantitative models should be combined with qualitative storylines (Fortes et al., 2015; Foxon, 2013; Foxon et al., 2010; Geels et al., 2016a; Trutnevyte et al., 2014; Turnheim et al., 2015). McDowall (2014) distinguished three ways for such combinations. The first way is that qualitative scenarios describe broad and exogenous future trends in politics (e.g. international cooperation or fragmentation), culture (e.g. do consumerist or environmentalist values dominate), or economics (e.g. high/low economic growth), which are then translated into quantitative models inputs. This approach, which often creates scenarios based on a 2 × 2 matrix, was advocated, for instance, in the IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios (Nakicenovic et al., 2000). Qualitative context scenarios thus remain relatively exogenous to the models in this approach. These trend-based scenarios may appear circular and tautological (Hughes and Strachan, 2010), because it is hardly surprising that climate change targets are likely to be met in future scenarios with environmentalist values, international cooperation and high growth.
The second approach is the detailed quantification of narrative transition scenarios, to ensure that they are technically feasible and consistent (Auvinen et al., 2015; Fortes et al., 2015). This approach may be useful in participatory settings, where stakeholders first articulate visions of low-carbon societies and qualitative storylines about how to get there, which are then subsequently translated into model parameters. Quantitative results of transition pathways are then communicated back to stakeholders, leading to adjustments in the storylines (Trutnevyte et al., 2014). This approach may facilitate learning by participants, but assumes that the models are unproblematic tools for feasibility checks.
The third approach is a dialogue between models and qualitative storylines to compare and contrast insights from both methods (Foxon, 2013; Geels et al., 2016a; McDowall, 2014; Turnheim et al., 2015). So, the methods are not integrated, but used recursively. This approach accepts that both methods have strengths and weaknesses and may usefully highlight different dimensions of low-carbon transition pathways. Instead of aiming for single prescriptive answers, this approach acknowledges non-linearities and branching points in transitions, and offers policy advice in terms of possibilities and risks.
We aim to contribute to this third approach by developing and illustrating a methodological procedure for dialogue between computer models and the Multi-Level Perspective (MLP), which result in Socio-Technical Scenarios (STSc) that develop plausible storylines for model-generated transition pathways. This procedure consists of eight iterative steps and uses transition bottlenecks as a novel methodological aid to focus the dialogue between models and the MLP, which is a widely used social science approach that understands transition pathways as enacted by social groups at niche, regime and landscape levels (Geels, 2002a; Geels and Schot, 2007). Focusing on concrete innovations, these transition bottlenecks clarify tensions between MLP analyses (which focus on path dependencies and recent developments) and goal-oriented model-generated scenarios (which focus on desired future diffusion trajectories needed to reach the target of 2 °C climate change). Dialogue between models and MLP helps identify these bottlenecks, which then become the focus for STSc that aim to articulate ways for overcoming them.
These STSc will focus on changes in policies and actor strategies that may improve social acceptance and political feasibility of low-carbon innovations, while also touching on techno-economic and infrastructural challenges (Loftus et al., 2015). These STSc aim to increase the reflexivity of modelers (and policymakers) about the non-economic considerations that need to be addressed in low-carbon transitions. Modelers already commonly make off-model interpretations of modelling outputs, noting for instance that ‘X-level of installed capacity would require stronger policies to boost deployment’, or ‘Y-level of demand reduction would imply considerable lifestyle change’.1 But they usually do not explain the processes that create favorable contexts for radically new policies, lifestyle change or social acceptance of low-carbon innovations. STSc aim to ‘open this black box’ by articulating the associated socio-political processes and mechanisms.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 elaborates the socio-technical scenario methodology and our eight-step methodological procedure. Section 3 presents quantitative model-based scenarios for the future of UK electricity generation (2010–2050). Section 4 makes an MLP-analysis of recent developments (2000–2015). Section 5 identifies tensions and transition bottlenecks between modelling outcomes and MLP-analyses. Section 6 develops two socio-technical scenarios (A and B) indicating how transition bottlenecks can be overcome. Section 7 discusses policy implications and reflects on the scenarios and bridging methodology. Section 8 concludes.
