In China, the estimated WEEE generation has reached over 4 million tons in 2016 according to the CHEARI’s WEEE generation methodology (CHEARI, 2016). WEEE is mainly composed of metals, plastics, glass and other materials, among which plastics accounts for 30 wt% of WEEE (Baldé et al., 2017). However, plastics containing BFRs are proved to be harmful to the human and environment, which have become the major impediment for the WEEE recycling (Zhang and Xu, 2016; Li and Xu, 2019).
Currently, the landfill and incineration have been the last resort for the WEEE treatment due to the pollution of soil and groundwater as well as the generation of extremely toxic PBDD/Fs pollutants (Ni et al., 2010). Mechanical recycling is another option of reprocessing WEEE plastics. However, the difficulties in separating and sorting heterogeneous plastics hinder its application (Al-Salem et al., 2010). Chemical recycling, including pyrolysis, hydrolysis or gasification, is a promising method for efficient converting WEEE plastics into gases, oils, char or other chemicals (Ma et al., 2016a, 2018). Among them, the pyrolysis process has the advantages of minimizing PBDD/Fs emissions and saving energy consumption (Shen et al., 2018). Many bench scale experiments have been conducted to study the pyrolysis of WEEE plastics (Grause et al., 2013; Muhammad et al., 2015; Hall and Williams, 2008). However, it is reported that the pyrolysis of WEEE plastics would generate a great amount of brominated compounds (e.g. HBr, SbBr3, and organobromines), which existed in all the pyrolysis products and impeded their industrial application (Yang et al., 2013).
For sake of improving the quality of pyrolytic products and eliminating the brominated compounds, extensive catalysts have been applied during the thermal degradation process. Blazso and Czegeny used the pyrolysis-GC/MS method for the pyrolysis of brominated epoxy resin and found that the zeolites exhibited an effective elimination of brominated aromatic compounds (Blazso and Czegeny, 2006). The removal of organobromine compounds from the pyrolysis of two flame retarded plastics (Br-ABS and Br–HIPS) using Y-zeolite and ZSM-5 was studied and the results showed that both Y-zeolite and ZSM-5 were capable of eliminating the organobromines (Hall and Williams, 2008). However, the use of zeolite catalysts caused a negative impact on the oil yield and valuable chemicals. In our previous work (Ma et al., 2016b, 2017a), we investigated the effect of five different catalysts (HY, Hβ, HZSM-5, all-silica MCM-41 and γ-Al2O3) on the pyrolysis of brominated ABS. The zeolite catalysts had remarkable effect on debromination, while all-silica MCM-41 was in favor of retaining the oil yield due to its mesoporous structure, high surface area and low acidy.
The metallic oxides have been utilized to remove brominated compounds in the pyrolysis of BFRs containing plastics. The catalytic degradation of mixed plastics has been carried out by using iron- and calcium-based catalysts (Brebu et al., 2005). Iron-based catalysts showed a better performance of Br removal with respect to calcium-based catalysts. Jung et al. proved that Ca-based additives (CaO, Ca(OH)2 and oyster shells) also showed satisfactory effect on the debromination of Br–HIPS pyrolysis oil (Jung et al., 2012). The fixation ability of bromine using different metallic oxides (ZnO, Fe2O3, La2O3, CaO and CuO) during the pyrolysis of tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) and printed circuit board have been conducted (Terakado et al., 2011, 2013). It was demonstrated that La2O3 and Fe2O3 were effective for suppressing the formation of HBr and organobromines. Red mud has also been used to improve the bromine fixation during pyrolysis of PCBs (Chen et al., 2018). The results indicated that iron oxides showed a satisfactory ability of bromine fixation. In addition, nickel oxides modified catalysts have also been demonstrated to increase the production of valuable chemicals and accelerate the degradation of brominated organic compounds due to their high catalytic activity in our previous study (Ma et al., 2017b). Therefore, the coexistence of iron and nickel oxides may enhance both debromination ability and catalytic cracking capacity of the catalysts in the catalytic pyrolysis process.
The catalytic pyrolysis could be categorized as in-situ and ex-situ pyrolysis on the basis of contact method of feedstock and catalyst (Wang et al., 2014). In the in-situ pyrolysis process, the plastics are mechanical mixed with catalyst. A large amount of coke and impurities would be easily deposited on the catalyst, which results in inevitable deactivation of catalyst and increases catalyst consumption. For the ex-situ pyrolysis, the plastics are pyrolyzed in the first stage and the volatile products undergo catalytic upgrading in the second stage. The pyrolysis-catalytic process is considered to be more practical for WEEE plastics recycling, which can not only slow down the deactivation of catalyst but also make the regeneration of catalyst more convenient due to the separation of residue and spent catalyst (Wu et al., 2015). The relevant literature reported the pyrolysis-catalytic of WEEE plastics in terms of effect of catalysts and improved process performance was achieved (Muhammad et al., 2015; Ma et al., 2017b). Unfortunately, the deactivation of spent catalyst has not been deeply studied.
In our previous study, the mesoporous catalyst showed good ability to increase oil yield, and the iron and nickel had effect on debromination and composition of the pyrolytic oils (Ma et al., 2016b, 2017b). The modified mesoporous catalyst with bimetallic oxides, may not only enhance removal of bromine from volatiles but also improve both the yield and quality of oil during pyrolysis of WEEE plastics. Thus, in this work, the Fe–Ni bimetallic MCM-41 catalysts with different ratios of Fe to Ni were used for the catalytic pyrolysis of WEEE plastics in a two-stage fixed bed reactor. The effect of catalysts on pyrolysis products and the removal of bromine from the liquid products were investigated. Moreover, the detailed characterization of fresh and spent catalysts was conducted to evaluate the debromination mechanism over different catalysts.
