One of the most common kinds of mental abuse is by means of both acute and chronic alcoholism [1]. Depending on the specific pattern of drinking and volume of alcohol consumed, the seriousness of it can be easily assessed. Alcoholism is a state where patients are obsessed with too much drinking alcohol, knowing well that alcohol can lead to a lot of impairments in the human brain and body and yet they cannot resist their desire to drink alcohol [2]. Too much of alcohol consumption leads to serious behavioral and cognitive problems in the human body by especially affecting the peripheral and central nervous systems. The patient develops an incapability to remember new things after chronic alcoholic consumption thereby taking a toll on the memory aspect too [3]. A major reason of worldwide mortality rates every year is due to alcoholism and its related disorders. Alcohol-related cancers are also on the significant rise affecting vital organs like stomach, liver, kidneys etc [4]. Alcoholism is also partially responsible for causing stomach ulcers, liver cirrhosis, pancreatic and gall bladder problems too. Alcoholism even contributes to deaths caused by accident, homicide, suicide, depression etc [5]. The social and personal relationships at colleges, offices, social gatherings, meetings etc is fully spoilt by alcoholism. Factors due to environment, genes and psychology contribute a lot to alcoholism. Because of such problems, alcoholism has to be definitely addressed in prominence so that early detection of it through simple and non-invasive techniques can save precious human lives [6]. Using the standard techniques, it is difficult to assess the cases related to alcoholism. Diagnosis of alcoholic patients in clinics is done by assessing the responses of alcoholic patients by measuring factors such as quantity of drinking, feeling of guilt, urge to drink incessantly, responses to criticism etc. Due to the societal stigmatization and fear, patients fail to reveal the exact information and so the rate of positive screening of alcoholism in hospitals is quite less. Therefore, with the advent of EEG, the measurement of the brain signals of the alcoholic patients can be easily done in a non-invasive manner [7].
For evaluating the various mental disorders like screening and diagnosis, EEG signals are predominantly utilized. By nature, EEG signals are highly dynamic and non-linear in nature and so it is utilized in various tasks such as classification of pilot mental states [8], drowsiness level detection [9], epilepsy detection [10], autism disorder detection [11], Alzheimer's disease detection [12], stroke analysis [13], consciousness and unconsciousness analysis [14], motor imagery classification [15], sleep related disorders [16], schizophrenia related disorders [17] etc. A more precise work for alcoholic EEG signal classification was done by Acharya et al in [18], where the alcoholic EEG signals was split from normal EEG signals by using non-linear features and Higher Order Spectra (HOS) features. Depending on the maximal weight matching concept, the functional connectivity in alcoholic EEG signals was done and evaluated by Zhu et al [19]. The alcoholic EEG signals were identified by their respective rhythms in [20]. The alcoholism disorder was explored by an EEG-based Machine Learning technique that utilizes resting state EEG features to classify the alcoholic patients by Mumtaz et al [21]. A wavelet filter bank technique which is orthogonal in nature and having three bands was utilized with Least Squares Support Vector Machine (LS-SVM) for identifying the alcoholic EEG signals by Sharma et al [22].
A medical expert who is trained to find out the fine variation in EEG signals between an alcoholic subject and normal subject for the diagnosis of alcoholism is quite difficult because the inspection of these subtle variations is difficult to analyze with the naked eye [23]. Moreover, to interpret the EEG frequency spectrum in a clinical manner, it involves the analysis of EEG frequency spectrum which is hectic to do. Owing to its strenuous and time-consuming nature, CAD is incorporated which involves both signal processing and soft computing techniques as a base to diagnose the disease using EEG signals [24]. A variety of signal processing techniques utilized for feature extraction are reported in [25]. Some of the commonly used soft computing techniques for analyzing the EEG signals are reported in [26]. To trace the deviation from the normal ones, certain linear and non-linear techniques [27] are utilized such as Hurst exponent, Lyapunov exponent, Fractal dimension etc.
In this paper, for the alcoholic EEG signals, initially the clusters are computed with the help of CD so that the features are extracted completely. Then the appropriate features are selected using distance metrics utilized here such as correlation distance, city block distance, cosine distance and chebyshev distance. Finally, it is classified with twelve suitable post classifiers for analyzing the alcoholic risk levels in EEG signals. The organization of the paper is as follows; In section 2, the materials and methods are discussed followed by the classification methodology utilized in section 3. Section 4 discusses the results and discussion and the paper is concluded in section 5 followed by suitable reference materials.
