The unemployment rate in the Philippines in January 2019 was estimated at 5.2%. “Of the total unemployed, the age group 15–24 years comprised 43.7%, while the age group 25 to 34, 30.6%. By educational attainment, 20.9% of the unemployed were college graduates, 8.2% were college undergraduates, and 28.2% have completed junior high school. Graduates of junior high school include those high school graduates in the old curriculum” (PSA, 2019).
The labor markets in the Philippines and abroad have become very competitive. When parents are confronted with the choice of Universities and Colleges where their children will attend and get a degree, the prospects for future employment carry much weight. Employability, thus, becomes a matter of crucial consideration when schools define their curriculum and their policies on recruitment, entrance, and retention.
“In the 21st century, employability skill is the most required skill besides technical knowledge in an attempt to compete for employment and sustain job at the industrial global market” (Ismail & Mohammed, 2015). Schools have to provide the training that meets the standards employers set for their workforce. Industries may have different standards, but they always have a set of characteristics they expect for their applicants to possess that would boost institutional objectives. Whether employers seek graduates whose skills are, either, related or not aligned to their field of specialization, they will always look for their standards.
Initial education needs to be able to grant the necessary skills for any professional to be able to overcome the existing challenges, either to the search for a job with continuity or to the creation of their own employment through enterprising behavior (Aranega, 2014). Thus, the university curriculum should be consistent with the demands of employment and self-employment, especially at higher education levels (Martin, 2014). Moreover, “competitive graduates in the job market often depend on a strong curriculum of the programs. Graduates are competing among themselves to meet the job market in various sectors. Because of the limited amount of jobs available, many graduates end up unemployed” (Ahmad, Zainal, Idris, & Rahmat, 2012).
It is further argued that “individuals who have best developed the competencies which firms feel to be most important are more likely to be in a position to obtain a job” (Teijeiro, Rungo, & Freire, 2013). This requires for the educational process to go beyond the level of imparting knowledge and developing skills. It must be leveled up to ensuring and producing employable graduates. Thus, schools need to regularly review their programs, offerings, curricula, and methods to strengthen the employability of their graduates. Alignment and realignment of resources towards this end must become a priority.
“Employability of graduates therefore has become an issue that is not easy to be ignored in the global economy” (Misra & Khurana, 2017). Studies like this have become the main instruments to determine the areas of strength and weakness of an institution’s graduates. “Graduate tracer studies (GTS) are important to Higher Education Institutions since it enabled such institutions to accommodate changes in the society especially the demands of the actual and potential employers, through evaluation and constant review of their curricula” (Caňizares, 2015, p. 82). Hence, this present study is conducted.
Outside the Philippines, Woya (2019) and Siraye, Abebe, Melese, and Wale (2018) conducted employability tracer studies among statistics graduates, and business and economics graduates, respectively. In the Philippines, there are also several attempts to conduct employability tracer studies among graduates of B.S. in Industrial Technology (Del Rosario, 2019), Bachelor of Secondary Education (Caňizares, 2015; Navida, 2018), and Bachelor of Elementary Education (De Vera, 2018), to name a few. In fact, the studies of Del Rosario (2019) and Navida (2018) adapted the GTS questionnaire from the country’s Commission on Higher Education. However, the study of Navida (2018) has a very low participation rate with only 29 out of 130 (22.31%) graduates completed the questionnaire. Another local study which is noteworthy is that of Balingbing (2014) because the respondents of her study were also B.S. in Information Technology graduates which are similar to the respondents of this study but with inclusion of B.S. in Computer Science graduates.
Billo et al. (2017) also conducted an employability tracer study of B.S. in Information Technology (BSIT) and B.S. in Computer Science (BSCS) graduates of Batch 2014, 2015, and 2016. Two hundred twenty one out of 253 graduates participated in this study. They sought to determine the socio-demographic profile of graduates, the employability of graduates (in terms of employment status, present occupation, companies graduates are employed, reasons for staying in the job, reasons for accepting the job, length of time it took the graduates to land in the first job, gross monthly income), and the reasons for not having a job. In this present study, the researchers conducted an employability tracer study of BSIT and BSCS graduates (the same programs as the previous study) of Batch 2015, 2016, and 2017. The following variables were determined: the socio-demographic profile of graduates, employability of graduates (in terms of employment status, present occupation, companies graduates are employed, reasons for staying in the job, reasons for accepting the job, length of time it took the graduates to land in the first job, gross monthly income), and the reasons for not having a job.
Other variables used in this present study that were not included in the study of Billo et al. (2017) are the following: whether or not the curriculum the graduates had in college was relevant to their first job, and whether or not the competencies they learned in college were found useful by the graduates in their first job. Another gap that this present study addresses is the paucity of published employability tracer studies among B.S. Information Technology (BSIT) and B.S. Computer Science (BSCS) graduates in the Philippines.
