The quinoxaline derivatives have also found applications in molecules [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Newly, the research of synthesis, structural and energetic properties of these compounds were made by our group [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. In addition, the organic photovoltaic solar cells represent a significant potential for evolution in the study of the electricity production from low-cost compositions. Then, the past 2 years we have seen an important growth in the conversion efficiency of organic photovoltaic solar cell PVSC, pass a 1% return realized in recent years [15], at a 5% recorded in 2 years ago [16]. The long-term goal of this study is to minimize costs of PV compositions; we present here a few technical aspects. There are, to expand a technology founded on eco-friendly materials along nearly limitless availability. This goal becomes achievable day by day, in the evolution of high performance organic screens in the electronic industry [17]. We use the diode technology of organic light-emitting [18] to establish guidelines for organic photovoltaic solar cell OPVCs research. Advances in OPVCs need a distinct agreement of the particular physics of deformed organic semiconductors and devices [19]. We begin by the essential properties of organic semiconductors, as charge transport. We provide guidance for choosing efficient OPV materials and we verify a few castes of materials used in various coats of a PVCs. Then, we present an electrical representation of organic solar cell OSC. A criticism analysis of physical procedures allows us to size the maximum and minimum yields possible using several device structures.
Lately, polymer PVCs have received a lot of attention for their flexibility, ease of processing, weak weight and weak cost of production [20, 21, 22]. Their relatively large band gaps limited the Jsc, reducing the power conversion efficiencies (PCE). After improving efficiency, low band-gap conjugated polymers (CPs), were developed to better conform to solar spectra, and thus produce higher Jsc [23]. Significant advance was done in PVCs founded on bulk-heterojunction networks done of weak band gap CPs and the fullerenes at last, Nowadays the photoelectric conversion efficiency of OSC is much greater than 7% [24]. Generally, the PCE based on the Voc, the Jsc, and the fill factor (FF) of the systems. The Jsc is controlled by the hatching among the absorption of the CPs and the solar spectra [25]. The Voc is calculated by variance among the ELUMO of the fullerene derivatives, and the EHOMO of CPs [26]. So the novel improvement in PCE request development of new CPs with adequate energy levels and greater absorption along the solar spectra. Thus, the mobility of the heavy load carrier of polymer semiconductors should be considered [27].
On the other hand, with the experimental results obtained for organic compounds without metals, research is again restricted. Just some study groups have searched the photophysical and optoelectronic properties for dye sensitizers [28, 29], as well intra compound e−-dynamic process enter compound and TiO2 [30,31]. So, the investigation study of novel quinoxaline-based dyes was signalized in Figure 1. The central quinoxaline was paired by means of conjugation to an (benzene, chlorobenzene, methylbenzene …) and the group (C=O, –NO2, –C3H5, …).Download : Download high-res image (752KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. Optimized geometries of all molecules.
The optical absorption and e−-structure properties of fifteen dye sensitizers Q i (i = 1–15) were investigated by using DFT. According to the results obtained, we analyzed the role of various e−-D groups in setting of structures, optical absorption and e−-structure properties have been analyzed. As well, we wanted to see the sensitizer D impacts on the Voc and the Jsc of the cell via discuss the main factors influencing Voc and Jsc along the purpose to discovery the potential sensitizers for use in dye-sensitized solar cell DSSC.
