In the last two decades, the concept of minimally invasive surgery that can excise deep-seated lesions of the brain with a minimum brain injury has evolved. The traditional brain surgical procedures have many limitations, most notable being damage to the healthy brain, both anatomically and functionally. To limit brain dysfunction, minimally invasive surgery is adopted by neurosurgeons to operate with less damage to the body than using open surgery. In this technique, neurosurgeons take advantage of the anatomical corridors in the brain called fissures. The fissures are the sites wherein two parts of the brain tissues are connected by thin arachnoid bands that can be broken easily. A fissure nearest to the lesion being removed is split open and retracted by a metallic strip, called spatula or retractor. This procedure provides accessibility and adequate exposure for the neurosurgeons in different intracranial procedures deep within the brain. It has been reported that during the brain retraction, the pressure applied by the retractor causes deformation of the adjacent tissue, causing damage to the brain tissue and partial or total closure of the blood vessels, thus hampering the oxygen supply to the brain. The amount of pressure being applied on the brain surface and the extent of injury depends on several factors, including geometry of the retractors, physical and material properties of brain tissue, resection, gravitational sag, distribution, and duration of brain retraction pressure (BRP) [1]. This pressure from retractors inevitably results in injuries to the brain, which include intra-operative bleeding, excessive retraction of brain lobes, cortical incisions, etc [2]. The severity of the damage is also amplified by abnormal physiological conditions such as hypotension, hypoxaemia, and hypercapnia [3]. In brain retraction, the most common aspect of detecting the damage is to measure the time for which the brain tissue can sustain the pressure without undergoing any permanent deformation. Bennett et al., [4] provided a threshold of retraction time of 15 min, after which the brain tissue becomes stressed, besides limits in terms of arterial pressure or regional blood flow have also been provided [5], [6]. Brain tissue is viscoelastic in nature, thereby exhibiting the stress-relaxation phenomenon and reduction in BRP as time progresses. Nevertheless, the application of pressure, exceeding one of the criteria mentioned above, for longer time durations can cause reversible or irreversible damage to the brain. Hence, to prevent the brain tissue from getting damaged, a monitoring system is required, which ensures when one of the criteria mentioned above is met. However, measuring the local pressure at tissue level is still a challenge as per the capability of existing medical devices [7].
Numerous experimental studies have been conducted in the past to study the effect of focal pressure applied by retractors. These studies focused on several attributes of brain retraction, namely: measuring the effects of BRP in different approaches of retraction such as subfrontal, interhemispheric, or subtemporal [8]; the peak magnitude and relaxation of BRP over time [9]; and continuous versus intermittent brain retraction [10]. Yokoh et al., [8] demonstrated that only one of the two different subjects exhibited postoperative complications by using the same retraction approach with similar BRP levels on both the subjects. This confirms that the level of BRP is not the only factor, but its duration, the exposure, the age of the subject, and the physical and physiological condition of the brain also affect the extent of injury to the brain tissue. The use of a neuronavigational system coupled with a virtual computer model of brain mimicking a patient’s anatomy might help in omitting a few of the risks mentioned above.
The image-guided brain retraction has been quantified in several studies [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. Hansen et al., [11] calculated the forces exerted on spatula through finite element (FE) analysis coupled with haptic feedback. A GPU accelerated FE brain model for simulating brain retraction and resection was proposed recently [12], [13]. The FE model used was based on the theory of linear elasticity and neglected the material non-linearity (hyperelasticity) as well as time dependence (viscoelasticity). Recently Li et al., [14] presented the FE simulation of a simple swine brain retraction using a visco-hyperelastic material model but calculated the deformation of the brain far away from the retraction area. The motivation behind these studies was to account for dynamic changes in the surgical field to improve the reliability of image-guided neurosurgical systems rather than understanding the effects of retraction on brain tissue. Also, most of the virtual brain models analysed for retraction in the past were elementary and limited to two dimensions [16]. In contrast, existing 3D brain models lack anatomical similarity partially or completely [11]. The anatomically correct FE models that were developed in the past remained focused on demonstrating their potential for traumatic brain injury [17].
There is a wealth of literature available to establish an analysis framework that would allow to include both finite strains as well as viscous behaviour as a time-dependent phenomenon in the brain tissues [18], [19], [20]. The most common studies considered either linear elastic [16], [11] or poroelastic [15] material models for modelling the brain tissue retraction. These models are computationally optimized and applicable to procedures with small deformations only. However, for surgical applications, the organs undergo large deformations [21]. Minimal efforts have been directed to simulate brain retraction problem using a visco-hyperelastic computational model with correct anatomical features. Miller [20] proposed an isotropic solid visco-hyperelastic material model for brain tissue, particularly for low strain rates, i.e., for surgical procedures. This material model of the brain has not been used to understand the biomechanical effects of deep brain retraction.
The studies evaluating the biomechanical effects of the retraction procedure adapted elementary geometrical models as well as material behaviour. The soft brain tissue undergoes large deformations during surgical manipulations, and using linear elastic material models cannot provide an accurate estimation of field quantities. The present study attempts to fill this research gap by incorporating the combination of certain anatomical features of the brain as well as the improved material physics, in contrast with previous numerical studies related to brain retraction only. Consequently, a quasi-static boundary value problem for sub-temporal retraction without taking into account any rigid body motion of the brain has been solved by mimicking the experimental setup. The constitutive behaviour was characterized by the theory of non-linear elasticity using an isotropic quasi-linear constitutive model in which the material response composed of non-linear elastic and linear viscoelastic parts. Additionally, a digital atlas of the canine brain was segmented and reconstructed for simulation purposes [22]. Efforts have been directed to quantify useful information on BRP and tissue deformation by qualitatively comparing the numerical results with the available experimental data. In the present work, the brain retraction has been modelled as a general and preliminary procedure, and the results presented are specific to the sub-temporal retraction only, independent of their application in any specific neurosurgical procedure. The developed model is a preliminary step towards providing a patient-specific surgical simulation platform, even for a more experienced surgeon, to effectively plan and perform complex non-routine operations with the aid of accurate physiological and anatomical information.
