Lung cancer is the most dangerous and deadliest type of cancer. Smoking is the basic risk factor for lung cancer [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], and it accounts for 85 out of 100 people dying every year [4]. Although people who do not smoke have a lower risk factor, they may still be affected by the smoke of other smokers [3].
There are many other risk factors, such as second-hand smoking, exposure to radiation and air pollution. Uranium is a metallic chemical element, which breaks down, with time, to form radon gas, which spreads in the air and water causing pollution and great harm to the lungs [4].
Lung cancer risk degree increases when there are cases of lung cancer in relatives, and this may be due to a common environment, genes or both [4]. In addition, the history of chronic pulmonary diseases is associated with lung cancer [4, 5].
Prognostic models to predict cancer have been developed in many cases, including the incorporation of these tools for patient selection and pretreatment stratification into clinical trials [6]; some of these tools predicted lung cancer [7].
1.1. Previous studiesLung cancer has been a major concern to researchers in both oncology and the field of medical aid that is based on artificial intelligence. Some studies have designed systems for the detection and diagnosis of lung cancer [8, 9], while others have focused on early lung cancer diagnosis [10, 11, 12, 13, 14].Studies about the diagnosis of lung cancer have been based on techniques such as fuzzy logic8 and neural networks [15]. Other studies have used hybrid neuro-fuzzy techniques [9, 14]. However, these methods are unable to construct a valid medical diagnostic system with increasing volumes of databases, making them unreliable. There are studies based on advanced machine learning concepts, such as decision trees [12, 13, 16, 17], which have demonstrated higher reliability compared to those old systems.Hanai and others introduced prognostic models for Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) based on neural networks [18]. They built their models on 125 NSCLC patients with 17 potential input risk factors.Kattan and Bach introduced a study on the variations in lung cancer risk among smokers based on many factors [19]. They measured the influence of those factors on the risk degree of lung cancer. They found that 15% of men who were over 68 years old and smoked two packs of cigarettes per day for 50 years and still continued to smoke had lung cancer, while only 0.8% of fifty-one-year-old women who smoked a pack of cigarettes per day for 28 years had lung cancer.Ramachandran and others built an early prevention system for lung cancer based on data mining in which they used 11 different factors [11]. They conducted experiments using a database consisting of 746 samples, but they did not mention any source for their database. In 2014, Thangaraju and others also used data mining techniques to predict the risk factor of lung cancer [12]. They used Bayes Trees and Decision Table for clustering and classification. The experiments were conducted using 303 samples.Manikandan and others designed a hybrid neuro-fuzzy system for the prediction of lung cancer based on 11 symptoms [14]. They used 163 samples from a database of 271 individuals (221 medical situations and 50 normal persons).Arulananth and Bharathi defined the symptoms that can be used for lung cancer prediction [20]. They differentiated between diagnostic factors and the symptoms that indicate the presence of cancer. They defined the diagnostic symptoms by age, sex, family history of cancer, smoking, exposure to radiation, exposure to radon, exposure to chemical subjects and air pollution. On the other hand, they defined the symptoms that indicated the presence of cancer by chronic cough, hemoptysis, chest pain, weight loss, fatigue, chronic lung inflammation, wheezing, swallowing difficulties and anorexia.In 2018, Senthil and Ayshwaya used neural networks and evolutionary algorithms to define the risk degree of lung cancer based on risk factors [15]. They applied these algorithms to the UCI Global Lung Cancer Database, which consisted of only 32 samples, and the symptoms used were not specific.Recently, in 2018, Markaki and others built a clinical risk prediction model for lung cancer based on smoking symptoms [17]. They depended on the number of years of smoking, number of cigarettes smoked per day, number of years since the start of no-smoking, weight, height, hours spent in contaminated places, frequent cough, sex and age. Some other studies used advanced machine learning algorithms, such as random trees and random forests, which were very useful for the classification of big databases [21]. On the other hand, others have relied on radiotherapy image processing techniques to determine whether lung cancer is present or not [22]. Other researches focused on the prediction of the mortality of people with NSCLC in the U.S. Military Health System [23].Cassidy concluded that for building a good lung cancer risk-prediction model, it was preferable to seek other factors in addition to smoking and age [7].Some previous models did not consider all risk factors and symptoms, and others used a very small database. In this study, a lung cancer prediction tool based on risk factors and their specifications is built. In addition, the symptoms and their effect on lung cancer are studied. Both local and international studies and reports are considered in order to build a powerful international prediction tool. Machine learning techniques are also applied to analyze an international lung cancer database of 1000 records and 23 attributes.
