There has been a significant increase in the use of cross-spectral iris applications over the past several decades. Cross-spectral iris recognition has been developed to overcome the limitations of iris recognition in a single spectrum, such as visible (VIS) wavelength-based iris recognition [1, 2], and near-infrared (NIR) wavelength based iris recognition [3, 4]. Iris recognition in the cross-spectral domain is considered to be superior among same spectral iris recognition approaches, as the cross-spectral domain employs different spectral bands to obtain richer information of the human iris [5].
Recognition performance can be enhanced by using complementary iris information from different spectral bands; this leads to more discriminative recognition features [6]. Cross-spectral iris recognition has widespread use in various biometric applications, such as the national ID card system, biometric passports and visas, criminal investigations, and e-commerce [7, 8]. In addition, several imaging products equipped with cameras from different spectral bands, such as Microsoft Kinect2, FLIR ONE, and Heatwave, are currently available on the market [9].
Iris recognition in the VIS spectrum is affected by reflection from the cornea; dark-colored irises are clearly visible, while light-colored irises are highlighted [10]. Meanwhile, the NIR spectrum disbands the striking patterns of the pigment melanin in the iris, and the iris recognition is affected by less reflections [11]. Consequently, recognition of iris images in both NIR and VIS spectra is more challenging than recognition within the same spectrum. Because NIR and VIS spectra are widely used and targeted in commercial implementations [12], the present study focuses on the NIR-VIS cross-spectral domain.
Existing studies on cross-spectral iris recognition primarily have a feature-based approach [13, 14, 15, 16, 17], which is significantly affected by parameters in the feature extraction process, such as spatial position and orientation, as well as iris image acquisition conditions that can degrade recognition performance. To address these limitations, we propose cross-spectral iris recognition using the phase of NIR and VIS iris images. The principle of this approach involves using the phase component of the 2D discrete Fourier transformation (DFT) of NIR and VIS images to calculate the matching score. Phase-based iris recognition is simple yet effective due to the availability of important characteristics in the phase component of an image.
Phase-based image matching has been used in various biometric recognition tasks in the VIS spectrum, including fingerprint recognition [18, 19, 20, 21], palm print recognition [22], finger knuckle recognition [23], and iris recognition [24, 25]. In this study, we apply phase-based iris matching techniques to the cross-spectral domain. Figure 1 presents a simplified diagram of the phase-based cross-spectral iris matching. An image has a phase and amplitude; however, only the phase is used for matching purposes. In the phase-based matching, the most challenging task is to obtain a similar spectrum of the phase component between the two images.Download : Download high-res image (289KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. Simplified overview of the phase-based cross-spectral iris matching. The matching process is based on the phase component of the two dimensional (2D) discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of near-infrared (NIR) and visible (VIS) iris images. (iris image source: PolyU iris database [47]).
Using images from different spectral bands results in a different spectrum of the phase component of each image, which may affect recognition performance. This problem can be attributed primarily to specular reflection caused by illumination variations in the two images. Therefore, we propose using a photometric normalization technique to address specular reflection. We explore different filtering techniques for integration into phase-based cross-spectral iris recognition, such as discrete cosine transform (DCT)-based filtering, TanTriggs filtering, and homomorphic filtering. In addition, in contrast to previous studies, this study considers the textural information contained in each color space (i.e. red, green, blue, Y, and V channels) to achieve more reliable recognition.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
a.To the best our knowledge, this is the first study that employs phase-based iris matching in the cross-spectral domain. The phase information of iris images is obtained from the DFT spectrum of the NIR and VIS images. We address specular reflection using homomorphic filtering prior to the segmentation steps.b.In contrast to previous approaches, which perform matching mainly in the red channel of the VIS image, we use various color channels such as the green, blue, Y, and V channels of VIS iris images to obtain an improved representation of iris patterns.c.We significantly improve the performance of cross-spectral iris recognition by integrating phase-based matching and a photometric normalization technique known as homomorphic filtering.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the related works, while Section 3 outlines our proposed method. Section 4 provides the experimental results and a discussion, and Section 5 presents conclusions.
