An area of endemism (AEs) is defined by the congruence of the areas of distribution of two or more species (Espinosa et al., 2001). These areas of endemism are considered as hypotheses of primary biogeographic homology, that is, conjectures about a common biogeographic history among taxa (Morrone, 2001). Sandoval and Ferro (2014) also recognize another area category: patterns of distributional congruence (PDCs), defined only or mostly by sympatric species, not endemic to the study region, and this category provides the first-step testable hypotheses of AEs for future analyses of neighboring regions, or analyses at more inclusive scales (Szumik et al., 2012).
Only in a few groups of parasites have distribution patterns been studied using quantitative methods (Morrone and Gutiérrez, 2005; Liria and Navarro, 2007; Luque and Poulin, 2007; Oliveira et al., 2017). The study of parasites indirectly provides information about the biogeographic history of their hosts, and in turn, the history of hosts allows elucidation of speciation events in parasites (Escalante et al., 2011).
Fleas are obligatory hematophagous parasites of higher vertebrates; the majority of fleas parasitize mammals, whereas their association with birds is less frequent (Medvedev and Krasnov, 2006). Primary association of fleas with small mammals is observed in all parts of the world (Krasnov, 2008). Fleas have evolutionary adaptations and ecological interactions with other organisms and it is estimated there are 2575 species in the world, therefore, fleas can be an excellent study group for geographic distribution analyses (Krasnov et al., 2005; Hastriter and Whiting, 2009; Bossard, 2014). Krasnov (2008) proposed that geographical distribution of a flea species should be a result of interaction between its responses to the geographical distribution of host/s and to the off-host environment. The degree of flea endemism varies among regions of the world, and in the Neotropical region the main hosts for endemic flea species are rodents of the subfamily Sigmodontinae (Cricetidae) and the family Caviidae (Krasnov, 2008). As mammals are becoming more threatened throughout the world, their associated fleas are disappearing at an alarming rate before they are even described, with habitat loss the greatest threat to the species (Kwak and Hastriter, 2020). The natural habitats of the world continue to disappear being replacement by agriculture land, housing, roads, pipelines, and other features of industrial development (Pardini et al., 2017). Since the areas with high endemism have been indicated as promising areas for conservation (Myers et al., 2000), the search and discovery of these areas could be of great value for the conservation of hosts and their parasites.
Fleas are also important from the epidemiological point of view, because they are capable of transmitting pathogenic organisms to wild and domestic animals and even to humans (Bonvicino et al., 2015). The analysis of the biogeographic patterns of the vector flea species will allow proposing biogeographic hypotheses that can be interpreted to explain the spatio-temporal integration of the endemic species and, in the future, deduce biogeographic factors and history of the different diseases in which fleas participate (Murray et al., 2018).
In Argentina, 130 species, 24 subspecies, and 37 genera belonging to 11 families (Ceratophyllidae, Ischnopsyllidae, Leptopsyllidae, Ctenophthalmidae, Hystrichopsyllidae, Stephanocircidae, Malacopsyllidae, Pulicidae, Tungidae, Rhopalopsyllidae, and Pygiopsyllidae) were recorded, of which 47 species are endemic (Beaucournu et al., 2004; Beaucournu and Gallardo, 2005; Lareschi et al., 2016; López-Berrizbeitia and Díaz, 2019). A large number of these fleas are distributed in northwestern Argentina (NWA), where 55 species and nine subspecies are mainly parasites of sigmodontine rodents (Lareschi et al., 2016; López-Berrizbeitia and Díaz, 2019). Of this total, four species are cosmopolitan, while the rest are native and seven of them are endemic. Most of the eco-regions in NWA are in an accelerated process of degradation, as for example the dry Chaco (Torrella et al., 2007, 2011) and Yungas Forests (Brown et al., 2001). The change from natural vegetation to cultivated areas is a constant threat to mammal hosts in this type of habitat (Ewers and Didham, 2006; Peters et al., 2006). On the other hand, NWA is interesting from the epidemiological perspective because bordering plague endemic areas (Bolivia and Peru) and there are other diseases transmitted by bacterial pathogens recorded in fleas (Schneider et al., 2014; Berger, 2018).
This paper represents the first quantitative analysis of distributional records of parasites of the order Siphonaptera from northwestern Argentina, recognizing patterns of distribution congruence and species that characterize them. In addition, we correlate these distributional patterns with traditional biogeographic divisions of the area as well as with other biogeographic studies of the main hosts of fleas, carried out in the same region (Sandoval and Ferro, 2014; Sandoval et al., 2015).
