Huge amounts of astronomical data have been generated due to the development of large ground-based and space-based telescopes as well as digital sky surveys. Current sky surveys such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) (York et al., 2000), Large Sky Area Multi-Object Fiber Spectroscopic Telescope (LAMOST) (Cui et al., 2012), Gaia (Gaia Collaboration, 2016), and Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (Ricker et al., 2015) have produced hundreds of TB of data. In the 2020s, more data will be produced at the PB and even EB level by several next-generation large telescopes and surveys around the world, e.g., SKA (Dewdney et al., 2009), FAST (Nan et al., 2011), LSST (Ivezić et al., 2019), Euclid (Laureijs et al., 2011), and WFIRST (Green et al., 2012). Thus, astronomy is entering a new era of big data where the data sets are too large for astronomers to download and analyze using their own computers, thereby calling for the development of an online science platform for astronomy (Yanxia Zhang, 2016, Desai et al., 2019).
Astronomy has always had a tradition of making data open and several pioneers have provided online data services and tools. For example, the Strasbourg Astronomical Data Centre (CDS) (Genova et al., 2000) established in 1972 has been dedicated to the dissemination of value-added digital astronomical data. The CDS developed a series of well-known tools for astronomers to allow them to query, explore, and analyze data online, including SIMBAD (Wenger et al., 2000), VizieR (Ochsenbein et al., 2000), and Bonnarel et al. (2000). The SDSS data release system is another example. The browser- and SQL-based interfaces provided by SkyServer and CasJobs (OMullane et al., 2005) were designed to allow astronomers to access and filter SDSS data in a convenient manner. These online data services and tools which make data easily discoverable laid a solid groundwork for the science platform idea.
A virtual observatory (VO) is a data-intensive online astronomical research and education environment based on advanced information technologies for achieving seamless and global access to astronomical information (Cui and Zhao, 2008). In order to work toward the same goal, the International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was established in 2002 with the aim of connecting worldwide data centers and projects by building a framework for discussing and sharing VO ideas and technology (Arviset and Gaudet, 2012). In China, the Chinese Virtual Observatory (China-VO) was established in the same year as IVOA (Cui and Zhao, 2004). Furthermore, the Chinese Astronomical Data Center was established as a member of the World Data Center system in 1989. During the last decade, China-VO has developed Astrocloud, a science platform that integrates data, tools, and computing resources for astronomical observations, research, and education. The Astrocloud platform is open to all users, including professional astronomers, amateur astronomers, students, educators and the public all over the globe.Download : Download high-res image (1002KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. China-VO AstroCloud portal.
