Despite significant advances towards gender equality in the labor market, men continue to dominate mathematically intensive STEM occupations in the workforce, particularly engineering and information technology (Blau & Kahn, 2017). Moreover, these patterns are anticipated by earlier gender differences in human capital investment choices, with male students over-represented in mathematically intensive study fields—such as physics and computer science—in secondary and tertiary education (Buser, Niederle, Oosterbeek, 2014, Friedman-Sokuler, Justman, 2016, Justman, Méndez, 2018, Rapoport, Thibout, 2018, Riegle-Crumb, King, Grodsky, Muller, 2012, Turner, Bowen, 1999).
The persistence of these gendered choice patterns, despite the narrowing gender gaps in educational achievement and despite substantial shifts in policies, institutions, and technology towards gender parity, highlights the role of culture in shaping individuals’ economic choices (Fernandez, 2007). While the role of culture in determining women’s participation in the labor force has received much attention in the literature (Alesina, Giuliano, Nunn, 2013, Antecol, 2000, Fernández, 2011, Fernández, Fogli, 2009), much less is known on the role of culture in determining women’s choices of educational and occupational fields. This paper contributes to the latter issue an empirical analysis of cultural differences in gendered choices of advanced STEM matriculation electives, the earliest significant juncture of individual choice in the STEM ‘pipeline’ in Israel (Friedman-Sokuler & Justman, 2016).
To analyze the significance of cultural gender norms on choices we take advantage of the unique institutional setting of the education system in Israel—a centrally administered system, with schools segregated by native language, Hebrew and Arabic. Hebrew and Arabic speakers in Israel form two societies characterized by distinct gender norms with Arab society exhibiting distinctively less gender equality (Abu-Baker, Azaiza, 2010, Yashiv, Kasir, 2011). Using a longitudinal administrative data set comprising all eighth-grade students in Israel during two consecutive school years, we follow two half-cohorts of Israeli youth in Arabic-language and Hebrew-language schools from the eighth grade, when they sit for national standardized tests, to the twelfth-grade, when they are tested in matriculation electives chosen during the three years of high school.
We find that in Arabic-language schools, which serve a society with markedly less gender equality, female students are the majority in all STEM matriculation subjects, including subjects that are male-dominated in Hebrew-language schools—physics, computer science and advanced mathematics. Our longitudinal analysis demonstrates that the earlier female advantage in mathematical achievement observed in Muslim societies by Fryer and Levitt (2010) is amplified in their choice of advanced STEM electives.1 These choice patterns remain significantly more gender-equal in Arabic-language schools, even after controlling for the larger achievement gaps favoring Arab girls in standardized eighth-grade mathematics and science tests, and for socio-economic status (SES). We show that much of the difference in gender gaps between the two sectors reflects different behavioral responses to early achievement and SES—with behavioral responses differing by gender among Hebrew speakers but not among Arabic speakers. These patterns accord with the recent findings of Falk and Hermle (2018), from international experimental and survey data, that gender differences in economic preferences are greater in societies with greater gender equality and higher GDP, showing that they apply to real-world decisions.
Our empirical approach is informed by the epidemiological method described by Fernández (2011), which identifies the effect of culture on outcomes by comparing individuals from different cultural backgrounds functioning within the same institutional setting.2 While the two ethnic groups we consider study in separate schools—segregated by language—they share the same institutional setting, operating under the aegis of a single, centralized ministry of education. The two types of schools are similar in many of the factors examined previously as affecting gender gaps in achievement and choice. They are co-educational,3 they follow the same curriculum in STEM subjects, and their students take the same STEM matriculation tests (except for translation). Moreover, their teachers belong to the same union, study at the same universities, and most attend the same teacher training programs.4 These institutional similarities suggest that the reversed patterns of achievement and choice of STEM subjects we observe in Arabic-language schools are not the result of explicit policy initiatives or institutional constraints.
The advantage of Arab women in high school STEM does not currently follow through to subsequent stages. Arab women are as much if not more under-represented in engineering programs in tertiary education, and in engineering and IT occupations in the workforce, as Hebrew-speaking women. This indicates that the differences we observe for matriculation choices are not motivated by a greater availability of jobs in STEM occupations for Arab women. Quantitative and qualitative research in behavioral science suggests other channels through which culture may affect the educational subject choices of Arab women. These include the value of STEM achievement in the marriage market, and differences between Arab and Western culture in the gender stereotyping of mathematically-intensive occupations.
Our findings contribute to the existing literature in several ways. First, the experience of Arab women in Israel belies the notion of a congenital female aversion to traditionally male STEM subjects such as mathematics, physics and computer science (Ceci et al., 2014), highlighting instead the role of culture in shaping the gendered patterns of education achievement and choice of STEM subjects. Moreover, the unique circumstances of Israeli society allow a comparison of Western cultural norms to traditional patriarchal norms within a common Western institutional setting; and our administrative longitudinal data allow us to compare choices made in secondary school while controlling for differences in early achievement within large population cohorts. They show that real-world educational choices accord with recent experimental and survey findings that higher levels of economic development and gender equality favor a greater manifestation of gender differences in economic preferences across countries. From a policy perspective, our analysis more generally illustrates the importance of tailoring programs aimed to increase female participation in STEM subjects to specific conditions. Where the imbalance in Hebrew-language schools calls for early intervention, in middle school or before, the decline in female STEM participation in Arab society occurs in the transition from high-school to tertiary education. Finally, Our findings contribute more broadly to understanding gender gaps in STEM participation in Arab and Muslim societies in general, highlighting the potential for greater participation of women in mathematically intensive fields in these societies.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the Israeli context. Section 3 describes the student population, the construction of the study sample and the main educational outcomes. Section 4 outlines our estimation strategy, and estimates ethnic and gender differences in the choice of STEM matriculation electives; and analyzes gender and ethnic heterogeneity in the relationship between prior achievement and choice. Section 5 discusses potential mechanisms driving the ethnic differences in gender gaps. Section 6 concludes.
