Forensic science laboratories are becoming more reliant on computers and data for both administrative and analytical operations. These technological advances create new opportunities and risks for all forensic disciplines, not only to digital evidence [1]. With proper preparation and management, forensic laboratories can employ technology effectively to improve performance and quality, while mitigating the associated risks. However, many forensic laboratories do not understand the subtlety and expertise required to manage risks of digital transformation, inadvisedly treating it as simply a technical component of existing quality management processes. Forensic laboratories that fail to realise the need for forensic digital preparedness to actively manage risks associated with digital transformations are vulnerable to significant expense, disruption and liability when problems arise.
Forensic laboratories rely on technology for much more than communication and routine business functions. Sophisticated equipment for processing chemical and biological materials are operated using computers and save results in digital form. Mass spectrometers, DNA analysis systems, and other laboratory equipment save their results in raw data files. Digital evidence is processed using specialized hardware and software, although not all forensic laboratories have integrated this new discipline. Forensic laboratories are using computerized case management systems for tracking treatment of all evidential exhibits and forensic results. Automated systems with artificial intelligence are being used to support forensic analysis. In reality, digital transformations are well underway, and forensic laboratories require a robust strategy to manage the associated risks and realize the opportunities.Digital Transformations – utilizing digital technology to make existing processes more efficient and effective, and to develop new solutions to emerging problems.
This increased dependence on digital technology creates risks and opportunities for forensic laboratories. Potential pitfalls include loss of data needed to perform forensic analysis, errors in analysis of physical traces (e.g., DNA, fingerprint, face) caused by computer hardware or software, ability to tamper with raw data files generated by laboratory equipment, and incorrect information input into laboratory information management systems (LIMS). Possible benefits are traceability and integrity of traces, reliability and reproducibility of results from information extracted from traces and stored as raw data, and use of artificial intelligence to support forensic analysis.
Lessons can be learned from the digital forensic domain, including forensic digital preparedness and accreditation challenges. Primary challenges encountered by digital forensic laboratories adopting quality standards include [2]:
•Inaccurate or insufficient information in technical records, including chain of custody, and no mechanism to detect subsequent changes to records.•Problems with the security of information technology systems and the backup processes of data.•Missing or insufficiently detailed procedures for treating digital data, and personnel not following documented procedures consistently.•Lack of robust quality checking mechanisms, and issues with validation of methods.
This paper presents risks and opportunities associated with digital transformation of forensic laboratories, providing examples based on the authors’ experiences. Examples have been anonymized, as the intention is to illustrate general lessons learned rather than critique specific laboratories. This work then presents forensic digital preparedness, a set of recommendations to help laboratories navigate risks associated with digital transformations, including mishandled exhibits, allegations of employee misconduct, and disclosure requirements. The role of digital forensic capabilities and expertise in risk management of digital transformations in laboratories is discussed. This work culminates with broader implications for international standards used to assess and accredit laboratories such as ISO/IEC 17025.
