In the field of dental prosthetic fabrication, net-shape casting using the conventional lost-wax method provides a large degree of design freedom; although it is difficult and time-consuming to fabricate high-precision prosthetic appliances because of the duplicate impressions and refractory casts required by the conventional lost wax method (Koutsoukis et al., 2015; Tasaka et al., 2019). Recently, dramatic advances in computer technology have enabled a new process to replace the lost-wax method, termed dental computer-aided design and computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM). Such systems have been used to design and fabricate dental prostheses, broadening the range of available materials. Prosthetic appliances using CAD/CAM systems have already been applied to crown and bridge coping and removable prosthesis frameworks (Kim, 2019).
There are two main processing methods for CAD/CAM systems: subtractive and additive manufacturing. New materials using the subtractive method for dental prostheses include nano-zirconia (N–Zr), fiber-reinforced composite (FRC), and polyether ether ketone (PEEK). Nano-zirconia is a nanocomposite in which nanometer-sized alumina particles and ceria-stabilized zirconia particles are dispersed within a ceria-stabilized zirconia crystal and alumina crystal, respectively. This material has excellent mechanical properties, such as high flexural strength, high fracture toughness, and high material stability to low-temperature degradation (Hagiwara and Nakajima, 2016; Tanaka et al., 2002). Nano-zirconia frameworks are suggested as an alternative prosthetic treatment option for maxillary complete dentures (Nishiyama et al., 2018). FRC material is predominantly composed of approximately 50–60% glass fiber and 40–50% epoxy resin, with sheets of woven glass fiber superimposed in multiple layers and hybridized with the epoxy resin. This FRC composite material shows anisotropic properties (Freilich et al., 2000); when the load is applied perpendicular to the glass fiber direction, the flexural strength is 393 MPa (Yasue et al., 2019), which is twice that of restorative composite resins. Conversely, when the load is applied parallel to the glass fiber direction, the flexural strength is 100 MPa (Yasue et al., 2019). However, the mechanical characteristics of FRC are comparable to those of traditional materials, which could render it a viable alternative to metal in the production of prosthetic structures (Passaretti et al., 2018). Polyether-ether-ketone (PEEK) is a semi crystalline thermoplastic resin of the polyaryl-ether-ketone genus. PEEK is known for its low absorption properties, good wear resistance, biocompatibility, and non-allergic nature, as well as having a lower elastic modulus than metal and ceramic materials (Zoidis et al., 2016). Therefore, PEEK has been applied for industrial and medical purposes, especially for orthopedic surgery in recent decades (Zoidis et al., 2016). A denture framework of PEEK could be fabricated by direct milling and thermopressing. The fit accuracy of the framework was noted between both techniques, and the fit was considered to be an acceptable clinical fit (Negm et al., 2019).
As for additive manufacturing, material extrusion and vat photopolymerization methods have been applied to fabricate denture bases, dental models, and individual trays. Another additive manufacturing method, the powder bed fusion method, also called selective laser sintering or selective laser melting, has also been used to fabricate removable partial denture (RPD) alloy frameworks (Kajima et al., 2016). This method can be used to fabricate complex geometries with undercuts, which is difficult to achieve with subtractive methods. The powder bed fusion process could also be applied to the preparation of RPD metal frameworks (Kajima et al., 2016). A cobalt-chromium-molybdenum alloy (CCM) is commonly used as the metal framework of an RPD and is also applicable to the powder bed fusion process. The accuracy of RPD metal frameworks fabricated by casting and those fabricated by the powder bed fusion process differed depending on the specific structural component used, but overall discrepancies were smaller in the case of the powder bed fusion process framework (Tasaka et al., 2019).
Several reports (Saponaro et al., 2016; Wimmer et al., 2018; Yilmaz et al., 2017) have introduced the concept of complete denture fabrication using CAD/CAM technologies; although pre-existing problems related to complete denture wear still remain. One such problem is that of midline fractures (Dabbar et al., 1994; Reddy et al., 2013). There are two approaches for preventing denture fractures; one is to strengthen the denture base and the other is to reduce the stress at the midline. Several methods have been proposed to strengthen the denture base by reinforcing the denture base polymer with other materials such as carbon fibers, fiberglass, or ultra-high modulus polyethylene fibers (Jagger et al., 1999). To reduce the stress at the midline, insertion of a strengthener made of metal and fiberglass reinforced wire (Hirajima et al., 2009) or a metal framework (Vallittu, 1995) has been suggested. Usage of these reinforcing materials was reported to reduce complete denture deformation; although the addition of those reinforcing materials into the denture base was time consuming and less precise than that achieved using CAD/CAM technologies. To understand denture fractures, deformation of the complete denture under stress has been evaluated using methods such as brittle coating (Matthews and Wain, 1956), photo elastic models (Craig et al., 1974), holography (Dirtoft et al., 1985), and strain gauges (Prombonas and Vlissidis, 2002). The rosette strain gauge can quantitatively measure the intensity and direction of strain by deformation; therefore, strain gauge measurements are often used to determine the strain of the complete denture induced by occlusal loading. During this type of strain measurement, minimal denture deformation is recorded without the use of in vitro artificial mucosa (Hirajima et al., 2009).
Several studies have evaluated the mechanical properties (Alp et al., 2018; Kalberer et al., 2019; Prpic et al., 2019) of dental materials used in subtractive and additive manufacturing, as well as the reproducibility (Goodacre et al., 2016; Wimmer et al., 2018) of complete dentures fabricated by dental CAD/CAM systems. The framework in a complete denture not only provides mechanical reinforcement but also improves patient comfort due to the presence of a thicker palatal area. Nevertheless, the effects of frameworks made by CAD/CAM systems have not been fully elucidated. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of different framework materials manufactured by dental CAD/CAM systems on complete denture deformation. The null hypothesis was that framework materials fabricated by CAD/CAM do not influence complete denture deformation.
