Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignant tumors, which is difficult to cure and easy to cause death due to its high degree of malignancy, rapid development and inapparent early symptoms [1]. The imagological diagnosis of HCC based on CT images is the most common diagnostic method [2]. However, the excessive working pressure of doctor, the poor quality and the insufficient phases of CT images lead to the misdiagnosis or the missed diagnosis easily. HCC can be classified into diffuse, nodular and massive types according to the number and diameter of tumor nodules which require different treatments or surgical plans [3]. Therefore, the computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system for HCC based on CT images is of great significance, including alleviating burdens on doctors, improving efficiency and accuracy of diagnosis and providing reference for subsequent treatment.
Several studies discuss about CAD system for liver tumors using CT images. Kumar et al. [4] report a CAD system that can distinguish benign and malignant tumors by a probabilistic neural network using contour-wave coefficient first-order statistics and contour-wave coefficient co-occurrence matrix obtained based on the segmentation of liver and tumor using confidence connected region growing algorithm and alternative fuzzy C-means clustering algorithm. Chang et al. [5] use the region growing method to segment the tumor, from which the texture features, the shape features and the gray-scale transformation features of images at different times are extracted using a gray level co-occurrence matrix, an elliptical model and using kinetic curves, respectively. Based on these features, logistic regression is adopted to classify benign and malignant tumors. Sethi et al. [6] use active contour model to segment the wanted objects and utilize neural network to classify the curvelet coefficient texture features for identifying the common abdominal diseases such as tumors, cysts, stones, and normal tissues. Sayed et al. [7] use fuzzy C-means algorithm to segment lesions to extract 16-dimensional texture and shape feature vectors and then adopt the SVM classifier to classify benign and malignant tumors. Most of these studies classify benign and malignant tumors, and this paper focuses on classifying HCC to determine the therapeutic regimen, especially whether the patients are suitable for minimally invasive therapy.
From the above analysis, it can be seen that the work flow of the traditional CAD systems mainly includes four steps: image preprocessing, image segmentation, feature extraction and classification. Image preprocessing is to perform noise reduction or contrast enhancement on the original image. Image segmentation is mainly to segment the liver and lesions using the automatic or semi-automatic algorithms. Feature extraction is to extract the texture or shape features of the target area through algorithms such as gray level co-occurrence matrix, wavelet transform and first-order statistics. Finally, the classification is mainly to classify the extracted features by nonlinear classifiers such as SVM, ANN, and the like. Feature extraction plays a very important role in the traditional CAD system because the selection of features heavily affects the final classification result. Therefore, it requires the researchers to spend a lot of efforts to determine the type of features to be extracted and also the corresponding extraction method. And sometimes the dimension reduction is even required for the feature vectors.
This paper presents a computer-aided diagnosis system based on convolutional neural network (CNN) technology. Full convolutional network (FCN) with weighted loss function is introduced to segment liver and tumor automatically, and then CNN classifier is used to classify diffuse, nodular and massive types of HCC. Different from the traditional systems, the proposed method does not require the steps of image preprocessing and feature extraction.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the data and equipment used in the experiments. Section 3 describes the selection and modification of FCN structure, the construction of the weighted loss function, the structure of the CNN classifier, and the evaluation metrics used in this paper. Section 4 analyses the experimental results of segmentation and classification. Section 5 concludes the work.
