Catechins are a family of secondary metabolites found in a wide diversity of vegetal products; this family of flavonoids includes (-)-Epicatechin (EC), (-)-Epicatechin gallate (ECG) and (-)-Epigallate catechin gallate (EGCG). Among them, (-)-Epicatechin is found mainly in cacao beans, which have the highest content of total flavanols (120–180 g/kg), of which 35% correspond to EC [1].
This flavanol has shown numerous biological effects such as: decrease risk of cardiovascular dysfunction, metabolism regulation, skeletal muscle cells differentiation induction, among others [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. However, despite its various positive effects there is little evidence demonstrating the mechanism(s) through which EC initiates those effects.
It has been proposed that EC improves cardiovascular dysfunction trough the activation of plasmalemma-associated G protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) which mediate, at least partially, the effects of this flavonoid in endothelial cells in culture, showing a similar response to the synthetic GPER's specific agonist (G1), and also partially blocked by a selective antagonist (G15), suggesting an agonist-acceptor/receptor type interaction [8].
Nevertheless, the effects of EC through this type of proteins seem not to be universal since in SkM the effects of EC, such as the increased expression of proteins that in turn induced mitochondrial biogenesis, muscular growth and differentiation regulation [4, 9], are not at all mediated by GPER.
In order to identify proteins that could mediate the EC's skeletal muscle effects and based on: 1) results showing that EC effects are specific/selective [10], 2) specificity seems to depend on EC molecular chiral centers and 3) EC's structural similitude with steroidal backbone, we analyzed proteins with receptor characteristics that can recognize steroids and whose activation/deactivation leads to similar effects to those observed for EC.
Pregnane X receptor (PXR) is one of the possible acceptor/effector proteins; although its main function is xenobiotics depuration, it is also linked to metabolism regulation and cell proliferation [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. In order explore the possible EC-PXR interaction, we used several experimental approaches: 1) analyzed the possible interaction through affinity score, via molecular docking. 2) developed an affinity column, immobilizing an EC's Mannich derivative to an agarose matrix, leading the flavonoid chiral centers free, preserving its stereochemical characteristics and 3) evaluated the EC-induced PXR activation in cultured C2C12 myoblast cells, analyzing the receptor's translocation, the effect on the expression of Cyp3a11 [22], a well characterized downstream gen activated after the binding of specific ligand(s) to PXR, and its possible participation on C2C12 differentiation.
On this regard, some attempts had been implemented to search proteins that can interact with EC as example: exchange columns to determine structural identifiers of EC and (+)-catechin required for their interaction with an specific flavonoid enzyme in vegetal extracts, highlighting the importance of chiral centers [23, 24]. Similarly, in the recent past our group developed an affinity column with EC to isolate proteins, using a methodology which blocks the C3 hydroxyl group; this approach allowed the isolation of GPER from endothelial cells [25]. However, even when this approach is reliable, it is possible that C3 hydroxyl group blockade could reduce the EC stereoselectivity necessary for its specific interaction with proteins.
With these approaches, we intended to demonstrate that PXR is a possible target for (-)-Epicatechin in skeletal muscle and C2C12 myoblasts.
