The segmentation task of the medical image that offers a large number of distinct loci for interaction that can act on a deep level for diagnostic assistance. Image segmentation based in various models and partial differential equations are promoter in view of their flexibility and computing performance. Segmentation models can be classified into contour-based models [1, 2, 3] or on the classification of regions [4, 5, 6]. Contour methods extract local features as well as first and second order derivatives of the image. The major drawback is the noise control during image processing. The variational problem offers a solution based on chunks with smooth boundaries. During iterations of numerical computation, the setting is crucial and topological changes are not allowed. Selective segmentation models are considered most suitable for applications, such as surgical simulation, medical diagnosis, object tracking, etc., to ensure the finality of experts to extract objects of interest in the image object of prognosis [7]. Gout et al. [8] introduced use a set of landmarks on the contour of interest for the geodesic active contour model based on geometry constraint. Later Badshah et Chen [9] proposed to improve the results by combining the term region with the region information in order to make the model more robust, especially for noisy images. These two level set functions perform two tasks simultaneously to describe a new variational model [10]. The object of segmentation is used to track the boundaries and the other focuses on the region of interest which is close to geometric constraints. The average channel image, which can extract textural and inhomogeneous objects introduces the selective segmentation model [11, 12]. Several research projects have focused on watershed segmentation. Image decision making is often deduced from the first segment the image (ie, gathering neighboring pixels into homogeneous regions) and then a classification step based on the supervised region. In such a process that uses watershed approach [13], the type of the segmentation stage is crucial for the final graded result. The watershed algorithm dynamically combines nodes into homogeneous network segments regarding their topological relationships and detection states. These groups of distributed data streams allow manipulation in space instead of individual nodes in order to realize network segments as programming abstractions describing various query processes to be executed [14]. This method proves its effectiveness in the field of medical imaging segmentation in research work [15, 16, 17, 18]. In this paper, our main objective is to make a comparative study between these two approaches, their impact in the diagnosis for the identification of heart and valvular diseases, to value the results obtained in the context of medical prognosis.
