To remain competitive on an increasingly global and technological market lead organisations to connect and converge information from various departments into a central and integrative solution (Finney and Corbett, 2007). Enterprise resource planning systems (ERP) give companies an efficient and effective integrative tool as it stores and shares business processes and information through the entire organisation in real-time (Hayes and McGilsky, 2007). Given the influence of enterprises systems on organisations performances, more and more companies are adopting this software to stay competitive and not being left behind. Thus, a market, where once only large enterprises could afford these complex and expensive systems, have been changing, due to, the demand for smaller companies for a more affordable, flexible and straightforward package. Chaudhari and Ghone (2015) predicted that in 2020 the market value would be 38.208 thousand euros, revealing the growth of 7.2% compared with 2014. The increasing adoption of ERP systems, implementation success rates are between 20% to 40% (Sun et al., 2015).
Moreover, Panorama Consulting (2017) reports that 37% of organisations in 2016, with ERP systems already implemented, received less than 50% of its expected benefits. Students' knowledge of ERP complex knowledge is a significant predictor of competency. Thus higher education adoption of ERP in their curricula increase skills of their students when providing sophisticated technology, such as ERPs. Given the importance of the ERP systems, higher education establishments have also realised its possible benefits and decided to incorporate enterprises system into their study programs (Hepner and Dickson, 2013; Maas et al., 2018). University management students understand that while using these systems, they are learning various managements concepts such as business cross-functionality, decision making, cooperation and coordination within the organisation (Aldholay et al., 2018; Boykin and Benjamin Martz, 2004; Mandal and Flosi, 2012). This empirical knowledge is considered more efficient and long-lasting and valued by companies as it guarantees better equipped and prepared employees (Chadhar and Daneshgar, 2018; Chauhan and Jaiswal, 2016). Although there are studies on ERP usage in university contexts (Binyamin et al., 2019; Rabaa'i et al., 2009; Schwald, 2011; Soliman and Karai, 2015), our question is still pertinent. The main goals of this study are to understand if the ERP usage supports management learning, and to identify the main success determinants, such as user satisfaction, use, and individual performance.
The contributions of this study are twofold. Firstly, this study indicates that ERP's usage is adequate for management learning purposes, and secondly, it presents a theoretical model of the ERP success determinants in management university learning context. In this study, we carried a quantitative methodological approach to validate the research model. We conducted a survey and 221 university management students participated voluntarily. We treated data using Partial Least Squares/Structural Equation Models' method.
The paper is composed of seven sections. The first two sections present the theoretical background in enterprise systems, state of the art about ERP usage and success. The third section contains the proposed research model. The fourth section describes the empirical methodology and the way the model was validated. The fifth and sixth sections present the study results and discussion. The final section describes the conclusions of the study.
