The need to adapt and use new technologies made the industry evolve into a new era. Connectivity, amount of data, new devices, inventory reduction, customization, and controlled production gave rise to the so-called Industry 4.0. Term created to meet the demands of innovation and changes announced in Germany “as the fourth industrial revolution” (Lee et al., 2014). The differences between the current industries and the 4.0 model are divide into three main lines: components (self-aware, self-predictive); machines (self-aware, self-predictive, self-compare); productive system (self-configure, self-maintain, self-organize). Customization and availability of data, allowing actions by people or machines, are some of the essential characteristics of Industry 4 (Jin et al., 2017, Lee et al., 2014).
Data is the key to this generation of information that can anticipate or collaborate in making predictive decisions. The idea that “Manufacturing industry needs to turn into predictive manufacturing” published by Lee et al., 2013, Lee et al., 2006 has motivated our study. Predictive Maintenance (PdM) is historic data-based, models, and domain knowledge. It can predict trends, behavior patterns, and correlations by statistical or machine learning models for anticipating pending failures in advance to improve the decision-making process for the maintenance activity avoiding mainly the downtime (Lee et al., 2006, Sezer et al., 2018). The implementation of PdM and methodologies aimed at improving manufacturing capabilities generate other definitions such as intelligent industry or intelligent manufacturing (Kiangala & Wang, 2018).
The maintenance has attained critical importance for industries, due to the growth in complexity of the interactions between different production activities in increasingly extended manufacturing ecosystems (Sezer et al., 2018). In this way, another concept that also adds value to the PdM process is the Internet of Things (IoT). With a specialization denominate Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), it uses the IoT technologies in an industrial environment, incorporating Machine Learning (ML) and Big Data (BD). Methods that reinforce the philosophy that “smart machines” show higher efficiency in comparison to humans in terms of accuracy and consistency for data management (Sezer et al., 2018).
Another system that has been making use of the IoT is the Cyber–Physical System (CPS), which is an area that refers to the next generation engineered systems (Gunes et al., 2014, Lee, 2016). The term coined at the National Science Foundation (NSF) in the United States around 2006 (Gunes et al., 2014). A key aspect of modeling and studying CPS is by having enough information about the machine and physical process to create an abstract representation for the intended purpose (Saez et al., 2018). Its architecture consists of several layers, such as digital connection, data-to-information conversion, high-performance computing infrastructure, cognition, and configuration layers (Wu et al., 2017c).
The integration of the concepts, as mentioned earlier, set the base for the development of the PdM area. In our search for related literature, we found surveys targeted at Industry 4.0, data analytics, and machine learning (ML), in which PdM is often one of the challenges (Lee et al., 2014, Lee et al., 2013, Muhuri et al., 2019, O’Donovan et al., 2015). However, we verified the need for a systematic literature review with a more specific discussion of PdM and its directions. As the main contribution, we proposed a taxonomy, emphasizing the use of PdM in the context of Industry 4.0, divided into three essential topics as maintenance types, principles, and domains in applications. Besides, we organized the main concepts related to the area, presenting the main predictive and monitoring models, identifying the challenges and future directions, aiming to create a reference for predictive maintenance.
The following text has six sections. Section 2 summarizes the essential PdM concepts. Section 3 detaches the related work and why the necessity and motivation of our study. Section 4 discusses the used research strategies and selection methods. Section 5 presents the taxonomy proposed, and it accomplishes a discussion responding to the scientific challenges and the research questions. Section 6 elaborates challenges and future directions, ending with our conclusion in the last Section.
