Length composition analysis is a common practice in fish stock assessment and can provide insights into the dynamics of a fish population (Vokoun, Rabeni, & Stanovick, 2001). The combination of length data with abundance or catch per unit effort and key life-history parameters can provide key information on year-class strength, growth, or mortality (Miranda, 2007). Thus, accurate quantification of the size structure of a population, which can only be achieved by developing effective monitoring programs, is critical to understand the status of a fishery and how the population may respond to environmental stressors and management (Adams, Crumby, Greeley, Ryon, & Schilling, 1992; Schaefer, 1957). It is important to develop a sampling program and estimate what kind of sample size is sufficient to build a reliable length-frequency estimate.
Statistic resampling of simulated and empirical data sets have been used to estimate the suitable sample sizes for estimating length composition (Miranda, 2007; Vokoun et al., 2001). The required sample size for describing length composition tends to be related to life history processes such as growth, mortality, and movement, and is affected by estimation methods. Commonly used methods include length-frequency distributions (LFD), mean length (ML), proportional stock density or length interval of LFD (Miranda, 2007; Schultz, Mayfield, & Whitlock, 2016; Vokoun et al., 2001). For small fishes (i.e., those with maximum length ≤30 cm), 300–400 individuals are often an appropriate sample size for describing LFD, and smaller sample sizes may be suitable for smaller fishes. Many large (i.e., maximum length >1 m) pelagic fishes are highly migratory species with wider spatial distribution. Small samples for them often fail to capture the true length composition of the whole population or of the total catches within a limited spatio-temporal range (Schultz et al., 2016).
For tuna regional fisheries management organizations (tRFMOs), length composition data are critical information required in stock assessment and management (WCPFC, 2007; Williams, 2018). The length composition of catches for both target and non-target species could be estimated in various monitoring programs such as port sampling, on-board observer programs and/or logbooks. It is generally accepted that the most accurate, reliable and representative way to get the information is through onboard observer programs (Gilman, Weijerman, & Suuronen, 2017; Kennelly, 1999). Regional Observer Programs (ROPs) of Regional Fisheries Management Organizations (RFMOs) play an important role in ensuring the integrity of the fisheries management system, and one of their main responsibility is to describe the characteristics of the catch (Lawson, 2006). All the five tRFMOs now have ROPs. But in most cases, the required coverage rate (CR) is not above 5% and the extent of coverage was defined differently as a percentage of catch, fishing days, sets or trips (Anderson et al., 2013). At a coverage of 5% or less, bycatch estimates are likely to remain highly imprecise for low occurrence species, although it may be still better than no coverage at all (Gilman, Passfield, & Nakamura, 2012).
In most regional observer programs, only one observer can be allocated to a vessel because of the financial and logistic limits. Most of the times, not all hooks of each set selected by an observer can be recorded because of hard work and sea conditions, thus observation ratio (OR), which is the percentage of the hooks observed in a set, is often less than 100%. To some extent, the observer has the ability to record the occurrence of all the catches.
One of the most important tasks for observers is to record the size compositions of catches for target species like bigeye tuna (Thunnus obseus, BET), yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares, YFT) or Albacore (Thunnus alalunga, ALB). Information about the sample size required to adequately estimate length distributions is often vague (Miranda, 1993). Sampling more individuals than necessary is inefficient and adds undue handling stress, particularly for an observer working along on a tuna longline fishing vessel. The objective of this study is to evaluate impacts of sample sizes on the accuracy of size composition for catches in tuna longline fisheries in western and central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) to found the relationships between the accuracy and precision of the estimates and the sample size. We developed a computer simulation method to evaluate how sample size (the number of individuals being measured, CR or OR) could affect the quantitative estimation of the length distribution. This study can provide an important reference for sampling design in regional observer programs with a limited coverage rate.
