The future of global tourism will be strongly influenced by numerous technological advances and tools such as digitization, information and communication technology, machine learning, robotics, and artificial intelligence (AI), which are also driving tourism to face a more automated future (Buhalis, 2020; Tussyadiah, 2020). Today, destinations are challenged to discover new approaches to enhance tourist experiences and adopt effective marketing strategies to build strong destination brands (Li, Robinson, & Oriade, 2017). AI mimics human intelligence, thereby allowing computers to perform human-like work and improving the efficiency of many jobs (Huang & Rust, 2018). In the tourism industry, including hotels, airlines, restaurants, and tourism attractions, the use of AI is becoming popular in practice. New technologies in the domain of AI, such as face recognition, virtual reality (VR), and robots, are helpful for the delivery of a novel on-site experience to tourists (Wang, Xie, Huang, & Morrison, 2020). As tourism inherently involves regular contact with a variety of tourists and produces large amounts of data, the adoption of AI for marketing in the tourism field is crucial.
In the future, dynamic and real-time data mining will be able to facilitate context-based marketing to bring about instant value co-creation (Buhalis & Foerste, 2015). The automation of the frequent real-time measurement and interpretation of large amounts of tourist observational data tied to specific travel motivations will be achieved (Mariani, Mura, & Felice, 2017). Therefore, the regular use of big data will become necessary for smart destination management. In the competitive tourism industry, the concept of AI can enable managers to automate procedures and simplify business activities.
In particular, online photo data constitutes large shares of user-generated content (UGC) data (45%) and big data (21%) (Li, Xu, Tang, Wang, & Li, 2018). Recently, a noticeable trend in tourism marketing is the mainstream transformation of online data from text-based to image-based (Molinillo, Liébana-Cabanillas, Anaya-Sánchez, & Buhalis, 2018). Most of the content posted online is photos (81.2%), followed by links and videos (Mariani, Di Felice, & Mura, 2016). Additionally, photos have been used extensively to promote destinations and attractions through visual experiences. Content generated by tourism destination photos greatly influences tourists' perceptions of a destination (Li, Hu, Huang, & Duan, 2017). The adoption of big visual data in smart tourism destination marketing and management is an apparent trend (Wang, Li, & Li, 2013). Photos, as a main type of visual data, have already been adopted in many tourism studies with manual identification methods. AI destination photo recognition can help both industry practitioners and researchers better understand the experiential features conveyed in online destination photos. However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, no existing tourism research has employed photos collected from extensive sources in a smart destination and analyzed by AI technology. Therefore, going beyond the traditional destination studies, this research seeks to address the following question: With the increase of the presence of AI in the tourism field, can an AI framework of destination photo identification be developed for better marketing decision-making?
To answer this question, an advanced online destination photo identification model supported by an AI computer algorithm was developed. This study contributes to tourism big data analysis by using a deep learning method to effectively and accurately analyze online destination photos with little or no human intervention. The empirical results of this study generate an AI system that can mimic human intelligence to accurately identify online destination images. The obtained destination images supported by this technique can assist in tourism policymaking, the facilitation of travel decision-making, and the promotion of destination marketing. This research has a profound influence on improving the effectiveness of the extraction and integration of destination information packets to support tourism marketing decisions, e.g., understanding which types of market segments to target, deciding what kind of preferred marketing communication combination to adopt, and determining how to shape the images of tourism products.
