Data science is promising field of study that involves detailed analysis on data flow from unstructured data especially in case of computer vision application. Craniofacial superimposition (CFS) is one of the most advanced skeleton-based identification technology in the field of forensic science technology. This method is generally utilized to identify a missing person with a 3D generated skull model generated from the lab to match its perspective [1]. The matching of landmarks over the skull and face is generally termed as skull face overly (SFO). The operation of this process is guided through the landmarks generated on the skull and the photograph for identifying the proper matching of landmarks which is commonly names as craniometric and cephalometric landmarks. The SFO is one of the time-consuming processes for identifying and constructing the missing person’s face. This process consumes landmarking for reconstructing of faces which are initially predefined by the forensic experts. A large set of landmarking is collected and best matching will be identified by the experts. (see Table 1, Table 2, Table 3)Table 1. Parameter of skull and face landmarks.Skull LandmarksFacial LandmarksVertexGlabellaGlabellaNasionNasionEndocanthionFronto temporalEclocanthionDacryonSubnasaleFrontomalar temporalAlareOrbitalLabiale InferiusAlareGonlonZygionPogonionNasosphinaleGnathlonProsthionGonlonPogonionGnathlonTable 2. Landmarking measurements of skull overlay.Craniometric Measurement (Cranial Landmark) in mmGlabella-Opisthocranion166.9Eurion-Eurion137.7Basion-Vertex126Basion-Opisthion37.9Cephalometric Measurement (Facial Landmark) in Angle (°)SNA0.979SNB0.993ANB0.984SND0.994SNPg0.995SN/ML0.991NL/ML0.988SN/OcP0.978SN/GoGn0.984Ar-Go-Me0.977Ui/Li0.982Ui/SN0.977Ui/NA0.970Li/NB0.983Mandible Measurement (Facial Landmark) in Angle (°)Wits0.975Pg/NB0.963A/NPg0.984S-Go0.993N–Me0.997Ii/NB0.980Is/NA0.938Overjet0.974Overbite0.958S-Go:N–Me0.992Table 3. Simulation system Configuration.System ConfigurationCPU-Processor:Intel Core™ i7 @ 3.5 ​GHzMemory:DDR3 8 ​GBOperating System:Windows 10 ProSoftware Used:Mat Lab R2018b
In the last few years, forensic experts more focused on utilizing such methods for improvising such kind of identification process [2]. In that, craniofacial superimposition (CFS) an efficient craniofacial identification method is mostly preferred for the superimposition of a missing skull utilizing large set of antemortem images for identifying a missing person’s skull orientation with its morphological features. This realization method requires the exact position of skull and the face with uniform pose. The orientation process is one of the processes in SFO which is a complex, challenging and time-consuming process and considered as one of the advanced technique in CFS method. These processes utilize the same fundamental operation of SFO utilizing the landmarking position of the skull and face. If an accurate landmarking position is obtained, the SFO will match those landmarking for better orientation of skull and face [3]. The scientific method is developed early for evaluating the orientation of the skull before the computer simulation is in practice. One of the important demerits of CFS technique, that it utilizes a common strategy for implementing and it is globally accepted. Forensic experts generally utilize specific tools and methodologies for solving the CFS problems to their knowledge level. During the implementation of the SFO stage, most forensic experts preferred trial and error method to achieve a stable superimposition [4]. Generally, manual SFO methods take much time for implementation due to the overlaying of two varied objects, namely skull, and face. Therefore, by developing an automatic system for SFO in forensic field. Some of the past research work takes effort for developing automatic SFO for improving the overlaying performance than the manual procedure [5].
Designing an efficient automatic CFS in forensic research is a challenging and innovative one in the modern technological world [6]. The involvement of software tools and computer-aided designing procedure increased the utilization in past years. Some of the computational methods such as computer vision (CV) and soft computing (SC) can be much useful for upcoming innovations. The computer vision methodology will process the image data to segment and register in an automatic manner [7]. With these image registration technique, it will find the geometric transformation which overlay a set of two images under different condition [8]. In the meantime, the main objective of SC is capable of designing an intelligent system which has the ability to process the uncertainty and imprecise data. This method can be applied to the real-world application can offer robust solution by conventional mathematical modelling [9]. Therefore the SFO can be modelled based on the IR technique to superimpose the skull over captured face image. Yet, this process utilizes a complex optimization process for executing the process [10]. Conclusively, this IR based on EA can obtain robust solution, the challenge of using this method is proven previously in the medical field. In the current contribution of research, by implementing a fully automatic method to assist the forensic experts in the application of the CFS technique for mandible articulation by a robust evolutionary algorithm resulting in a simple, quick, and systematic approach which will be one of the most outstanding research areas in forensic medicine for human identification respectively.
The contribution of CFS in this research work solves the misconfiguration of the overlay by placing an accurate overlaying of skull and face by predicting the optimal landmarking position. Lately, forensic experts are focusing on innovative methods to improve the efficiency of identification. However, in the upcoming era, forensic technology follows newer advancements namely craniofacial superimposition with the incorporation of computer-aided simulation to improve the performance of identification process. With this availability of digital technology, a significant improvement has been achieved in identification. Particularly, the SFO which is one of the CFS method mentioned as the challenging and consumes more time for executing it. Based on the observation of the past CFS development in forensic field, automatic techniques found to be an efficient method for improving the testability. It is evident from the past observation, the need for computerized CFS is more important in modern research. The evolutionary algorithm in machine learning process is applied to solve various sort of problems namely, parametric optimization and prediction used in this research for improvising the efficiencies of the skull face overlay respectively.
The research work is organised in the following sections namely literature survey in section 2, proposed methodology in section 3, experimental part and result discussion in section 4 and conclusion in section 5 respectively.
