Signage systems play an essential role in facilitating occupants’ wayfinding in complex buildings. A well-designed signage system reduces perceived spatial complexity of a built environment, thereby improving occupants’ ability to find their way from an origin to a destination [1]. More importantly, during emergencies, signage provides essential information to help occupants evacuate through emergency exits and reach safe areas.
In the design of signage systems intended to support efficient and safe wayfinding, a central challenge is the positioning of signs in ’optimal’ locations. In large and complex buildings with multiple entrances and exits, leading to multiple combinations of passageways and junctions, manual positioning of signs is a challenging, cumbersome and time-consuming design task. It is practically unfeasible to manually account for the myriad of possible wayfinding scenarios while considering various (often conflicting) design objectives; direct occupants along the shortest route (e.g. in the case of emergency), avoid redundancy of signs, maximize the visual catchment area (i.e., is the region in which an occupant can physically perceive wayfinding information from a sign [2]) of a sign with respect to the location of decision points, etc. Traditionally, signage evaluation and design are based on general guidelines, expertise, and paper mock-ups, all of which rely heavily on designers’ intuition and experience.
More recently, Virtual Reality (VR) walk-throughs and spatial analysis methods have also been employed to inform manual signage design, and in particular signage placement. Despite their advantages, both methods are highly laborious and time-consuming, and yet, neither one is able to explicitly inform signage placement to improve the overall range of wayfinding scenarios, or visibility constraints due to the building configurations and human perception. Poor design of signage systems that conflicts with either the building design or human perception may cause stress, reduce wayfinding efficiency and pose a threat to the evacuees [3]. The effort required to manually design signage systems to account for all factors is considerable and can rapidly scale up in a complex building.
To improve the efficiency and effectiveness of designing signage systems in buildings, a computational approach that can automate the process of signage positioning and evaluation is necessary. This paper presents AUTOSIGN – a computer-aided signage design tool that supports a user-in- the-loop, multi-criteria-optimization of signage layouts in complex buildings. AUTOSIGN employs a multi-objective genetic algorithm for path optimization based on various cost functions followed by particle swarm optimization to determine the optimal sign placement based on visual coverage area.
The architectural design process of buildings consists of various stages, from preliminary design to construction. Throughout this process, the level of detailed information encoded in buildings’ representation (i.e., floorplans, 3D BIM model) varies from highly abstract to highly detailed. To support informed signage design throughout the various stages of a building’s design process, AUTOSIGN is intentionally designed with minimal input requirements. To that end, AUTOSIGN allows the users to control the level of detail at which the building geometry is exported (i.e., depending on the design stage). Once the building model is exported AUTOSIGN automatically generates an optimized signage layout onto the 3D model. The signage layout includes both the physical locations of signs in space and the directional information (arrows) corresponding to each sign. The tool provides the designer/user with the flexibility to manually translate and rotate the sign position and orientation.
The main deliverable of this paper is AUTOSIGN: an interactive user-in-the-loop design and optimization system for signage placement in complex mixed-use environments (e.g., transportation facilities, shopping malls). AUTOSIGN is powered by two main contributions: (1) an automated approach to extract wayfinding decision points from raw 3D building geometry to serve as the basis for estimating the wayfinding complexity of an environment. (2) Formulation of signage design as a two-step optimization process. First, we perform multi-objective optimization to select the most effective combination of route choice criteria to form a weight vector that produces routes between each pair of O-D. Second, we present a particle swarm optimization-based approach to determine an optimal sign positioning that maximizes signage coverage area.
To validate the effectiveness of the tool, we apply it to the design of signage layouts for two virtual 3D mixed-use buildings. Signage layouts for both buildings are first generated and then optimized for user-defined criteria by AUTOSIGN. Both optimized and non-optimized layouts are evaluated for occupants’ wayfinding performance using agent-based-simulation and expert-based VR walk-through. We also evaluate the signage-design variations by systematically adjusting the relative influence of the proposed cost functions. Finally, the performance results from a System Usability Study with experts is presented.
