Due to the special features, mild steel has been widely applied in industrial processes. However, the high activity of the steel surface gives rise to chemical and electrochemical interactions with the environment. Corrosion is an adverse electrochemical reaction, leading to material waste in industrial equipment. For this reason, the inhibition routes such as cathodic protection, organic/inorganic coatings, and inhibitors have been developed for corrosion retardation (Erami et al., 2019; Loto et al., 2019; Alibakhshi et al., 2016).
Coating fabrication is a usual approach for protecting the metallic substrates from the corrosion. The coatings restrict the direct contact of the corrosive electrolytes/solutions with metallic substrates. Because of the biocompatibility and low hazardous effects, the silane-based coatings have been recognized as one of the most favorable materials in recent years. However, weak protection and high permittivity are the negative aspects of the silane coatings in saline environments (Ashassi-Sorkhabi et al., 2019a). To improve the protection performance of this kind of coating, the pigments' introduction into the silane matrix is the best route (Cao et al., 2019). However, most of the pigments have many drawbacks in saline media, for example, insufficient inhibition action due to poor solubility. To improve the anti-corrosive actions of the pigments, the hybrid pigments composed of the organic and inorganic species have been proposed and developed (Cao et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a; Xue et al., 2019).
Based on the literature, due to the interferences between the pigments and coating functional groups, the direct presence of pigments in the organic coatings brings about undesirable effects on the adhesion and mechanical characteristics (Bustos-Terrones et al., 2019; John et al., 2019). Encapsulation of the pigments in the nano-containers is one of the most common ways of controlling the pigments release and coating performance improvement. Recently, double-layered hydroxide (LDH) pigments (Iqbal and Fedel, 2019), metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) (Tarzanagh et al., 2019), halloysites (Zahidah et al., 2019), montmorillonite (MMT (Ashassi-Sorkhabi et al., 2019b) and organic containers (Galvão et al., 2020) have been chosen and employed as advanced nano-containers for producing smart anti-corrosion coatings (Bagale et al., 2020). Earlier reports illustrated that the inhibitors' encapsulation in nano-containers offers higher inhibition efficiencies and better protection in saline environments compared with direct pigment utilization (Heakal and Elkholy, 2020; Machielse and Darling, 2019).
Cyclodextrins (CDs) are cyclic molecules that are formed by glucopyranose units (1,4-glycosidic linkage). The CDs are categorized into three types, including α-CD (six C6H12O6 groups), β-CD (seven C6H12O6 groups), and γ-CD (eight C6H12O6 groups) (Kobayashi et al., 2019). Nowadays, the CDs are applied in various industries, e.g., food, environmental protection, biotechnology, cell biology (Tang et al., 2019; Fliszár-Nyúl et al., 2019; Erickson and Borbon, 2019). Thanks to primary and secondary R-OHs, the exterior side of the cavity becomes hydrophilic, and the existence of hydroxyl moieties causes the interior cavity to be hydrophobic (Fan et al., 2019). The CDs' hydrophobic characteristic makes possible the materials encapsulation in the cavity, resulting in the formation of inclusion complexes, which has been recently applied in drug delivery, pollutant removal, novel materials synthesis, and toxicity reduction (Deng et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019b; Wei et al., 2019; Floresta and Rescifina, 2019). In recent years, the β-CDs attracted significant attention in various applications due to their low aqueous solubility, high complexity, negligible hazardous impacts, and the high cavity volume (Du et al., 2019). Evidence demonstrated that β-CD provided specific property, among other types of CDs. Measurements demonstrated that the β-CD inner cavity is about 0.70 nm, and the cavity volume is about 0.14 ml.g, which is completely suitable for pigments encapsulation (Lipkowitz et al., 1992). Achievements demonstrated that the α-CD interior cavity diameter decreased to 0.45 nm, and the cavity volume diminished to 0.10 ml.g that cause unsuccessful inclusion occurrence between the host and guest molecules (especially macromolecules) (Lipkowitz et al., 1992). Besides, the α-CD can make strong H-bindings via encapsulated pigments, resulting in the release degree reduction and lower performance. Although the γ-CDs provide a high inner cavity (0.88 nm) and cavity volume (0.20 ml.g), the solubility degree of this type of CDs is pretty high in aqueous solution (Kano et al., 1985). Investigations displayed that the γ-CD solubility in room temperature is about 249 gr.l−1. Visualizes depicted that the hydrophilic pigments can enhance the solution penetration into the coatings matrix, concluding destructive effects on the coating barrier effectiveness. Evidence illustrated that the β-CD solubility is about 18 gr.l−1 (in room temperature), which is completely sufficient for anti-corrosion applications as smart nano-container/filler in the coating matrix (Betzel et al., 1984). Besides, affordable price of β-CD (in the comparison with other types of CDs) makes the β-CD as cost effective nano-container for industrial applications.
Up to now, the β-CD was not utilized as nano-containers for loading the CeA in anti-corrosion applications. Because of the high safety and significant anti-corrosion capacity, β-CDs have the potentiality to be employed as a new generation of nano-containers in neutral environments.
In the current work, the CeA was loaded into the β-CD cavity and subsequently added to the silane coating matrix. The possible inclusion complex formation of β-CD and CeA (i.e., β-CD-CeA) was approved by FT-IR, XRD, Raman analysis, UV–vis absorption analysis, and TGA methods. The corrosion inhibition capacity of the resulting inclusion complex was evaluated by the EIS technique. Also, the inhibition mechanism was studied by Tafel diagrams. The steel substrate was analyzed by FE-SEM, EDS, Mapping, and GIXRD experiments. Additionally, the anti-corrosion performance of the β-CD-CeA in SC was inspected by the EIS test. The scratched SC morphology was visualized by FE-SEM, EDS, and mapping methods. Moreover, the salt spray test was utilized to explore the long-term visual effects on the silane coating. In addition, with the use of computer modelings, including DFT technique and MC/MD simulations, the reactive sites and the adsorptivity of CeA complexes above metallic surfaces were probed at detailed levels.
