In the early days of robotics research, the structure, kinematics, control, and information processing of single robots were the focus of research. With the development of robot technology, the working ability, reliability and efficiency of a single robot have greatly improved. But in the face of some complex, high-efficiency, parallel tasks, a single robot is difficult to do [1]. In order to solve this kind of problem, the research of robotics on the one hand further develops robots that are more intelligent, capable, and flexible; on the other hand, based on the existing robots, through the coordination of multiple robot complete complex tasks. Compared with single robot, multi-robot system has many advantages. Multi-robot system has better characteristics of space distribution, function distribution, time distribution, information distribution, resource distribution and so on [2,3]. Each robot in the system can realize a variety of information sharing, so that the entire system has better data redundancy and better robustness. Multi-robot complete tasks by cooperating with each other, making the system have the advantages of parallelism, fault tolerance, flexibility, and efficiency. The theory and technology of multi-rob otology are closely related to its increasingly extensive application in different fields.
Due to the rapid progress of artificial intelligence, computer science, sensor technology and other related disciplines, the research of robots has been carried out at a high level, and at the same time, higher requirements have been set for the performance of robot controllers. Due to the complexity of robot control algorithms and the need to improve the control performance of robots, efforts have been made to reduce calculations from various aspects such as modeling and algorithms, but it is still difficult to meet the requirements of real-time calculation on serial structure controllers [4]. The legged walking robot has a multi-processor structure for its controller, and the host computer is responsible for the overall system management, kinematic calculation, and trajectory planning. The lower computer is composed of multiple processors, and each processor controls a joint motion. The connection between these processors and the master is through the coupling of the bus. The working speed and control performance of the controller of this structure are obviously improved [5]. The performance of the multiprocessor system in this controller becomes the bottleneck of robot motion.
Based on the BS structured digital media, this paper introduces a robot multiprocessor control system to design the overall architecture, overall structure, and functional modules of the system; then this article introduces the system's functional timing and system use case structure in detail. The system environment and system configuration are mainly described, and the core modules of the system are upgraded and implemented. Finally, this paper verifies that the efficiency of the robot multiprocessor control system has been improved through functional tests.
