With the development of storage capacity and processing power, the importance of data science in industrial engineering becomes more apparent. Recent years have seen the explosive development of artificial intelligence, machine learning, smart production and deep learning in industrial engineering (Li et al., 2020, Lin, 2018). However, there are two major challenges in this area as data science development. Firstly, data governance is the most significant aspect. Some data is privatized based on the legal concern. With the promulgation of General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (EU, 2018), users become the absolute owner of their own data. Any institutions or organizations do not have authority to employ user’s own data unless they have agreement. Secondly, data silo is also a confronting problem that puts a limit on the development of modern industry since more training data would improve the training performance. For example, compared with the earliest AlphaGo, which used 160,000 sets of human chess data and could beat entry-level professional players. Alpha Zero (Holcomb, Porter, Ault, Mao, & Wang, 2018) used 28.6 billion sets of human and machine-generated chess data, which could easily beat professional players. Besides, data annotation relies on experienced workers in some fields such as medical industry which may cause rareness of valid data. The scarcity of labeled data is also detrimental to industrial development. However, the emergence of FL happened to overcome these challenges in industry.
FL is a burgeoning machine learning scheme, aiming at tackling the problem of data island while preserving data privacy. It refers to multiple clients (such as mobile devices, institutions, organizations, etc.) coordinated with one or more central servers for decentralized machine learning settings. It was first put forward by Google in 2016 to predict user’s text input within tens of thousands Android devices while keeping data on devices (McMahan, Moore, Ramage, Hampson, & Arcas, 2017). The original process of FL is generally described as Fig. 1 shows. This kind of federated training approach called federated average (FedAvg), which is the baseline of FL in many other researches. Firstly, each device downloads a generic global model for the following local training. Secondly, the download global model will be improved by multiple local updates with local data, which belong to different mobile devices separately and then upload related gradient information to cloud in an encryption mode. Thirdly, the averaged update of local models implemented in the cloud will be dispatched to device as a renewed global model. Finally, the above procedures repeat until the model achieves a certain desired performance or the final deadline arrives. The emergence of this technology will solve the contradiction between data privacy and data sharing for dispersed devices. Due to the property that data are not exposed to third central server, FL is appropriate for application when data are privacy-sensitive. These includes cases in health care or mobile devices that data are not available to be aggregated with legal concern.Download : Download high-res image (227KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Illustration of FL framework proposed by Google.
Recently, many scholars band together to publish papers to review advances and open problems in FL. The studies provide several further aspects to enhance FL contribution (Kairouz, McMahan, Avent, Bellet, Bennis, Bhagoji, & Zhao, 2019). Motivated by the promising prospects and increasing growth of FL research in industrial field, this study aims to review prevailing application of FL in industrial engineering to guide for the future landing application. This study concluded characteristic of FL and remained challenges to clarify various solutions that researchers have done to optimize FL. This study reviewed related studies of FL to base on the baseline a universal definition to identify fronts to address FL literature and help advance our understanding of FL for future optimization.
This paper is organized as follows. Beside the introduction, we sketch the overview of FL which include characteristics and mainstream open-source framework as well as categories in Section 2. In Section 3, we point out three challenges in FL along with relative improvement. Furthermore, we conclude indirect information leakage in FL and existing privacy-preserving method employed in FL. Section 4 discusses realistic applications in IOT devices and grounding application in industry engineering and healthcare. At the end, some frontier achievements are given, around these discussions we describe some promising direction of FL to give a guiding for future work.
