Patient-specific finite element models of soft tissue and organs receive a large amount of interest. Such finite element models are widely employed to investigate both the underlying mechanisms that drive normal physiology of biological soft tissues and the mechanical factors that contribute to the onset and development of diseases such as tumour growth [1], atherosclerosis or aneurysms [2], or multilevel lumbar disc degenerative diseases [3], to name a few. Finite element models are also valuable tools that contribute to the development of medical devices such as, for example, vascular stent-grafts [4], and have the potential to improve prevention strategies [5], surgical planning [6] and pedagogical simulators for medical training [7].
In this context, one major issue is meshing, since the reliability of the predicted mechanical response arising from computer simulation heavily relies on the quality of the underlying finite element mesh: if some elements of the mesh are too distorted or if the mesh is too coarse in some regions, the numerical solution may deteriorate significantly [8].
The patient-specific mesh has to be built from segmented medical images (CT, MRI, ultra-sound), and has to conform to anatomical details with potentially complex topologies and geometries [9], which led to the design of algorithms that aim to optimize the quality of the generated mesh by reducing the distortion of the elements [10]. These algorithms may also have to satisfy a number of additional constraints such as minimizing human intervention (automation), preservation of certain important anatomical details or robustness with respect to data [11]. In general the quality of a given mesh is assessed through purely geometrical criteria, that allow in some way to quantify the distortion of the geometry of the elements and how far they are from their ideal shape [12].
Beyond mesh quality, mesh density is another, related, parameter which must be controlled during biomechanics simulations. Solutions must be obtained on commodity hardware within clinical time scales: milliseconds (for surgical training); minutes (for surgical assistance); hours (for surgical planning). Therefore, and although this would lead to the most accurate solution, it is impractical to use a uniformly fine mesh over the whole domain. This remark begs the question: “given a tolerable error level, what is the coarsest possible mesh which will provide the required accuracy.” This leads to the notion of “mesh optimality,” which is achieved for an optimal balance between the accuracy in a given quantity of interest to the user and the associated computational cost. It is probably intuitively understood that this “optimality” criterion, and the resulting optimized mesh both depend on the quantity of interest and that, in general, the optimal mesh will be non-uniform, displaying local refinement around specific regions. A possible criterion for mesh adaptation can be any a priori knowledge of the problem or its solution such as geometry, material properties or boundary layers e.g., localized loads, contacts, sharp features, material interfaces. Similarly, knowledge of the quantity of interest can help guide local mesh refinement. Nevertheless, such mesh refinement guidelines are generally ad hoc and cannot guarantee the resulting mesh will be optimal.
To summarize, the choice of an optimal mesh, in particular its local refinement level for given problems and quantities of interest remains an open issue. Moreover, without knowing the finite element solution itself, it is practically impossible to quantify the adequacy of a given mesh only from heuristics or other ad hoc criteria derived from a priori knowledge of the problem or its exact solution.
As a result, we aim at addressing the following two questions in this paper:
1.For a patient-specific finite element computation, how can we provide some information to the user about the accuracy of the numerical solution, namely how can we compute an approximate discretization error caused by the choice of the mesh ? By discretization error, we mean the difference between the finite element solution and the exact solution of the same boundary value problem on the same geometry.2.How can the numerical solution be used to optimize the mesh in the critical regions only, to achieve maximum accuracy for a given computational cost, or, conversely, to achieve a given accuracy with a minimum computational cost?
For the sake of simplicity we do not consider
1.modelling errors, which arise due to the approximation of the geometry, physical assumptions, and uncertainty on material parameters,2.numerical errors, which arise due to linearization, iterative solvers, and machine precision.
In this paper, we investigate the capability of a posteriori error estimates [13], [14] to provide useful information about the discretization error. A posteriori error estimates are quantities computed from the numerical solution, that indicate the magnitude of the local error. These estimates are at the core of mesh adaptive techniques [15]. Many a posteriori error estimation methods have been developed in the numerical analysis community. These methods have different theoretical and practical properties. However, despite their great potential, error estimates, to the best of our knowledge, have rarely been considered for patient-specific finite element simulations in the biomechanical community. The only reference known to us which addresses discretization error estimation in biomechanics is the very recent paper [16] who consider simple but real-time error estimation approaches for needle insertion.
We limit our study to a simplified setting in order to gain preliminary insights into the behaviour of such a posteriori error estimates and to address the first technical difficulties. We focus on two-dimensional linear elasticity (plane strain) problems, with simple boundary conditions (prescribed displacements and tractions), and we assume triangular meshes. This is somehow restrictive in comparison to current practice in soft tissue simulation. Among the existing a posteriori error estimates, we focus on Dual Weighted Residuals (DWR), as presented in, e.g., [17], [18]. Indeed this method allows to estimate the error for a given quantity of interest. As a matter of fact, for the majority of applications, controlling the error in the energy norm is not relevant, and the error must be controlled for a specific quantity of interest to the user (e.g., shear stress or strain intensity at specific locations). The DWR method is conveniently implemented in the standard finite element library FEniCS [19] and we make use of the implementation described in detail in the paper of Rognes and Logg [20], with some modifications. Our adaptive algorithm has been made freely available and can be downloaded from the Figshare repository.1
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the linear elastic problem, the corresponding finite element method, the a posteriori error estimates as well as the algorithm for mesh refinement. In Section 3, we consider three test-cases, a first one for experimental validation, and two others inspired by patient-specific biomechanics, where the current methodology is applied. The results are discussed in Section 4. A conclusion follows in Section 5.
