In April 2019, in a Guardian article, different advertising female gurus gave their opinions about sexism in advertising and marketing (Fox, 2019). The author also discussed sexism in advertising and its relation to the #MeToo movement, a movement in social networks that gave visibility to sexism and sexual harassment (Fox, 2019).
Sexism, defined as a bias in treatment of people of different genders, has been the reality in many cultures throughout history (Hammond et al., 2018). Gender inequality is reflected in many aspects, such as access to resources or decision making (Mills, 2008). The main aim of sexist ideologies is to preserve gender inequalities in the society (Glick et al., 2000; Brandt, 2011). This leads to a critique of women in political or managerial positions (Connor et al., 2016) as compared to women in traditional roles (Hammond and Overall, 2016), thereby preventing women from pursuing their professional goals (Montañés et al., 2013).
According to Lakoff and Lakoff (2004), the words used to talk about a common reality give shape to a shared identity. Therefore, analyzing such keywords enables us to better understand the relations that underlie the societal structure. Several relevant studies have sought to investigate sexism and its terminology in different contexts. For instance, Umera-Okeke (2012) focused on the analysis of sexism everyday discourse, while Pérez-Sabater (2015) and Bekalu (2006) analyzed how sexism is reflected in textbooks and newspapers, respectively.
Furthermore, there has been some research on the use of sexist language in advertising and marketing (e.g., Groza and Cuesta, 2011). More recently, some studies have addressed sexism in language content available on social platforms (e.g., Dubrofsky and Wood, 2014), such as Facebook (Strain et al., 2015; John et al., 2017; Drakett et al., 2018) or YouTube (Thelwall and Mas-Bleda, 2018).
These and many other studies have demonstrated that the main reason why sexist content has been used in the media is that, from the point of view of marketing and business, such content is more persuasive, attracts attention, and more easily generates a positive attitude towards the conveyed information (Brown and Stayman, 1992; Reichert et al., 2001). The effect of sexist content on consumers is more convincing and, therefore, is considered to be more effective (Aaker and Stayman, 1990; Wolin, 2003).
In recent years, many scholars have argued that it is necessary to study content on social platforms (John et al., 2018; Strain et al., 2015; Drakett et al., 2018). At present, many users access social platforms to tell others about their daily activities and experiences, as well as to share their opinions (Dubrofsky and Wood, 2014). Importantly, if a story of a social platform user becomes viral, thus reaching a much larger audience than a specific group of followers, a social network movement is initiated (Reyes-Menendez et al., 2018a).
A main advantage of social platforms with respect to social movements is the fact that users are organized in networks of individuals with similar opinions and views (Palos-Sanchez et al., 2018). Among other social platforms, Twitter is an important network where users share their opinions. Discussions of various topics can happen around a profile, for example, @WomensEqualityUK, or around a hashtag (#), like #MeToo. This makes it possible to study the entirety of comments to such profiles or hashtags (Saura and Bennett, 2019).
Table 1 shows several main movements (and corresponding hashtags) that appeared on Twitter in recent years.Table 1. Social movements and their hashtags.HashtagOrigin of the Social MovementCategoryYear#FreeAJStaffThe aim of this movement was to free Al Jazeera journalists imprisoned by the Egyptian authorities between 2013 and 2015.Terrorism2013#JeSuisCharlieThe death of Charlie and 12 other victims in the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo's office in Paris aroused empathy among millions of Twitter users.Terrorism2015#BlackLivesMatterThe 17-year-old black youth Trayvon Martin was unarmed and killed by George Zimmerman who was acquitted a year later.Racism2013#BlackExcellenceA video recorded in 2016 by black students of Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) went viral and has been used ever since to demonstrate the professional success of the Black people.Racism2017#HeForSheCreated in 2014 by the United Nations (UN), this hashtag has been used by celebrities such as Emma Watson, UN Goodwill Ambassador, to fight for gender equality.Gender Equality2014#MeTooFirst used in 2006 by Tarana Burke on Myspace; in 2017, after a tweet by Alyssa Milano, the hashtag reached worldwide coverage and gave visibility to sexual harassment.Sexual Harassment2017#TimesUpSince 2018, this hashtag has also been used to refer to sexual harassment in the workplace.Workplace Sexual Harassment2018
Previous research on tweets with specific hashtags (Sumiala et al., 2016) demonstrated the usefulness of the content published on social networks for studying terrorism, racism, gender equality, or sexual harassment. Figure 1 shows the growth of searches for different social movements related to gender equality and sexual harassment, such as #MeToo, #TimesUp, and #HeForShe.Download : Download high-res image (135KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. Evolution of searches on social movements using Google.
As can be seen in Figure 1, among all the aforementioned movements, #MeToo has had the greatest reach. This movement against sexual harassment aptly reflects the reality that has been present, but that has not been sufficiently visible (Bhattacharyya, 2018; Kearl, 2018). Owing to social platforms, #MeToo has achieved visibility and coverage that united people all over the world around the #MeToo hashtag.
In part, the impact generated by the #MeToo movement can be explained by the statistics recently reported by the Gfk company (Kearl, 2018). According to the results of this report, 81% of women and 43% of men interviewed in the USA during 2018 had experienced some form of sexual harassment throughout their lives. First of all, 77% of the interviewed women confirmed having suffered from verbal sexual harassment. Furthermore, 51% of the women had been sexually touched without them willing or inviting such actions. Finally, 41% of women and 22% of men experienced cyber sexual harassment.
The #MeToo movement was launched in 2006 by Tarana Burke to support victims of sexual harassment. However, the hashtag went viral only in 2017 when actress Alyssa Milano included it in a Twitter post saying, “If you've been harassed or sexually assaulted, write me #MeToo in response to this tweet.” Her intention was to give visibility to a latent topic (Wolfe, 2018). From that moment, many international celebrities have shared their experiences using the same hashtag. The hashtag was also used by many other Twitter users.
In this context, it is important to investigate what issues arise around the powerful #MeToo movement. Such investigation can provide meaningful insights for companies and institutions and in terms of identification, awareness, and communication actions with regard to sexual harassment and women's inclusion. The results can also help reinforce marketing and advertising messages supporting gender equality.
Accordingly, the main aim of the present study is to help companies and marketing professionals to better understand the challenges posed by the #MeToo movement through the analysis of publications shared by users on Twitter. The present study continues previous research by Manikonda et al. (2018) and Field et al. (2019). Along with these studies, our research highlights the need to investigate the topic sexual harassment in today's world.
Our overarching goal is to uncover practical implications of the topics and sentiments around the #MeToo movement for business and marketing, as well as to explore their theoretical importance for the theoretical investigations. Therefore, the primary purpose of this study is discovery, rather than hypothesis testing. We do not control the variables, but seek to discover them using exploratory analysis (Saura et al., 2019a). Therefore, the identified variables and indicators (in the form of topics with sentiments associated with them) could be used future studies as a starting point for the development of quantitative models that measure the influence of these variables on new hypotheses.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. After a review of relevant literature in (Section 2), in Section 3, we formulate the research questions to be addressed in the present study. Section 4 presents the methodology. Results are reported in Section 5. In Sections 6-7, we summarize the findings, draw conclusions, and discuss the implications of our findings for further research.
