High strength, easy availability, and cost efficiency are the most important objects which make the mild steel alloys utilization more common than others [1,2]. However, high surface activity and interactions with the surrounding environment likely affect the alloy properties. Corrosion is one of the most critical and undesirable chemical/electrochemical interactions in industrial applications, which can leave huge cost waste. Generally, acid washing and de-scaling processes happened to remove the impurities inside the industrial equipment [[3], [4], [5]]. However, after surface treatment, the corrosion activities increased notably. Because of the easy production and financial flexibility, the usage of inhibitors has become very usual among different protection paths, such as cathodic protection and coatings.
Due to the high toxicity and hazardous impacts, the utilization of traditional inhibitors like azole, chromatic, and phosphate-based materials has been distinctly banned nowadays. For these reasons, the green organic-base inhibitors have received special research attention in the present decade. The green-type corrosion inhibitors are categorized as drugs [6], biopolymers [7], and ionic liquids [8]. El-Haddad reported that by dissolving 800 ppm of chitosan in HCl acidic solution, the corrosion was controlled significantly with nearly 94% efficiency. The scanning electron microscope (SEM)) micrographs demonstrated that a uniform protective film covered the substrate [9]. In other research, the protection ability of alginate was evaluated by weight-loss and EIS measurements, and it has been reported that 1000 ppm alginate could diminish the acid aggression with 85% efficiency [10]. The corrosion retardation behavior of four allyl imidazolium-based ionic liquids was investigated by Qiang et al. for copper in H2SO4 media [8]. Results demonstrated that a uniform substrate was achieved after inhibition of corrosion attacks through Langmuir isotherm based adsorption of inhibitive molecules. El-Hajjaji et al. studied the enhancement of e pyridazinium-based ionic liquids in 1 M HCl solution, and using EIS measurement, proper inhibition (84%) was observed. These authors also found that significant protection occurred even at higher temperatures [11].
Despite the suitable corrosion inhibition offered by these types of inhibitors (i.e., drugs, ionic liquids, and biopolymers), they are not cost-effective, and their preparation procedure is not entirely safe. Low availability is another factor that limits the utilization in different applications. However, the green inhibitors such as Limonene [12], Tryptamine [13], and Betanin [14] are highly efficient, low cost, safe, and readily available in different geological regions. The researches carried out by Hammouti et al. reflected that after dissolving 2200 ppm of Limonene in HCl solution, about 72% efficiency was achieved. Tafel curves of this green inhibitor approved the cathodic and anodic protective interactions of inhibitor molecules [12]. Similarly, Moretti et al. found that the metal corrosion was inhibited even after 72 h metal exposure against 0.5 M H2SO4 environment via applying the Tryptamine compound [13]. Furthermore, Ashassi-Sorkhabi and Es'haghi study disclosed that Betanin is an efficient anti-corrosive inhibitor in 1 M HCl medium. It has been reported that after the enhancement of 100 ppm Betanin into aggressive solution, about 98 and 97% inhibition performances were yielded using weight loss and EIS exams, respectively [14]. Very recent reports from Chen et al. demonstrated that the extract (i.e., Coconut leaf) worked as a sufficient material in acidic solution. Tafel achievements demonstrated after introducing 400 ppm of Coconut leaf extract, a retardation degree of 94% was achieved [15]. In the same work, the inhibition potency of Allium sativum extract was explored by Ojha et al. Weight loss evidence demonstrated that after the inclusion of 4000 ppm inhibitor into 1 M HCl media, a 77% degree of acid aggression suppression was achieved [16]. Based on Farahati et al. reports, 500 ppm of Cysteine can reduce 91% of steel aggression in 1 M HCl solution after 4 h. Besides, Tafel curves depicted that the Cysteine protects the iron substrate via a mixed hydrogen evolution/ion dissolution mechanism [17]. Visualizes from Ismaiel and Farag literature demonstrated that the Crab waste protein could play as a suitable corrosion inhibitor for carbon steel in 2 M H3PO4 solution. Weight loss measurement reflected 94% effectiveness after dissolving 500 ppm Crab waste protein in the acidic environment [18].
Evidence from recent literature conveyed that the electron-rich locations in inhibitors structure could assist their adsorption on steel substrate [19]. Because of the high percentage of O element, CC double bonds, and carbonyl groups, the quercetin compound (C15H10O7) can be a potential green inhibitor source in the acidic solutions [21,22]. Accordingly, this work aimed to comprehensively explore the Quercetin inhibition performance by integrated experimental (including electrochemical and morphological) and detailed-level modeling approaches. The protection mechanism of Quercetin was evaluated by electrochemical analysis, relying on potentiodynamic polarization. Also, the corrosion retardation capacity of Quercetin was visualized with the help of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The surface homogeneity/heterogeneity was studied by a field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM). The surface was also explored through atomic force microscope (AFM). Additionally, the surface hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity features were investigated by making use of contact angle measurements. Eventually, the structure of Quercetin was examined choosing Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) and UV–Vis methodologies. The computer modeling relying on DFT was executed to get detailed information regarding the local/global reactivity of cationic Quercetin/iron complexes. Also, the adsorption affinity of metal-organic compounds was studied in detail by making the use of MC and MD based classical simulations.
