Increasing their level of well-being, health, and comfort has been a constant concern for human beings. Throughout the 20th century, architects and builders have improved indoor comfort by developing resources to adapt environmental conditions in buildings such as HVAC, electric lighting and other systems. Despite the standardisation efforts to guarantee and optimise comfort in modern buildings, complaints are still raised by occupants [8]. Since the average fraction of time spent indoor reaches 90% [21], such complaints become more and more relevant and need to be addressed not solely to reach an average satisfaction, but preferably for the satisfaction of each occupant individually. However, it remains to be clarified to what extent occupants’ dissatisfaction is due to unmet conditions of indoor environments or subjective characteristics.
Vision being the most developed and primary sense of human beings, the visual dimension of comfort is of particular interest. It encompasses topics such as the amount of light (i.e., illuminance measured in lux), or the sight a window offers. Visual comfort is best defined as the absence of visual discomfort: visual comfort is achieved when light intensity is nor too bright, nor too dark, or when characteristics of the visual environments do not interfere with proper vision and occupants current activities [21]. Visual comfort depends on the physiology of the human eye, the physical quantities describing the amount of light as well as its distribution in space and on the spectral emission of the light source. Accordingly, visual comfort has been evaluated in existing methodologies through the assessment of the amount of light, light's uniformity, its quality in rendering colours and the prediction of the risk of glare for occupants [10]. In this study, we will focus on the former assessment of the amount of light while ensuring no discomfort glare. While these are objective physical measurements of light (or have evolved towards it in the case of glare), the present study sets out to encompass physiological and psychological assessments of visual comfort through eye-tracking metrics and self reported visual comfort [36]. In the past years, visual comfort has been profoundly changed by scientific and technological breakthroughs, such as non-visual effects of light and the advent of LEDs. Standards have been proposed and adopted by several organisations [11,14,15,27], to guarantee an optimal level of visual comfort for the majority of occupants. Visual comfort has been shown to have a wide range of impacts on physiological and psychological aspects. For instance, good lighting can enhance productivity, focus, alertness [37], visual acuity [7] and mood [29]. On the contrary, poor lighting conditions may induce from mood downturns to depressive disorders [4] and could also be held responsible for performance decrease [18].
In the last 20 years, a particular source of light has appeared, namely back-lit screens. Accompanying the advent of mobile computing, back-lighting pervaded occupants' visual environments, with offices’ monitors, laptops, smartphones and tablets and considerably changed visual comfort habits. Indeed, back-lighting provides a sufficient amount of light from devices without requiring external light supply [12]. However, the discrepancy between the amount of light coming from such screens and the one originating from background lighting induces discomfort and eyes fatigue [40]. Back-lit screens have been shown to impact cognitive performance [9], while exposure to the blue light emitted was shown to change physiological body rhythms [6] by misruling circadian rhythms that impact sleep, mood and other psychological aspects [5,43]. Despite their current omnipresence, there have not been enough studies involving back-lit screens in their standard usage context in conjunction with standard luminaires to draw robust conclusions on the visual comfort required with such devices.
The impact of digital technologies on visual comfort and habits reaches beyond the advent of back-lit screens. User interfaces mediating the interactions between occupants and buildings are installed to control lighting conditions, such as presence sensors, daylight sensors, or reflective blinds with often as the primary goal the saving of electrical energy. However, many such systems are examples of technology rejection. For instance, motion-sensors activating electrical lighting end up covered up to avoid lights switching on at inappropriate times, or switching off when visual acuity is required [17]. Compromising between automation and user rejection may even result in a worse energy balance in the end, as the impact of occupants' behaviour on building energy performance remains largely overlooked or over-simplified [25]. A field called Human Building Interaction (HBI) [2,3] has recently applied the methodologies of human-computer interaction and user-centred design to the specific context of users within buildings interacting with digital devices. In addition to visual comfort and energy-saving, an HBI approach to lighting would consider the context of occupants interacting with lights. By focusing on individual behaviour, it bears the potential to increase each occupant's visual comfort according to her or his own characteristics and needs. The present study aims at approaching visual comfort with an HBI perspective in interplay with quantitative research methods of psychological science to provide a better understanding of factors underlying occupants' behaviour. This approach allows shedding light on some of the questions (Questions 3, 4, 7 and 8) raised by Hong, Yan, D'Oca and Chen [25].
Interactions with the visual environment and their impacts are highly subjective and vary from one occupant to another [8]. This is true likewise for reactions to changing light conditions. An interesting experimental setup to explore such reactions is light dimming, in which light intensity is gradually lowered, in an analogy to changing sunset light. Using this setup, Fridell [20] found that her participants preferred a low amount of light and therefore reacted late to light dimming.
Similarly, Begemann et al. [5] uncovered two different profiles: one requiring a high amount of light and another preferring a low amount of light, calling these distinct groups “Mr Bright” and “Mr Dim Light”. The existence of such profiles unlocks the potential to take into account occupants' individual needs and therefore saving energy according to those requirements, while preserving each occupant's visual comfort. To this end, a comprehensive understanding of the underlying characteristics of these profiles is needed. However, despite the substantial amount of research on visual comfort, and because most studies did not specifically target such questions, it remains unclear whether these variations in reactions are due to subjective characteristics or discrepancies in the comfort of the visual environment. This is, indeed, the reason why further research investigating personal light preferences resulting from the reaction to light dimming is proposed in the current study.
To evaluate occupants’ reactions to light dimming, the accepted methodology consists in a constant gradual decrease in light over time, with the evaluation of reaction at specifics speeds in lux per seconds, subsequently called ramps. Studies using ramps evaluate reaction from two perspectives: detectability and acceptability. The former aims at investigating the rationales underpinning the detection of a light decrease, while the latter explores the factors influencing the acceptance of a specific amount of light. The typical approach to investigate acceptability involves subjecting participants to ramping conditions until a reaction occurs. Following Newsham et al. [33] and concentrating on dimming acceptability, results of previous studies are presented in a unified manner using the percentage of deviation from the initial illuminance level since experimental conditions differ in initial level, ramp and tasks.1 For example, let an initial illuminance level be 500 lux, a reaction from a participant occurring at 300 lux will be presented as an accepted dimming of 40% (i.e., −40%). The study of Akashi et al. [1] revealed that participants accepted −20% change from the initial light level, and no effects of ramps nor task (free gaze vs paperwork) were found. In their study, Tenner, Begemann and van den Beld [41] found an effect of the initial illuminance level: letting their participants choose an initial level between 830, 1660, and 3100 lux resulted in participants accepting −30, −40 or −60% (i.e., 581, 996, or 1240 lux) respectively [41]. In other studies, participants accepted −50% with high inter-individual variability [32], or participants were satisfied with a dimming of −40% [33]. Altogether, these studies reveal that an average of about 40% of dimming is acceptable (e.g. from 500 to 300 lux corresponding to the range of recommended values [11,14,27]).
While altogether these studies shed light on the impact of ramps and the amount of acceptable light dimming, it remains to be understood whether reactions to light dimming are wired to the amount of light or to ramps and what factors trigger the reaction. Indeed, despite unnatural ranges used in ramps, occupants mostly reacted at the same level of light no matter the ramp. Existing studies used various dimming ramps from natural to unnatural ones ranging from a decrease of 0.5–337 lux/s. For reference, in Central Europe, natural sunset ramps range from 1 lux/s (winter overcast sky) to 5 lux/s (summer clear sky) [35].2 Moreover, the use of ramps was guided by either the goal of energy savings or visual comfort. However, the use of unnatural ramps has no practical implications for handling idiosyncratic behavioural reactions to address these goals. Additionally, some of these studies did not control for the influence of daylight, mixing daylight conjointly with electric lighting, preventing conclusive interpretations of the results as the impact of electrical light and daylight cannot be disentangled.
Regarding acceptability, even if it is shown to be highly subjective, it was not found to be dependent of the task performed: the same amount of dimming was accepted while participants performed free gaze, paper works or computer works. However, this lack of effect might arise from the absence of task difficulty control according to each individual. Tasks used in these studies may have elicited different performances across individuals, inducing different reaction to light dimming, and thus potentially shading effects of task or ramps. Controlling for task difficulty bears the potential to increase sensibility to evaluate such effects.
Last but not least, these studies did not measure socio-demographic and psychological aspects influencing the inherent capabilities of occupants to take action on their visual environment. Indeed, psychological traits have been shown to impact the proclivity to take action or complain [24], potentially influencing reaction to changing visual conditions. From a bodily perspective, physiological indices were also not monitored in previous studies investigating light ramps, whereas they could be meaningful indices to evaluate lighting impacts on occupants and their visual comfort. Such physiological impacts of light may trigger anticipated body reactions before occupants complain or take action on lighting, thus offering fruitful possibilities for HBI and smart building controls.
All the above arguments converge to support the affirmation that actual results on ramps remain inconclusive and might be explained by confounding variables, different goals in evaluating reactions to ramps and the variability of settings used. This finding calls for a more tightly controlled experimental setup to confirm or infirm ramp or task effects. The present study thus proposes to fill previous studies' gaps by manipulating natural ramps, controlling for individual task difficulty and by evaluating the impact of screen back-lighting. To the best of our knowledge, back-lit screens were never studied in the context of light dimming, although taking into account both natural ramps and back-lighting is crucial to draw ecologically valid conclusions. Additionally, psychological traits' are assessed using a validated psychological assessment of personality that is often overlooked in comfort studies and was — as far as we are aware of — never used in the context of visual comfort. Such psychological traits assessment bears the potential to untangle the subjectivity of visual comfort preferences, opening the way for including it in personalised light control systems to increase each occupants’ visual comfort and well-being individually. Also not studied in the light dimming context, several physiological markers are collected with the aim to anticipate and predict reactions to light dimming.
The general goal of this encompassing experimental setup is to drive visual comfort research beyond a global average satisfaction goal towards idiosyncratically comfortable environments. More particularly, our goals are to evaluate differences in reaction to light using three different natural ramps (the ramp condition with three modalities: 0.5, 1 or 2 lux/s) as well as to manipulate the ability of the screen to adapt its luminance to environment lighting or not (the screen condition with two modalities: fixed or adaptive). Moreover, we evaluate socio-demographic and psychological traits to untangle their impact on the proclivity of participants to react to light ramps. Finally, this study also aims at defining the potential of physiological markers to intervene before the action undertook by participants to change lighting and to predict participants reaction to light dimming. Altogether, we aim to provide insights into occupant behaviour as a function of different ramps and conditions, and using new physiological and psychological traits metrics that are good candidates to feed building automation processes. In summary, the main contributions of this study are the following:
•Participants' reactions to environmentally realistic ramps are assessed in a tightly controlled setup, involving manipulations relevant to occupants in buildings, and including a back-lit device, representative of the most prevalent type of working devices in office buildings (see section 2).•The impact of back-lighting on occupants' behaviour with lights is evaluated, showing that participants exposed to back-lighting tend to choose light levels that are lower to the norms (see section 3.2).•The impact of psychological traits on the participants' reaction proclivity is evaluated (see section 3.3) using a validated personality scale commonly used in psychological assessment, namely the NEO-PI-R [16] (see section 2.2).•The potential of physiological indices to provide an early indication of discomfort is investigated (see section 3.4). A novel method called Matrix Profile [45] is used to efficiently identify shifts in physiological data (see section 2.5).•Psychological and physiological markers are demonstrated to be good predictors of participants' behaviour (see section 3.5).
