Real world networks and data systems have been usually understood as graphs, where nodes represents the agents of the network and edges are drawn to keep track of the binary interactions between these agents. They present a complex behaviour, since we can not always infer global properties based on local ones, and Network Science and Statistical Mechanics of complex networks ([2], [3]) offer a universal language which allow to classify them, elucidate patterns of interactions and make predictions about the structure and evolution of such systems. But many real complex systems, such as social systems, data systems, brain networks or other biological complex systems, have a much richer inherent structure due to the fact that multi-interactions among agents are allowed. From this point of view, Topological Data Analysis (TDA) provides a mathematical tool (coming from algebraic topology) to deal with and faithfully represent multi-interactions among agents: the simplicial complexes. A simplex is just a set of different vertices and a simplicial complex is, roughly speaking, a collection K of simplices which contains together with each simplex all its smaller subsets of vertices (called the faces of the simplex). Hence, simplices can be understood as higher dimensional generalisations of a point, line, triangle, tetrahedron, and so on, and they can codify multi interaction relations in classical networks (binary relations are lines or 1-simplices, ternary relations are triangles or 2-simplices,...). The applications of TDA have been fruitful and varied during the last 15 years and have mainly (but not only) focused on the study of network topology and its evolution using homology and persistent homology of simplicial complexes; see for instance [5], [6], [7], [11], [27], [28], [30], [34] for applications in social systems, [13], [16], [24], [39], [40] for biomolecular systems, [12], [17], [18], [26], [36], [38] for brain networks, [31] for network control or [19] for a survey on algebraic topology tools and data.
One of the most successful tools for analysing topological and dynamical properties of complex networks is the use of centrality measures: numeric quantifications of the relevance of a node attending to different parameters (such as position, number of connections, number of edges passing through it, number of links among its neighbours,...). The concept of centrality has its origins in mathematical modeling of certain aspects and theories in sociology and psychology, and was introduced by Bavelas in [4] (which was concerned with communication in small groups) and the notion of centrality index was formalised in [25]. Their results show that centrality was well related to the efficiency of a group in problem-solving and the perception of the relevant agents in a network, thus opening the door to numerous applications and experiments in the following decades. A precise mathematical formulation of this framework was given in [37] and the ideas of Bavela’s group have been used in several fields such as social studies (see for instance [14] for a detailed review of the implications of the Bavela group’s ideas and some of the first definitions of centrality measures in social networks).
We aim to develop, from a theoretical point of view, a mathematical framework in which to study centrality measures in simplicial complexes. If one attempts to define centrality measures based on a notion of degree for simplices (which would allow to characterise certain relevance of an agent, or group of agents, in a simplicial network), a different definition of adjacency between simplices is required, since, contrarily to what happens in the vertex case (where there is only upper adjacency between vertices connected by an edge), triangles, for example, have lower adjacent lines and vertices (at least all of its faces) and also might have upper adjacent simplices (if it is nested in a tetrahedron, for instance). In [13], [15], [27], [28], [30] definitions of lower, upper and general adjacency for q-simplices were given: two simplices σ(q) and σ(q) are lower adjacent if there exists a (q−1)-simplex τ(q−1) which is a common (q−1)-face of both of them; they are said to be upper adjacent if there exists τ(q+1) having both as q-faces; and they are considered adjacent if they are strictly lower adjacent but not upper adjacent. The associated degrees for these notions of adjacencies in simplicial complexes can be effectively computed by the entries of a matrix associated with a q-combinatorial Laplacian operator. Applications of these simplicial adjacencies and degrees can be found in [15], [27], [28] for theoretical or social-networks implications, [13] for protein interactions or [21], [32], [35] for spectral theory and random walks on simplicial complexes.
But those definitions do not allow us to lower compare two simplices at different dimensions q and q′ which share a p-face for general p, nor do they permit us to upper compare them if they are faces of a bigger p′-simplex. In [20] we have presented a mathematical framework generalising the notions of lower, upper and general adjacency and their associated degrees, which is valid for any simplicial dimension comparison: two simplices σ(q) and σ(q′) are p-lower adjacent if there exists a p-simplex τ(p) which is a common p-face of both of them; they are said to be p-upper adjacent if there exists τ(p) having both as faces; and they are considered p-adjacent if they are strictly p-lower adjacent (meaning p-lower adjacent and not (p+1)-lower adjacent) but not p′-upper adjacent for a certain (explicitly given) dimension p′. The associated degrees to these notions of adjacencies are defined, and they are proved to generalise the usual ones. Moreover, a new higher order multi combinatorial Laplacian operator in an oriented simplicial complex is defined (by using a novel multi-parameter boundary operator) and it is used to effectively compute all the higher order degrees there defined.
In this paper we apply the results given in [20] to introduce new centrality measures in simplicial complexes, which would allow to study the relevance of certain communities in a simplicial network and might be useful in studying topological and dynamical properties of complex systems. We start by defining centrality measures associated with the given notions of higher order degrees, needed to understand the relevance and higher order relations among different collaborative simplicial communities and to study higher order degree distributions in simplicial complex networks. In fact, we have already revealed in [20] the potential practical utility of a simplicial degree centrality measure (which we will define in these notes), since an structural analysis of higher-order connectivity of several real-world datasets (including coauthor networks, cosponsoring congress bills, contacts in schools, drug abuse warning networks, e-mail networks or publications and users in online forums) is performed is made there by studying statistical properties and the degree distributions associated with the new simplicial degrees. A rich and varied higher-order connectivity structures are shown to exists and real-world datasets of the same type reflect similar higher-order patterns. In addition, we will propose in this paper a generalized simplicial eigenvector centrality measure, extending in a natural way the one given in [13], and which allows to identify those q-simplices in a simplicial network that are p-adjacent to many other well-connected q-simplices. We also define the notions of walks and distances in simplicial complexes, different to that of [13], [29], to study connectivity and to generalise, to the simplicial case, the well-known closeness and betweenness centralities. These measures should be needed, for example, to study the relevance of a simplicial community in terms of its ability of transmitting information. Finally, we define a clustering coefficient for simplices in a simplicial complex different to that of [29]. This measure generalises the standard graph clustering of a vertex in a graph network, and allows to know not only the simplicial clustering around a node, but the clustering around a simplicial community. As far as a topological analysis of a simplicial network is concerned, this new simplicial clustering could be a useful tool to study a notion of simplicial density in a simplicial network and to reveal the existence and location of well-connected simplicial hubs (in classical Network Science, hubs are nodes with a high number of connections).
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 is devoted to recall the basic definitions of simplicial complexes and the results of [20]. We start by giving the notions of lower, upper and general adjacency for simplices (valid for any dimensional comparison), its associated higher order degrees and how to effectively compute them by using the multi parameter boundary and combinatorial Laplacian operators. The main results are tackled in Section 3: centrality measures associated with the higher order simplicial degrees are introduced, such as the simplicial degree centralities and the p-order simplicial eigenvector centrality; the notions of walks and distances in simplicial complexes are presented to study connectivity for simplicial complexes and to generalise, to the simplicial case, the closeness and betweenness centralities. Finally, we define in this section a clustering coefficient for simplices making use of both the higher order degree and the generalised distance in a simplicial complex. We end with Section 4 summarizing the main results and their potential practical applications within the simplicial network science.
