With the rapid development of quantum computer, the digital signature schemes used for authentication in most current cryptosystems present a significant vulnerability to the quantum adversary. As the Shor’s algorithm [1] can provide an exponential speedup for integer factorization and the discrete logarithm by the quantum Fourier transform [2]. The Grover’s algorithm [3] can provide a quadratic speedup for the searching problem. It can seek the pre-image to a function value in time of order O(n), which is more significantly faster than the classical brute force search in time O(n) (classical attack). Most current cryptosystems are based on these mathematical hard problems, but they will be solved in finite polynomial time by the quantum computer. In recent years, there are two visions to counter these threats, one is to develop quantum resisting (or anti-quantum) cryptographic tools, such as the hash-based cryptography, the code-based cryptography, the lattice-based cryptography and the multivariate-quadratic-equations cryptography [4], [5]. The other is to develop quantum informational version system like quantum blockchain [6].
As the anti-quantum mitigation, lattice cryptography is more appropriate for the designing of quantum resisting signature scheme in quantum age. In 2008, Ref. [7] presented the first provable secure lattice-based signature scheme in which a novel cryptographic primitive called the preimage sample function (PSF) has been proposed. Meanwhile, this scheme can prove to be safe in the random oracle model as it can be reduced to the short integer solution (SIS) problem [8]. Recently, some researchers have presented the anti-quantum cryptographic schemes depend on the lattice cryptography to strength the transaction authentication process in blockchain-enabled systems. Ref. [9] proposed a blind signature scheme depend on lattice assumption, which can provide anti-quantum security and user anonymity. Ref. [5], [10] took the Bonsai Tree technology to generate the private keys from the seed keys, which can construct a lightweight nondeterministic wallets. Meanwhile, the proposed anti-quantum transaction authentication lattice-based signature schemes can provide the theoretical support for the application of blockchain in the anti-quantum age; Moreover, Ref. [11] gave a simple definition of the post-quantum blockchain (PQB), and proposed a secure lattice-based cryptocurrency scheme based on PQB.
The blind signature (BS) has attracted lots of attentions recently with the emergence of blockchain-enabled systems, such as the digital cash system, voting system, blockchain-enabled internet of things, etc. In fact, the blind signature can provide anonymous authentication in these blockchain-enabled systems, which constructs the foundation for these systems with the special property of blindness. In 1983, Ref. [12] proposed the first blind signature for creating untraceable payment system. There are two main participants, the user only knows the original message but the signing key, but the signer is only aware that he has signed a message and does not know when he signed it. Then, there are two main properties, blindness and one-more unforgeability, should be satisfied in the blind signature scheme [13], [14]. As the blindness is that the signer signs a message without knowing what he has signed, but he could not deny the signed message with his signature. The one-more unforgeability is that the signer can control the excepted number of valid signatures. In addition, the blind signature has been widely used in e-cash and voting system. It can guarantee the anonymity for users’ sensitive information, and protect the individual spending from tampering even if all parties collude [15].
In this paper, we propose an efficient anti-quantum lattice-based blind signature scheme to deal with the quantum vulnerability in extant blockchain-enabled systems and applications. In order to resist the quantum attacks, the signature scheme is constructed with lattice assumption as the lattice cryptography can provide anti-quantum security. The bimodal Gaussian distribution has been used for blinding the original message, which can protect the users’ sensitive information. Then, the security of the proposed scheme can be reduced to SIS problem, and significantly improve the users’ privacy and system data security in the blockchain-enabled systems and applications.
Then, the main contributions of this paper are summarized as following:
•we propose an anti-quantum lattice-based blind signature scheme to improve anti-quantum security for blockchain-enabled system. The lattice assumption can make the signature scheme more secure against quantum attack, and the blindness of the proposed scheme can provide anonymity for the protection of users’ sensitive information. Then, the security proof of the proposed scheme has been performed in random oracle model.•We construct a simple framework for the transaction processing with the proposed signature scheme in blockchain-enabled system, and provide the detail descriptions of the transaction processes. The proposed scheme can significantly protect the users’ privacy and system security.•We compare the proposed signature scheme with similar literatures which shows that it is more efficient. And comparing with other cryptosystems, this signature scheme also can provide more stabilized signature size.
Following are the organizations of this paper: Some relate works about blockchain-enabled systems and lattice-based blind signature schemes have been given in Section 2. Section 3 presents some lattice theories, scheme definition and security model. In Section 4, an anti-quantum lattice-based blind signature scheme has been proposed, and the correctness and security proof has been presented in Section 5. Then, the performance analysis and efficiency comparison have been given in Section 6, and conclusions are provided at last Section 7.
