Numerous occupations involve the generation of respirable dust particles, many of which, like coal, silica, and asbestos dust, are known to contribute to respiratory ailments in workers [1], [2], [3]. Industries, therefore, have adopted a variety of measures to minimize exposure in the workplace environment [4], [5]. However, the problem is aggravated in confined work areas, like underground coal mining operations, where it poses an additional safety hazard. If not diluted to harmless levels, float dust generated in underground coal mines can be transported widely by the ventilating air currents. Coal dust in critical accumulations underground could form an explosive mixture; the explosion at the Upper Big Branch mine in West Virginia, U.S., led to 29 fatalities [6].
In addition to this, miners exposed to coal and silica dust are prone to coal workers’ pneumoconiosis (CWP) [7], [8]. This is a debilitating ailment resulting in the formation of scar tissue in the lungs, which impedes normal breathing, and has no known cure. Its prevention can be best realized by minimizing the exposure of personnel. Lately, the CWP has seen an upsurge in the Appalachian coal-mining region in the eastern U.S. [9]. Regulatory bodies prescribe threshold exposure limits for dust concentrations [10]. The Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act was enacted into law in 1969 and laid down specific provisions to regulate the exposure of miners [11]. The law established exposure limits and called for periodic dust sampling, especially in the designated areas. A NIOSH study in 2008, however, reported an increased occurrence of miners contracting CWP after decades of decline [12]. Subsequently, the “final rule” promulgated in 2014 revised the upper threshold limits of exposure for miners to 1.5 mg/m3 in coal mines [13].
Ventilating airflow is the mainstay of dust-control strategies, with airflow diluting the concentration of dust particles while directing the particles away from workers [14]. Damage resistant brattice stoppings, air-and-water spray systems, the application of foam, and wetting techniques form the isolation and suppression methods in underground mines [15], [16], [17], [18]. Active dust capturing systems, like flooded-bed dust scrubbers, are deployed on continuous mining machines to capture dust generated at the coal face [19]. These scrubbers capture dust particles on a mesh-like impingement screen flooded with water. These systems have proven to reduce respirable dust concentrations between 60% and 90% on a mass basis. However, the porous screens are prone to overloading by aerosols and clogging due to deposition of dust particles [20], [21]. Therefore, this fibrous screen requires frequent maintenance, which may lead to a loss of machine productivity. Reduced airflow, due to clogging, results in a lowered capture of the dust particles and hence an accompanying higher exposure for workers.
Research efforts at the Institute of Research for Technology Development at the University of Kentucky have led to the development of a Vortecone scrubber (Fig. 1), to capture the over-sprayed paint particles on the automobile painting lines [22]. The particle-laden air is accelerated and then discharged into a vortex chamber, resulting in a rapid swirling motion. The heavier particles are differentially cast out of the airstream towards the periphery of the vortex chamber and trapped by the water film. Therefore, trajectories of the particles are altered based on their mass and momentum. Cleaning efficiencies exceeding 99.0% have been realized by the Vortecone with the added benefit of lower power requirements on automobile painting lines. Water used to clean the surface could be recycled and reused for a prolonged period, preventing any transfer of pollutants to other media. The moving water film is continuously replenished, and unlike fibrous screens, clogging is avoided, resulting in a consistent capture of particles.Download : Download high-res image (36KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A 3D printed model of the Vortecone developed at the Institute of Research for Technology Development, University of Kentucky.
The authors propose the application of a suitably sized Vortecone as a substitute for the conventional scrubber presently used in the mining industry. A reduced-scale model was used in the experiments to establish the cleaning efficiency of the scrubber. This article presents the flow patterns inside the Vortecone established via steady-state CFD models. Water films in the Vortecone have been modeled using the volume of fraction (VOF) approach. The Lagrangian method of particle tracking is used to mimic the motion of the dust particles in the Vortecone. Finally, laboratory experiments conducted to validate the CFD models are discussed.
