Handwritten recognition system is a huge research field in the area of artificial intelligence, pattern recognition and computer vision. Nowadays people use ‘sticky notes’ or write some notes on the piece of paper to keep them remembered in doing a specific task in a specific day. Some people may use digital documents in order to remind them doing their task. Computer which recognizes the paper documents, pictures and other sources can be then converted into machine encoded form by which the machine can easily understand. However handwritten recognition is a major problem since there are lots of difficulties in identifying various variations in each individual’s handwriting [1]. One way to identify is by extracting some features like curvature of letters, spacing between characters. Later, a classifier in Machine learning like Support Vector Machine (SVM) is used to classify between the writers dependent on the languages. Subset of image recognition system is the machine learning systems (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (13KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. General flow of Image recognition System.
The purpose of effective use of machine learning is that the system by itself learns from examples and experience and much effectively used without being programmed. One such kind of algorithm is a classification algorithm, in which it is possible to feed the data of different groups and such that it can identify whether the given data is a handwritten one or not. Similarly it is also applicable in various applications and one such applicable way is to identify whether the obtained mail is a spam or not spam. Hence becomes the need for machine learning is been highly increased. Machine learning Techniques is a subset of Artificial Intelligence (AI). Applying AI in a real time task may be suitable for simpler applications but it is a difficult task for some complex problems and needs more challenging works to accomplish it. Thereby with some understanding, it became a huge impact by making the computer to learn by itself and also to learn by gaining the experience which is very similar to a child learning by itself from the beginning [1]. Neural Networks are the learning models used in Machine Learning. There are three wide categories of ML: (i) Supervised Learning (ii) Unsupervised Learning (iii) Reinforcement Learning. In this paper, we are going to see various features of Machine Learning Techniques used in handwritten character recognition.
