With the arrival of Artificial Intelligence (AI), the nature of the firm is changing. These changes can be traced with the help of economic theory. The modern firm has only been in existence for not much more than two hundred years and initially economic scholars did not show much interest in any theoretical investigation of the firm. It took until the backend of the last century for the discipline of economics to fully appreciate and further develop early insights by Adolf Berle and Gardiner Means (1932), Ronald Coase (1937) or Chester Barnard (1938). Today, a comprehensive body of literature with numerous specializations on what is called “the theory of the firm” is well established (Foss, 2000; Furubotn & Richter, 2005; Holmstrom & Tirole, 2008, pp. 63–133; Kroszner & Putterman, 2009) and this chapter of economic theory seems to be more or less completed.
But in the light of digital transformation and disruptive technological change, the firm is changing rapidly and businesses as well as politics are required to formulate adequate strategies for unknown terrain. Following Kurt Lewin's maxim that “there is nothing as practical as a good theory” (Lewin, 1943, p. 118), an update of the theory of the firm is proposed here. It follows Ronald Coase's original intent when he wrote that “it is hoped to show … that a definition of a firm may be obtained which is not only realistic in that it corresponds to what is meant by a firm in the real world, but is tractable by […] powerful instruments of economic analysis” (Coase, 1937, p. 386). No ambition is made here to change “durable economic principles” (Shapiro & Varian, 2008) that have led the theory of the firm to be so versatile and useful. Rather, established theories and concepts are used to trace new economic dynamics and phenomena that are about to shape the institution of the firm and that are triggered by the rise of AI.
This endeavor is made with two important limitations. The first is that due to the comprehensive body of literature only selective elements of the theory of the firm can be covered. With the aim of nevertheless arriving at a full picture, precedence is given to developments and phenomena which are both, already observable and have the potential to be influential, namely Machine Learning and rationality; asymmetric information and resulting structure of agency arising with the deployment of AI; and AI's impact on the boundaries of the firms. This leads to the second limitation: As AI is still in its infancy and therefore future technological development as well as economic and social consequences can hardly be projected, one could conclude that it is too early to discuss the nature of the artificially intelligent firm. And yes, some of the considerations that follow below might turn out to miss the mark as and when the artificially intelligent firm actually takes shape. However, given that AI is a rapidly developing, disruptive technology (Denning & Lewis, 2017), it appears prudent to sharpen the economic tools now to be able to have a chance to use them when the dynamics further unfold. Otherwise, it might be too late.
To achieve its objective this paper first identifies Artificial Intelligence as a new variable that fundamentally influences the nature of the firm. From an economic point of view, increasingly autonomous, artificially intelligent pieces of software can be interpreted as new agents of the firm. By conceptualizing the technology in form of AI agents as a social phenomenon, it is made accessible to the field of economics. On this basis an interdisciplinary integrative literature review (Torraco, 2016) is conducted. This means that by reviewing and critically synthesizing representative literature from the two fields of computer science and from economics, AI is systematically woven into the theory of the firm, so that new economic perspectives are generated. This is not meant to be a one-way street, but to also support disciplines other than economics. Mignerat and Rivard (2009) and Weerakkody, Dwivedi, and Irani (2009) have already shown that institutional theories are of relevance in the domain of information technology. As a result, an investigation that rests on proven economic principles serves to enhance the economic understanding of the nature of what may be called the Artificially Intelligent Firm. This promises to be of relevance for a variety of fields and disciplines including business and corporate strategy, computer science, software engineering, organization theory, economics and politics.
