The advancement of Internet technology and adoption of mobile devices have created massive user-generated big data, in which this popular buzzword has resulted in changes in the tourism and hospitality fields (Mariani, Baggio, Fuchs, & Höepken, 2018). Given the increasing popularity of big data and analytics, an accumulating number of studies on big data, such as social media data, are being conducted in various research fields, particularly tourism and hospitality (Boyd & Crawford, 2012; Li, Xu, Tang, Wang, & Li, 2018). Researchers and industries are exploring the theories and applications of big data by using high-performance algorithms to maximise the fullest potential of big data. Previous studies have generally considered big data a favourable supplement than the traditional small data; hence, they utilised the big data to detect patterns, understand consumer satisfaction and predict different outcomes, such as tourist arrivals and hotel occupancy (Li & Law, 2019; Li, Pan, Law, & Huang, 2017; Xiang, Schwartz, Gerdes, & Uysal, 2015).
Topics related to big data and social media in the tourism and hospitality fields have received increased attention from researchers. Numerous studies in tourism- and hospitality-related journals can be identified by inputting keywords, such as ‘big data’, ‘social media’, ‘social network’, ‘user-generated content (UGC)’ and ‘online reviews’, into professional databases (Xiang & Gretzel, 2010; Ye, Law, & Gu, 2009). General databases include Science Direct, Scopus by Elsevier, Google Scholar and Web of Science (Law, Qi, & Buhalis, 2010). Researchers can collect data from these databases and analyse the retrieved information by adopting bibliometric techniques to identify important issues and trends in big data-related research (Lu & Stepchenkova, 2015; Schuckert, Liu, & Law, 2015).
The current line of study contributes to the literature that involves the analysis of research foci and trends. However, existing studies on tourism and hospitality are limited to two streams. Firstly, the existing analyses emphasise on the systematic investigation and evaluation of big data or social media in the tourism and hospitality fields (Leung, Law, van Hoof, & Buhalis, 2013). That is, minimal effort has been devoted to compare the current state of big data research in tourism and hospitality with that in other relevant fields, such as management and marketing, from a comprehensive global perspective. The selected articles focused on the tourism and hospitality field and seldom considered the publications from other fields. This approach restricts the quantity of publications and completeness of evaluation in a broad social science domain. Secondly, the majority of the review articles conducted content analysis on the development of specific topics within a selected period. However, a comprehensive visualisation analysis of the overall development of big data research, particularly co-citation, clustering and evolving trends, has yet to be conducted. Such a visualised analytical tool can be used to obtain an improved understanding of the research nature and emerging and evolving trends in big data research in tourism and hospitality. Dynamic changes in research trends over the years can be identified to further follow the entire research progress.
The concept of big data has gained increasing popularity in the social sciences, where it has been used to create values and enhance the performance of industries (Mariani et al., 2018). The methodological development of big data and big data analytics requires knowledge from various disciplines, including computer science and mathematics (Bryson, Kenwright, Cox, Ellsworth, & Haimes, 1999). Tourism studies have been described as inter-disciplinary perspectives (Coles, Hall, & Duval, 2006). Ritchie, Sheehan, and Timur (2008) reported that tourism studies are the intersections of multiple disciplines, such as sociology, business, economics, culture and management. Therefore, advancements in other disciplines, such as computer science, mathematics, engineering and business and management, can promote the development of tourism studies. By comparing the developments of big data research in tourism with those in other domains, we can formulate a comprehensive understanding of the state of big data research in the tourism and hospitality fields.
The primary objectives of this study are to provide a comprehensive network analysis of big data research in the tourism field by assessing the overall research trends and foci. Furthermore, the current research aims to compare the current big data applications in tourism with those in other relevant fields from a multidisciplinary perspective. Existing review studies, such as that of Mariani et al. (2018), have systematically reviewed business intelligence and big data in the tourism and hospitality field until 2016. The current study differs from the existing ones and contributes to the tourism and hospitality literature by performing network analysis to provide a comprehensive evaluation of big data research in other research fields, including computer science, management and marketing. We conducted a systematic network analysis of the relevant publications and established a complete database through Web of Science. A co-citation network connects articles with authors and their cited references, which has been demonstrated effective to identify the research state and reveal the intellectual structure of the tourism field (Benckendorff & Zehrer, 2013). Additionally, the different research foci and evolving trends during the studied years can be revealed on the bases of algorithms in a time-zone view of a network. Particularly, network analysis is proposed to answer the following questions: What are the most cited articles related to big data research in tourism? What are the most prominent topics in big data-related research? How did big data research evolve from 2008 to 2017? What can big data research in tourism draw from other disciplines from a social science perspective? Hence, this study contributes to the existing literature by providing answers to the abovementioned research questions, and offering potential directions for future research on big data in tourism and hospitality.
Two data sets were collected from various research domains, including tourism and hospitality, business, management and marketing. For the first data set, we focused on publications in the tourism and hospitality fields. We did not limit the research domains for the second data set, which covered relevant publications in comprehensive domains, including management and marketing, computer science, mathematics and geography. Thereafter, we analysed the two data sets and compared their results to provide a comprehensive understanding of big data research in tourism. Network and comparative analyses, including co-citation, clustering and trend analysis, were performed to investigate the overall research state of big data in tourism from 2008 to 2017.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the relevant literature and identifies research gaps. Section 3 introduces the network analytical method. Section 4 describes the data and network analysis. Lastly, Section 5 provides the conclusions, study limitations and future research directions.
