Link prediction is an important problem in network analysis. Many problems related to it are currently being studied widely, including friend recommendation in social networks [24], protein-protein interaction prediction [4] and the reconstruction of airline networks [13]. In fact, many real-world networks are complicated and include heterogeneous interactions. Consequently, more efforts have been made to improve link prediction methods by fully using topological structures and interconnections of the heterogeneous networks [9], [25].
Many advanced algorithms have been proposed to solve the link prediction problem. The current algorithms can be grouped into three categories: similarity-based algorithms [1], [19], [34], path-based algorithms [18], [25], [30] and factorization-based algorithms [5], [10], [11], [26]. In similarity-based methods, similarity scores are calculated to measure the correlations between the nodes. These algorithms have lower computational cost but lower prediction accuracy, since they cannot fully utilize global structures in the known network. Path-based algorithms generally utilize the topology of network and attributes of nodes for link prediction. However, it brings a higher computational cost to learn the structure from the networks. Factorization-based algorithms can extract latent features from the known networks for link prediction. However, existing factorization-based algorithms neither fully utilize the information from the auxiliary network nor keep the valid information during feature integration. In brief, all of the above algorithms have some advantages and disadvantages over each other, but none of them consider the consistency between the target and the auxiliary network, which causes the low prediction performance.
Recently, manifold learning for link prediction has been becoming popular in machine learning and pattern recognition fields [22], [27], [29], [33]. The basic idea of manifold learning is to project the data from original high-dimensional space to another low-dimensional space, and thus more latent information can be learned for reproducing essential structural features in the original data. It outperforms the algorithms that only consider the original feature space. After dimensional transformation, redundant features in original feature space are removed, and mutual relationships between nodes are reconstructed to better demonstrate their similarities. Manifold learning has been widely applied in knowledge representation models due to its effectiveness on data distance measurement. For instance, Wan et al. proposed a two-dimensional maximum embedding difference(2DMED) method which combines graph embedding and difference criterion techniques for image feature extraction [28]. Zhang et al. introduced a drug feature-based manifold regularization method that projected drugs in the interaction space into a low-dimensional space to predict drug-drug interactions [32]. Ma et al. proposed a manifold concept factorization model with adaptive neighbor structure to learn a new representation for clustering [20].
In this paper, we propose a collaborative linear manifold learning algorithm, named CLML, to predict the links in heterogeneous networks. The overall illustration of the proposed framework is shown in Fig. 1. In CLML, manifolds characterized by neighbors can be used to measure the correlations of the data. Specifically, one manifold is constructed from the target network and the inter-network, while the other one is constructed from the auxiliary network and the inter-network. The loss function of CLML is defined by jointly considering the consistency between these two manifolds. Since the networks in the real-world applications are generally sparse, low-rank approximations on the target and the auxiliary network are employed to maintain the sparsity of networks. Since the loss function cannot be learned by traditional gradient descent algorithms, an alternative updating strategy that combines the proximal gradient method and the estimation of learning rate is adopted. The experiments on four real-world datasets show that the proposed CLML method improves the performance of link prediction compared with current state-of-the-art algorithms. The stable performance on benchmark datasets also proves that CLML can be easily generalized to other applications.Download : Download high-res image (915KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A schematic of Collaborative Linear Manifold Learning Algorithm. (1) Three small-scale heterogeneous networks are constructed from real-world data. Adjacency matrices T(0), R and A(0) are obtained according to the interactions within the networks. (2) T(0)R and RA(0) are the two initial manifolds for target and auxiliary networks. (3) T and A are alternatively updated by collaborative learning of TR and RA iteratively. (4) The predicted links in matrix T are obtained after the convergence of CLML.
The main contributions and novelties of our work are as follows:
1. We propose a novel collaborative linear manifold learning model, CLML, for link prediction. CLML can better capture the correlations among data points and utilize the consistency within networks. Moreover, the two manifolds in CLML is capable of detecting the hidden network topological features from both target and auxiliary networks.
2. CLML employs the low rank constraint and also combines prior knowledge to overcome the sparsity problem of heterogeneous networks. Therefore, CLML can still maintain stable performance on networks containing lots of missing links or unobserved interactions.
3. CLML significantly improves the accuracy of predicting unknown links on different real-world applications, including social rating network, scientific co-authorship network, and drug-drug interaction network compared to current state-of-the-art algorithms.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the current study of link prediction methods are grouped into three categories. Subsequently, the representative methods in each category are reviewed. In Section 3, we first describe the notations in the model. Then, we present the proposed Collaborative Linear Manifold Learning model in detail and an alternative optimization algorithm for solving it. The baseline methods and experimental results are presented and analyzed in Section 4. Finally, this paper is concluded in Section 5.
