Machine Learning (ML) has matured and can be used for solving several practical problems in medicine. In the field of radiology, ML has proven to be an effective tool to automate the analysis and diagnosis for medical images [1]. Several ML approaches have been proposed today, which not only assist in image-based diagnosis but also in disease prognosis and risk assessment [2]. Supervised ML techniques have shown significant potential in medical image analysis and can potentially reduce the burden on radiologists in daily practice [3], [4], [5].
However, as for any other system that learns from training datasets, the training data that need to be collected for an adequate generalization is a key issue. This issue becomes even more important in the field of medical image analysis and particularly in radiology since the training data sets 1) may not be available, 2) may be available but of small size (small data sets), 3) may be available but not representative and 4) may be available but with weak labels (non-well-annotated data sets).
In the past, the availability of large datasets with diagnostic labels has altered the course of research not only in the field of disease diagnosis but also in the field of disease prognosis [2]. However, the availability of only small sized labelled training datasets does not often allow the development and improvement of supervised ML techniques [6]. If large enough training datasets are not available, methods such as virtual sample generation [7] and data augmentation have previously been proposed [8] to compensate.
Other remaining challenges that further hinder the application of ML techniques in medical imaging are the existence of a) non-representative as well as of b) non-annotated training data sets. In the first case, supervised ML techniques may achieve high performance when both training and test data sets are subgroups of the same image distribution, but they will exhibit low performance when the test images have been acquired from a different imaging protocol (such as different scanner, different imaging center, different technologist, different patient population characteristics, etc.). In the second case of non-annotated training data, most of the supervised ML techniques require the availability of training images where experts have previously designed the necessary contours and labelled the images. However, performing this task is not always easy since the quality of the available images may not be suitable due to various reasons (such as underlying disease, image artifacts, limited spatial and temporal resolution of images, etc.) or because there is a lack of sufficiently specialized personnel. Moreover, even when appropriately trained personnel is available, visual assessment and manual annotation remain subjective and may deviate from reality.
In the field of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), the process of creating training datasets is considered costly, both in time and money. Creating training datasets requires not only acquisition of medical images that cover a broad spectrum of medical parameters but also manual annotation of the medical images by experts. In addition, generating the training dataset requires the use of an MRI scanner and the availability of personnel (such as technologists and radiologists). Moreover, the complexity of the underlying MRI physics hinders this process even more. Furthermore, image acquisition is performed under a specific MRI protocol and MRI system configuration. While supervised learning techniques have demonstrated good performance on relatively controlled experiments with standardized imaging protocols, their performance may deteriorate in cases where images are acquired with a different imaging protocol or on a different MRI system [2]. In addition to this, acquisition of data that cover the entire range of parameters that describe the anatomy and physiology of the population is impractical. Last, despite that several other approaches have recently been proposed in the field of MR image synthesis, they may be based on a kspace-corruption approach for the generation of synthetic MR data [9,10] that are “not entirely representative” for a wide range of real cases, and/or require the availability of thousands of real MR images [11]. The latter is a quite common approach in the field of medical image synthesis [12].
The specific aim of this study was to propose a solution to these limitations encountered today in generating training datasets for supervised ML techniques in the field of Magnetic Resonance Imaging. We hypothesized that this can be achieved without the use of a real MRI scanner, without scanning patients and without having personnel (such as technologists and radiologists), but through the application of advanced MR simulations on a realistic computer model of human anatomy. This study is a proof of concept that artificial MR-images can be used as training datasets in supervised learning approaches in the MR field. For this purpose, an example in myocardial segmentation of end-diastolic images with MRI and existing neural-networks was utilized. Since this work is not aimed per se at presenting LV segmentation methods and due to space considerations, end-systolic examples are not shown. This work is only the initial step to a wide range of potential applications (e.g. tissue characterization, image reconstruction, etc.) with or without various pathologies that will have to be developed and validated.
