Productivity of a person multiplies manifolds, if a person adopts a career related to the subjects one has studied (Woolley, Rose, Orthner, Akos, & Jones-Sanpei, 2013). Choosing an appropriate career path at early stages of a person's life can offer a jump-start to one's successful future. Careers and subjects are deeply interlinked entities. To become a successful professional, one key ingredient is to undertake a profession which is in line with the studied subjects (Woolley et al., 2013). If the adopted profession of an individual is not related to his or her academic degree, then it might result in that individual becoming a misfit for the profession (Woolley et al., 2013). Many researchers in general, and a few from network science have studied the impact of education on careers. Some researchers have explored the relationships between careers, training, and professional development (Ombayo, Egessa, & Shiamwama, 2014). Others have investigated the relationships between career training and employees' productivity (Ombayo et al., 2014).
Network science is an interdisciplinary research area. It has vast applications in communication networks, citation networks (Dietz, Bickel, & Scheffer, 2007, pp. 233–240; Guo, Zhang, Zhu, Chi, & Gong, 2014; Amjad, Daud, Khan, Abbasi, & Imran, 2018, pp. 1–6; Imran et al., 2018, pp. 1–6) airline routes, telecommunication networks, market dynamics, biological systems (Hirschi, 2010) and in analysis of social interactions among people (Mincer & Niewiadomska-Szynkiewicz, 2012; Saeed, Abbasi, Razzak, & Xu, 2019). It has also a few applications in text mining (Amancio, Altmann, Rybski, Oliveira Jr, & Costa, 2013). Network science is based on graph theory which uses network structure (Caldarelli & Vespignani, 2007; Dorogovtsev & Mendes, 2003; Pastor-Satorras & Vespignani, 2006). Distinct elements are represented by nodes and their relationships are represented as edges to understand and model complex systems.
In this paper, we investigate the relationships between various subjects and careers using network science. The main goal of this study is to analyze the relationships between favorite subjects and their impact on adopted careers to provide guidance for people associated with higher education, career counselling and career development. For this goal, we have employed principles from network science (Vespignani, 2018), primarily because it provides some methods and techniques to study complex systems composed of relationships between entities which we cannot study with only statistical methods. For example, with the help of network science, we can find groups of related professions and subjects, we can also study the bridges connecting multiple groups in form of a network. Such bridges are considered as basic components of connectivity within the network. To collect data, we have conducted a survey consisting of 228 participants belonging to 12 different careers and modeled the relations between subjects and careers using bi-partite networks. As we are interested to model the relations between two different types of entities, subjects and professions, therefore, there is a need to use bi-partite network for relationship analysis. Besides this, to find the associations among subjects, it is necessary to convert the bi-partite network into a network having only one type of entities, using so called one mode projection. In a broader perspective, we are interested in providing counselling to the students for appropriate career selection. We study the following relationships using concepts from network science:
1.Relationships between subjects and professions2.Relationships among subjects3.Relationships among professions
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
•We study the relationships between various subjects and careers.•We model the relationships between subjects and careers using a network which helps in understanding the positive and negative contributions of certain subjects towards other subjects and careers.•We propose methods from network science to understand the relationship between the subjects studied by a person and the impact of these subjects on the career of the person.•This research is of particular importance to the persons involved in higher education, as it provides a systematic way of choosing the suitable career path based on the subjects studied.
The remaining paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the concepts and terminologies used in this paper. Section 3 provides the data collection techniques. Section 4 describes the network extraction and analysis portion with complete description of relations among various professions and subjects and finally Section 5 concludes the paper.
