There are already lots of tools that can help scholars to find research trends in an area of a study. However, predicting the future scientific research trends could be a tricky and exhaustive task. To this aim, researches have drawn on citation networks as a tool to track the scientific activities, the impact of scholars, and to predict the future structure of these networks (Shibata, Kajikawa, & Sakata, 2010; Takeda & Kajikawa, 2010). Also, there have been investigations on collaboration networks to find the collaboration behavior between males and females (Abramo, D’Angelo, & Di Costa, 2019). Guns et al. proposed a method to recommend research collaborations using link prediction and machine learning techniques (Guns & Rousseau, 2014). Other approaches on finding the future structure of scientific knowledge were applied in a few studies on keyword networks. Yi and Choi used the keywords of articles as an alternative knowledge element and studied the structural characteristics of these keyword networks to make a better understanding of the scientific knowledge (Yi & Choi, 2012). Zhu et al. managed to prove that the keyword networks are small-world based on the network clustering coefficient and average distance among reachable nodes in the network (Zhu, Wang, Hassan, & Haddawy, 2013). Choudhury and Uddin have studied the effects of temporal knowledge evolution using link prediction based on the topological features of the keyword network. The network is constructed from author-defined keywords extracted from the Scopus dataset. They used datasets of journal articles for three different fields of study for a 6-year period and after cleaning the data and constructing the keyword network, some supervised learning link prediction algorithms were applied to predict the future associations of the keywords (Choudhury & Uddin, 2016).
Moreover, some researches revolve around the idea that how the knowledge elements like keywords used in the articles can impact their future citations. Guan et al. developed a knowledge network using article keywords and a collaboration network to be able to investigate the prior citations by finding the relationships between the collaboration network and the knowledge network of the papers (Guan, Yan, & Zhang, 2017). Uddin and Khan studied the impact of statistical properties of author-defined keywords and the topological attributes of their co-occurrence networks like network centrality measures such as degree, closeness and betweenness on paper citation counts (Uddin & Khan, 2016). Furthermore, Chen and Xiao addressed the problem of choosing the right keywords for conducting the analysis of scientific knowledge structure. To this aim, they examined three methods: traditional term frequency (TF), TF-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF), and TF-Keyword Activity Index (TF-KAI). The qualitative and quantitative evaluation of these methods showed that TF-KAI performed better and was close to the expert selected keywords (Chen & Xiao, 2016).
The descriptor keywords that come along with an article usually are abstract definitions of the main research context that the article focuses on. We use keywords specified in the articles, published in both journals and conferences in computer science field, to create a semantic knowledge network to predict its future structure and to examine the impact of both article types on research trend evolution. This network is obviously dynamic in nature and evolves over time by developing new nodes and edges. However, we construct the annual snapshots of the actual network and use these static snapshots for our analysis. From this point on, in this article, the term network is used in place of the snapshot of the network. In computer science filed, conferences and proceeding are among the main scientific outlets and could be reliable sources to analyze the underlying structure of knowledge in this field. Prior studies have shown that unlike other science fields for which journals are the main hubs of sharing knowledge and research (Lisée, Larivière, & Archambault, 2008), conferences have attracted reasonable number of authors to share their studies amongst scholar society of computer scientists (Kim, 2019).
Since the author-defined keywords dataset may not be homogeneous and an assigned keyword to the same area of research may vary from author to author, cleaning the data will be challenging and yet the output may have inconsistencies. Thus, to overcome the difficulties in cleaning the keywords data, we used INSPEC Controlled Indexing keywords collection which is a major indexing database of scientific and technical literature published by Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET).
The main objective is to find a robust method to reveal the future structure of the keyword networks to enable us to find the future trends of scientific researches. Hence, two link prediction methods were utilized based on nodes similarity and a new topology-based method is additionally introduced to predict the missing links. We also employ four machine learning algorithms and it is tried to increase their prediction performance by feeding them a wide range of network topology-based features. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the data gathering and keyword network construction. Section 3 describes the feature extraction stage and explains how each feature is calculated to be used in the proposed link prediction algorithms in Section 4. Section 5 explains how the performance of each predictor is evaluated. Then, in Section 6, comprehensive comparison were made between journal and conference keyword networks followed by the results of the accuracy of all predictors. Finally, discussion and conclusions are given in Section 7.
