In December 2019, an epidemic of pneumonia, named COVID-19 by the World Health Organization (WHO), emerged in Wuhan city of China and rapidly spread worldwide; causing an ongoing pandemic 1, 2. Whole genome sequencing of the causative virus showed that it belongs to the beta-coronavirus subfamily with most similarity to SARS-like BAT coronaviruses bat-SL-CoVZC45 and bat-SL-CoVZXC21 [3]. This new coronavirus was named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) by the Coronavirus Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses [4]. The previous coronavirus (SARS-CoV) binds to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor via its spike protein receptor-binding domain (RBD). It has been signaled also that SARS-CoV-2 can recognize some CD markers along with ACE2 in order to infect human cells 5, 6, 7. A wide range of studies have rushed to accelerate the discovery of new drug and vaccine candidates against SARS-CoV-2, specially a new target receptor of the immune response as a CD marker that binding to S protein. The large liberation of cytokines through the immune system in reaction to the viral infection and/or secondary inflammation can consequence in a cytokine storm and offer of sepsis that are the induce of death in 28% of incurable COVID-19 patient [8].
T cell receptor (TCR) has a central role in adaptive immune responses, their repertoires are considerably decreased in the first stages of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection but start to return to normal in the convalescent stage [9]. Dendritic cells (DC), which are highly abundant in the lung and sensitive to viral diseases, induce a TCR-mediated cell apoptosis in the absence of costimulatory molecules [10]. Several RNA expression profiling studies have demonstrated that human DC also express the hACE2 receptor alongside with the dendritic cell-specific ICAM-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN), especially CD209 and CD299 DC-SIGNs of the family C-type lectin receptors which are found on the surface of macrophages and dendritic cells. Those receptors are characterized by a high affinity binding to mannose-rich glycans that are present on other cellular receptors or pathogens 11, 12, 13. L-SIGN (CD299) act as a mannose receptor for several viruses and it is associated with viral entry into host cells 14, 15. C-type lectin receptor was firstly determined as a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) attachment factor and described after as a receptor for hepatitis C virus and dengue virus. L-SIGN, which is related to ACE2, is present also on human type II alveolar cells and may enhance the ACE2-mediated cellular attachment and entry of SARS-CoV-2, Ebola virus, cytomegalovirus and other viruses as well. CD147 was described as a red blood cell (RBC) receptor for the parasite Plasmodium falciparum and was also cited as a target for COVID-19 known as Basigin (BSG) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. CD147 is a heavily glycosylated protein that functions as a principal upriver stimulator of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs); and its expression has been shown to be up-regulated in some conditions such as asthma and diabetes [22]. CD147 expression is induced by the high glucose concentration (25 mM) in monocytes [23]. Recently, Bao et al., suggested potential correlation between CD147 and diabetes mellitus in clinical complications resulting from SARS-CoV-2 infection [24]. Thus, the design of peptide inhibitors targeting the RBD domain of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein can be a promising strategy to impair the viral entry into host cells. Peptides are reported as powerful drug-like inhibitors at the mesoscale over chemistry and protein therapeutics. Peptides are characterized by their high specificity and potency toward the targets, as well as a low toxicity and limited undesirable effects toward the organism [25]. Furthermore, peptides are central constituents of the immune systems in protozoans, invertebrates, flora, and vertebrates, including mammals, that are able to neutralize various infectious agents like viruses, microorganisms, and mushroom [26]. The mimicking peptides designed [27] to detect the the specific epitopes of proteins which are involved in protein-protein disorganization [28]. The T20 peptide, used for HIV care, is a successful example of viral envelope inhibitors that mimics the COOH-terminus domain of the gp41 subunit including HIV1 and prevent it from binding to the host cells receptors 29, 30. It has been shown that the S487T and K479N mutations in the external loops of SARS-CoV spike RBD enhances the binding of the viral spike to the host cells receptor ACE2 and may be responsible of the virus jump from civets to humans 31, 32. In the search of peptide inhibitors targeting the RBD of the SARS-CoV-2 spike, we designed four hypothetical peptide inhibitors (P1, P2, P3, and P4) based on interfaces of the docked complexes of RBD with CD147, CD299 and CD209 using CABS-Dock and ZDOCK servers. The free energy of binding computed by the MM-GBSA method was applied to determine the strength of the binding RBD to CD147, CD299, CD209 and ACE2 which was taken as a reference. The MM-GBSA energy was further decomposed as per-residue contributions to reveal the hotspot residues in the interface of the RBD/CD complexes and molecular dynamics (MD) are a powerful method for improving stability and fluctuation of protein residues [33]. Finally, the spike glycoprotein epitopes in CD299 were identified and four peptides were designed through computational approaches to block the binding interactions between the RBD domain of SARS-CoV-2 and its CD targets.
