When new scientific terms emerge and gain prominence in land use policy and scientific writing, the social and historical contexts of their use become critical for their interpretation (Skillen, 2015; Norton, 2005; Klyza, 2000). There are significant policy debates around the choice of language for defining management strategies on public lands as well as frequent disagreements among scientists and managers about the definitions of new terminology, such as keystone species, sustainability, ecosystem management, forest integrity and new forestry (Wright, 2010; Hays, 2006; Davic, 2003; Grumbine, 1994; Gillis, 1990). Underlying these disagreements are often conflicting scientific conceptions, environmental values, beliefs about the purpose of public land, and views of the role of cross-boundary disturbances like fire. This study examines the context of the use of resilience: a word with multiple interpretations and increasing importance for land management science and policy. Rather than offering a new technical definition of resilience, we perform a content analysis of its emerging use in the documents of forest and fire management and science in the western United States (US) to better understand the underlying social factors driving its increased use and varied meanings.
In recent years, the word resilience has proliferated across academic disciplines and policy sectors concerned with the stated concern of adapting social-ecological systems to change, but how it will be operationalized for land management remains uncertain (Walker and Cooper, 2011; Brand and Jax, 2007). Land use policy discussions about the word often draw from an interdisplinary scientific literature on the management of social-ecological systems, and in these documents, it is usually associated with a concept developed in systems ecology in 1970s that has been called a “metaphor” and a “way of thinking” by its primary theorists (Folke et al., 2010; Carpenter et al., 2001). Buzz Holling, who is credited with introducing the concept to ecology, was also the first to define it in multiple ways: engineering resilience and ecosystem resilience (Holling, 1973, 2001). Rather than solidifying into a unified definition over time, the word resilience has acquired new definitions (Brand and Jax, 2007; Davidson et al., 2016). Uncertainty about its technical definition and application to management persists in recent land management policy briefs and reports (Timberlake et al., 2017). Advocates and critics of applying the word resilience in land management policy both believe that the way it is defined will have “major consequences for policy” (Holling and Meffe, 1996; Newton and Cantarello, 2015).
Previous studies of the use of the word resilience in United States Forest Service (USFS) documents have found it increasingly used in relation to fire and climate change adaption policy but in various and sometimes contradictory ways (Benson and Garmestani, 2011; Bone et al., 2016). For example, the word has been used to describe a management strategy for adapting forests to climate change, a national goal of learning to adapt and “live with wildland fire,” and alternatively, in a recently passed law (H.R. 1625), a goal for expedited timber harvests for fuel reduction with reduced regulation (Millar et al., 2007; Moritz et al., 2014; U.S. Department of Agriculture and Interior, 2011). In discussions about climate adaptation strategies, some scientists and managers, frustrated with the ambiguity of the word resilience, have even suggested that its use is “maladaptive” because it can simultaneously imply “diametrically opposed” management strategies ranging from historical ecosystem restoration to a guided transition to ecosystem novelty (Fisichelli, Schuurman, and Hoffman, 2015; Newton, 2016; Rissman et al., 2018). These alternative uses of the word resilience in discussions about the contentious issues of fire management and climate change adaption—as well as the persistent difficulty in formally defining it—call for a further investigation into the social factors behind its increased use and varied meanings, factors which bear on how the word resilience will be operationalized and interpreted on public lands in the coming decades.
In this study, we take a social-scientific approach to examine the academic and technical uses of the word resilience in the documents of USFS management and forest and fire science in the western US. The evolving languages of science and policy cannot be isolated from their social contexts: institutional norms, environmental values, scientific conceptions, and management priorities all underlie changes in the language of land use policy. Our aim is not to define the word resilience but to provide a timeline of its adoption and use, and to explore how social factors may be influencing its increased and varied use. We apply the methods of computer-aided content analysis, structural topic modeling, and semi-structured interviews to take a broad look at the use of the word resilience (i.e. resilience, resilient, and resiliency) in the documents of western US forest and fire science and management to answer three questions:
1How has the use-rate of the word resilience changed over time, and did its use-rate first increase in science or in management documents?2Are changes in the use-rate of the word resilience associated with shifts in other terminology related to environmental values, complex systems theory, or environmental change?3How do uses of the word resilience vary between the scientific literature and USFS planning documents?
