A face recognition system attempts to identify/verify the identity of a person by extracting appropriate features from facial images/videos and comparing them with pre-recorded features using machine learning techniques. The recognition accuracy of these systems has improved significantly over the last decade due to the availability of diverse databases for testing, more discriminant features, and robust machine learning techniques [1]. The face is an important stimulus for humans to recognize each other; therefore, face recognition has found significant utility in a wide range of applications from video surveillance to human-computer interaction [1]. The main challenges in face recognition, i.e., variation caused by Pose, Illumination, and Expression (PIE), have been solved [1]. However, there remain certain challenges such as aging [2], plastic surgery [3], heterogeneous face recognition [4], and matching facial images with sketches [5]. Another challenge that has been identified recently is the negative effect of facial makeup on face recognition. It has been shown that facial makeup can significantly reduce face recognition accuracy, both in human perception and psychology studies [6], and in automatic face recognition studies [7]. Facial makeup poses a serious challenge to face recognition systems as it is a non-permanent, easy to implement, and cost-effective method of confusing the system. Moreover, facial makeup is a socially acceptable practice for females in most parts of the world. Cosmetic products mainly alter or enhance the skin in general, and the ocular and mouth region in particular. Skin products are used to enhance color, suppress wrinkles, and other imperfections. Lip makeup is used to alter the color and shape of the lips. Eye makeup is normally used to enhance the shape of the eyes and accentuate the eye-brows/eyelashes [8].
In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of illumination normalization techniques for decreasing the variation caused by makeup in a face recognition system. We believe that the variations caused by applying makeup to facial images are similar to the ones caused by illumination changes. Therefore, their effect on face recognition systems can be reduced by applying illumination normalization techniques. Consequently, given a facial image, we first apply certain photometric illumination normalization techniques. We selected photometric illumination normalization techniques as they do not require multiple gallery images for modeling illumination, and can be applied as a preprocessing step using non-complex image processing techniques. Furthermore, we experimentally tuned the parameters to provide better results for face recognition in the presence of facial makeup. Next, we extract facial features using three texture-based feature extraction methods: Gabor filtering, Local Binary Patterns (LBP), and Local Gabor Binary Patterns (LGBP). The main reason for utilizing texture-based feature extraction methods is that both facial makeup and illumination variation considerably affect the texture of the face. Finally, the classification is performed using a Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel-based Support Vector Machine (SVM). In this study, we use two publically available and widely used databases, i.e., YouTube Makeup (YMU), and Virtual Makeup (VMU) database. The YMU database contains two samples before the application of makeup, and two samples after the application of makeup, extracted from YouTube makeup tutorials. The makeup in these images varies from subtle to heavy. The database is relatively unconstrained, exhibiting variations in facial expression and pose. This database allows us to study the effects of the illumination normalization techniques in real-world situations. The VMU database was collected by synthetically adding makeup to facial images. This database allows us to test the illumination normalization techniques in the absence of variations due to pose, illumination, and expression. The main experiment is designed to test the effectiveness of the illumination normalization techniques on face recognition in the presence of facial makeup. First, illumination normalization and feature extraction methods are applied to all the facial images. Next, an SVM is trained using the non-makeup images to perform face recognition, and the makeup images are used for testing the system. To study the effect of illumination normalization, the experiment is repeated, but the illumination normalization step is skipped. The results clearly show that all the normalization techniques improve face recognition results. Furthermore, experiments are also carried out to evaluate the performance of the three texture-based feature extraction methods.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
•The role of photometric illumination normalization techniques for makeup-invariant face recognition is studied comprehensively for the first time.•Exhaustive experiments are conducted on two different databases. The first database allows us to study the effect of illumination normalization on facial makeup in a real-world scenario. The second database allows us to study the effect of illumination normalization on facial makeup in a more controlled environment.•Experiments are also conducted to search the ideal parameters for the illumination normalization and feature extraction methods for performing makeup-invariant face recognition.•Experiments are also conducted to select the most suitable feature extraction method for performing makeup-invariant face recognition.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the current literature. Section 3 describes the proposed methods. Section 4 explains the experiments and the results achieved. Finally, Section 5 ends with the conclusions.
