Stability of power system is important for efficient power transfer. Even though many conventional methods have been used for improving system stability, flexible ac transmission systems (FACTS) are best suited for achieving this goal. Statcom is a member of thyristor controlled FACTS device [1]. Statcom has many advantages including speed of control response. But Statcom dynamic equations exhibit nonlinearity involving products of trigonometric functions of input and state variables. To design a control system for Statcom, it is preferable that its dynamic equations are first linearized by any of the linearization methods. Many linearization techniques have been proposed to linearize the Statcom equations [2], [3]. Schauder et al. [4] proposed two types of control techniques for the control of Statcom. In the first type, inverter firing angle and the relation between a DC voltage and peak value of line voltage are varied. In the second type of control, only the firing angle of the inverter is varied for control. Petitclair et al. [5] proposed nonlinear control of Statcom using exact output linearization. Lehn et al. (1998) [6] linearized the Statcom around an operating point and applied multivariable control law. Chen et al. [7] considered nonlinearity as a bounded uncertainty and applied linear robust control technique Diego, et al. (2004) proposed two internal nonlinear control strategies based on feedback linearization technique for cascaded multilevel inverter-based Statcom. Zhichang et al. [8] introduced modulation index as an additional manipulated variable. However, the dc link voltage constitutes the internal dynamics which is needed to be regulated. Yang, et al. (2005) proposed a linear model for Statcom which is independent of the operating point. Keyu et al. (2011) [11] proposed nonlinear control of Statcom based on feedback linearization Yang, et al [10] described a new back-to-back Statcom system with asymmetrically structured converters and developed its mathematical model. Geethadevi et al. [12] proposed a quadratic linearization method of Statcom dynamic equation which will not involve internal dynamics. In this paper, a new method of quadratic linearization due to Krener et al. [1] applied to Statcom dynamic model is proposed. The method does not suffer from the issue of internal dynamics as in the case of feedback linearization. In this paper, we study Matlab simulation of the quadratic linearization of Statcom model and show its closed loop performance. The main contribution of the paper is the statement of quadratic linearization of Statcom model and its Matlab simulation to show the effectiveness of linearizing transformations used. Also, the closed loop performance of the linearized system is evaluated. Summarizing the rest of the paper, Section 2 discusses the derivation of Statcom model. Section 3 deals with quadratic linearization of the Statcom model. Section 4 gives the numerical form of the system considered together with the linearizing transformations used. Section 5 describes Matlab simulation of linearization of Statcom model together with the results. Section 6 concludes the paper.
