Many problems in science require the study of vast amounts of data, being this an increasing necessity with the evolution of technology available. Examples of that include the study of data from scientific experiments, the identification of iso-surfaces in physics problems, the fast access to information from databases, or the classification of population in a statistical study.
This work focuses on the problem of performing orthogonal range searching in multidimensional static databases. In particular, the problem that this manuscript deals with is the following: having a multidimensional database of n elements, the objective is to find all of those elements that are contained in a given searching range [ai, bi], where ai and bi are respectively the lower and upper bounds of the searching range in each dimension. In general, this kind of search can be performed by a brute force approach consisting on checking, one by one, all the elements of the database to determine if they are included in the searching range. By doing this, the searching time required by the algorithm is directly proportional to n, the number of elements in the database. This implies that the larger the database, the slower this kind of algorithms perform their search. As a result, a wide variety of methodologies have been proposed to improve this limiting behavior. Examples of these algorithms are the projection method [1] which consists on performing the search in a database sorted in one dimension of the problem, the grid files method [2] which is based on defining a grid to ease the searching process, or the many algorithms based on tree data structures [3], [4], [5] such as the b-tree [6], the quad tree [7], the k-d tree [8], the R-tree [9], or the Kdb-tree [10]. However, there is a wider variety of methodologies [11], [12], [13], [14], [15] based on different approaches to the problem [16], [17].
This manuscript introduces the cell web algorithm, a new technique devised for the fast retrieval of all the elements from a multidimensional static database contained in a given orthogonal searching range. This algorithm is based on the idea of defining a grid in a set of dimensions of the database and provide some navigation metadata between the different cells of the grid. In order to ease the navigation between cells, a representative element in each occupied cell of the grid is selected. These representative elements are used to identify the positions in memory of the elements inside the cells previously defined. That way, the algorithm is able to move through the different regions of the searching space in a fast and easy process. In addition, if the number of cells defined by the algorithm is too big (due to a high number of dimensions) when related to the number of elements of the database, the algorithm performs the search in a projected space defined in a subset of dimensions of the problem.
The cell web algorithm performs the retrieval of elements based on the grid defined during the pre-processing effort. This means that unless applied to problems where an approximated search is requested, a post-processing performed in the elements retrieved is required. This post-processing follows a brute force scheme, where the algorithm first assesses the possible dimensions not covered by the defined grid, and then it continues by checking the remaining dimensions. This allows the algorithm to match the searching range while significantly reducing the number of elements to study during the post-processing.
This work is organized as follows. First, this manuscript presents a general overview of the algorithm containing the conceptual idea behind it. Second, a more detailed description of the methodology is shown. This exposition includes the study of the database structure, the generation of the navigation metadata, and the searching process of the algorithm. Finally, the complexity and speed performance of this technique is studied. In that regard, the speed performance is compared with a brute force approach in order to have a clear comparison reference for the methodology.
