Yam (Dioscorea spp.) has been identified as one of the most important food crops for a wide range of tropical countries including Nigeria, Ghana, Togo, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, with over 600 species, in which only a few are cultivated for food purpose (Olatoye and Arueya, 2019). It has been described as a staple food for 60–100 million people in the world, also serves as a good source of carbohydrate (Amandikwa et al., 2015). Due to the high moisture content (50–80 % wet basis) of yam and its susceptibility to deterioration during storage, it is difficult to store fresh yams (Chen et al., 2017; Falade and Onyeoziri, 2012). Drying has been regarded by humans as probably the most important and oldest food preservation method and it entails a complex thermal process in which simultaneous heat and mass transfer occur (Ojediran and Raji, 2010; Doymaz, 2011). It is a process of moisture reduction in agricultural products to extend its shelf life (Abbaspour-Gilandeh et al., 2019). High moisture content in food products increases the activities of micro-organisms, chemical, and biochemical reactions (Kaveh et al., 2018a). During drying of a wet agricultural product, two phenomena occur simultaneously; transfer of heat energy to the product and movement of internal moisture to the surface of the product were it is evaporated. Dried white yam can be stored for a longer period, used as instant yam flour for cooking, and extraction of resistant starch (Falade and Onyeoziri, 2012; Srikanth et al., 2019). The three (3) major drying processes based on heat transfer are; conduction, convection, and radiation (Liu et al., 2019a). Some of the drying technologies which have been used for agricultural products include; sun drying, hot air convective drying, vacuum drying, microwave drying, infrared drying and their mixtures (Omari et al., 2018; Kaveh et al., 2018a). Hot air drying which has two major importance; efficient removal surface water and low operating cost, involves blowing heated air over food materials to remove moisture has been used frequently in food dehydration (Jimoh et al., 2009; Omari et al., 2018). Mathematical models have been used in describing the drying process of several food products, but it is still associated with a range of difficulties including; estimation of many experimental parameters, application of advance calculation methods, and deep knowledge of the process mechanism which the black-box modeling approach is to solve (Omari et al., 2018). In recent times, the applicability of the black-box modeling method also called soft computing technique is becoming popular partly because of their high accuracies and ease of use. They are the best fit for the situation where exact mathematical models or information is difficult to establish for the dynamics of a system. Soft computing methods include; Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) and Genetic Algorithms (GA) amongst others (Omari et al., 2018). The soft computing methods differ from conventional or traditional computing methods but are complementary in the sense that they are tolerant of imprecision, partial truth, approximation, uncertainty, and heuristic approach (Zalnezhad et al., 2013). Soft computing is artificial intelligent techniques, which simply refers to machine intelligence used in controlling or performing seemingly complicated tasks. Machine intelligence is important in modern-day because human brains are not able to efficiently managed exponentially growing information, hence the need for machine assistance. Application of artificial intelligence methods in drying is still in developmental stages and its continued development is anticipated in other to cater to new needs and new solutions; therefore, studies in this area are still relevant. The gap inapplicability of artificial intelligent techniques has been partly attributed by Martynenko (2017) to the lack of commercially available artificial intelligent systems for drying of agricultural products and bio-related materials. This is a result of difficulties associated with the interpretation of artificial intelligence language for the realistic needs of drying community or probably due to the availability of simpler but less accurate alternatives such as Proportional Integral Derivative controller.
In some previous studies concerning the applicability of artificial intelligent methods; Zalnezhad et al. (2013) recorded a good approximation in application of fuzzy logic for the prediction of surface hardness of alloy coating; Yousefi (2017) applied ANFIS and genetic algorithm artificial neural network (GA-ANN) to modeling the drying kinetics (MR) of papaw slices in a hot air dryer. Results showed that ANFIS has a better prediction ability, based on the implications of statistical root mean square error (RMSE) values; Kumar and Sharma (2016) used response surface methodology (RSM) and ANFIS in modeling the extraction process of bioactive compounds from taro, the results obtained using ANFIS was found to be competitive to RSM; Rahman et al. (2012), compared the use of ANFIS, multivariable regression, and ANN in prediction of the thermal conductivity of foods, ANFIS was reported to provide a better prediction ability as compared to ANN and multivariable regression; Kaveh et al. (2018b) applied ANN and ANFIS for prediction of the drying characteristics (moisture diffusivity, moisture ratio, drying rate) and specific energy consumption (SEC) of potato, garlic, and cantaloupe in a hot air convective dryer, ANFIS was showed to have higher prediction ability than ANN; Al-Mahasneh et al. (2016), conducted a review on the application of artificial intelligent modeling tool like; ANFIS, ANN, fuzzy inference system (FIS), and multiple linear regression (MLR) in food processing and technology, ANFIS was reported to produce a better performance. Pusat et al. (2015), used ANFIS in the prediction of moisture content of coal in a convective drying process; the predicted result was reported to be in an agreement with the experimental data with a high correlation coefficient. Abbaspour-Gilandeh et al. (2019), used ANN and ANFIS in the prediction of the kinetic, energy and exergy of quince fruit in a hot air dryer. The prediction ability of ANFIS was compared with ANN and other mathematical models, ANFIS had the best performance. Kaveh et al. (2018b) compared the use of ANFIS, ANN, and other eleven (11) mathematical models in prediction of moisture ratio of an almond kernel in a convective dryer, ANFIS had the best prediction ability. Liu et al. (2019a) applied ANN in the prediction of energy and exergy of mushroom during drying in a hot air impingement dryer. Liu et al. (2019b) used extreme learning machine (ELM) in the prediction of the drying behavior of broccoli florets. Liu et al. (2019c) used Bayesian extreme learning machine (BELM) in color prediction of mushroom during drying.
In this study, ANFIS was used to simulate the moisture ratio drying characteristics of yam (Dioscorea rotundata) slices in a hot air convective dryer. Moisture ratio was specifically selected because it forms the background on which other drying characteristics including drying rate, effective diffusivity, and activation energy amongst others are based. Hence, understanding the dynamics of moisture ratio will improve the accurate representation and analysis of the other drying characteristics. The choice of ANFIS was made because of its hybridized nature leading to high accuracy tendencies more than the un-hybridized methods. Also, ANFIS or any other soft computing tool has not been reportedly used in modeling the drying kinetics of yam (Dioscorea rotundata) from literature, and this formed the basis of this study. The aim or objective of this study was to (1) use ANFIS in modeling the moisture ratio (MR) of yam slices in a convective hot air tray dryer (2) study the effect of temperature, air velocity, and thickness on the effective diffusivity, activation energy, and rehydration ratio of yam.
