Glass or resin 90Yttrium (90Y) microspheres are commercially available for the Selective Internal Radiation Therapy (SIRT) of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and liver metastatic infiltrations in case of extrahepatic tumors. The purpose of this treatment is to perform a focal administration, using a catheter in the hepatic arterial flow, of highly radioactive 90Y resin-bounded microspheres or 90Y glass matrix-embedded microspheres. Then, as the tumor vascularization is naturally selective for the arterial blood, and the portal blood vascularizes the healthy liver parenchyma, a selective irradiation of the tumor is achieved.
The advantages of these intra-arterial radioactive compounds include the high delivered absorbed doses to target volumes with relatively low toxicity profile, the ability to target the to-be-treated area (the whole liver, a liver lobe, or a segment), and the possibility to combine other therapy modalities. The disadvantages are mainly due to the radioprotection constraints and the limitation to hepatic treatment only [1]. After a baseline angiography and the administration of 99mTc-MAA, a Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography / Computed Tomography (SPECT/CT) is usually performed to ensure no significant irradiation of the lung or any other extrahepatic microspheres distribution, as well as to predict the post-therapeutic biodistribution of the microspheres in the tumor and in the normal liver. Furthermore, after the 90Y microsphere SIRT, a 90Y- Positron Emission Tomography / Computed Tomography (PET/CT) can be performed (due to the positron emission of 90Y) in order to make sure the 90Y microspheres were distributed within the tumor. Both these acquisitions can be used for dosimetric calculations.
Suppliers of both glass and resin 90Y microspheres suggest several methods, some based on the partition MIRD model, for the calculation of the needed activity in a specific dose. In the case of glass 90Y microspheres, the suggested dose for the treated hepatic lobe usually ranges from 120 Gy to 150 Gy (depending on the treatment objective and the Child-Pugh status) and reaches 190 Gy for a segmentectomy [2]. The lobar mass is estimated based on morphological imaging [1] as a volume and then multiplied by a fixed density value. Once the activity to be administered has been set up, this value and the lung shunt measured on planar scintigraphy are used to estimate the dose absorbed by the lungs. If necessary, hepatic-not-tumoral-tissue dosimetry also can be estimated on PET/CT slices.
The personalized dosimetric approach is more and more popular, firstly because several recent studies have highlighted the need for a higher tumoral irradiation to be efficacious [[3], [4], [5]] while avoiding an over-irradiation of the lungs, other extra-hepatic tissues, and hepatic-not-tumoral-tissues; secondly because the estimation of the dose absorbed by tumoral and non-tumoral tissues has been made possible by several commercially available software. This software can perform segmentation and coregistration of functional and morphological imaging based on artificial intelligence.
Although several recommendations have been made to avoid over- or under- irradiation during radionuclide therapy, and accumulating data about the treatment optimization after personalized dosimetry have become available [6], only a few studies have described the implementation of dosimetric software in clinical routine protocols [4,[7], [8], [9], [10], [11]]. Furthermore, only a small part of these studies uses commercially available software for the internal dose estimation of the tumoral, lobar, or whole liver absorbed doses based on SPECT/CT and/or PET/CT [4,8,9]. The first aim of the present study was to compare two dosimetric approaches based on SPECT/CT and PET/CT data, using Simplicit90Y™ vers. 2.1 (a commercially available software for dosimetric purposes in SIRT) versus the supplier suggested method for activity calculation. A second aim constituted in the investigation of a relation between dosimetric parameters and overall survival.
