According to our understanding of Kuhn’s paradigm on the Structure of Scientific Revolutions, scientific knowledge often develops incrementally (incremental research), occasionally disrupted by paradigm-shifting discoveries (transformative research) (Kuhn & Hawkins, 1963). In contrast to incremental research, which moves forward through the continuous, incremental accumulation of knowledge, transformative research drives science forward by radically changing our understanding of a concept, causing a paradigm shift, or opening new frontiers (Trevors, Pollack, Saier, & Masson, 2012). Prioritization of transformative research has become pervasive among funding agencies (Sen, 2017). Such research brings great rewards, but also carries great risks for funding agencies because transformative research projects are very hard to identify in their early stages. An on-going challenge lies in identifying transformative research projects at the time they are proposed. Although it is almost impossible to predict the transformative potential and effect of research during the proposal stage, yet it is more predictable during the research process or even for a long time after the discovery. Further, transformative research should not be understood as just the opposite of incremental research. Actually, most transformative research began with incremental goals, and the transformative effect was recognized later (Gravem et al., 2017).
Ahead-of-time knowledge and transformative research play key roles for the development of science, but they are often at the very beginning ignored or resisted by the scientific community and thus are subjected to delayed recognition (Fig. 1). In a report by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in 2016, the authors reviewed five transformative research areas of geographical science that have taken shape over the past 65 years to explore how transformative research has emerged. They found that transformative innovations can arise from older and long-ignored ideas (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, & Medicine, 2016). Such ideas are often called “Sleeping Beauties” (SB) in science, one type of publications that rarely cited (or “sleeps”) for a long time and then, almost suddenly, attracts a lot of citations (or “is awakened by a Prince”) (Van Raan, 2004). This concept, in terms of citation curve of a given paper, actually quantifies the phenomenon of “delayed recognition of scientific achievements” (Hook, 2002). To the best of our knowledge sociologist Stephen Cole was the first to propose one could use citations to measure delayed recognition in science (Cole, 1970).Download : Download high-res image (262KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A schematic model of sleeping beauty and delayed recognition in science.
Among the many papers written by colleagues on delayed recognition or SBs which have been discussed in our foregoing papers (Du & Wu, 2016, 2018), we concentrate on a few important recent developments and focus on the early identification of such type of publications and/or transformative research. Can we know in early stages if a research project looks promising or might lead to transformative research? The studies mentioned below may provide some insight into early signs of the awakening of SB publications or the recognition of premature discoveries and transformative research. It has been shown by Marx (2014) using the example of the paper by Shockley and Queisser (1961) that delayed recognition papers often start getting cited when a highly cited paper or a well-known author has paid attention to them. But it is difficult to define such highly-cited paper or prominent scholar just at that time.
One type of citation-based early signs focused on trans-disciplinary citing pattern. Dey, Roy, Chakraborty, and Ghosh (2017) analysed the features of a given paper which may become an SB, and were the first to investigate the early identification of SBs in computer science. They developed a methodology to early predict whether a paper is likely to become an SB. They observed that the potential of a given paper to receive citations from multiple fields is the most important feature. This observation is corroborated by Ke, Ferrara, Radicchi, and Flammini (2015). They found that in many cases, the awakening of SBs occurs when an application in a field outside of the SB’s field is found, such as statistical methods that became useful in biology, chemistry, or physics.
Another type of citation-based early signs focused on patent citations to papers, i.e., the correlation between the SBs and the scientific non-patent references (SNPR) in patents. An established belief is that SBs relate to more basic and theorical concept rather than more applied and experimental work. But the fact is that half of the SBs in physics, chemistry, engineering, and computer science are applied research or published in application-oriented journals (Van Raan, 2015) and significantly more cited by patents than other common scientific papers (van Raan, 2017). The time lag between the publication year of the SBs and their first citation in a patent becomes shorter in recent years (van Raan, 2017). van Raan and Winnink (2018) investigated this further by using younger SBs cited in patents. Their observations suggest that, on average SBs are awakened increasingly earlier by a patent (“technological prince”) rather than by a scholarly paper (“scientific prince”) in the more recent years. Very recently, the scientific and technological impact of sleeping beauties in medical research fields was analysed by van Raan and Winnink (2019). Du and Wu (2018) also found that 60 % of the extreme SBs published in Science/Nature have technological impact (cited by patents), and their first citation in a patent is usually earlier than the awakening year.
But findings by van Raan (2017) and van Raan and Winnink (2018) on a more density of patent citations to sleeping beauty publications were drawn by comparing those with all Web of Science publications, rather than with the just the opposite group, for example the instant recognition papers used in our study. In their foregoing papers, they analyzed a set of SBs with such thresholds as: (1) the average number of annual citations is at most one during 10 years after publication and, (2) the average annual citations is at least five during the next 10 years after 10 years of sleep. So, we can expect that the SBs have been cited at least 50 times. They identified 389 SBs for physics, 265 SBs for chemistry, and 367 SBs for engineering and computer science and found that 62 (16 %), 92 (35 %), and 108 (29 %) of those SBs are also cited by patents. The possibility of SB papers being cited by patents is obviously higher than the proportion of all Web of Science (4.4 %) or MEDLINE covered publications cited by patents (4 %) according to Ahmadpoor and Jones (2017) and Ke (2018). The percentage 4 % is calculated based on all papers indexed by Web of Science/MEDLINE, including the papers which have never been cited. According to an investigation on the uncited papers in Web of Science (Van Noorden, 2017), basically about one in fifth (21 %) publications across all disciplines during 1900–2015 haven’t been cited. Setting papers published in 2006 as the sample, the proportion of uncited papers within ten years after publication varies across different disciplines, for example 4 % for biomedical science, 8 % for chemistry, 11 % for physics, and 24 % for engineering and technology. Since these papers have no scientific impact, they are likely to have no technical impact and thus will probably not be cited by patents.
In this study, we will answer two questions based on van Raan’s work: (1) to what extent patent citations to papers can serve as early signs of delayed recognition using a comparative study with a control group, i.e., instant recognition papers? Delayed recognition in science is a phenomenon where papers went unnoticed until they are re-discovered some years after publication. By contrast, instant recognition (also called "flashes in the pan") in science is a phenomenon where papers received a lot of citations shortly after publication, but were ignored very quickly (Ye & Bornmann, 2018). (2) What is the pattern of science-technology interaction between the sleeping science and the technology inducing its recognition? Based on our previous investigations on systematic identification of SBs and on their awaking mechanisms (Du & Wu, 2016, 2018), this contribution will further validate and detect early signs of the awakening of SBs.
