Science education standards worldwide stress the importance of engaging students in learning science through inquiry (e.g., NGSS Lead States, 2013; Taiwan Ministry of Education, 2014). This learning approach is called inquiry learning, which situates learning in investigations of complex problems or phenomena with an emphasis on learning activities that involve, but are not limited to, the process of posing questions and investigating them with empirical data (Bell, Urhahne, Schanze, & Ploetzner, 2010; Hmelo-Silver, Duncan, & Chinn, 2007).
Specifically, computer simulations can be incorporated into inquiry learning environments to enable students' investigations. Research has found positive impacts of student inquiry with simulations on students' understanding of science concepts (Chiu, DeJaegher, & Chao, 2015), development of inquiry skills (Efstathiou et al., 2018) or science epistemic beliefs (Huang, Ge, & Eseryel, 2017). However, few studies have investigated whether and how the use of simulations in science inquiry learning environments may facilitate students' scientific literacy, given that developing students’ scientific literacy has been recently emphasized in science education standards globally and locally (NGSS Lead States, 2013; OECD, 2016; Taiwan Ministry of Education, 2014).
Moreover, a practical concern involves a common reluctance of science teachers to engage students in inquiry learning because many teachers may concern that implementing inquiry learning activities may result in a decrease in students' school science achievement scores. However, we found little research that was able to address this practical concern since studies often developed their own instruments to measure students' conceptual understanding of science (e.g., Chang, 2017; Chiu et al., 2015; Thacker & Sinatra, 2019) rather than using school science achievement scores. To address the issues that have not been investigated much in past studies, in this study, we investigated the effect of the guided inquiry with simulations environment on learners’ scientific literacy and school science achievements.
Another central issue remains regarding how to design and guide student inquiry with simulation to best benefit learning (Donnelly, Linn, & Ludvigsen, 2014; Scalise et al., 2011; Rutten, van Joolingen, & van der Veen, 2012). For example, students may have difficulties conducting mindful and purposeful inquiry with simulations, given the openness of an interactive simulation environment (McElhaney & Linn, 2011). In this study, a new interactive simulation focusing on the concept of buoyancy has been developed via the CoSci platform (http://cosci.tw/) (Wen et al., 2018) and was used in this study. Learners' inquiry with the simulation is guided through students' self-generated inquiry maps. This guidance employs an innovative approach to support students’ inquiry by providing elements of inquiry and allowing students to create their own inquiry map (detailed in the methods section). We examine the effectiveness of the design in this study.
Despite the existence of the studies documenting successful interventions of science inquiry with simulations and their effects on learning outcomes, there is also still a need for studies investigating students' inquiry processes and linking these processes to their pre- and post-performances. For example, Gal, Uzan, Belford, Karabinos, and Yaron (2015) analyzed log files collected from an open-ended virtual laboratory environment to make sense of students' actions during inquiry. Their purpose was to develop an automatic approach to analyzing students' problem-solving processes that can be used in the future to develop technology for adaptive feedback. With this focus the study only investigated the learning process. Issues still remain such as what kinds of inquiry processes are more or less productive in terms of leading to a more or less successful inquiry learning outcome. As initial steps to address such issues, in this study we linked the students’ inquiry learning processes to their inquiry learning outcomes and characterized the students based on their learning processes and performances. Such work can provide insight into the development of science inquiry learning environments that address the needs of different students.
The research questions addressed include: (1) What is the quality of the students' inquiry with the simulation? (2) What is the effect of the guided inquiry with the interactive simulation on students' scientific literacy and school science achievement? (3) What are the relationships, if any, among the students' prior school science achievement, their inquiry process with the interactive simulation, and their developed scientific literacy? (4) How can the students' performance be characterized according to their school science achievement, quality of inquiry process and scientific literacy? The present study aimed to provide insight into the question of how to augment effects of inquiry with simulation learning environments, such as effective designs of inquiry with interactive simulations adapted for students with different science achievement levels to promote scientific literacy. It is hoped that the results of the study contribute to theory and practice in that they address the theoretical perspectives and practical concerns regarding whether and how inquiry learning with simulations has impact on students’ scientific literacy and school science achievement.
1.1. Background1.1.1. Guided science inquiry with interactive simulationSimulations refer to computer programs that simulate scientific phenomena through systems of representations or models. Interactive features are usually programmed so that students can interact with the simulation to conduct virtual experiments. Virtual experiments involve the use of technologies to engage students in “What-If” explorations where the outcomes of the experiments can be immediately accessed through the use of a simulation (Hennessy et al., 2007). Virtual experiments are particularly beneficial for supporting students’ explorations on phenomena that cannot be easily observed or investigated in real-life situations.Reviews on the use of computer simulations to support learning have indicated overall positive effects of computer simulations on learning outcomes (e.g., Donnelly et al., 2014; McElhaney, Chang, Chiu, & Linn, 2015; Rutten et al., 2012; Scalise et al., 2011). For example, Scalise et al. (2011) reviewed 79 articles reporting on the learning effects of using computer simulations to support science learning, and found that 53.2% of the studies reported gains and 17.7% reported gains under the right conditions, such as effective interfaces that consider students' cognitive load, or inquiry supports that guide students’ learning with the simulation, whereas 25.3% had mixed results, and only 3.8% showed no gains. It can be evidenced that computer simulations often support science learning, but a central issue remains, that is, how to design and guide student inquiry with simulation to best benefit learning.Blanchard et al. (2010) categorized inquiry instruction into four levels: Level 0 refers to verification laboratory instruction in which the teacher provides students with the question and methods of investigation, and guides them toward an expected conclusion; Level 1 refers to structured inquiry in which students are provided with a question and a method but are responsible for interpreting the result; Level 2 refers to guided inquiry in which students design their own method of investigation and generate interpretation of the results; Level 3 refers to open inquiry in which students generate a question and take responsibility for all major aspects of the investigation. Studies have shown that the verification or cookbook-style laboratory instruction has an unfavorable influence and the least effect on student learning (Blanchard et al., 2010; Scalise et al., 2011). In contrast, the results from the study by Adams, Paulson, and Wieman (2009) suggest that students are more engaged and learn better with minimal but nonzero guidance as they conduct inquiry with simulations. Similarly, one study found that the participants in the guided inquiry with simulation condition conducted more systematic and comprehensive investigations and reported a lower level of cognitive load than the participants in the unguided inquiry with simulation condition (Moon & Brockway, 2019). In light of the relative effect of structured and guided inquiry with simulation, Chang (2017) found that structured inquiry supported students in conducting more virtual experiments with simulations, but such student behavior did not lead to better conceptual understanding of the science concepts targeted in the simulation, given that both the students in the guided and structured inquiry conditions developed equally good conceptual understanding. As a result, the guided inquiry approach led to better learning efficiency than the structured inquiry approach did, because the guided inquiry group conducted fewer experiments but gained comparable conceptual understanding of the science concepts. Donnelly et al. (2014) reviewed 30 effective science inquiry learning environments with visualization or simulation, and found that the majority of the environments employed guided inquiry. Overall, consistent evidence indicates that guided inquiry with simulations can benefit student learning. However, there are variations of guided inquiry and their effects need further differentiation and investigation.The guided inquiry approach is also employed in the current study in which elements of inquiry are provided for students to create their inquiry map which guides students' inquiry process (detailed in the methods section). The design of such guidance is consistent with design principles suggested for inquiry learning environments (Donnelly et al., 2014; Quintana et al., 2004; Scalise et al., 2011). Salient components of inquiry are revealed via the inquiry map, and hints or prompts are provided in each component to support students’ thinking and inquiry process. Multiple paths are allowed so that students can set and test their own hypotheses with virtual experiments. We examine the effectiveness of such a design in the current study.1.1.2. Learning outcomes of inquiry with simulationWell-designed science inquiry with simulation learning environments can be effective in promoting at least three types of learning outcomes, as research has provided evidence. First, guided interaction with simulations can promote students’ conceptual understanding of the content targeted in the simulation (e.g., Chang, 2017; Chiu et al., 2015; Thacker & Sinatra, 2019). For example, Chiu et al. (2015) engaged 45 eighth-grade students in guided science inquiry with a molecular simulation. They found that the students made significant gains in terms of their understanding of gas properties from the pretests to the posttests.Second, guided inquiry with simulations can enhance students' general inquiry skills (Efstathiou et al., 2018). In the study by Efstathiou et al. (2018), the fifth-grade students used the Go-Lab simulation and computer-supported inquiry learning environment in which they were guided to conduct virtual experiments to learn science concepts related to sinking, floating and relative density. The Experiment Design Tool of the Go-Lab environment provides the experimental group students with feedback regarding their design of virtual experiments. In contrast, the control group only used paper-based worksheets that supported the students' design of virtual experiments without feedback. The experimental group outperformed the control group on assessment measuring inquiry skills including four aspects of designing an experiment: identifying variables, stating hypotheses, operationally defining, and designing investigations. Since the items of the assessment involve the four aspects of inquiry skills across various contexts and events, the assessed inquiry skills indicate more domain-general than domain-specific inquiry skills. The results of the study provide evidence for the use of guided inquiry with simulation environments to facilitate students’ general inquiry skills.Third, one study found that engaging students in guided inquiry with simulations also enhanced the students' science epistemic beliefs (Huang et al., 2017). The students significantly improved in their beliefs about the source or certainty of science knowledge after the intervention lasting 10 days with one 45-min session each day in which the students were guided to conduct an inquiry with two PhET simulations about motion and force. The guidance was prompting questions to engage students in inquiry phases of predict-observe-explain (White & Gunstone, 1989). The study provided evidence that students’ fundamental beliefs about science can also be changed and developed during guided inquiry with computer simulations.In the current study we focus on scientific literacy, which has received relatively little attention as a learning outcome in research on guided inquiry with simulations. Developing future citizens' scientific literacy involves the goal of educating young people to become critical users of scientific knowledge, including developing their ability to explain phenomena scientifically, evaluate and design scientific inquiry, and interpret data and evidence scientifically (OECD, 2016). This goal has been emphasized in science education standards in Taiwan (Taiwan Ministry of Education, 2014) and globally (e.g., NGSS Lead States, 2013). Compared to general inquiry skills often measured in studies, assessment of scientific literacy requires students to apply science knowledge or concepts and may need to take advantage of multiple formats of assessment such as multiple-choice and constructed-response items. Therefore, in this study we developed assessment of scientific literacy in the case of science concepts relating to buoyancy. By examining the guided inquiry activities the simulation environment provides, we hypothesize that the intervention can enhance the students' scientific literacy in the case of buoyancy in five aspects: (1) identifying the question explored in a given scientific study, (2) offering explanatory hypotheses, (3) interpreting data and drawing appropriate conclusions, (4) evaluating ways of exploring a given question scientifically, and (5) proposing a way of exploring a given question scientifically (OECD, 2016). Moreover, we further examined the students' inquiry processes and related them to their scientific literacy performance. Such links between inquiry processes and outcomes reveal patterns of students’ inquiry that lead to productive or less productive learning outcomes, and provide insight into designing adaptive learning activities for students with different characteristics.However, researchers have noticed that it is challenging to use specific innovations such as inquiry-based instruction to raise scores on external achievement tests such as some high-stakes achievement tests or school achievement science tests, probably because of the way the achievement tests are constructed (Hickey & Zuiker, 2012). Many of the science achievement tests at schools in Taiwan consist of only multiple-choice items, cover a wide range of science concepts, and do not focus on the critical thinking or reasoning that scientific literacy emphasizes. Therefore, researchers suggest using such achievement tests with caution since they may be faulty indicators of how much individuals have learned from an intervention (Hickey & Zuiker, 2012). In this regard, we did not expect that the inquiry activity in the treatment of this study would better increase students' school science achievement scores after the intervention than did the traditional instruction. In fact, many science teachers in Taiwan think that implementing inquiry learning activities may result in a decrease in students' achievement scores because traditional science instruction is usually specifically tailored for helping students perform well on achievement tests whereas inquiry instruction is not. However, we think that this perspective may be a misconception because research has shown that inquiry can foster students' conceptual understanding of science concepts (e.g., Chang, 2017; Chiu et al., 2015; Thacker & Sinatra, 2019). Therefore, in this study we compared the impact of the treatment which used an inquiry approach versus the control which used the traditional approach on students' school science achievement scores after the unit. Our hypothesis was that the inquiry treatment would not harm the students' performance on the achievement tests. We also collected the students' school science achievement scores before the intervention to help characterize the students’ school science achievements and to relate them to their inquiry processes. Doing so would provide insight into understanding how students with different prior school science achievements may perform and learn during guided inquiry with simulation to spur discussion and reflection on designing adaptive activities for different students.
