The analysis of biomedical signals is a very important research field in biomedical sciences. The information extracted from those signals has been shown to be of great value for the diagnosis, prognosis and risk stratification in many different scenarios [1]. Considering the living organism as a complex system, the measurable physiological signals can be considered as the outputs of this system, from which it is possible to study the dynamics of the regulatory processes involved in the body homeostasis. As examples of physiological signals, we can mention the electrical activity of different structures, such as the heart (electrocardiogram, ECG), the brain (electroencephalogram, EEG) and the skeletal muscles (electromyogram, EMG); the respiratory tidal volume; the arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2); the arterial blood pressure, among others.
Although the analysis of raw physiological signals is of great interest in many situations, such as in EEG analysis, it is a very common practice to study one or more time series derived from the raw signals. For example, identifying fiducial points within the respiratory tidal volume signal (such as the maximum volume at each cycle), it is possible to derive a time series with the respiratory frequency per breath. Similarly, from the ECG or arterial pressure signal, it is possible to obtain a series of successive cardiac cycles. In the case of ECG, the cardiac length is usually estimated from the intervals between successive R peaks, while in arterial pressure signals the intervals are estimated considering the systolic or diastolic pressure values as fiducial points [2]. A great number of time series can be derived from raw biomedical signals, providing complementary information to that extracted from the raw signals. It is worth noticing that the term ‘time series’ is general and can refer to both the raw signals and the series derived from them. Here, ‘time series’ is referring rather to the derived series instead of the raw physiological signals, even though the two terms can be used interchangeably.
One of the most studied physiological time series is the tachogram, which consists of a series of cardiac intervals or cardiac cycle length on a beat-by-beat basis. The fluctuations of cardiac intervals over time, known as heart rate variability (HRV), carries relevant physiological information and has become a valuable tool to evaluate the mechanisms regulating the generation and conduction of cardiac action potentials, as well as the modulatory components influencing heart rate, such as the autonomic nervous system and humoral factors [3,4]. In addition to the tachogram, beat-by-beat series of arterial pressure values (mean, systolic, diastolic or pulse pressure) are often used to study cardiovascular regulation. An important example relies on the analysis of spontaneous baroreflex function, where time series of arterial pressure and cardiac interval are used to assess the reflex responses to changes in arterial pressure [5].
Several computational software applications intended for biomedical signal analysis have been developed in the last years. Most are focused on the analysis of HRV series only, i.e. the tachogram, while some can also deal with other types of series. All of them have their strengths and drawbacks, depending on the specific needs of each user. In general, the characteristics of the software vary regarding the computational language used, the types of inputs allowed, the pre-processing tools available for editing the signals before the analysis, the variety of analysis methods and the possibility to save pre-processed signals and analysis results. Examples of software include ARTiiFACT [6], Kubios HRV [7], HRVanalysis [8], EZ Entropy [9], EasieRR [10], PhysioNet Cardiovascular Signal Toolbox [11], PhysioZoo [53] and HRVTool [12], all created with Matlab platform (The MathWorks, Inc), gHRV [13], pyHRV [14] and RR-APET [15], created using Python language, as well as PhysioScripts [16], PhysioNet HRV toolkit [17], HRVFrame [18] and CadioSeries [2,19], developed using R, C, Java and LabVIEW (National Instruments Corp), respectively. A summary of the main functionalities provided by the abovementioned software is presented in Table A1 (Appendix).
In this paper, we introduce a new freeware software, named PyBioS, intended for the analysis of cardiovascular signals and time series. From now on, we will refer to both signals and time series as signals. PyBioS was developed in Python language, has a friendly and intuitive graphical user interface, and is composed of the following main functionalities: signal opening or creation, signal visualization and saving, signal pre-processing and signal analysis. Although the main purpose of PyBioS is the analysis of cardiovascular signals, it can be used with any type of biomedical signal.
