Over the past decade, there has been an enormous increase in the spending allocated to cybersecurity on the magnitude of billions of dollars (Arquilla, 2016; Garfinkel, 2012). Meanwhile, large-scale data breaches and data leaks have been increasing (Symantec, 2012). Taken together, the increase in resources allocated to cybersecurity have not definitively overcome or prevented cyberattacks. According to several estimates, this continuance in compromised security is because human error comprises the primary cause for breaches of personal data and secure information (Arquilla, 2016; Butler, 2014; Dupuis, 2017; Garfinkel, 2012; Parsons et al., 2017; Sawyer and Hancock, 2018; Wiederhold, 2014).
Meaning, the fallibility of the human user is the central target for socially engineered cyberattacks, phishing scams, and data leaks. Thus, there are several “human factors” that raise or diminish the likelihood of being the victim of a cyberattack, hack, or data breach – and even being victimized a second or third time (Wiederhold, 2014). Put another way, unfavorable outcomes can be traced back to the fact that some users have better cyber hygiene than others, which in turn is linked to several individual differences.
Cyber hygiene involves establishing and maintaining important cyber health behaviors. Routinely monitoring technology for threats or attempted hacking, changing passwords and avoiding recycled passwords, updating virus protection software, storing online information securely, and running appropriate security scans are but a few examples of such effective, adaptive, and “healthy” behaviors. Cyber hygiene is certainly important in maintaining cybersecurity, but it is not necessarily synonymous with cybersecurity. For example, cybersecurity is the objective measurement of behaviors taken to maintain security and remain defensive toward cyberattacks (Han et al., 2017), whereas cyber hygiene is related to the knowledge about online security and the practices associated with increasing cybersecurity (Parsons et al., 2017). Thus, in order to improve cybersecurity, we must improve cyber education. One area in which to improve cyber education is within the classroom, as the number of students enrolling in computer science-based courses has increased, especially for female students (Roberts et al., 2002). Thus, as the demographics and enrollment in these course (and ultimately, careers) change, it would be especially beneficial to include a discussion of cyber hygiene and individual differences in cybersecurity risk factors.
1.1. Human factors and cyber hygiene1.1.1. Cyber educationOne individual difference linked to improving cybersecurity includes knowledge related to cybersecurity, or cyber education. While Internet security guidelines for consumers are freely available, it is questionable how many users read these reports and if these security guidelines are written in a digestible language for both tech savvy consumers and tech laggards (Symantec, 2012). One proposed solution for overcoming the educational gap in cybersecurity advocated for mandatory cyber hygiene education for all individuals, including both cyber and non-cyber professions (Dupuis, 2017; Sobiesk et al., 2015). However, this is not necessarily a feasible solution, and it is unclear how this idea could be enforced en masse.While mass cyber education may serve to offset poor cybersecurity behaviors, mandatory education becomes a moot point if the curriculum is not focused on user behaviors or human factors, which currently appears to be the case. Many computer science, information system, and cybersecurity courses do not contain content explicitly addressing the weaknesses associated with human users. Moreover, at many institutions, specific coursework related to human cognition and human behavior is not required of computer science or information systems majors, which is problematic given a human user will ultimately be using a computer-based product. Fortunately, many programs of study are shifting to a more multi-disciplinary approach (Dupuis, 2017). Due to this shift in the current cyber educational system, it is an opportune time to investigate specific individual differences that may be associated with better cyber hygiene so as to broaden and strengthen the revised curricula associated with these new multi-disciplinary approaches. Further, such an understanding of individual differences in cybersecurity behaviors provides significant practical implications for areas outside of education, such as the United States Government, where cyber security training is mandatory for all employees (Cone et al., 2007).1.1.2. Individual differences related to cyber hygieneIn one study, Whitty and colleagues observed that older individuals, and individuals who score high in “self-monitoring,” were more likely to share their passwords with another individual (2015). Yet, in a more recent study, age and gender were not related to information security awareness (Parsons et al., 2017). Rather, Parsons et al., 2014, Parsons et al., 2017 determined that specific cyber-related knowledge and attitudes shape several cyber hygiene behaviors, including password management, opening unfamiliar links through websites or via email, privacy settings, and cybersecurity when working in public places. Similarly, Butler (2014) demonstrated that knowledge, capability, and motivation were all human factors that influenced poor password practices.Finally, in a landmark study of human behavior and cybersecurity, Tischer et al. (2016) placed 297 USB flash drives, loaded with malware, throughout a large university campus. Cyberattacks were successful approximately 45 – 98% of the time and malware was connected in less than six minutes. Importantly, the flash drives’ appearance did not increase attack success (Tischer et al., 2016). Instead, users reported that they installed the flash drive for altruistic reasons – they intended to find the owner of the missing drive.
1.2. The present studyConsequently, the purpose of the present study is two-fold: 1) understand the unique human factors that may impact cyber hygiene, and 2) use these findings to justify the need to discuss individual differences in cyber hygiene in modern computer and information science course curricula. By understanding the human factors that both pose and offset cybersecurity risks, we provide students with a holistic education. More specifically, we seek to understand the role of cybersecurity knowledge (Parsons et al., 2014, Parsons et al., 2017), motivation and self-efficacy (Butler, 2014; Tischer et al., 2016) Whitty et al., 2015), and demographics (Parsons et al., 2017; Whitty et al., 2015), such as age and gender, in predicting cyber hygiene-related knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors.We also elected to explore the impact of trust on cyber hygiene – given the importance of this topic in the field of human-computer interaction and automation (Balfe et al., 2018; Hancock et al., 2011; Hensel, Cains, Hoffman, and Kelley, 2015; Linkov et al., 2019; Schaefer et al., 2016). While there is a great deal of literature on the role of trust in technology, it remains understudied in the context of cyber hygiene.The present research is largely exploratory in nature as the individual differences in this study have not been examined collectively or in tandem as predictors of effective cybersecurity behaviors. This begs a broader research question that we attempt to address: what is the relationship between known and unknown human factors that influence greater cyber hygiene?
