Low achievers (LAs) are typically identified as students who have not achieved the expected basic level of academic performance at school due to some temporary situation. Various documents regarding international assessments such as the TIMSS (Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study) and PISA (Programme for International Students Assessment) have stated that students with lower levels of learning achievement are likely to face more difficulties in making decisions after graduation (OECD, 2016). In many cases, students' prior knowledge is a critical resource that enables them to acquire in-depth understanding (Bhargava, Loewenstein, & Sydnor, 2017; Ohst, Glogger, Nückles, & Renkl, 2015; Song, Kalet, & Plass, 2016) and positive learning attitudes (Demirbag & Gunel, 2014; Lodge & Kennedy, 2015), and such knowledge is closely related to their argumentation ability (Cogliano, Kardash, & Bernacki, 2019; Yang, Lin, She, & Huang , 2015). Argumentation is an important aspect of science education, which focuses on teaching students how conclusions can be made through a series of logical analyses reasoning (Erduran, Ozdem, & Park, 2015; Osborne et al., 2016). In general, educators consider the promotion of high school students’ argumentation abilities to be a difficult task because arguing scientifically involves a number of high-order thinking activities, such as peer-to-peer communication, critical thinking, knowledge evaluations, and making decisions from multiple perspectives (Hu, Wu, & Gu, 2017; Sadler & Fowler, 2006; Zohar & Nemet, 2002). Relatedly, it is generally believed that LAs face greater difficulty in performing such activities (Cook, Carter, & Wiebe, 2008; Zohar & Dori, 2003). According to a study by Cook et al. (2008), LAs “did not have the background knowledge to make the connections between the salient features they viewed and underlying content principles” (p. 257).
Moreover, Lin and Mintzes (2010) indicated that “high-ability students were significantly better than low-ability students at generating complete arguments. (p993)”. In other words, the LAs basically focus on the superficial aspects of the materials they are learning in higher order thinking problem solving about in solving problem with higher order thinking skills (Zohar & Dori, 2003).
The topic of argumentation learning has attracted considerable attention in the recent educational literature, but that literature has still not provided sufficient explanations regarding how LAs argue scientifically, what promotes their learning progress, or how to facilitate their learning (Lin, 2018; Hu et al., 2017). Based on previous studies on science and computer education, a number of teaching strategies have been suggested, including the use of scaffoldings for effective communications (Mauricio, Heidi, & Stephen, 2008), the use of inquiry-based instructions (Margunayasa, Dantes, Marhaeni, & Suastra, 2019), and the use of web-based learning environments (Song et al., 2016; Yang, Chen, & Chen, 2018). Bearing that in mind, we developed a web-based argumentation program (WAP) and created various scaffoldings to support the science concept and argumentation of LAs. In addition, socio-scientific issues (SSIs) were used to construct the learning content of the WAP because they are generally considered appropriate topics through which beginners can learn how to argue critically and scientifically (Anisa, Widodo, & Riandi, 2017; Eggert, Nitsch, Boone, Nückles & Bögeholz, 2016).
