Since the beginning of the 21st century, both Digital Marketing (DM) and Data Sciences (DS) have remarkably evolved in terms of use and profitability (Tiago & Veríssimo, 2014). This has led to the emergence of a digital ecosystem, which connects users 24/7 and which has shaped users’ new habits and behaviors (Mayer-Schönberger & Cukier, 2013).
DM is defined as a set of techniques developed on the Internet with to persuade users to buy a product or service (Avery, Steenburgh, Deighton, & Caravella, 2012). Today, the daily roadmap for companies that operate on the Internet includes techniques such as Search Engine Optimization (SEO), i.e. optimization of search results from major search engines; Search Engine Marketing (SEM) or programmatic advertising, i.e. strategies to sponsor ads in search engines or in advertising space on banners in websites; as well as Social Media Marketing (SMM), i.e. strategies of interacting with users on social networks through social ads (Lies, 2019, Palos-Sanchez et al., 2019).
In recent years, DM has spurred a considerable research interest among scholars (Kannan, 2017). For instance, Rogers and Sexton (2012) sought to understand the key ways to improve profitability or ROI (Return of Investment) in DM. Furthermore, Kumar et al. (2013) measured the influence of data on the DM ecosystem. Likewise, Saura, Palos-Sánchez, and Cerdá Suárez (2017) identified the metrics to measure the efficiency of each of the DM actions developed by a company on the Internet.
Numerous studies demonstrated that a key way to increase the effectiveness of DM strategies is the application of DS techniques in this industry (Braverman, 2015, Dremel et al., 2020, Sundsøy et al., 2014). For example, Kelleher and Tierney (2018) argued that DS can increase the effectiveness of DM by improving issues such as (i) companies’ management of the information collected from users; (ii) the type and source of data from the companies’ datasets, and (iii) application of new data analysis and innovative techniques to create knowledge (Palacios-Marqués et al., 2016).
Furthermore, Fan, Lau, and Zhao (2015) and Saura and Bennett (2019) underscored the importance of several important aspects, such as the type of data collected from different online sources, purchases made by users, and their digital habits or behaviors. Likewise, Wedel and Kannan (2016) demonstrated that, in order to increase the chances of success on digital and social media platforms, companies should identify unsuspected patterns using Artificial Intelligence (AI) or Machine Learning (ML) techniques. Accordingly, the DM industry has been increasingly influenced by research areas such as Information Sciences (IS) or Computer Sciences (CS), as well as by all other areas of research that facilitate collecting, ordering, and managing data (Provost & Fawcett, 2013).
Until now, the key tasks of DS have included improving the storage capacity of company data, performing market research and consumer segmentation, or extracting key information regarding company problems (Loebbecke & Picot, 2015). However, DS is a broad ecosystem that encompasses different pattern identification strategies, models of analysis, performance indicators, statistical variables, and technicalities skills linked to a great technological expertise (Leeflang, Verhoef, Dahlström, & Freundt, 2014). However, several studies have highlighted that there is a skills gap in this industry (e.g., Ghotbifar et al., 2017, Royle and Laing, 2014). Specifically, both marketers without expertise in IS, CS, or DS and non-technical researchers who lack the knowledge of data management have faced the challenge of acquiring such knowledge and skills and using them not only technically, but also strategically and operationally. These challenges and the ways to overcome them are the motivation of the present study.
In order to analyze the impact of the increase in companies’ use of DS on DM, the present study performs an in-depth review of (i) methods of analysis, (ii) uses, and (iii) performance metrics based on DS applied in the scientific literature to DM strategies. The aforementioned three aspects will be studied, explained, and analyzed from the marketer's point of view, rather than from that of a data scientist. By reviewing the main concepts of DS framework applied to DM, the present study will allow marketers and non-technical researchers to better understand the main applications of DS to DM, as well as to become more aware of the importance of each such application.
Considering the scarcity of previous research on the relationship between DS with DM, the present review both bridges a gap in the literature and offers directions of further research in this area. The results of this review will allow marketers and non-technical researchers to better understand how the DS ecosystem applied to DM works, and what the key points of and alternatives to applying these techniques to DM are.
Therefore, the present study addressed the following two research questions:
RQ1: What are the main methods of analysis, uses, and performance metrics of Data Sciences applied in Digital Marketing?
RQ2: What are the areas of further research on the use of Data Science in Digital Marketing?
To address these two questions, a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) is performed based on the publications available from several scientific databases, such as ACM Digital Library, AIS Electronic Library, IEEE Explore ScienceDirect, and Web of Sciences.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The following section presents the theoretical framework of DS. In the second part, Theoretical background, the main concepts of the DS framework are presented. Sections “Methodology development” and “Analysis of results” present the methodology and report the results, with a particular focus on the development of descriptors that define the key aspects of DS in DM. Finally, the last section draws conclusions and outlines directions of further research.
