Every day, new knowledge is being created and published in the form of scientific articles. When knowledge is steadily increasing, it becomes difficult for new ideas to gain traction and to get noticed (Katz et al., 1963; Rogers, 2003). To navigate this complex and overloaded market of ideas, scientists often consider the citations that a publication receives. Independent of the alleged quality of a scholarly idea, citations indicate the recognition that it received in the past, evidencing the extent to which the idea diffused successfully in the community (Radicchi et al., 2008; Uzzi et al., 2013; Wang, 2016). Research has shown that the network position of idea generators and their teams critically influences whether or not an idea diffuses successfully (Abrahamson and Rosenkopf, 1997; McFadyen and Cannella, 2004; Wang, 2016; Wejnert, 2002). For instance, a central network position is often associated with the possibility to access more resources and new knowledge (Perry-Smith, 2006; Tsai, 2001). This access provides teams with a higher awareness of what is going on in the field and thus might help the team to develop potentially more relevant ideas. A central network position could also be a signal of a team's status which could be leveraged to exert influence on others (Podolny, 2001).
While our knowledge about idea generators and their social network position has continuously increased, theorizing about the role of ideas has taken a backseat in recent years (Goldenberg et al., 2001; Litchfield et al., 2015). We suggest that it is necessary to not only focus on the social network, but also on the characteristics and the network of the idea itself (Goldenberg et al., 2001). We do so by studying how an idea's diffusion is shaped by its connectivity in a so-called "content network.'' A content network represents the semantic connections between ideas. In this study, we specifically focus on how ideas are connected to other ideas through common title words. Similar to earlier studies on relatedness in the context of regional knowledge production (Boschma et al., 2014; Heimeriks and Balland, 2016) our approach is based on the analysis of co-occurrences of words. We adapt this approach and construct a connectivity measure for each scientific paper by examining the title words that different papers share with each other. Making these connections visible allows us to shed light on the organization of knowledge and how highly connected scientific ideas intermediate between different knowledge domains (Mannucci and Yong, 2018).
Ideas which have a high connectivity in the content network can indeed be considered as important "bridges'' (Gloor et al., 2009; Van der Hulst, 2009) and we therefore argue that they trigger more attention than ideas that are connected with fewer knowledge domains. When ideas have a high connectivity, they often combine and blend different knowledge into something novel (Hargadon and Sutton, 1997; Harvey, 2014). At the same time, individuals from different knowledge domains can relate more easily to at least certain aspects of such an idea and thus experience a higher familiarity, which often makes that particular idea more useful to them (Berg, 2016; Dailey and Mumford, 2006). We therefore argue that connectivity in a content network indicates novelty and familiarity—both of which are critical features of an idea and facilitate its diffusion process in the marketplace for ideas.
In addition to examining how the connectivity of an idea influences idea diffusion, we suggest that this effect is further enhanced by the social network of people and their teams. Bridging research on the influence of content connectivity on idea diffusion (Nerghes et al., 2015) and the influence of social network connectivity on idea diffusion (Abrahamson and Rosenkopf, 1997; McFadyen and Cannella, 2004; Wang, 2016; Wejnert, 2002), we show that the joint effect of content and social network connectivity is highly beneficial for idea diffusion. This research thus contributes to our understanding of how an idea's connectivity across knowledge domains in a content network influences its diffusion and how social network connectivity of people and their teams can further assist in pushing forward an idea.
While others have studied, for example, how the relatedness of scientific topics shapes knowledge dynamics or specialization patterns on a regional level (Boschma et al., 2014; Heimeriks and Balland, 2016; Hidalgo et al., 2018), in our study, we focus on the diffusion of scholarly ideas (Horowitz, 2017). Prior work has studied idea diffusion in different ways, for example through looking at innovation adoption (Battisti and Iona, 2009) or sales (Garber et al., 2004). While recognizing the value of such approaches, we operationalize idea diffusion as the acceptance of an idea by groups of scientists and thus measure the total citation score of the scientific publication of an author team (Radicchi et al., 2008; Uzzi et al., 2013; Wang, 2016). Indeed, citations are often used to measure diffusion success—not only of scientific publications but also, for example, of patents (Balconi et al., 2004; Fischer and Henkel, 2012; Magerman et al., 2015; Sorenson and Fleming, 2004).
We investigate the Semantic Web research community, a sub-field of computer science, which develops structures and processes to organize, access, and share information on the Web. We use publication data from the Semantic Web Conference Corpus and complement this data with citation scores from Microsoft Academic Search. Our findings support our hypotheses that ideas that connect multiple knowledge domains are more successfully diffused, and that this effect is further enhanced when the author team is highly connected in the social network.
