COVID-19 poses heterogeneous global challenges. In many developing countries, disease containment and suppression through non-pharmaceutical interventions, such as lockdowns, have spurred massive layoffs and sustenance issues. Enforcing lockdowns leads to a paradoxical situation-it is essential to prevent the infection’s spread and “flatten the curve,” but those at the lower end of the income distribution will struggle to survive due to economic impacts, as highlighted by Mobarak and Barnett-Howell (2020). The absence of a social security mechanism to cover unemployment claims and the prevalence of informal workers in the economy makes COVID-19 management a daunting task for Pakistani government. Uncertainty has been high for the overall economy, and particularly acute for the education sector, as COVID-19’s highly contagious nature will limit traditional learning institutions’ roles in the near future, which demands specifically designed and targeted policy interventions to mitigate economic and learning losses. As lockdowns seem inevitable and pervasive, we need to analyze the feasibility of working and studying from home thoroughly. Previous research focusing on the developed economies, such as (Dingel and Neiman, 2020, Gottlieb et al., 2020), indicates a high capacity for significant transition to home-based online options for work and education. However, we need to determine how a similar transition will work for Pakistan, a developing country with the world’s sixth-largest population and significant regional and gender-based disparities.
The nature of jobs, the possession of digital devices, internet access, prior technology exposure, and requisite training provision are important factors we must analyze to determine if home-based online work and education options are attainable for a developing country like Pakistan. Pakistan is likely to suffer heavily due to lockdown (Nafees & Khan, 2020), as high-skilled services in finance and information technology are only around 10% of its total workforce (Sharma, 2019), and most sectors cannot switch easily to online service. E-commerce platforms use is extremely limited in Pakistan, and even such jobs often require face-to-face interaction. Furthermore, distance learning is also constrained by the limited access to internet and computers, as well as teacher’s lack of prior exposure to them.
We use Pakistan’s 2018–19 Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement (PSLM) Survey data (Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, Government of Pakistan, 2020) to assess the extent to which workers and students could work or study from home. PSLM is a nationally representative household survey with extensive information on employment outcomes, children’s educational attainment, and internet, computer and TV access information. Analyzing occupational codes at 4-digit level and internet availability across rural and urban regions, we adapt Dingel and Neiman (2020)’s approach to determine what percentage of Pakistan’s labor force can switch to online work, while explicitly accounting for limited access to mobile or broadband internet. We also examine differences in rural and urban workers’ and male and female workers’ abilities to switch to online work. Finally, we use the PSLM survey to assess the degree to which students could study from home using computers, TVs, or mobile phones during school closures. We specifically examine the constraints of TV availability for students to compensate for academic loss. Pakistan recently introduced Teleschool, a dedicated TV channel, for educational outreach (Zahra-Malik, 2020).
Our article contributes to a growing literature that examines the impacts of COVID-19 on work-from-home feasibility. Most existing literature focuses on developed countries, such as the United States (Dingel and Neiman, 2020, Baker, 2018, Mongey and Weinberg, 2020, Bick and Blandin, 2020), Italy (Barbieri, Basso, & Scicchitano, 2020), the United Kingdom (United Kingdom Office for National Statistics, 2019), and Germany (Fadinger & Schymik, 2020). These studies find that even in developed countries, less-educated workers, women, and those in occupations with more need for physical proximity are affected more (Mongey & Weinberg, 2020). In particular, Mongey and Weinberg (2020) find that workers who cannot work from home are more likely to be non-white, lower-income, renters, less-educated, and lack employer-provided health insurance. Saltiel (2020) and Dingel and Neiman (2020) are the two exceptions to our knowledge that provide information on the share of jobs that can be done from home in developing countries. They use 2-digit ISCO (international standard classification of occupations) employment numbers, and find that 13% of Pakistan’s workers can do their job from home (Dingel & Neiman, 2020).
We find that 12% of Pakistan’s urban jobs and 9% of rural jobs can be done at home, which is slightly lower than and roughly aligns with the prior study’s findings. Additionally, we provide a heterogeneity analysis that indicates that megacities are considerably different from urban and rural regions in terms of work-from-home options. Interestingly, we find that the top female occupations—the health and education sectors—have more work-from-home options than the top male occupations. Our examination reveals female students face substantial pre-existing inequalities in primary and secondary education opportunities. Less than half of eligible females enroll in primary schools, and this ratio drops to less than 30% for secondary and 20% for tertiary education. The proportion of households with access to TV and internet is very low, especially in rural areas, which suggests disproportionally larger pandemic impacts on students’ abilities to study from home in socially disadvantaged households.
We enrich the literature by validating and refining Dingel and Neiman (2020)’s findings by explicitly accounting for internet access. Additionally, our results reveal important additional challenges to workers effectively working from home in rural areas and in urban districts outside the ten megacities. Finally, we also provide the first systematic estimate on the feasibility of Pakistani students studying from home using a computer or TV.
