Changes in science and technology have affected the structure of societies and have led to rapid change in human profile. In order to adapt to the changing human profile, reforms in education as well as scientific and technological enrichment in educational environments have become necessary. In an era where the use of technology in daily life is rapidly increasing, effective use of technology in education has become important (Alkan, 1998). Since abstract concepts are frequently used in explaining nature and natural phenomena during science courses, supporting these courses with technology has become a necessity. In order to enrich students' learning environments, it is important to amplify their visual and intellectual engagement through the use of technology, especially when explaining abstract and difficult concepts. The use of technology also allows students to perceive phenomena in science courses in a multidimensional manner, to interpret information better and to keep their attention on the course (Akpinar, Aktamis, & Ergin, 2005). Educational technologies in science teaching serve to improve the quality of science courses through effective scientific activities, develop students' reasoning skills in science courses, help students discover knowledge, enhance their problem-solving abilities and convey difficult-to-comprehend situations that are difficult to recognize in daily life (Karamustafaoglu, Cakir, & Topuz, 2012). It is important to provide technology-based instructional materials for students in science courses and to reorganize learning environments in accordance with students' needs, thereby enabling them to learn through action and experience (Akpinar, Aktamis, & Ergin, 2005). An emergent technology, augmented reality (AR) was used in the study. Thanks to AR technology, it has become possible to prepare effective and interesting technology-based instructional materials.
Students at primary school have difficulty fully comprehending complex abstract concepts. For example, basic astronomy concepts are abstract in nature, which interferes with students' comprehension of the material and negatively affects their attitudes towards the course (Gundogdu, 2014). In order to overcome these difficulties, it is necessary to make abstract concepts in science more concrete through the use of visuals in teaching. As a result, a more meaningful learning environment can be designed in which enhanced achievement and the development of positive attitudes can be expected. AR plays an important role in embodying and visualizing abstract concepts in accordance with students' comprehension levels, and in enabling the observation of phenomena that are impossible to encounter in real life (Arici, Yildirim, Caliklar, & Yilmaz, 2019). Considering the importance of AR applications, this study aims to investigate whether AR technology affects middle school students' achievement and attitudes during their science courses.
AR can be described as an interactive platform which presents a combination of virtual objects and the real world (İbili & Şahin, 2015; Milgram & Kishino, 1994). When a real-world image is taken with a camera, AR is able to attach virtual objects to pre-determined points in the image and interprets the output through specific programs (Azuma, 1997, Yilmaz, 2016, Yilmaz and Goktas, 2017). Since AR applications contain many virtual objects, it is used for educational purposes especially in three dimensional objects (Shelton, 2002). In educational contexts, AR technology increases students' interest and motivation through the interaction between real and virtual worlds (Chen & Tsai, 2012). It is thought that the usefulness of AR in education lies in its ability to present complex information in easier to understand ways, teach subjects that are impossible to observe directly, demonstrate dangerous phenomena and objectify abstract concepts (Walczak, Wojciechowski, & Cellary, 2006).
In the literature, there are many studies on the use of AR in science education (Arici, Yildirim, Caliklar, & Yilmaz, 2019). For example, Shelton and Hedley (2002) observed AR's effect on undergraduate Geography students' comprehension of Earth-Sun relationships. At the end of the study, it was concluded that AR technology positively affected students' understanding of the subject. Another study, carried out by Kerawalla, Luckin, Seljeflot, and Woolard (2006), investigated the impact of AR on dialogues between teachers and students. They found that the experimental group which learnt via AR had better dialogues with their teacher and had to warned less about poor behavior during their lessons as they were more focused than usual. Additionally, Wang and Chi (2012) investigated the effects of AR on students' satisfaction and achievement. Their data demonstrated that students' achievement had improved and that they were satisfied with the AR system. Abdüsselam (2014) stated that AR technology would be useful in teaching magnetism in Physics courses. It was revealed that AR technology could enable visualization of the magnetic field and contribute to the concretization of the subject. Additionally, a study conducted by Wojciechowski and Cellary (2013) showed that students found AR-aided classes entertaining and enjoyed the application. They also found a strong positive relationship between attitudes and the use of AR applications.
Di Serio, Ibáñez, and Delgado-Kloos (2013) investigated the effects of AR technology on students' motivation. Results indicated that AR had a positive effect on middle school students' motivation. Delello (2014) studied prospective teachers' perception on the use of AR in science courses. In this study, it was found that AR applications positively affected the learning environment by increasing motivation, class commitment and the teacher's excitement, and enabled the partnership in the implementation of the application. Cai, Wang and Chiang's (2014) study also concluded that AR, as a computer-aided tool, had considerable integrative effects on learning. In another study, Erbas, 2016 used a mobile AR application on tablet computers in a 9th grade biology class. He investigated these students' academic achievements and attitudes towards the course. It was concluded that the use of AR technology in courses enhanced student achievement and improved their attitudes towards the course. Yildirim, 2016 investigated the effect of AR applications on students' achievement, motivation, perception of their own problem-solving skills and attitudes. In this study, there was two experimental groups which are students who learnt via computer-based AR applications and students who learnt via computer-based AR applications. Students who learnt via computer-based AR applications were more successful than those who learnt via tablet-based applications. The study also demonstrated that both experimental groups had higher motivation levels than the control group. Summarizing the studies about AR in the literature, it is seen that students' attitudes, motivations, interests and achievements are frequently discussed. In general, a single variable was considered and there were few studies dealing with multiple variables. Additionally, although various scientific topics have been covered in investigations on the impact of AR, the solar system has not yet been investigated in detail. Accordingly, this study aims to fill this gap in the literature. The main aim of the study is to investigate the effects of AR technology on middle school students' achievements and attitudes towards the course, and to determine their attitudes towards AR applications. In parallel with the aim of this study, the following research questions will be answered.
(1)Is there a significant difference between the academic achievement of middle school students using AR applications and those using traditional methods?(2)Is there a significant difference between the attitudes of middle school students towards their science course based on whether they learned via AR technology or traditional methods?(3)What attitudes do students who used AR technology have towards AR applications?(4)Is there a correlation between middle school students' attitude towards AR, their attitude towards the course and their academic achievement in experimental group?
