Software quality is an essential ingredient for software success. Quality is affected mainly by its attributes, which are divided into two groups: external attributes and internal attributes. Internal attributes, such as class cohesion, are measured directly from the software, while external attributes, such as maintainability, need to be measured indirectly, and their prediction often relies on internal attributes [1]. Software maintainability is one of the fundamental external quality attributes and is recognised as a research area of primary concern in software engineering.
Prediction is a core part of estimation, which is a crucial aspect of project planning [2] and involves the determination of a number of factors including duration, staff, size, costs, and effort [3]. Prediction depends mainly on historical internal and external quality attributes from completed projects. The correlation between internal attributes, “independent variables”, and external attributes, “dependent variables”, is a recognised part of software maintainability prediction [1]. Software maintainability prediction models have been investigated to assist organisations to utilise cost, allocate resource as well as obtain an accurate management plan and effective maintenance process [4]. However, prediction of software maintainability is a challenging task and requires accurate prediction models [3].
Object-Oriented (OO) software systems are now widely developed by and deployed within organisations and object-orientation has emerged as the dominant software development paradigm. OO programming languages, such as Java, C++, C# and software development tools, such as Unified Modeling Language (UML) are also widely used in these organisations [5], and consequently they share significant concerns regarding the effective maintenance of these OO systems.
This paper reports on a systematic literature review (SLR) of relevant journals and conference proceedings papers that focus on the topic of software maintainability prediction. This review investigates a set of research questions (RQs) to comprehensively summarize, analyse and discuss various viewpoints: software maintainability measurements, metrics, datasets, evaluation measures, standalone models and ensemble models. Our search was focused on the most common computer science digital database libraries between 1991 until 2018 and we survey 56 relevant studies in 35 journals and 21 conferences proceedings.
The primary objective of this review is to investigate the current state of software maintainability prediction to and discover the progress made, limitations and challenges, along with future research requirements. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first SLR of software maintainability prediction for OO systems that comprehensively evaluates a wide variety of important journal and conference proceedings with respect to a specific defined research question. Our review differs from the previous review studies [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11] because it includes a higher number of relevant journal and conference proceedings in the software maintainability field. Furthermore, we also apply a different analysis on the selected primary studies and provide more additional detailed analysis of each paper. Previous review studies focused on non-object-oriented systems [9], [10], [11], or considered a limited number of studies [6], or concentrated on a single aspect such as the measurement of software maintainability, or the models or the metrics used [7], [8]. In contrast, this study is classifies the concept of software maintainability according to three dimensions: the measurement of maintainability (dependent variable), the metrics considered (independent variables) and the models employed. This study has applied the research method for conducting a SLR proposed by Kitchenham [12], and has analysed comprehensively each selected study. Therefore, we have confidence our SLR is both novel and hope that software engineering researchers and practitioners will find it to be a useful resource. The key contributions of this paper are:
•We present a SLR of the work in the field of software maintainability prediction using machine learning techniques.•We analyse and compare 56 relevant studies according to several research questions.•We determine gaps and identify further research opportunities in this field.
The structure of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 introduces the research method used to conduct this literature review. Section 3 provides the results of the SLR. Section 4 discusses our major research questions (RQs). Section 5 concludes this study with limitations and research gaps and formulate directions for further study.
