The goal of this paper is to establish a strong connection between domain theory and stochastic process theory. This follows the emergence over the past several years of random variables in domain theory as models for probabilistic choice (cf. [25], [29], [3]) in programming language semantics, and of probabilistic programming semantics, an important tool for modeling programming languages that support sampling from probability distributions to study Bayesian inference (cf. [19], [28]). Our aim is to devise domain representations of stochastic processes that are amenable to computational analysis.
Random variables are measurable maps X:(S,ΣS,μ)⟶(T,ΣT) from a probability space S to a measure space T. It is customary to identify a random variable X with its law, X⁎μ, the push forward of the measure μ under X. A common setting is that of Polish spaces – completely metrizable separable spaces, because the probability measures on a Polish space also are a Polish space in the weak topology. Our approach expands Polish spaces into domains, which allows us to represent each random variable as a Scott-continuous map, and to use techniques and results from domain theory to prove analogs to results about stochastic processes.
We illustrate our approach by reformulating Skorohod's Representation Theorem, a fundamental result in stochastic process theory, in the domain setting. In more detail, Skorohod's Theorem [30] states that any Borel probability measure on a Polish space P is the law of a random variable X:[0,1]⟶P. That is, if μ is a Borel probability measure on a Polish space P and if λ denotes Lebesgue measure on the unit interval, then there is a measurable map X:[0,1]⟶P satisfying μ=X⁎λ. Furthermore, if μn⟶wμ in ProbP in the weak topology, then the random variables X,Xn:[0,1]⟶P can be chosen with laws μ and μn, respectively, so that Xn⟶X almost surely wrt λ. This allows one to replace arguments about the weak convergence of probability measures on a Polish space with arguments about almost sure convergence of measurable maps from the unit interval to the Polish space in question.
In the domain approach, the unit interval equipped with Lebesgue measure is replaced by a suitable domain equipped with a corresponding probability measure, and the class of Polish spaces is replaced by a suitable category of domains. In outline form, the approach relies on the following:
•It is well known that the Cantor set, C≃2ω, regarded as a countable product of two-point groups, is a standard probability space: the canonical quotient map π:C⟶[0,1] is a Borel isomorphism taking Haar measure νC on C to Lebesgue measure (see Corollary 4.9 and, e.g., [8]).
