Artificial intelligence (AI) is becoming an essential element in our lives. It tackles problems that have been left unsolved, or poorly solved, in the last decades. Famous examples like self-driving cars, face recognition systems, and virtual personal assistants are examples of how AI is drastically changing the way we live and interact with the surrounding environment. Usually, an AI-based application relies on connected devices able to perceive and take actions over the environment. This is the case of cyber–physical systems (CPS), where the combination of different software components (e.g., algorithms) with connected hardware (e.g., sensors and actuators) give birth to the so-called “smart devices” [1].
Nowadays, smart devices are present in almost every environment and they may become even more intelligent if combined with each-day-more-sophisticated AI algorithms. Using modern AI techniques, we can teach devices what they should do based on data, context, and so on. An interesting subset of these systems comprises smart devices [2] equipped with specific-designed sensors able to monitor gaseous molecules in many different applications, including indoor and outdoor air quality monitoring [3], precision agriculture [4], analysis and diagnosis of clinical disease with non-invasive methods [5], and safety in the workplace [6]. Historically, research around these sensing devices has been driven by materials science communities and industries that have tried to identify the best sensing materials and procedures to build reliable sensors with high sensitivity and selectivity. Solid-state gas sensors are the most studied devices, which exploit different physical–chemical principles to detect target gases. Among all the different categories, chemoresistive gas sensors are the most investigated due to their great versatility [7], [8]. These devices are based on a photo- or thermal-activated semiconductor that acts both as a receptor, interacting chemically with gases, and as a transducer, since the chemical interaction with gas molecules leads to a change in one the semiconductor physical properties, i.e., the electrical resistance [7], [9], [10]. Finally, the generated signals are correlated to the concentration level of target gases. It follows that the combination of sensing devices with purposely designed machine learning techniques may improve the overall performance of the whole sensing system [2]. Furthermore, if the algorithm is correctly trained, it is also possible to understand if there is a mixture of different gases and their concentration. Several works describe the combination of AI techniques with gas sensor data. For instance, Vergara et al. [11] collected three years of data by injecting 6 different gases in a measurement chamber containing a 16 sensors array (metal-oxide sensors, TGS-type sensors from Figaro). They developed an ensemble method based on support vector machines (SVMs) to detect different gases with the aim to study the drift of sensors over time. Their data-set is publicly available and adopted, for instance, by Wang et al. [12] to train SVMs to detect the concentration of gases. Moreover, they exploited a genetic algorithm (GA) to find the best hyper-parameters of SVMs. Other researchers [13] used an array of commercial sensors to collect responses to mixtures of gaseous compounds. They propose a methodology to identify and train the best neural network architecture with the aim to correctly identify the odor intensity and the hedonic tone. Casey et al. [14] deployed sensor arrays, which comprise commercial sensors, and fed machine learning algorithms with mixtures of sensor output signals. They compared neural networks with linear models with the aim to understand if these methods may help to address the cross-sensitivity of sensors. However, these examples use commercial sensors or public data-sets. First, commercial sensors may suffer from cross-sensitivity; moreover, they may be expensive and are often covered by the industrial secret that prevents research communities to acquire a full understanding. On the other hand, while research conducted over public data-sets and commercial sensors is essential to develop new methods, the main drawback is that we do not have full control of physical experiments since we cannot control the environmental conditions (i.e., air temperature, relative humidity, etc.), the sensor array (i.e., which sensors we want to study and their working temperatures), the injected gases (i.e., compounds, concentrations, injection profiles, etc.), and how we sample signals (i.e., sampling frequency).
In this paper, we propose MetaNChemo, a multidisciplinary and end-to-end framework to support the design of smart chemometric systems. In detail, this framework allows us to identify and train a small (in terms of the number of weights) and accurate (in terms of F1-score) neural network that can be inferred by a tiny embedded device. This network has to detect the right concentration of carbon monoxide (CO), within the range 0 to 25 ppm in the air, at different relative humidity levels. Monitoring of CO concentration is extremely important due to the high toxicity of this gaseous compound, being CO poisoning the leading cause of fatal air poisoning in several countries. Our neural network has to combine signals sampled from a sensor array made of up to 3 different chemoresistive sensors (SnO2 [15], ZnO-1 [16], and ZnO-2 [17]). Such sensors have been designed and developed by the Micro-Nano Facility(MNF) research unit of our institution, the Bruno Kessler Foundation (FBK, Italy). This synergy allows us to design and implement a complete end-to-end research pipeline using state-of-the-art and innovative techniques for sensor production and data analysis. Moreover, it reduces research costs to build and study smart gas sensors. In this work, we want to prove that the selection of the sensor array and hyper-parameters of the neural networks can be performed combining state-of-the-art meta-heuristic tools and techniques. Many of the algorithms belonging to this family exploit bio-inspired mechanisms [18] to optimize parameters with respect to one or more fitness functions.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are threefold:

•to introduce a multidisciplinary end-to-end framework, called MetaNChemo, able to support the design of chemometric systems, from the production of gas sensors to the assessment of AI models;•to propose a data-driven approach that comprises the entire processing pipeline and exploits different state-of-the-art AI techniques (preprocessing, meta-heuristics, machine learning) to identify an AI model with strong design requirements: low number of parameters (i.e., 20–50 weights) and high detection capabilities (F1score≥0.95);•to reduce the research gap and join forces between computer science and material science worlds.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 is devoted to present an overview of the state-of-the-art of meta-heuristic techniques related to machine learning model design and optimization. We present the sensor technologies and production techniques in Section 3. The data collection setup and data-set construction are delineated in Section 4. Section 5 describes the meta-heuristic based approach designed to identify the best sensor array and network architecture. The results obtained are presented and analyzed in Section 6. Finally, in Section 7, we draw some conclusions, outlining possible future works and the main challenges opened by our research.
