Worldwide, peptic ulcer disease and its complications remain the cause of much suffering and significant mortality. A peptic ulcer is a sore on the lining of stomach which named (gastric ulcer) or on the lining of duodenum (duodenal ulcers). It is believed, that peptic ulcers develop due to imbalance between aggressive factors (reactive oxygen species, stress, helicobacter pylori, NSAIDs, gastric acid) and protective factors (mucus-bicarbonate barrier, mucosal blood flow, prostaglandins) leading to interruption in mucosal integrity [1]. Indomethacin, belongs to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Also, it is considered as one of the most commonly prescribed drugs in the world to treat pain and inflammation. Unfortunately, it is observed, that long term use of indomethacin is associated with severe gastropathy by different mechanisms independent on gastric PH [2]. Moreover, these mechanisms include the topical irritant effect on the epithelium, impairment of the barrier properties of the mucosa, suppression of gastric prostaglandin synthesis, reduction of gastric mucosal blood flow and interference with the repair of superficial injury [3, 4]. In addition, other mechanisms include, reduction of bicarbonate and mucus secretion [5], inhibition of both COX isoforms [6], induction of gastric mucosal apoptosis and necrosis [3, 7], enhance leukocyte adherence to the vascular endothelium and microcirculatory disturbances [8]. On the other hand, sildenafil (SILD) is a selective and potent inhibitor of cGMP specific phosphodiesterase (PDE5), which catalyzes hydrolysis of cGMP leading to increase Nitric oxide (NO) level [9]. Thus, it can prevent indomethacin (INDO)-induced gastric ulceration, through a reduction of leukocyte-endothelium adhesion, modulation of epithelial barrier function. Further mechanisms include, increase in mucus and bicarbonate secretion, reduction of gastric acid secretion. Also, SILD exerts gastroprotective effect by inhibiting HCl producing cells, inhibition of apoptosis and maintenance of gastric mucosal blood flow [10].
Diosmin (DIO) is a natural citrus flavone with remarkable antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic features [11]. These features are responsible for its protection against cardiac, hepatic and renal injuries [12]. However, these papers have not considered the peptic ulcer protection through incorporating the effect of DIO and SILD with ranitidine (RANT). Accordingly, RANT an H2-receptor antagonist which used in gastric acid disorder treatments was incorporated for comparative purposes. Furthermore, RANT was employed not only to compare efficacy of the medications but also, to assist clarify potential mechanisms of their effect.
The aim of this paper is to investigate gastroprotective effect of DIO, SILD and their combinations with RANT against INDO-induced ulcers specifically. Accordingly, seven different groups were resulted. Moreover, the underlying mechanisms of different medications and their combinations were considered to compare different groups. These mechanisms represent gastric PH, MDA, reduced glutathione concentration, TNF-α, NO and caspase-3. The results of these comparisons contribute to provide a new gastro protective agents in clinical gastropathy. So, this study not only provides an efficient way for peptic ulcer protection, but also it may be considered for future studies in ulcer healing and gastric cancer.
