The greatest challenge mankind faces in the 21st century is to curb the continued accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The overarching climate goal of the Paris Accords is “to hold the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels” (UNFCCC, 2015). This effort requires the participation of all countries in the world to formulate effective environmental policies. Environmental informatics has experienced a very rapid development and wide application in monitoring, modeling, and managing environmental processes in the past decade (Fang et al., 2014). Hence, in the future, data-driven policies are of vital importance in determining whether nations can fulfill their international commitments as defined in the Paris Accords and achieve their carbon emissions peak quickly.
Big Data concern large-volume, complex, growing data sets with multiple, autonomous sources (Wu et al., 2014). With the fast development of networking, data storage, and the data collection capacity, Big Data are now rapidly expanding in all science and engineering domains. Since big data has been applied in many fields, such as transportation, banking, medical care, logistics, education, ecology and other fields, many studies have reviewed its application in different fields (e.g., Moharm, 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2019).
Environmental policy is the level of an organization or government set minimum countrywide environmental performance standards, in this paper it main concerns air pollution, climate change and natural energy resources. Environmental management is an operational process of environmental policy, such as environmental control, management incentives for environmental performance and environmental technologies used in operations (Christmann, 2004). Giest and Mukherjee (2018) held that necessitates certain capacities within government to tackle the complexity of environmental programs via big data. Many governments have enacted policies to apply big data to solve questions such as greenhouse gas emissions reduction and environmental protection. For example, in August 2015, the Chinese government observed that big data could be used to construct an effective reaction mechanism for ecological environment monitoring (GOSC, 2015). To cope with the urgent demand for energy saving and emissions reduction, governments and international organizations have been exploring carbon trading markets. For instance, Yahşi et al. (2019) developed a model to predict the European Union's Emissions Trading System carbon pricing based on Big Data. Scholars believe that big data, with its great volume, variety, and velocity, has tremendous potential for application in carbon emissions regulation and environmental management. Researches on the application of big data to carbon emissions and environmental management (BD-CEEM) have aroused the interest of scholars come from different area.
In recent few years, scholars have reviewed amount of literature on the application BD-CEEM. It concerns transportation, business, medical care, ecology and other fields. For example, Wong and Zhou (2015), Wang et al. (2019), Lachhab et al. (2019), Hu and Pavao-Zuckerman (2019) made the reviews about environmental sustainability, which included building life cycles, sustainable consumption and environmental monitoring. Zhang et al. (2019), Uchida et al. (2017) and Challinor et al. (2018) focused on climate change and climate risks of a specific area. Cheong et al. (2019) and Bai et al. (2018) reviewed health cost of air pollution. Although the aforementioned studies have instrumental in reviewing existing literature in some specific areas, there is no review summarizes the research trends and identified the established emerging areas in BD-CEEM. A systematic review can be conducted via bibliometric tools, and a network analysis for mapping and clustering the important information can be scientifically discovered.
Hence, the purpose of this article is to answer the following questions. What are the researches status of existed studies in BD-CEEM? Who is the most influential authors in BD-CEEEM? What is the co-author situation between scholars, organizations and countries? What are the most popular research topics? Under present researches, could we find some insightful implications and useful applications for future development?
Before searching and analyzing the literature in BD-CEEM, some hypotheses are proposed as follow. The first assumption is articles which the searching terms appear in the keyword match the researching topic better than articles which the searching terms are only mentioned in the content. The second assumption is articles related to the topic of research, labeled the searching terms as keywords. These assumptions are made to ensure that as many papers as possible are found that are highly relevant to the searching topic.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on BD-CEEM. Section 3 introduces the methodology. Section 4 proposes a detailed analysis using strict bibliometric tools. Finally, the conclusion, limitations, and directions for future research are offered.
