In the context of the rapid development of modern society, the physical education of Chinese schools has also made great progress, but people's health and physical fitness have not been improved accordingly. With the rapid development of communication technology, embedded technology and sensor technology, people have begun to use these technologies to design a portable instrument that can detect the effect of motion and can guide people to scientific movement. Wireless sensor networks are widely used, not only with great value in environmental science and military, but also have good application prospects in daily medical care, smart home and other commercial fields.
Due to the importance of human exercise energy expenditure research, many research teams have begun to study human energy expenditure and achieved good results. For example, Martin Møller and others have shown that an important health index is to consume at least one week 1000Kcal of calories is equivalent to the energy consumed by walking 1 h a day for 5 days a week [1]. Eleni A Greenwood rides a bicycle and applies 40% VO 2 max strength to men and women of the same age. After 2 h, through the test results, it was found that there was a significant difference in energy consumption and energy supply during and after cycling. The fat oxidation amount and fat energy supply ratio were higher for women than men, but the sugar supply ratio was male. Higher than women [2]. S. Schmidt conducts energy expenditure tests on 8 female endurance athletes with different exercise intensity. The results show that the amount of carbohydrate oxidation is increasing due to the increase in exercise intensity. The fat oxidation peaked at 65% VO 2 max [3]. Masaaki Sugita et al. Used the same exercise intensity cycling for trainers and untrainers, and the results found that the amount of fat oxidation is higher than that of untrainers, and the amount of fat oxidation is related to the training background and oxygen uptake the quantity also has a great relationship [4]. In a study by Terry B J Kuo et al., We also found that in cycling and treadmill exercise with the same intensity and different exercise modes, the gender of the subjects was not related to the amount of fat oxidation. Moreover, the amount of fat oxidation in cycling is lower than that on treadmills, but the production of blood lactic acid is higher than that on treadmills [5].
In the research of measuring the energy consumption of human movement, it is a good method to use wireless sensor networks to measure the energy consumption of running people. As a branch of wireless sensor networks and an important part of the Internet of Things, human sensor networks integrate biomedicine. Engineering technology and wireless sensor network are in one. It has the characteristics of high accuracy, small monitoring range, miniaturization, low power consumption, simple operation and safe use. It can monitor the human body's physiological information and movement information in real time, providing testers with A lot of important quantitative information.
This article introduces the development status of wireless sensor network technology, energy consumption detection system and ZigBee technology in detail. Based on this, the research focuses on the design of detection terminals (coordinator and router nodes), the routing protocol of the ZigBee network, and the algorithm for detecting human energy consumption. This topic proposes a design scheme of human motion energy consumption detection system, researches and designs the coordinator, router node and host computer monitoring system of wireless sensor network. The microprocessors of the two types of network nodes use the CC2530 chip. Among them, the router node is composed of a sensor module, a data transmission module, and a power module. This text uses USB interface to carry on the data transmission with the host computer monitoring system. The host computer monitoring system receives and organizes the data packets from the coordinator through the communication window and stores them into the back-end database at the same time. When needed, it can analyze the historical data and provide each student's state whether the exercise is reasonable and healthy exercise suggestions. Information, so as to achieve the purpose of students' sun sports. The experimental study found that during 5 min of brisk walking (5 km/h), jogging, and brisk walking (6 km/h), the largest energy consumption is brisk walking (6 km/h), and the energy consumption reached It was about 165Kcal/kg/day.
