What does research look like in practice? Aside from popular assumptions of how researchers are lonely isolated individuals sitting disconnected from the rest of the world enmeshed in thought, a considerable part of research involves working with data. Whether this data is quantitative, qualitative, gathered through experiments or involves writing code, all of this data is not just magically ‘invented’ out of thin air, but instead develops in a process of interaction with both human beings and technical systems. However only a small fragment of this process is presented to outside reviewers, the outputs and the framing often specifically designed to make a specific point. How the author got there, and which assumptions were made on the way and how these assumptions developed over time is seldom included in the final write-up.
Who scientific endeavour considers to be an appropriate reviewer is also a crucial point in this context. As Shapin and Schaffer (1985) note, when the concept of scientific inquiry was invented, only men were considered as reliable witnesses for this endeavour. This idea of verification of science as a social technology that requires material and literary technologies exist, enabling a process of experimentation, documentation and verification of scientific knowledge. However even in the 17th century, “not everyone could come to London to see those experiments for themselves” (Law, 2017, p. 36). Thus the process of accurate documentation of the experiment became particularly important. We argue that in recent years the quality of documentation of technology research has been neglected, particularly in areas of high risk and high impact research. While other disciplines such as Medicine have invested considerable energy in ensuring their results are transparently documented and externally valid, there is still considerable work to be done to ensure the same level of rigour in technology research.
This challenge is not just a challenge of documentation alone. Scientific endeavour strives to produce reliable and, in some fields, reproducible knowledge. Acknowledging that all knowledge is situated and that researchers over-emphasising the objective validity of their own research may be falling for their own “god trick” (Haraway, 1988, p. 584) does not take away from the need for rigorous documentation. If anything, the reality of science requires “engaged, accountable positioning” (Haraway, 1988, p. 590) in a manner that allows for “less false claims” (Harding, 1992, p. 587) rather than objectively true. To state that scientific claims are dependent on “all the procedures of the sciences (at best) can generate,” (Harding, 1992, p. 587) is not a failure but appreciates the reality of what it means to conduct science. As a result “scientists and social scientists need to be accountable for what they write, rather than hiding behind the fiction that what they are reporting comes direct and unmediated from nature” (Law, 2017, p. 35). Seen from this perspective, better documentation of technology research can ensure not just a more accurate account of its process but contribute to safeguard the core of what constitutes good research itself. While the goal of “strong objectivity” (Harding, 1992) may remain hard to achieve, ensuring greater documentation of the results of scientific research can help ensure meaningful accountability of scientific research.
At the same time, this approach builds on the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), specifically the accountability principle in Article 5(2) and Privacy by Design in Article 25 (Regulation, 2016). Academic research deals with large amounts of research data, which frequently includes personal data. At the same time a lack of accountability in the use of research data can have grave consequences both for the data subjects who data is being stored or processed incorrectly, and for the societies who base their decision-making on the results of unaccountable academic research. Rather than relying just on data protection authorities, who are already struggling to keep up with technological developments (Raab and Szekely, 2017), or data protection impact assessments (Binns, 2017; Gellert, 2017) to ensure the accountability of academic research, we instead propose an accountability by design approach. When considering the accountability duties of controllers in Article 24 of the GDPR (Regulation, 2016), a by design approach that minimises potential risks seems to be a particularly appropriate response (Gellert, 2018).
The following article argues that rather than just providing output data to be considered in research – or providing explanations for technical outcomes as is frequently proposed in computer science (Diakopoulos, 2015; Tufekci, 2015; Wagner, 2016), accountability can only be developed by better understanding the research process. In order to do this, we suggest a series of mechanisms that can be built into existing research practices to make them more intelligible to outside reviewers and scholars. These mechanisms are designed to develop the accountability principle of the GDPR and ensure more accountable scientific research. As the GDPR recitals also explicitly references “data […] processed for scientific research purposes,” (Regulation, 2016, p. 30) an accountability by design approach to technology research is grounded both in the Articles and recitals of the GDPR. By documenting the key elements of a narrative research story which explains not just what you believe to have discovered but also how researchers got there, it may also be possible to create better accountability mechanisms. Many technical and organisational mechanisms that could enable more accountable research processes already exist; however, they are not typically used in this context and are thus not fit for purpose. To link these individual mechanisms together, we then suggest the blueprint for a combined organisational and governance framework for accountability by design in technology research. In conclusion, we discuss potential pitfalls of such an approach as well as future research areas that would need to be explored in order to implement this accountability by design for technology research in practice.
Within the context of this special issue, technology research is defined based on the work of the PanelFit EU H2020 research project. PanelFit researchers argue that “Large amounts of personal data are processed during research projects and several researches (mostly ICT researchers) produce algorithms that could be employed in several fields with significant effects on data subjects,” (MaLGieri, 2019) a challenge which integrates all disciplines from law to the social sciences, humanities and art. As such, we propose to define technology research as any forms of research related to information technology, whether this is related to its legal, technical, social political or other relevant aspects of research (MaLGieri, 2020).
Throughout the article we also refer to ‘high risk’ technology research. Following the risk-based approach of the GDPR, we argue that high risk technologies need to be interpreted using the GDPR, as such high-risk technology would typically require a data protection impact assessment following Article 35 of the GDPR (Regulation, 2016, p. 53). As such, an accountability by design approach in technology research constitutes a step towards mitigating risks in conducting high risk technology research.
