The MS alloys are widely used in the oil and gas-related industries, wastewater purification, and automotive industries because of their excellent physical and unique mechanical properties. Despite these, the high activity of the steel surface in atmospheric and aqueous media provides undesired chemical and electrochemical reactions called corrosion [1], [2], [3], [4]. Corrosion can limit the widespread usage of metal alloys in various industries. Right now, there are different surface pretreatment methods that were developed, such as electrodeposition, conversion coating, anodizing, sol-gel technique, and organic coating [5], [6], [7]. The creation of hydrophobic and superhydrophobic coatings is one of the high-performance techniques for controlling the aggression of the corrosive agents on the steel substances. Generally, the CA of the hydrophobic and/or superhydrophobic surfaces is higher than 90° and 150°, and the sliding angle is lower than 10° [8], [9], [10]. Recently, the thin hydrophobic layers have been used in the construction of the anti-icing, anti-biofouling, water/oil separation, and self-cleaning applications [11,12]. The superhydrophobic phenomena were observed in the natural environment, such as rice and lotus leaves, strider legs, and butterfly wings. Based on the Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter's theory, the existence of the heterogeneities over the hydrophilic substances can affect the water droplet CA and surface water-repellency properties . Surface modification using materials having low surface energy and micro-/nano-roughnesses are the key parameters reaching this target. The etching is one of the most common techniques for producing micro/nano-smoothness over the steel substance [13,14]. According to the prior reports, the presence of iron oxide/hydroxide particles (on the MS substrate) and Mg oxide/hydroxide (on the magnesium substrate) provide an undesirable and unstable surface. Additionally, in some studies, materials with hazardous nature such as H2SO4 and HF were utilized as a surface modifier for authorizing hydrophobic/superhydrophobic layers with high degrees of CA. Hence, because of this reason, surface post-treatment by CCs was suggested in recent years. After the surface coverage via conversion coatings, the sufficiently stable film covered the whole area of the steel substance [15,16].
Nowadays, due to the hydrophobic nature of the C-F bonds, the fluoroalkylsilanes (FASs) were employed as an appropriate modifier for obtaining hydrophobic surfaces. However, the high toxicity and price are two important factors that have limited their usage recently. For this reason, carboxylic acid-based components were used as the environmentally-friendly surface modifier [17]. In most cases, it was found that the carboxylate groups of these acids (negatively-charged part) interact with the metal substances (i.e., positively-charged part). Achievements proved that the hydrophobic nature directly depends on the carboxylic acid chain length. Shen et al. reported the great anti-corrosion effect of the TiO2-based hydrophobic coating on the metal surface in the chloride-containing solution [18]. In another research, Wang et al. evaluated the effect of superhydrophobic metal complex on the copper surface in corrosive media and understood that the corrosion resistance was increased [12]. Boinovich et al. reported that the combination of the hydrophobic and superhydrophobic layers with an oxide sub-layer could increase the metal surface anti-corrosion features [19]. Cui et al. examined the impact of the hydrophobic coating on the corrosion resistance of the Mg alloys. It has been shown that the developed coating could effectively improve the metal corrosion resistance [20].
In the present work, the steel surface was post-treated with nanostructure EuCC. The chemically-treated samples were then modified with the help of stearic and palmitic acids as hydrophobic molecules. The samples were then analyzed by EDS and mapping approaches. Moreover, the film agglomeration was evaluated by FE-SEM. The sample surface structure was characterized by GIXRD. The CA analysis was done for surface energy calculation. Eventually, the Tafel and EIS techniques were respectively applied to investigate the protection behavior and the anti-corrosion performance of the designed hydrophobic layers.
