Postharvest processes, such as fermentation and drying, are critical for the quality of plant materials derived from coffee and cocoa. These processed grains are highly regarded around the world based on their aroma and flavor. In each of the postharvest processes these products are submitted to, a series of enzymatic and chemical reactions happen. These reactions, are also favored by the initial composition of the cocoa beans, and by the operative conditions such as temperature, relative humidity, and changes in the pH at the time the whole transformation process is carried out. One should notice that these reactions are essential for the development of expected profiles of aroma, flavor, and color, and that this cannot be achieved otherwise during later stages of processing [1, 2]. On the other hand, these processes also lead to the undesired formation of harmful/carcinogenic components such as 2-propenamide, commonly known as acrylamide, due to reactants formations [3, 4, 5, 6]. One of the main reactions under study is the Maillard reaction, which generates acrylamide from free amino acids and by reducing sugars as glucose, which is considered as a more effective precursor than fructose, tagatose, or maltose. Whereas the importance of glyoxal as one of the key sugars fragmentation intermediary was confirmed, controversial results about the order of reactivity are on the conditions of the different studies were conduced [4, 5].
The processing of cocoa beans by fermentation is the stage to obtain free amino acids and reducing sugars. Those components form by hydrolysis of peptides and sucrose, respectively. Fructose (FRUC) and glyoxal from glucose (GLY-GLU) play a significant role during the cocoa transformation, because both reactants could correlate to lead to formation of substituted pyrazine and neo-formed compounds, such as acrylamide, during non-enzymatic reactions [4].
The Maillard reaction is expected to occur rapidly during the next stage of industrialization, the roasting, where higher temperatures (above 120 °C) for long time periods are utilized [7, 8, 9]. This reason explains the results of several studies reported on the content of acrylamide and its derivatives in cocoa beans after fermentation, drying and roasting [2, 10, 11, 12]. Usually, the studies do not evaluate the levels of the neo-formed compounds after drying without roasting, likely because the formation of acrylamide is only expected at temperatures higher than those commonly reached by solar (30–50 °C) or artificial (between 50 and 70 °C) drying. Although a recent study showed acrylamide content levels in dried cocoa beans [13], its drying conditions, the composition of cocoa beans and the sample treatment were not reported. These parameters are important in order to carry on the traceability, quality control and to propose mitigation alternatives from this post-harvest stage.
Due to the above, the possibility of acrylamide formation should ideally be controlled at the drying stage, this because asparagine and reducing carbonyls (fructose and glucose) reactants required for Maillard reaction are generated at this stage. That is what happens instead of other mechanisms as the enzymatic pyrolysis of gluten or decarboxylation of asparagine [4, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17].
In this context, the aim of this work was to determine the effect of temperature on the formation of acrylamide in cocoa beans during drying treatment by an experimental and computational study, in order to assess the presence of this neoformed compound from postharvest stage. These will be made to evaluate the feasibility of acrylamide formation from the reaction of fructose or glyoxal from glucose with asparagine at temperatures typical of the drying process of cocoa beans (323.15, 333.15 and 343.15 K) in aqueous phase.
The content of sugars (fructose, glucose and sucrose) and the asparagine in cocoa beans during the postharvest processing steps (fermentation, drying, and roasting) were experimentally measured, as well as the content of acrylamide in dried and roasted cocoa beans to compare the results from a computational study with the real consumption of sugars that may react with asparagine to form acrylamide.
