Electromyography (EMG) is a technique used to record and analyze myoelectrical signals, called electromyograms, generated by skeletal muscles. An EMG signal detected noninvasively on the skin surface is called surface EMG (sEMG). sEMG exhibits stochastic and nonstationary features [1]. These biosignals represent a muscle activity during a movement and reflects a person's intention when he/she moves his/her limbs. In fact, sEMG is nonlinearly related to joint kinematics (angle, velocity, and acceleration), joint moments, and muscle forces. These signals have been investigated for many purposes, including the diagnosis of neuromusculoskeletal diseases, movement analysis, rehabilitation evaluation, and recently, position- and force-based control of human–machine interfaces, such as exoskeletons and prostheses.
Many approaches can be used for mapping between sEMG and joint kinematics and kinetics, such as i) integrated biomechanics and multibody dynamics [2] and ii) discrete classification of a person's intention (motion or force) based on sEMG activity using the signal analysis and machine learning (ML) methods [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. However, these methods have drawbacks that limit their usability. Alternatively, joint variables can be reconstructed from sEMG via continuous and proportional ML-based estimation approaches [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23], including artificial neural networks (ANNs), as many of their variables are known as universal approximators [24, 25, 26]. However, training an ANN to model multi-input multi-output systems requires sufficient computational resources and is time consuming; additionally, ANNs are sensitive to noisy signals. Hence, studying the dependencies between the inputs and outputs of such complex biosystems is important and facilitates appropriate input–output selections prior to modeling; hence, optimal solutions with minimal resources and time can be achieved.
The selection of the most activated muscles contributing to limb motions (in terms of sEMG signals and their representing feature/feature sets) that reduces redundancies can be achieved by different methods, which can be classified into the following: i) dimensionality reduction (e.g., principal component analysis (PCA) [27, 28] and linear discriminant analysis [4]), ii) variables selection (e.g., mutual information (MI) [12], forward and backward selection [29]), and iii) hybrid approaches (e.g., integrated PCA and MI [5]). Some of these approaches suffer from input–output linear dependencies (e.g., PCA), long-time implementations as they are model-based selections (as in forward and backward selections), and failure to obtain optimal input variable sets (as in the forward selection). However, although these methods are powerful, simpler and customized approaches are preferred in the current study owing to multiple participants involved and many modeling algorithms used with an intensive parametric study applied to each one.
This study, which proposes two simple visual and numerical techniques, has three main objectives: 1) to investigate the provided dataset quality (as it is assumed to be a worldwide benchmark); 2) to investigate the dependencies between sEMG channels or inputs and kinematics degree-of-freedom (DOF) readings or outputs, such that the appropriate input variables can be selected, thereby reducing the ANN learning times; and 3) to estimate the performance of four types of ANNs prior to the training phase, in proportional and continuous mappings of sEMG to hand joint angles using those simple, low-computation techniques. Hence, data of eight individuals performing two sets of movements were obtained from a publicly available dataset [9].
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents dataset acquisition and processing. Section 3 explains signal pre-investigation techniques and the ANN models used. Section 4 provides results of the data pre-investigation phase and ANN modeling. Results discussion and study limitations are presented in Section 5. Finally, the conclusions and future studies are presented in Section 6.
