In the last few years, Agent-Based Models (ABM) have sought to address questions of economics in the field of Land Use and Cover Change (Parker, 2014). For land market models in particular, Agent-Based Models of Land Use and Cover Change (ABM/LUCC) provide modeling paradigms and formalisms that are more and more acknowledged for their effectiveness to produce modular and scalable computer models for virtual experimentation. They supply engineering concepts, methods and IT techniques that provide a new way to overcome the inherent difficulty of spatial land-use planning models that describe economic development and land competition. ABM/LUCC computer models facilitate the behavior of highly heterogeneous economic agents in very diverse areas and biotopes. While corresponding classic economic models are generally analytically intractable, the ABM/LUCC make it possible to simulate heterogeneous behaviors integrating many interacting components. Conceptual formalisms based on Agent-Based Models (ABM) are a prerequisite to effectively carry out the interdisciplinary labor that is needed to development computer code. However, the path from the verbal and mathematical model descriptions traditionally employed by economists to the detailed specifications required to create a computer model is not transparent. The methods and formalisms coming from Modeling & Simulation computer science (M&S) can dictate a formal modeling process that can assist in this process.
In this paper, we present a method to build an ABM/LUCC of land and housing market using Design Patterns. We highlight benefits offered by this software engineering technique to design reusable, extensible and scalable code for economic models. Design patterns couple recurrent problems and their solutions to overcome the difficulties raised when designing software components. They are usually employed by modelers experienced in Object Oriented Programming (O.O.P.). The use of Design Patterns in M&S is fairly new and seems to be promising - especially in ABM design (Alexander, 1977, Cruz Torres, Van Beers, Holvoet, 2011). Design patterns provide solutions for modelers to design and write computer models that are accessible to all researchers community members. Hence, design patterns improve the modeling process in multidisciplinary contexts, such as our case study. We show how design patterns can be used in the modeling process: from the conceptualization and description of the real-world problem, to design of the computer model, to implementation of the programming model. Our contribution also aims to increase uptake of design patterns used at all stages of the modeling process by a larger audience of researchers in M&S. To this end, we use textual specification and graphics formalisms, the MR POTATOHEAD: Property Market Edition, to develop a conceptual model representing the different points of view and behaviour of system actors for our real world case study. The exercise provides an example of an interdisciplinary process modeling involving economists and computer scientists to formulate an ABM/LUCC computer model, which describes the organization of computer code. By means of the ABM/LUCC formalisms, we built our ABM/LUCC for a tourist area that faces an intense residential development leading to a huge pressure on land prices as well as to land-use conflicts.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we present the use of design pattern in computer simulation and describe the MR POTATOHEAD conceptual design pattern specifically used for describing ABM/LUCC. A short review of ABM/LUCC literature regarding the main papers used to formulate the structure, the behavior algorithms as well as the simulation rules governing the ABM/LUCC agents follows. In section 3, we present how we apply the methodology based on MR POTATOHEAD Property Market Edition standardization (Parker et al., 2019) in the context of our case study and the construction of the computer modeling process (Parker, 2014, Parker, Brown, Polhill, Deadman, Manson, 2008, Parker, Entwisle, Rindfuss, Vanwey, Manson, Moran, An, Deadman, Evans, Linderman, Mussavi Rizi, Malanson, 2008). We conclude and draw research perspectives in Section 4.
