In addition to satiating our curiosity, asking sensitive questions can help us learn important information. For example, learning how much a friend pays in rent or how much a co-worker earns can inform important economic decisions that we make. Similarly, asking a new acquaintance if they are single, what their political views are, or when they might have a new baby can help us navigate our social world. Yet many individuals avoid asking sensitive questions. Past work has explored how would-be respondents might avoid answering difficult questions (Bitterly and Schweitzer, 2020, John et al., 2011, Rogers and Norton, 2011), but little work has investigated whether conversational partners will ask sensitive questions in the first place.
Despite the popular adage that there is “no such thing as a stupid question,” etiquette experts generally caution us against asking questions. In fact, Duffey (1877 “The Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Etiquette”) advises people to avoid asking virtually any type of question as a matter of polite society. This prohibition against asking questions, and in particular asking sensitive questions, seems to stem from agreed-upon norms to avoid causing discomfort (Brown and Levinson, 1987, Goffman, 1967). As humorist Dave Barry asserted, many types of questions, such as asking a woman if she is pregnant, should remain off-limits in almost every situation, “unless you can see an actual baby emerging from her at that moment” (Barry, 1998). The concern is that by asking a sensitive question, askers may cause discomfort that ultimately harms their relationship with their conversational partner.
In this article, we explore the aversion conversational partners have to asking sensitive questions. In related scholarship investigating survey methods, Tourangeau and Smith (1996, p. 276) define a sensitive question as one that “raises concerns about disapproval or other consequences (such as legal sanctions) for reporting truthfully or if the question itself is seen as an invasion of privacy.” For example, they define asking survey questions about sexual contact and drug use as sensitive questions. Consistent with this definition and related prior work (Acquisti et al., 2012, John et al., 2011, John et al., 2012, Tourangeau and Yan, 2007), we define sensitive questions as questions that are 1) about topics that are uncomfortable to discuss, 2) inappropriate for the social context, or 3) about information respondents would rather keep private. Of course, some questions can fit all three criteria (e.g., asking a wedding guest if she has ever slept with the groom). Although classifying a question as a sensitive question may depend on the setting, the relationship between the conversational partners (e.g., friends, coworkers, or strangers), and cultural norms (e.g., one’s salary might be a sensitive topic in the U.S., but less so in the Middle East; Gelfand & Brett, 2004), we expect broad consensus on the sensitivity of many questions across a variety of contexts, opening the door for empirical investigation of when sensitive questions are posed or avoided.
Although etiquette experts have counseled individuals to avoid asking questions, this advice reflects intuition rather than careful investigation. Recent scholarship suggests that intuitive beliefs about effective impression management strategies may not be very accurate (see Steinmetz, Sezer, & Sedikides, 2017, for a recent review), and we postulate that prescriptive advice to avoid asking sensitive questions may reflect misguided intuitions about impression management. Across five experimental studies, we challenge conventional wisdom about avoiding sensitive questions, and we break new ground in three ways. First, our findings describe both topical (e.g., questions about income and personal relationships) and contextual factors (e.g., face-to-face versus computer-mediated conversations) that influence how willing individuals are to ask sensitive questions. Second, we describe the underlying mechanism that accounts for the aversion to asking sensitive questions. We show that individuals’ reticence to ask sensitive questions is triggered by concern about causing a conversational partner discomfort and harming interpersonal impressions. Third, we assess the consequences of asking sensitive questions and show that askers overestimate both discomfort and impression management harm, and consequently seldom ask sensitive questions. As a result, potential question askers miss opportunities both to learn valuable information and to learn that their sensitive questions would likely be better received than they anticipate.
1.1. Asking questionsBy avoiding sensitive questions, individuals may limit the information that they learn. Some of the information they fail to learn could be important. For example, by not asking colleagues about their salaries, individuals may fail to recognize their own salary potential and make decisions that limit the amount they earn. The willingness to ask sensitive questions can also prevent individuals from forming mistaken assumptions. For example, question askers may learn that unexpected behaviors, such as a colleague injecting themselves in a bathroom stall, are in fact benign, and simply an insulin injection for treating diabetes. The cost of failing to ask sensitive questions may be especially high in strategic information exchanges, such as negotiations and interviews (Minson, VanEpps, Yip, & Schweitzer, 2018); in these settings, information gathering is particularly important and individuals have incentives to conceal information. Prior work has stressed the importance of asking questions in these contexts, and demonstrated that by asking questions individuals can gather valuable information (Huang et al., 2017, Minson et al., 2018, Schweitzer and Croson, 1999, Thompson and Hastie, 1990).Although questions have largely been conceptualized as a conversational tool to gather information, several scholars have documented important ways in which questions can advance other conversational objectives as well. In Fig. 1, we introduce the Communication Motives and Expectations Model to describe the different goals individuals may pursue within a conversation (e.g., to gather information or manage impressions) using different communication behaviors, including questions. Even when the information a question asker gleans from asking a question is slight, the act of asking may still influence relational outcomes. For instance, questions can be used to express interest in others (Brooks et al., 2015, Chen et al., 2010), which in turn can improve interpersonal impressions and the quality of future interactions. Questions also create opportunities to share information, both by communicating information about a question asker’s level of interest and expertise (Minson et al., 2018) and by triggering reciprocal questions (Hauser, Yeomans, Brooks, & Norton, in preparation). In some cases, such as at a cocktail party, banal questions may bore a counterpart or create a forgettable impression. In contrast to asking low-risk questions, asking sensitive questions is risky; sensitive questions may cause discomfort – or they may initiate an engaging and meaningful conversation. Questions can also increase liking by enabling respondents to talk about themselves, an enjoyable proposition for most conversational partners (Huang et al., 2017; Sprecher et al., 2013), which can increase perceptions of interpersonal closeness (Aron, Melinat, Aron, Vallone, & Bator, 1997).Download : Download high-res image (260KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Communication Motives and Expectations Model. Note. According to the Communication Motives and Expectations Model, individuals develop expectations about their conversational partner and make conversational choices to advance their conversational goals. Conversational Goals: In addition to exchanging information, individuals engage in communication to pursue a diverse set of objectives, including but not limited to managing impressions (e.g., to influence interpersonal perceptions), amusing oneself or one’s counterpart, building rapport, and guiding action. Expectations: Individuals’ beliefs about their counterparts’ goals (e.g., competitive v. collaborative) and how their conversational partners will react to a conversational choice will moderate their communication behavior. Importantly, these expectations may or may not be accurate. For example, an individual may avoid asking a sensitive question (or asking for advice) because they mistakenly believe that a counterpart will react negatively – and that the interpersonal costs of asking will be high. Communication Behavior: In this investigation, we study the questions that people choose, though this model generally extends to include a variety of communication behaviors, both verbal and non-verbal, such as questions, statements, expressions, and prosodic behavior.A related literature has begun to explore the interplay between questions, disclosure, and impression management. John et al. (2011) investigated disclosure of past unethical behavior and found that the way sensitive questions are framed influences the disclosure of sensitive information. For example, individuals’ willingness to divulge sensitive information increases when they believe that disclosing sensitive information is the norm (Acquisti et al., 2012). In other work, Minson et al. (2018) found that the way a question is phrased can increase disclosures by shifting perceptions of the question asker’s knowledge and assertiveness.In addition to soliciting information, questions can convey information about the asker’s intentions, expectations, and knowledge (Holtgraves et al., 1997, Näher and Krumpal, 2012, Schaeffer and Presser, 2003). How questions are phrased can also influence perceptions of the appropriateness and riskiness of particular behaviors (Belli et al., 2006, Belli et al., 1999, Catania et al., 1996), which in turn can influence disclosure (John et al., 2011, Williams et al., 2006). Importantly, some questions can reveal unflattering information. For example, when individuals ask for help, they risk revealing their inability to complete a task on their own (Gino et al., 2012, Lee, 2002). As a result, people may be reluctant to ask for help or advice to avoid the anticipated social cost of acknowledging one’s dependence upon others (DePaulo and Fisher, 1980, Lee, 1997). However, help-seekers often mis-predict the consequences of asking for help. Not only do they underestimate the likelihood that others would be willing to help them if they asked (Flynn & Lake, 2008), but they also overestimate the discomfort they would cause potential helpers (Bohns & Flynn, 2010). In fact, Brooks et al. (2015) found that seeking advice can actually boost perceptions of the advice seekers’ competence, because advisors feel flattered to have been asked and infer that the advice seeker appreciates their expertise. Building on this work, we predict a perspective taking failure in asking sensitive questions. Specifically, we postulate that question askers will systematically misperceive the interpersonal costs of asking sensitive questions.
1.2. Conversational forecasting errorsIndividuals often struggle to predict the downstream consequences of their actions. This is true when individuals make predictions for themselves (e.g., affective forecasting errors, see Buehler and McFarland, 2001, Wilson and Gilbert, 2003, Gilbert et al., 2004, Gilbert et al., 1998) and when individuals make predictions about others (e.g., perspective taking errors, see Scopelliti, Loewenstein, & Vosgerau, 2015). In this work, we consider forecasting failures related to conversations (Bohns and Flynn, 2010, Brooks et al., 2015, Dorison, Minson, & Rogers, 2019, Epley and Schroeder, 2014, Kruger et al., 2005). We build on work that has found that individuals often engage in ineffective impression management tactics (Steinmetz et al., 2017). These tactics include humblebragging, boastful behavior that fails to boost interpersonal impressions (Sezer, Gino, & Norton, 2017), backhanded compliments (Sezer, Brooks, & Norton, 2018), attempts to hide one’s own successes (Roberts Levine, & Sezer, 2020), and overly-friendly communication strategies in negotiation (Jeong, Minson, Yeomans, & Gino, 2019). In each of these cases, individuals mis-predict the consequences of their conversational strategies on their counterparts.In general, perspective-taking is difficult (Caruso et al., 2006, Ross et al., 1977), and perspective-taking errors in conversations may contribute to forecasting errors conversational partners make. This may be particularly true for sensitive topics that might cause a question asker to feel uncomfortable or embarrassed. If individuals project their own discomfort (e.g., discomfort triggered by asking a sensitive question) to a conversational partner, they may overestimate the costs of asking sensitive questions. Of course, there are occasions in which a sensitive question might offend a conversation partner and cause relational harm. However, we propose that the mental model by which individuals estimate the costs and benefits of asking sensitive questions is systematically biased to overestimate the likelihood that a counterpart will be offended and underestimate the likelihood of a neutral or positive response. As a result, would-be askers likely overestimate the relational costs of asking these questions and may thus avoid asking sensitive questions.In our investigation, we focus on sensitive questions. Consistent with our definition, we operationalize sensitive questions as those that independent observers rated to be “sensitive,” “uncomfortable,” “inappropriate,” and “intrusive.” Individuals expect sensitive questions to cause discomfort (Tourangeau & Yan, 2007), and we postulate that, like asking for help, individuals overestimate the harm that asking sensitive questions will cause—both to their conversational partner and to the impressions their conversational partners’ form of them. As a result, we predict that individuals will avoid asking sensitive questions, both in relatively anonymous (e.g., via computer-mediated chat) and in identifiable (e.g., face-to-face) interactions, due to biased impression management concerns and concerns about others’ discomfort. Even in anonymous conversations, in which question-askers should be relatively comfortable asking questions, we expect that askers will avoid asking sensitive questions. We also expect this aversion to asking sensitive questions to reflect a bias; we predict that respondents will be significantly less offended by sensitive questions than askers expect.
1.3. Research overviewWe postulate that askers’ aversion to asking sensitive questions reflects a failed mental model: Askers anticipate that sensitive questions will offend respondents and harm interpersonal impressions more than they actually do. As a result, potential question askers miss opportunities to ask potentially valuable but sensitive questions. We explore this thesis across different conversational contexts, conversations with strangers and with friends, and conversations that are conducted both face-to-face and via computer.In our studies, we investigate when askers are willing to ask sensitive questions, and we explore the proposition that askers misperceive the impact of their questions on respondents’ feelings and impressions of them. We conducted pilot studies to identify and validate a set of sensitive questions and topics, and we show that despite individuals’ reluctance to ask these pre-tested sensitive questions, they expect these same questions to yield more valuable information than they would gain from asking our pre-tested non-sensitive questions. Therefore, we conceptualize the decision to ask sensitive questions as a trade-off between eliciting more valuable information and avoiding the perceived relational risks of offending conversational partners. Across five experimental studies, we show that askers avoid asking sensitive questions, and that they anticipate that asking these questions will trigger discomfort and harm respondents’ impressions of them.In Studies 1 and 2, Askers and Respondents interacted via an online chat platform. We contrast Askers’ estimates of the impact of their sensitive questions on Respondents’ impressions and discomfort with Respondents’ actual impressions and discomfort. In Study 2, we investigate the relationship between Askers’ predictions about the impact of asking sensitive questions and the questions that Askers chose to ask.In Study 3, we explore Askers’ willingness to ask sensitive questions with monetary incentives, and assess the economic consequences of the reluctance to ask sensitive questions. In Study 4, we extend our investigation to face-to-face conversations, and explore Askers’ willingness to ask sensitive questions even when they can attribute the selection of the questions to a third party. In Study 5, we again study face-to-face conversations, and we investigate differences in Askers’ mental models of the impact of sensitive questions on Respondents when the Respondent is either a friend or a stranger. The data from all studies can be found at the Open Science Framework page (https://osf.io/gwpa8/).
