Human-induced climate change presents a major challenge for future human development. As of 2020, the impacts are becoming more and more visible and the need for rapid low-carbon transformations of our current social, economic and technological systems seems increasingly evident. In 2015 this urgency was recognized in the political realm as countries under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) agreed to keep global temperature to well below 2 °C and pursue efforts to limit warming to 1.5 °C in the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC, 2015). Accordingly, policy-makers face the challenge of developing mitigation strategies. The Paris Agreement has stressed the need for tools and approaches to anticipate possible futures in global climate governance (Vervoort and Gupta, 2018). The multitude of possible climate strategies and the uncertainties regarding their challenges, effectiveness and interlinkages, inevitably involves an exploration of possible socio-economic transformation pathways that are consistent with the temperature goals. This culminated in 2015 when the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) announced its new direction from the attribution of causes towards response strategies (Goldenberg, 2015). This implied a prominent role for Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) which form the basis of the defined response strategies of the IPCC since the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5; IPCC, 2014 cf. Cointe et al., 2019).
IAMs are in essence computer simulations that represent complex interactions and feedbacks on a long time scale between the socioeconomic system (including climate policies) and the natural system, which are explicitly designed to inform climate policy-making (Parson and Fisher-Vanden, 1997, van Vuuren et al., 2011). The models vary largely in their structure, detail and type of policy questions they are designed to address (Kelly and Kolstad, 1998, Weyant, et al., 1995). An important distinction is made between (1) detailed process-based IAMs, which form the basis of IPCC’s assessments of transformation pathways towards temperature targets, and (2) highly aggregated cost-benefit IAMs that estimate optimal mitigation levels relative to economic costs of climate impacts, which play a less prominent role in the IPCC, but are particularly influential in US climate policy (Weyant, 2017, Wilson et al., 2017). One of the first contributions of process-based IAM scenarios was to show how existing socio-economic trends resulted in high emission levels and as the political ambition grew, IAMs were increasingly used to construct mitigation pathways (Weyant, 2017). An analytical strength of IAMs is their ability to integrate information from various scientific disciplines into a single framework, enabling the coherent analysis of social, technological and physical processes relevant to low-carbon transformations (Geels et al., 2016). However, the use of IAMs for developing mitigation strategies is also criticized. The epistemic, political and ethical implications of the various dimensions of uncertainty and how modelers deal with those are often brought up for discussion (see Beck and Krueger, 2016, van der Sluijs, 1996, Van Asselt and Rotmans, 2002 for overviews). With regard to their use to inform climate mitigation policy specifically, IAM scenarios are often criticized for favoring large-scale supply-side solutions like negative emissions technologies (NETs) (Fuss et al., 2014, Anderson and Peters, 2016, Vaughan and Gough, 2016) and more generally their limited ability to conceive of radical transformation pathways beyond economic and technological measures (Anderson and Jewell, 2019, Gambhir et al., 2019, van Vuuren et al., 2018).
IAMs are the backbone of scenario analysis of Working Group III (WGIII) of the IPCC – which focuses on response strategies – since the IPCC AR5. Consequently, the IAM community plays a leading role in climate policy research and assessment (Cointe et al., 2019). Fig. 1 illustrates this trend, showing a growing prominence of IAM analyses in subsequent IPCC reports, as well as an increasing number of IAM publications on climate change, signaling the growing modelling community around this topic. Another observable trend in Fig. 1 is the sharp increases in IAM publications towards each IPCC report, which indicates a strong ambition to provide policy-relevant information. The relative high share in IPCC reports compared to academic climate research further underline this aspiration. The underlying science-policy dynamics that explain these trends however, remain unclear. The first studies on the application of climate models in the science policy interface focused on General Circulation Models (GCMs), the first generation of climate modelling that constitute the backbone of IPCC WG I (e.g. Edwards, 1996, Edwards, 1999, Edwards, 2010, Shackley et al., 1999, Shackley, 2001, Hulme and Dessai, 2008, Mahony and Hulme, 2016, Miller, 2004, Shackley and Wynne, 1995, Shackley and Wynne, 1996). At the time of writing, only a handful of studies on organization and application of IAM research in climate policy exist (i.e. Beck and Krueger, 2016, Beck, 2018, Beck and Mahony, 2017, Beck and Mahony, 2018, Cointe et al., 2019, Corbera et al., 2016, Edwards, 1996, Hughes and Paterson, 2017, Lövbrand, 2011, Low and Schäfer, 2020, McLaren and Markusson, 2020). These studies repeatedly find that although IAMs aim to function as ‘heuristic guides’ to explore strategies (Edwards, 1996), they are in fact performative: they shape the possibility space in which future options for climate action are discussed and thus the content of policy deliberation in international climate politics (Beck and Mahony, 2017, Beck and Mahony, 2018, Lövbrand, 2011, McLaren and Markusson, 2020). As Beck and Mahony (2018, p.1) put it: IAMs exercise a “[…] ‘world-making’ power by providing new, politically powerful visions of actionable futures”. While the prominence and performative effect of IAMs in the climate science-policy interface is evident, we still lack an understanding of how and why IAMs gained this position. This is only more relevant given the fact that any modelling effort will necessarily render certain possible futures more actionable and legible at the expense of other possible futures, thus guiding the transformation towards a post-fossil society. To improve our understanding of the emergence of IAMs, this paper is driven by the following research question: how and why have IAMs become prominent in the climate science-policy interface?Download : Download high-res image (332KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Number of publications involving IAM in academic literature between 1989 and 2019 (black line),estimated percentage of IAM results in IPCC Synthesis Reports (blue bars) and relative share of academic IAM publications within the total body of academic climate research (red dotted line).(see Supplementary Material B for methodology). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
In order to answer this question, we applied an analytical strategy with a historical focus for which we used different sources: academic work on the history of IAM (e.g. Parson and Fisher-Vanden, 1997, Weyant, et al., 1995) and the history of international climate politics (e.g. Bodansky, 2001, Gupta, 2010, Gupta, 2014), 18 semi-structured interviews and document analysis (see Supplementary Material for an elaboration on the methodology). We describe historic developments in modelling and policy and identify the changing ‘role’ of IAMs over time (referring to how the alignment of science and policy was negotiated, such as agenda-setting, target formulation or evaluation of response strategies). The focus of this role was on both the characteristics of IAMs as well as on the emerging community of experts around IAMs: both the model and the modeler are relevant to understand the role of IAM in the science-policy interface. With regard to the model, since model results are typically represented in the form of scenarios, we attend to the type of future representation (referring to how possible futures were represented using scenarios, with varying numbers of alternatives, distinct framing and action orientations). With regard to the modeler, we analyze the strategies to obtain policy relevance (referring to efforts of the modelling community in pursuing policy-relevance).
The paper is structured as follows. In section two, we introduce five distinct phases and discuss their dynamics. In section three we interpret these historical developments and discuss the key factors that explain the prominent role of IAMs in the climate science-policy interface and provide a set of reflections on their future role.
