High-throughput thermodynamic calculation based on the CALPHAD (CALculation of PHAse Diagram) has recently demonstrated its great importance in accelerating the research and development of advanced materials [[1], [2], [3], [4]]. Its impact can be further extended into the design of new materials within the context of modern data analytics, which is an emerging area in materials science and engineering. In contrast to the conventional trial-and-error basis experimental approaches and physics-based bottom-up simulation approaches for material design, data analytics can considerably reduce cost, risks, and time, and thus significantly accelerate the pace of identifying superior new materials [5,6]. The analysis of databases by supervised machine learning, which ideally combines trustworthy data generated by high-throughput CALPHAD from high-fidelity models together with high-quality experimental data, or data from other sources, enables the materials scientists to better understand materials in the view of thermodynamic properties and generate novel material hypotheses [5]. However, the increasing volume of modern materials databases makes their analyses increasingly challenging for materials scientists. Although several machine learning tools are publicly accessible [7], most of them require a certain level of programming skills and are often intimidating to users who have little background in computing and data science.
Herein, we present an easy-to-use, versatile, and open-source data analytics frontend, ASCENDS (Advanced data SCiENce toolkit for Non-Data Scientists) [8], to assist the research and development of advanced materials. ASCENDS is a general-purpose data analytics tool for any person who wants to perform correlation analysis and machine learning with any dataset of adequate quality for data analytics. ASCENDS focuses on two data analytical techniques, i.e., correlation analysis and (supervised) machine learning. Correlation analysis allows a researcher to quantify the strength of the relationship between input (features) and output (target properties), which is useful for evaluating the influence of certain features on the properties of materials and facilities the understanding of the underlying mechanism. Machine learning focuses on two different (supervised) machine learning tasks - classification and regression. ASCENDS is designed based on the following principles: (a) supervised machine learning (classification/regression), (b) correlation analysis, (c) no programming skills and user-friendly, and (d) publicly available via GitHub [8] frontend of open-source projects, and (e) a high-throughput correlation analysis and machine learning.
A flowchart describing the usage of the ASCENDS is presented in Fig. 1. Firstly, users should prepare a dataset with adequate quality based on their knowledge of a particular system. Then with ASCENDS, correlation analysis between the input features and the target can be performed to rank the features and identify/select key features that should be included in the training of machine learning models. Next, machine learning training is carried out to obtain accurate surrogate models. These models then are applied to predict the property of candidate materials and identify promising new materials with improved property. Last, experiments are expected to validate the identified promising new materials.Download : Download high-res image (142KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A flowchart describing the usage of the ASCENDS.
ASCENDS provides two user interfaces: a web-based graphical user interface (GUI) and a command-line interface (CLI). With the GUI, the user can intuitively perform various correlation analysis and machine learning tasks without any programming skills. The ASCENDS CLI is much faster and more efficient than GUI and provides more functionality and greater flexibility of use, for instance, classification tasks and tuning of hyperparameters of machine learning models. More importantly, CLI can easily be used in batch files or scripts; thus, the user can automate tasks, i.e., performing tasks in a high-throughput manner. This article presents a concise user guide to make this powerful and user-friendly toolkit available to the broad materials community and beyond.
