Governments around the globe have become increasingly concerned about the economic consequences of unequal access to technology among school children.1 One class of programs that has received considerable support and media attention is the one-laptop-per-child initiative, which provides personal laptops to school children and has thus far been implemented in at least 42 countries.2 Underlying the adoption of these programs is the idea that broadening access to computers among school children will increase their access to learning opportunities and decrease future inequalities.3 However, policy evaluations of one-laptop-per-child initiatives have found no short-term effects on a set of social, educational, and cognitive outcomes (Beuermann, Cristia, Cueto, Malamud, & Cruz-Aguayo, 2015), and have not yet examined the overall, long-term effects on human-capital accumulation. As children grow older, they become responsible for a larger set of educational decisions, face higher opportunity costs of schooling, are exposed to developmental factors that shape their interactions with technology (Doyle, Harmon, Heckman, Tremblay, 2009, Heckman, 2006), and get more years of exposure to computers and the internet, which may increase their ability to use technology effectively (Van Deursen, van Dijk, & Peters, 2011). Marginal differences in motivation and performance, barely noticeable in primary and middle school, may be amplified by the time the children reach young adulthood (Schweinhart et al., 2005).
In this paper, I examine the early-adulthood educational outcomes of students who were provided laptops and internet access as school children. To this end, I use evidence from Plan Ceibal in Uruguay, the first nationwide one-laptop-per-child program, and investigate its effect on children’ s educational attainment and choice of major one decade after its initial implementation.4 Starting in 2007, Plan Ceibal delivered a personal laptop to each student in primary and middle schools within the public education system and equipped all public schools with wireless internet access. To my knowledge, this is the first paper to consider the long-run effects of a one-laptop-per-child program of this scale.
To identify the causal effect of the intervention, I first link participation in the program to children’s early-adult educational outcomes, combining survey and administrative data from the National Institute of Statistics and the public university system of Uruguay. Provincially representative monthly household survey data (Encuesta Continua de Hogares; henceforth, ECH) allow me to track access to technology in the home as well as educational characteristics, and administrative data on all students enrolled in the public university system allow me to track characteristics of university students and their academic choices.5 I then use information about an individual’ s cohort and location to approximate their likelihood of being exposed to the program: the cohorts of students who were finishing middle school when the intervention arrived in their province did not receive laptops, but the younger students did. I therefore use an interrupted time-series (also known as regression discontinuity in time) with province-specific trends to compare the educational attainment of individuals who were or were not exposed to the program over time. Identification comes from detecting discontinuities in province-specific trends around the first cohort exposed to the program in each province. The critical assumption is that the province-specific trend up to the first treated cohort is a good counterfactual for the outcomes of interest. I validate my findings using a controlled interrupted time series that compares cohorts of public and private school students over time.
I first document that the program was implemented successfully—the rollout was complete by 2009 for primary schools and 2011 for middle schools, and essentially everyone who was targeted received a laptop. I estimate that the program increased students’ access to a home computer by almost 30% in 2011 (up 20 percentage points from 70% to 90%), while internet access in public primary schools more than doubled (up 40 percentage points from 26% to 70%) between 2006 and 2009. The unprecedented scope and scale of the program make for a great setting in which to conduct this research.
I then consider the effects of the program on educational outcomes, starting with educational attainment. I examine total years of education as well as high school, post-secondary, and university enrollment, and high school graduation rates. Contrary to what one might expect of a program designed to improve learning, diverse specifications offer no evidence that the program had any positive effect on educational attainment. I estimate that total years of education decreased, on average, by one month, although this figure is not statistically different from zero. To understand this finding, I explore the two main reasons for dropping out of high school as reported by students: lack of interest in education, and finding employment. I find that while most students use the internet for entertainment, very few of them report using it for learning activities, and the program does not appear to have increased employment among adolescents.
Next, I investigate whether the program had any effects on choice of major, conditional on attending university. I use administrative data on all incoming students to Universidad de la Republica, Uruguay’ s tuition-free, largely unrestricted public university system, which enrolls over 80% of the country’ s university students. According to a recent survey, 36% of alumni would choose a different major were they given the chance to go back in time.6 Access to information about the degrees offered and how they are valued by the market, as well as online vocational tests, could improve the quality of the match between students and their major. According to the survey, which groups students in three categories according to their field of study, overall satisfaction was highest among graduates of science and technology and lowest among the social sciences (the remaining category was health). In addition, some may expect access to computers to foster interest in technology-related majors. However, contrary to these expectations, I find that the intervention was associated with a significantly lower rate of enrollment in science and technology and a higher rate of enrollment in the social sciences. A more granular analysis suggests that the laptop program had a nonsignificant but generally negative association with enrollment in technology and computer-related majors. Consistent with my findings for overall educational attainment, I find a negative association but no significant effects of the program on the share of students who applied for a scholarship.
The direction of the effect of technology access on educational choices is not obvious. For instance, internet and computer access in schools might make the educational experience more enjoyable to children and may allow teachers to adapt more effectively to each student’s level and needs. On the other hand, access to entertainment may encourage leisure and drive students to pay less attention in class. These trade-offs can in turn affect students’ daily decisions about whether to attend class and how much effort to put forth, as well as decisions with long-lasting effects such as whether to enroll or drop out of school, which might not reflect immediately in test scores. It is unclear how this intervention will affect college entry: on the one hand, technical skills may be more valuable in college than in primary and secondary school (Escueta et al., 2017); on the other hand, computer skills that are valuable in the labor market may discourage children from furthering their education. In the longer run, prolonged exposure to information technologies might affect the way students learn about the costs and benefits of college and career choices.7 For instance, (Hoxby & Turner, 2013) show that providing students with semi-customized information on the application process and college’s net costs, as well as no-paperwork application fee waivers, causes high-achieving, low-income students to apply and be admitted to more and better colleges. College students who overestimate costs are less likely to matriculate and more likely to drop out, while students who overestimate earnings enroll in programs with historically worse outcomes (Hastings, Neilson, Ramirez, & Zimmerman, 2016). Once students are in college, their familiarity with computers may encourage them to pursue professions that involve or require this technology.8 On the other hand, internet-connected computers that enable users to access a wider range of information may encourage students to pursue lesser known professions, or to pursue majors that better fit their abilities, interests, and employment and income prospects.
This paper makes three main contributions to the literature. First, this is, to the best of my knowledge, the first paper to examine the joint effect of school children’ s access to personal laptops and the internet on their educational outcomes in early adulthood, and the first to explore its effects on choice of major.9 Second, this paper examines a program that incorporates the use of computers both at school and at home, whereas much of the existing literature focuses on one or the other. These correspond to very different types of treatments in terms of the setting and the intensity of the intervention, the key supporting actors, and the different constraints on the use of the technology. Third, this paper exploits a large-scale quasi-experimental design; therefore, it is minimally affected by the concerns of external validity associated with randomized controlled trials and is particularly relevant for informing policy.
Due to the popularity of these interventions, there is now abundant evidence on the short-term effects of computers on learning in primary and secondary school. De Melo, Machado, and Miranda (2014) found that, two years after the intervention, Plan Ceibal had not influenced primary school students’ math and reading scores. Similarly, Cristia, Ibarrarán, Cueto, Santiago, and Severín (2017) found that, one year after a similar primary school intervention (although with no internet treatment) in rural Peru, the program had increased computer use both at school and at home and some cognitive skills, but it had not influenced enrollment or math and language scores. These programs have yielded similar results to interventions focused on home computers only. For instance, Beuermann et al. (2015) found that home computers had no short-run effects on academic achievement or cognitive skills, while teachers reported lower student academic effort. They found short-run improvements in proficiency at using the program’ s computer (which typically runs Linux) but no improvements in either Windows computer literacy or abstract reasoning. In a follow-up study, Malamud, Cueto, Cristia, and Beuermann (2019) found that providing free internet access led to improved computer and internet proficiency, but to no significant changes on math and reading achievement, cognitive skills, self-esteem, teacher perceptions, or school grades. More concerning, some studies found negative effects on academic achievement from interventions that are purely focused on expanding technology access (Malamud, Pop-Eleches, 2011, Vigdor, Ladd, Martinez, 2014). These findings contrast with positive effects found in alternative programs that use technology specifically for educational purposes (Banerjee, Cole, Duflo, Linden, 2007, Roschelle, Feng, Murphy, Mason, 2016). A few papers have examined the effects of access to technology at more advanced stages of the education system. For instance, Cristia, Czerwonko, and Garofalo (2014) found no statistically significant effects of high school computing labs on grade repetition, dropping out, or initial enrollment. Dettling, Goodman, and Smith (2015) found that, while high-speed internet access generally increased applications to college, the effects were concentrated among high-income students. Fairlie and London (2012) found some evidence that donating laptops to recently enrolled community-college students improves their educational outcomes.
The literature has typically found negligible effects of technology access on academic performance, with results switching from negative to positive with the educational level of the recipient. A potential explanation is that college students are likely more inclined, either by nature or by context, to use computers for educational purposes. Despite this, in a follow-up to the community-college experiment (Fairlie & Bahr, 2018), the authors matched students to employment and earnings records for seven years after the random provision of computers, and found no short- or medium-run effects on earnings or college enrollment. However, providing computer access to adults is different than providing it to children: developmental considerations and the likely presence of an experience curve mean that both the age at exposure and the years of exposure matter for treatment, while the effects of technology access on later-life outcomes such as income may operate through decisions made earlier in life, such as high school enrollment, graduation, and career choice. Once enrolled in tertiary education, there may be little scope for influencing educational attainment and career choices. In this paper, schooling and choice of major are observed at approximately age 19, but the treatment occurs in childhood; hence, there is enough time for children to develop technological skills and to face important educational milestones.10 Primary and middle school education are mandatory and generally enforced by parents, while high school and tertiary education might not be enforced by parents and involve higher opportunity cost. Thus, the effects of the laptop program could be different in the longer run.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the program. Section 3 describes the data and summary statistics. Section 4 outlines the identification strategy and its implementation. Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 concludes.
