With the widespread use of digital technologies in modern research and the rise of data-driven research, the nature of scientific discourse is changing to include the complete digital record of how scientific discoveries were derived. This has been mainly driven by demands to allow more open scrutiny of the scientific evidence underpinning policy decisions in response to perceived loss of public trust in scientific consensus.1,2 National science funding agencies are increasingly requiring openness and transparency in research they fund3 and scientific journals are increasingly requiring publication of digital materials alongside any manuscript.4 This move to “open science” has been championed by leading scientific agencies as the next stage of scientific discourse in a digital age, to increase the transparency and access to the scientific evidence on which important societal decisions are based (both in the public and private sectors). This is seen as an important principle for scientific endeavor to enable modern (often digital) social discourse as laid out in the open access policies of several national funding bodies (e.g., The Royal Society,5 the European Commission European, through the Open Science Cloud,6 the National Science Foundation,7 and the Chinese Academy of Sciences8).
Together with the pressure for open science has come the requirement for a more holistic approach to major research questions, such as responses to climate change, limits of ecosystem resilience, sustainability of agricultural practices, and impacts of policy trade-offs in management of natural resources and human health. This is especially true when providing scientific evidence to support policy development for sustainability goals, e.g., the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals9 at regional or national level. National science funding agencies, such as UK Research and Innovation10 have prioritized funding for larger, multi-disciplinary consortia in order to promote this more holistic approach in the provision of scientific evidence to government funders (as set out in the Nurse review of the UK research councils11). Such initiatives are also being adopted by other international agencies to support large multi-disciplinary projects (e.g., the EcoCloud initiative in Australia12).
Alongside these cultural developments has been the relentless increase in digital materials involved in scientific research commonly referred to as “big data” and characterized by a rapid increase in the volume, velocity, and variety of data being used. This has led to the rise of data science as an important discipline to facilitate scientific discovery from rapidly increasing “big data” resources.
We believe that these trends in the practice of scientific research, together with societal expectations of openness and scrutiny of scientific evidence, has led to the need for flexible, collaborative research environments, where researchers from different disciplines with highly varied skill sets can explore and learn from the wealth of data available using a range of data science and other modeling methods. This encourages publication of the full range of different data and methods that support an assertion, rather than a single analytical result that is vulnerable to being presented as irrefutable truth. To disseminate and evaluate these publications requires access to virtual, scalable computation resources that are seen as a trusted, collaborative workspace for research teams learning to work with each other as well as with new methods and data to produce a new quality of scientific outcome. Development of collaborative research environments are needed to underpin this change in working culture for data-intensive cross-disciplinary projects and facilitate a significant increase in science capability. This includes harnessing the power of data science methods and facilitating seamless access to such techniques to enable scientists and decision makers alike to extract meaning from ever-increasing datasets.
This paper introduces one such potential solution, a concept known as a data science lab approach. The overall goals of this work are as follows:
1)Define our vision of a virtual, cloud-based, collaborative, and transparent environment, and how they provide a vital platform for the future of open and transparent science.2)Set out a clear and defined research roadmap on how we feel is the path forward in this rapidly emerging scientific field.3)Provide a focal point for the research community to progress the cultural changes required for open and collaborative research.
The remainder of the paper is laid out as follows. We first present an overview of the current state of the art in infrastructure technologies that are trying to facilitate open research, such as virtual research environments (VREs). We then present our vision of the data science lab concept and how they will take open science forward. Finally we discuss the remaining gaps to be addressed and present a research roadmap to make data science labs a vital tool for championing open science.
