We are all different, and this is the biggest challenge in the evaluation of the safety and efficacy of medical therapies. Gender, age, genetic background, disease and life style can all cause variations in the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion of drugs across individuals, and can also modulate biochemical and physiological effects of the drugs on the body [1,2].
A specific challenge in drug development is the early identification of adverse drug reactions, and specifically those affecting the heart. A recent review investigated 462 drugs withdrawn from the market between 1953 and 2013, and drug induced cardiotoxicity was one of the most prevalent reasons [3]. In addition, drug candidates often fail in pre-clinical phases or clinical trials due to adverse effects or limited efficacy, leading to significant loss of research time and funding. Therefore, an early detection of drug-induced cardiotoxicity can largely reduce the healthcare risk for patients, and can also relieve the economic burden in drug development.
Animal experiments are extensively used in the early examinations of drug safety and efficacy. These present important limitations [[4], [5], [6]]. Firstly, animals and humans exhibit significant pathophysiological differences, which compromise the clinical translation of animal-based predictions. Secondly, the large variability in genetic background, comorbidities and environmental factors present in the human population is ignored in animal experiments. The animals used are often healthy, and from the same breed and sex. Therefore, human-based approaches that can capture key disease conditions and inter-subject variability are critical [7].
In this paper, we present our experience in translating a new human-based cardiac modelling and simulation approach for drug evaluation, from academic research to industry use. We specifically describe the foundations and development of the Virtual Assay software and its application for drug-induced pro-arrhythmic cardiotoxicity. The key advantages that human-based modelling and simulation bring are as follows. Firstly, their focus is on human pathophysiology, and therefore inter-species differences, important for clinical translation, are largely overcome. Secondly, they enable fast investigations of thousands of testing conditions, including diseases and genetic mutations, which are essential to mimic the variable drug responses in a large population. Thirdly, they allow integrative investigations of the mechanisms explaining the adverse outcomes. Fourthly, they can be implemented into the compound screening process to speed up the early discovery of cardiotoxicity with very low cost, building on ion channel screening.
