The industry has undergone a major transformation since the advent of computers, and these in turn have been pushed to their limits and far beyond to meet the needs of the industry itself. In the area of computer graphics, one of the differentiating aspects that has allowed a great evolution in the industry are the CAD systems for computer design. On the one hand, they allow the parameterization and automation of geometry with a high level of precision and applied in the different areas of the industry (Davia-Aracil et al., 2018; Jimeno et al., 2006). The 3D prototyping allows the design process without the need of manufacturing, so the times and uncertainties in the phase of conceptualization of the product are reduced notably, with the consequent saving of costs. In the footwear industry, the use of CAD systems is very widespread, initially for the processes of pattern making and cutting of the material by means of automated cutting machines and then, for their use for 3D modelling and prototyping of the footwear models before the manufacture of the samples and final product. In addition, the use of these tools is also important for this industry, since the manufacturing model is often delocalized, so that the design offices are located in one continent, usually Europe or the United States, and the product is manufactured in others, such as Asia. Therefore, having all the production information in digital, allows to work instantly between two different parts of the world and the final result is as if the whole process was taking place in the same location.
An important part of computer graphics has always tried to imitate with the highest possible level of realism the physical world and the objects and materials that form it. For this purpose, thanks to static rendering technique, a complex processing of the lighting of a 3D scene is generated together with the rest of the elements of the environment and their materials, and after the calculation times, a high level of realism is obtained, very similar to what it would be in the real world. However, for many applications, such as the visualization of 3D elements in product modeling software, more specifically in the footwear and other manufacturing industries, the current productivity standards require generating this hyper-realistic image in the shortest time possible, with an operation very close to a real-time generation. In this type of industry, design times cycles are very short, and a large number of 3D models are used to decide the seasonal products. So, the decision-making process must be very fast and precise at the same time. Therefore, this can only be achieved with a visualization of the 3D prototypes as close as possible to what the physical product would be in the real world, and where the design changes were applied in a very short time, both at the geometric level and at the level of different combinations of materials and textures. To this end, hyper-realistic generated images seek achieve this realistic perception by humans (Alhakamy and Tuceryan, 2020).
The most widely used specification for computer graphics generation is OpenGL (The Khronos Group, 2020a). It is a graphics library for both 2D and 3D open source environments. This library has a smaller version optimized for use in web browsers, called WebGL (The Khronos Group, 2011).
Currently, Physically Based Rendering (PBR) techniques are widely used to generate this photo-realistic images, which greatly impacts industry by providing appealing look (Dai et al., 2020; De-Vries, 2020). It seeks to render graphics in a way that more accurately shapes the flow of light in the real world. Thanks to these representation models based on real-world physical properties, the behavior of the light and how it reflects can be simulated with the different objects and materials of the scene, working in real-time, what it is a huge improvement against the conventional ray-tracing techniques that have a problem of performance for close to real-time applications due to the complexity required to process them.
This research addresses these issues in order to be able to generate hyper-realistic images both for OpenGL & WebGL graphic specifications. Thus, the main contribution of this work is a computational model based on PBR able to provide the same results independently of the environment where the 3D image is depicted. In addition, the results generated by this proposal meet the high quality that the footwear industry requires to represent the models used in the product definition process. The proposal is based on the PBR techniques (McDermott, 2018) since they provide the required quality for product design of the footwear industry. The novelties of this work are twofold: the first one is the computational model itself for generating 3D hyper-realistic images by using uniform shaders; and secondly, this model is able to work with WebGL in order to generate the same images in a web browser, which provides a very wide compatibility regardless of the operating system or the device where it runs.
The remaining part of the work is organized as follows: in Section 2 the related work is described; Section 3 introduces the features of the computational model that make it compatible both OpenGL with WebGL, and describes the different shaders designed; in Section 4 the experimentation results are presented; finally, some conclusions and future work are drawn in Section 5.
