Digital tools and semi-virtual visualizations drive, challenge, and alter the planning, research, development, dissemination, and deployment of ideas in all areas of society. These innovations facilitate transformative, open, and autonomous knowledge production processes (Barth & Burandt, 2013; John, Caniglia, Bellina, Lang, & Laubichler, 2017; Trapp, 2006). They create new ways to explore and simulate complex problem, scenario, and solution analyses, and they allow for decision-making based on enhanced participatory methods (Maffei, Masullo, Pascale, Ruggiero, & Romero, 2016; Roupé, 2013).
A variety of approaches offer a digitally supported, semi-immersive, visual environment for research, planning, and decision-making. They are labeled as “theater,” “laboratory,” “studio,” “center,” “institute,” and “environment”; yet, “decision theater,” “visualization studio,” and “command/operation center” are most prevalent. What unites these facilities is a strong visualization component, building on novel software and hardware settings (e.g., computational power and video walls), allowing for visually supported human-computer-content interactions to facilitate participatory design, planning, experimentation, and decision-making. We introduce the term “Decision-Visualization Environments” (DVEs) to refer to this class of infrastructure as a generic moniker to distinguish between the concept of such an environment and the existing variety of branding by institutions. “Decision” represents the practical outputs of research in these facilities and encompasses differences, e.g., negotiating, capacity building, and planning. “Visualization” describes the central procedural element in the computerized environment.
The three main facility types covered under DVEs differ in focus and origins. The first group of DVEs aims to create solutions to complex problems by involving the public and decision makers and visualizing large data sets. Boukherroub, D’amours, and Rönnqvist (2018) trace their origins back to the 1970s and 80 s to a facility at Our Lady of the Lake University of San Antonio. This group of DVEs is being used for water management and policy at the municipal level (Sampson, Quay, & White, 2016), community planning for resources and land use (Salter, Campbell, Journeay, & Sheppard, 2009), and resilient infrastructure planning with city departments (City of Portland, & Institute for Sustainable Solutions, 2018). A pioneering DVE facility of this type with experience in interdisciplinary topics is Arizona State University’s Decision Theater (DTN). It provides advanced modelling and simulation tools for real-world problems, using an international network. The second group of DVEs emphasizes their facilities as being research tools offering multi-disciplinary data visualizations in 2D and 3D (Kawano et al., 2017) and real-time collaborative work for scientific and engineering discoveries (Park, Renambot, Leigh, & Johnson, 2003). Prominent institutions are the Electronic Visualization Laboratory at the University of Illinois Chicago, the Laboratory for Advanced Visualization and Application (CyberCanoe) at the University of Hawaii, and the Visualization Center C at Linköping University Campus (LAVAWP, 2018; Visualiseringscenter, 2018). The third group is comprised of command and operation centers that supervise, control, and adapt systems, e.g., to increase productivity and monitor emergencies. They rely on advanced methodologies for immediate decisions supported by large real-time data analysis, e.g., for military purposes. Such facilities date back to 1905 (Lambert, 2005), and since then, paper, pinboards, and whiteboards have given way to computer-based data analysis. A representative facility is at the Swedish National Defence College, focusing on complex information processing at mobile command posts (Brehmer, 2007). The facility at Australia’s Defence Science and Technology Organization (FOCAL) provides a multimodal user interface and animated virtual characters to advise within a 3D real-time animation (Wark et al., 2005). Overall, a large number of DVEs are currently located in North America. However, facilities such as those at DTN, Anfiteatro de Decisiones (AD-LANCIS, UNAM), and CyberCANOE also invest in larger networks to disseminate their work to summarize DVEs, host diverse interdisciplinary research activities, and facilitate knowledge generation for a variety of problems and topics.
The human-computer-content interaction is the core element of DVEs that elicits new knowledge and activates knowledge in semi-immersive environments. Human-computer-content interactions are facilitated through visualizations or virtual reality (VR) to improve system understanding and build planning capacities (Larson & Edsall, 2010; Salter et al., 2009). Studies detail important methodical elements that allow for a transformative setting for knowledge production with a collective and action-oriented developmental process (Bonk & Graham, 2006; König, 2015). Bonk and Graham (2006, p. 44) state that “for technology-mediated learning, interaction is a key value proposition,” as it supports exploring ideas, discovering alternatives, and stimulating creativity. Thus, human-computer-content interaction not only consists of displaying and analyzing content, but it requires the integration of the entire environment: the processes and the participating people.
There is a growing demand to experiment with ways that interaction is facilitated by technology (Bonk & Graham, 2006; Schroth, Angel, Sheppard, & Dulic, 2014; Schulmeister, 2002). The dispersed and interdisciplinary field is challenged to integrate both insights into individual elements, e.g., visuals, VR, and 3D, regarding successful and social interactions mediated through technology, as well as insights from comprehensive settings of DVEs. In addition, more knowledge about the strategic placement of facilities and a coordinated overview of transferable products is needed.
Comparative research on DVEs allows the derivation of transferable design principles that should help to improve existing DVEs, create new DVEs, facilitate mobile experimentation on solutions to complex problems, and advance research at the science-society-policy interface level (Wiek & Forrest, 2018; Wiek & Lang, 2016). This study addresses the question: How are DVEs structurally set up, and what are the current practices in the context of their institutional settings and applied cases? We investigate this question by developing an analytical framework of DVEs, conducting empirical studies on existing DVEs, and deriving design recommendations.
