Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic, pruritic, recurrent, inflammatory cutaneous disease, mainly occurring in children (60% of all cases begin in the first year of life, and 90% - before age of 5), with a susceptibility to regress during childhood (60−90% up to 15th year of life) Spergel (2010). However, it may persist in a chronic, recurrent course until adulthood being resistant to any treatment strategy Napolitano et al. (2016) and coexist with other atopic diseases dependent on IgE: bronchial asthma, allergic rhinitis and food allergy. AD is the result of complex genetic, epigenetic, environmental and immunological interactions with the overlapping defect of the epidermal barrier Schlapbach and Simon (2014), Garmhausen et al. (2013). The incidence of AD increases worldwide with no standardization of diagnostic criteria using high-resolution non-invasive methods and an urgent need for accurate assessment and monitoring of treatment results Napolitano et al. (2016), Silvestre Salvador et al. (2017). There is no laboratory test to determine the severity of the disease. An invasive skin biopsy also does not show any specific histological characteristics Tong and Mihm (2017). The scoring indicators require subjective judgment and have poor reproducibility Charman et al. (1999).
High frequency ultrasound (HFUS) is one of the non-invasive methods of imaging skin inflammation. A characteristic ultrasound feature of inflammatory dermatoses is the presence of a superficial hypoechoic band below the echo entry, which may represent an acute inflammatory process with edema or infiltration in the upper dermis Borut et al. (2000), Danczak-Pazdrowska et al. (2012). It has been shown that there is a strong correlation between HFUS and histological features in the assessment of AD Polanska et al. (2013). Ultrasound refers to mechanical density waves with a frequency above 20 kHz.
Improvement of inflammatory skin condition may be visualized as a decrease of the thickness of superficial hypoechoic band (SLEB) and increase in the intensity of the dermis image Polańska et al. (2017).
The depth of the skin penetration (4−6mm of the 75MHz probe) is sufficient to image the epidermis, dermis, subcutaneous tissue and subcutaneous fat Schmid et al. (2005). The reflection of ultrasound waves from the border between tissues with different acoustic density is the basis for ultrasound skin imaging. This principle allows for the differentiation of tissues with only 0.1% difference in density Bezugly (2015).
As the HFUS becomes more and more popular in dermatological diagnosis Polanska et al. (2013), Danczak-Pazdrowska et al. (2012), Polańska et al. (2017), the HFUS image processing methods are developed Gao et al. (2013), Sciolla et al., 2015, Sciolla et al., 2018. However, since the US imaging is still not a standard procedure in dermatology, the described methods apply to various US frequencies (10MHz Gao et al. (2013) - 50MHz Sciolla et al. (2018)). As reported in Polańska et al. (2017), although 20MHz is well-established for scanning the whole skin, higher resolutions allow for a much more detailed imaging of the epidermis and the upper dermis layers. To meet this need, this developed methodology is addressed to 75MHz US image analysis. This allows the measure of SLEB thickness to be more accurate and robust. As reported above Gao et al. (2013), Sciolla et al. (2015, 2018, the different skin layer segmentation techniques have already been developed. Starting from the oldest, Gao et al. Gao et al. (2013) present an Automatic Skin Segmentation Tool (ASST) to evaluate the skin toxicity in breast cancer radiotherapy. The developed algorithm was based on a geometric framework and as the author reported, it outperforms the parametric approach. The overall goal of this work was the skin thickness measurement and the obtained values were compared with the expert annotations, resulting in 95% accuracy. The analysed database consists of 730 images acquired by a 10MHz frequency ultrasound. The frequency was lower than the frequencies typically used in dermatology (>20MHz) yet it was imposed by the other measurements performed during the examinations.
The two newest approaches Sciolla et al., 2015, Sciolla et al., 2018 address the problem of high frequency (>20MHz) US image segmentation. The first work Sciolla et al. (2015), being rather preliminary study targets in skin layers as well as tumour segmentation and introduces a generic Level Set (LS) segmentation algorithm based on the statistics of the envelope signal. The methodology was tested on simulated and medical images, yet the obtained segmentation results were not compared with expert delineations. The extension of the developed technique reported in Sciolla et al. (2018) presents a novel joint segmentation and characterization algorithm for the assessment of skin aging using 50MHz frequency US images. Authors proposed a segmentation method which allows a fine determination of the envelope signal statistics in the dermis as a function of depth. The accuracy of the automatic segmentation was validated using 20 annotated HFUS images. The SLEB area was also indicated by the algorithm, but the segmentation results in this case were not validated. Moreover, the analysed database did not contain the inflammatory cutaneous disease cases.
In this study a fully automated atopic dermatitis assessment framework targets in the segmentation and measurement of superficial hypoechoic band (SLEB) below the echo entry. The method enables the analysis of the inflammatory skin condition in patients with AD while monitoring the therapy results. The processing steps yield also the epidermis layer detection and segmentation for further numerical analysis. To the best of our knowledge, the SLEB segmentation methods for AD is not addressed in the literature. The methodology is dedicated to 75MHz US images, which is sufficient to visualize all the interesting skin layers. It consists of an automated entry echo layer detection followed by the LS method for epidermis segmentation. The main part providing the SLEB thickness is based on Weighted Fuzzy C-Means Clustering and active contour technique. The obtained segmentation results are compared with the expert delineations and the skin US image segmentation methods described in literature.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the methods of the skin layer segmentation and skin abnormality analysis. The evaluation of the overall system is shown in Section 3 followed by Discussion (Section 4) and Conclusion (Section 5).
