In the past few years, the rapid growth of scholars has significantly produced graduates, postgraduates and doctoral students. Most of these scholars are contributing to their domain to become stars of the future, but at the start of their career they may face different challenges. In academia, the scholars produce different types of publications including conference papers, journal articles, books or review articles and sometimes their research sets new trends. Similarly, an extensive increase in the commercial use of internet sources including social media, online communities and blogs can be observed over the last decade. Markers on it generate an extensive variety of trends including comments, audio, video, images and links. These research trends reveal directions, events or activities in which something is inventing and have always been an important factor for innovations in technology forecasting, medical, sports or prediction of some useful information in human life.
When we move from the traditional social network to academic social networks, instead of trends research topics are discussed. These topics could be categorized into possible sub-topics as hot, cold or stable topics [1]. This research focuses on Finding Rising Stars in academic networks with the help of hot topics. The rising stars are new-comers, who usually have unknown profiles at the start of their careers but may become soar contributors over some time period [2]. The complete literature about finding rising stars is reviewed. They have categorized existing methods into different categories, provided datasets descriptions, discussed performance evaluation criteria’s and provided future research and challenges [3]. As they proceed in their career, the researchers can possibly follow any one of the research trends shown in Fig. 1 that includes Well Established, Rising Star, Stable or Declining [4]. The well-established authors are the senior researchers who are at a prestigious and stable position in their career. Rising Stars are Junior Researchers, who are at the start of their career and have potential to grow quickly. Stable researchers are the ones who are maintaining their performance at a middling rate. The declining researchers are the ones whose performance is degrading with time.
In an academic environment, finding Rising Stars, who contribute to hot topics is a difficult task, especially if the research area belongs to multiple sub-domains or there is a diversity in the domain. The existing methodologies have investigated several social computing key performance indicators (KPI) to identify the rising stars in different domains, such as, collaboration, venue-rank, h-index, sociability, citations and publications count, appearance of the scholars [5], [6], heterogeneity, bibliographic [7], mutual influence of co-author networks and citation networks [8], feature design, dynamics, nonlinearity [9] and temporal dimension. However, the problem of identifying rising stars via textual attributes of the publications, which leads to hot topics, has not been explored. It needs to be investigated for finding rising stars. Social computing these days explores both textual and non-textual attributes. Exploring textual attributes semantics usually provides us with useful results. These hot topics may reveal the rising stars, who contribute to hot trends of the research. The title of the publications is a core component of the publications, which usually contains hot topics. Therefore, it could not be ignored. However, it is a difficult task to identify hot topics from the title of the publications.Download : Download high-res image (89KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Junior scholar over time by contributing to research [4].
This study attempts to find rising stars by detecting hot topics that reflect the research trends and can be identified from title of publications. The hotness of topic depends on how often a topic appears in trends over the period. The count of publications which contain that topic [10] discovered across dataset, multiple collections of textual documents, through topic modeling, by trends analysis or it could be predefined [11]. A method named HTRS-Rank is proposed to identify the Rising Stars, who contribute in research hot topics at start of their career. First, the AMiner [12] dataset is used to extract the title of publications [8], [11] of five years and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [13], [14] is used to identify research topics from the title of publications. Secondly, the Junior Scholars are ranked as Rising Stars based on their influence on hot topics.
Salient contributions of this paper are as follows.

•Proposal of HTRS-Rank for finding rising stars through hot topics detection.•Exploring textual content for finding rising stars which has yet not been addressed in literature.•Calculating influence of topic while ranking the rising stars.•Finding hot topics to rank junior scholars, which shows less standard deviation showing stability of the method.•Detailed performance evaluation in terms of productivity, citations, socialness, and correlation.
Rest of the paper is organized in a way that Section 2 covers the related work found from literature, Section 3 gives details of the proposed method, Section 4 presents the experimentation, results and their discussion in detail and Section 5 finally concludes the paper with some important future directions.
