Malware refers to malicious software developed by attackers to harm computer users. Attackers remotely inject the malware into the user machine using any of the payload delivery mechanisms such as e-mail attachments or drive-by downloads. Ransomware is a type of malware that is developed with the malicious intent of extorting money from the victims. Ransomware primarily encrypts the user files in the target machine, and as a follow-up action, either creates newly encrypted files while deleting the original files or modifies the existing files in the system. Finally, it locks down the system [1]. After encryption, the ransomware displays a pop-up message on the user screen demanding the user to pay a ransom in Bitcoins. After payment of the ransom by the victims, a decryption key is given to access the user files.
Ransomware attacks have evolved as a serious cyber threat for common online users, industries, and governments. In early 2011, more than 60,000 ransomware attacks were detected by cybersecurity organisations; as the years passed, this count has increased by fourfold. In 2013, the Cryptolocker ransomware infected more than 250,000 systems, which then drastically increased to 500,000 machines during 2014. Variants of this ransomware have been estimated to harvest approximately $3 million from the global organisation during this period [20].
The cybercrime reports show that 406,887 unique ransomware attacks hosted in the year 2015 cost the world over $325 million dollars. In 2016, ransomware attacks led to financial losses of approximately one billion dollars. Researchers observed that 40% of spam e-mails contained links to ransomware, which resulted in a 6000% steep increase compared with that in the year 2015. In 2017, the financial losses of global organisations due to this malware attack exceeded five billion dollars with an annual attack growth rate of 350% [16,17]. Global ransomware-protection agencies predicted that the loss due to ransomware attacks will exceed $20 billion by the year 2021. In addition, they mentioned that the present solutions are not effective in protecting against ransomware attacks and indicated the need for developing active solutions [22].
The focus of ransomware attacks is currently shifted from user-centric to more lucrative targets such as healthcare, schools, district/state/local governments, law-enforcement agencies, and small and medium business entities [21]. This shift is mainly due to the lack of valuable resources existing in consumer computing devices as well as the higher dependence of enterprises on e-mails for their communication, which is leveraged by most malware to infect the target systems. Enterprise infections have gone up by 12% and accounted for 81% of the total ransomware infections [13]. In 2018, 45% of the infected organisations paid ransom for recovery, which increased to 58% in the year 2019. These facts clearly show that ransomware is one of the fastest growing threats in the cybercrime landscape, and robust technological solutions and user education against this attack are needed.
According to its behavioural pattern, ransomware is widely categorised into two types, namely, crypto and locker. Among these variants, the crypto ransomware is considered highly risky because it applies strong encryption algorithms on the user files and makes recovery impossible without paying the ransom. Most of the protection systems against the crypto ransomware are designed based on passive or signature-based analysis. The signatures are commonly generated offline, based on the code patterns existing in known ransomware and stored in a signature repository. The malicious executables are only identified as ransomware when an explicit signature that matches an entry in the repository exists. However, these techniques fail to detect new variants of ransomware featuring code-obfuscation techniques and those designed for targeted attacks.
Hence, developing a robust protection method against this critical malware is needed by considering all the aforementioned gaps. The method proposed in this paper deploys a dynamic-analysis based paradigm to detect active ransomware. This method monitors the changes that happen in a computer system with respect to the user files, retention state, lateral movement, and system resources. The variability of the system states due to ransomware as well as benign applications is unambiguously captured and represented using a formal framework finite-state machine (FSM). A set of listeners and decision-making modules is deployed along with the FSM model to detect a ransomware attack.
To summarise, this study makes the following research contributions.
•It proposes a novel dynamic-analysis based ransomware detection model, which provides more effective countermeasures against ransomware attacks.•It develops an FSM that represents the polymorphic traits of the ransomware. The state transition of the FSM signifies the changes that occur in the underlying system.•This generic protection system is designed to detect different ransomware variants.
An overview of related works is presented in Section 2. The architecture of the overall system is discussed in Section 3. In Section 4, we explain the components involved in the behaviour-analysis module. Section 5 explains the decision-making module and details the FSM model used for ransomware detection. The implementation details, evaluation methodology, and experimental results are discussed in Section 6. Section 7 details the limitations of the proposed method. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section 8.
