Representational pictures (RPs) that illustrate information from a verbal problem statement (i.e., multiple representations) are frequently employed in educational test items to supplement text information. Decorative pictures (DPs) that are visually appealing but do not display task-critical information are integrated into testing materials as well, mostly with the intention to enhance test-taker motivation in low-stakes assessments. Pictures in learning materials have been intensively studied and yielded numerous cognitive principles on how to design multimedia materials in order to improve learning (see, e.g., Butcher, 2006; Mayer, 2014). In contrast, research on the functions of pictures in testing is sparse. Empirically-founded principles for test constructors if and how to integrate pictures into test items are therefore not yet available. However, since computer-based assessments are likely to become the standard in large-scale testing programs, in schools and other educational institutions, multimedia elements (e.g., text-picture combinations) will be much more easy to integrate into testing materials (compared to paper-pencil tests) and will most certainly play an even greater role in future test environments.
It is, therefore, important to develop specific knowledge about the functions of different picture types in the area of testing. This is also because―despite the shared necessity of building a mental model of the presented information in both learning and testing materials―the subsequent cognitive processes (i.e., building new representations and making connections in long-term-memory in learning vs. retrieving and applying previously learned information from long-term-memory to solve a problem in testing) are different. Differences also exist with regard to the educational goals and circumstances (e.g., homogeneity of the material, time pressure), the use and functions of pictures, as well as the interpretation of pictures’ impact on outcome parameters.
Inspired by research on the multimedia effect in learning, the number of empirical studies on multimedia effects in testing has recently increased. While RPs have been in the focus of multimedia testing experiments (e.g., Lindner, Lüdtke, Grund, & Köller, 2017; Saβ, Wittwer, Senkbeil, & Köller, 2012), effects of DPs have hardly received attention (Hu, Chen, Li, & Huang, 2019).
This study closes two gaps in research in one experiment. First, it investigates the multimedia effects of RPs and (as a main focus) of DPs on several cognitive and affective-motivational variables in comparison to parallel text-only items. Second, the domain specificity of multimedia effects is explored for scientific and mathematical test items at once, which allows for a first systematic investigation of the generalizability of the effects.
1.1. Mental model construction from text and picturesStudents need to build a coherent mental model and activate their prior knowledge to understand the given information in both learning (Mayer, 2014; Schnotz & Bannert, 2003; Schnotz et al., 2014) and testing materials (see, e.g., Ögren, Nyström, & Jarodzka, 2017; Lindner, Ihme, Saß, & Köller, 2018; Saβ et al., 2012). Mental model construction is a prerequisite to fulfill the specific task of either learning new information or recalling relevant content to solve a given problem. This shared process (i.e., the internal representation of task-relevant information) supports the idea that theories on how mental model construction takes place can also be applied to the testing context.Specifically, the Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML, Mayer, 2014) and the Integrated Theory of Text and Picture Comprehension (ITPC, Schnotz & Bannert, 2003) can help to explain how text and adequate pictures contribute to a richer mental model construction. The CTML focuses on a more efficient use of the limited working memory resources by combining text and relevant picture information (using the auditory-verbal and visual-pictorial channel) and a more active engagement in the processes of selecting and organizing relevant information and integrating it with prior knowledge to explain positive effects of adding instructional pictures to learning materials (i.e., multimedia effect). The ITPC further refers to the fundamentally different symbolic systems that underlie text and picture processing. Text is not initially understandable, but needs to be processed with substantial effort by an analysis of symbol-structures. In contrast, pictures underlie analogical-structure mapping and can contribute more directly to a coherent mental model (i.e., a sound understanding). Furthermore, in accordance with the Cognitive Load Theory (CLT, Sweller, van Merriënboer, & Paas, 1998), students' extraneous cognitive load (ECL) might be affected by pictures as well. Specifically, pictures that facilitate essential processing of task-relevant information (i.e., RPs) should reduce ECL and can be expected to have a positive impact on students’ achievement.In general, instructional pictures that display task-relevant information can be assumed to have positive effects on students’ cognitive processing and achievement. However, this is less clear for pictures that solely fulfill a decorative function (i.e., DPs). However, a mere focus on cognition is not sufficient for explaining multimedia effects. Motivation is considered a boundary condition to elicit the cognitive processes that are required to build understanding and, thus, to help students use their cognitive potential. This connection of cognition and motivation is, for example, stated in the affective mediation assumption (e.g., Moreno & Mayer, 2007), which suggests that DPs may have indirect positive effects on learning by inducing positive emotions. Assumed functions and empirical findings with regard to RPs and DPs in learning and testing contexts are discussed in the following.
1.2. Representational pictures in learningRPs represent information visually that is also given in a corresponding written or spoken text (i.e., multiple representations; Ainsworth, 2006) with the intention to support students' comprehension. Many experiments in instructional research provide evidence for a learning enhancing function of RPs. This constitutes the base for the multimedia principle (Mayer, 2014), which states that presenting text together with instructional pictures (compared to text only) leads to greater learning success. RPs are assumed to offer computational advantages for students' cognitive processing (Carney & Levin, 2002). Specifically, RPs allow visuospatial relations to be mapped onto semantic relations that provide the structure of the mental model (Schnotz & Bannert, 2003). This is especially true for early information processing, where pictures can serve as a mental scaffold (scaffolding assumption; Eitel, Scheiter, Schüler, Nyström, & Holmqvist, 2013), facilitating the subsequent understanding of a corresponding text. Furthermore, since text is often ambiguous, RPs can constrain the interpretation of described aspects, such as spatial relations between or characteristics of relevant subjects and objects (Ainsworth, 2006). Apart from interactions with student characteristics such as prior knowledge or working memory capacity (e.g., Kalyuga, 2005), RPs are typically expected to be beneficial for students’ understanding and learning achievement (e.g., Ainsworth, 2006; Mayer, 2014; Schnotz & Bannert, 2003).1.2.1. Representational pictures in testingRPs, in the context of testing, visualize relevant parts of a given problem, but they are not essential and do not add solution-relevant information beyond the text-based problem statement (see, e.g., Elia & Philippou, 2004; Lindner, Eitel, Stobel, & Köller, 2017). RPs can therefore be understood as multiple representations (verbal vs. pictorial) of equivalent, task-relevant information. Studies support the assumption that such RPs have a cognitive facilitation function in testing, even though they might theoretically increase ECL if they were subject to the redundancy effect (Kalyuga & Sweller, 2014). However, as a key finding, several studies show that integrating RPs into test items makes item solving easier, resulting in reduced item difficulties of text-picture compared to text-only items (e.g., ; Lindner et al., 2018; Lindner, Lüdtke, et al., 2017; Saβ et al., 2012). More direct evidence for a cognitive facilitation function of RPs in the testing context comes from studies that include measures of time on task (TOT) and eye tracking parameters.Solution time measures indicate that TOT is not significantly affected (Saβ et al., 2012)—or even reduced (Lindner, Lüdtke, et al., 2017)—when an RP is added to a text-based test item stem. From a perceptional point of view, this is surprising, because the RP constitutes an additional visual element that needs to be processed. An eye tracking study by Lindner, Eitel, et al., 2017 suggests that students compensate the additional picture processing time by a faster encoding of the given test item information (i.e., shorter reading of the item stem and incorrect answer options). Gaze likelihood analyses further showed that RPs received attention both in the initial phase of the item solving process (i.e., mental scaffolding) and in the later phase of the solution process (i.e., mental model updating; see also Schnotz et al., 2014). Overall, the eye tracking findings indicate that presenting both text and RP (i.e., multiple representations) does not increase, but rather reduce students’ ECL due to the flexibility of attending to the two informational sources to their liking and the potential to extract relevant information from the RP with less effort than re-reading the text.Research has further shown that RPs positively impact students' item-solving enjoyment (Lindner et al., 2018) and reduce rapid-guessing behavior (RGB; Lindner, Lüdtke, et al., 2017; Wise, Pastor, & Kong, 2009). RGB means that students are not getting engaged with the item solving task and just make a very fast guess. However, even though research so far indicates that RPs have beneficial effects on students' test enjoyment and test engagement, it is unclear whether this effect operates on top of RPs' cognitive function or rather due to their cognitive function. To gain insights into the origin of students’ enhanced test-taking motivation, an explicit comparison of affective-motivational measures for pictures that contain task-relevant (i.e., RPs) and task-irrelevant information (i.e., DPs) is indispensable.
1.3. Decorative pictures in learningDPs are pictures that have only little or no relation to a corresponding text content and provide no task-relevant information despite their visual attractiveness. DPs are typically used with the intention that they would enhance students' attention, interest and enjoyment to work on a given task. Colors and emotional design features actually seem to support that goal (see, e.g., Brom, Stárková, & D’Mello, 2018 for a review). However, inconclusive research findings regarding the effects of DPs in learning have driven two opposite views: Less is more versus more is more (see, e.g., Magner, Schwonke, Aleven, Popescu, & Renkl, 2014).The first view reflects the assumption that DPs constitute extraneous information (seductive details; see, e.g., Alexander, 2019; Rey, 2012), which increase students' cognitive load and could lead to undesirable distraction, disruption or diversion (e.g., Harp & Mayer, 1998; Rey, 2012; Sung & Mayer, 2012). DPs may, thus, hampers students' coherence formation of relevant learning content, causing negative effects on information processing and performance (Rey, 2012), especially when prior knowledge levels are low (Magner et al., 2014). From this perspective, extraneous material such as DPs should always be avoided (i.e., coherence principle). Furthermore, according to the multimedia heuristic (Serra & Dunlosky, 2010), pictures can bias students’ metacognition and lure them into the belief that a task is easier (i.e., inflated metacognitive judgements). Such inappropriate overestimations of achievement (i.e., deception; Wiley, 2019), have been demonstrated in several studies (e.g., Lenzner, Schnotz, & Müller, 2013; Serra & Dunlosky, 2010; Wiley, 2019; Ögren et al., 2017).The second view accounts for potential positive effects of DPs, such as directing students' attention to the material, enhancing their affective state, interest and motivation to actively engage in the learning process (e.g., Lenzner et al., 2013; Magner et al., 2014). Thus, even though DPs are not expected to have a direct positive influence on students’ cognition as they do not add task-relevant information, indirect cognitive effects might exist (i.e., mediated by motivation; Moreno & Mayer, 2007).The meta-analysis by Brom et al., 2018 indicates that decorative elements tend to have a small multimedia-as-enhancer function rather than detrimental effects in learning, but empirical findings regarding the affective-motivational impact of DPs are mixed. Studies suggest that moderating factors, such as anthropomorphic picture elements (e.g., Schneider, Nebel, Beege, & Rey, 2018) or students’ level of prior knowledge could be involved (e.g., Magner et al., 2014; Park, Korbach, & Brünken, 2015).1.3.1. Decorative pictures in testingDPs, in the context of testing, do not provide any substantial information concerning a presented problem and therefore have no relation to the problem solution (see, e.g., Elia & Philippou, 2004), even though the pictorial information can be loosely related to the item content. As a typical feature, DPs can be designed to be visually attractive (e.g., using colors and aesthetic pictorial content). Systematic research regarding the effects of DPs in testing is largely missing (Hu et al., 2019). As a factor that differs greatly from learning situations, students must create an all new mental model for each presented item in a test context (Lindner, Lüdtke, et al., 2017). This demanding task occupies limited working memory resources and can lead to aversive emotions if cognitive resources get exhausted in the course of a test session (e.g. Ackerman & Kanfer, 2009). Furthermore, students' are not always fully motivated to provide their best effort in the context of low-stakes tests. This can severely undermine the validity of the test results (Finn, 2015). It would therefore be particularly valuable if DPs actually evoke positive emotions during testing, since they might help maintain student motivation during a test session. These specific circumstances in testing explain why appealing DPs (e.g., decorative photographs) are frequently used in large-scale assessments with the hope and the intention to attract students’ attention and motivate them to engage in a test.However, not much is known so far about the effects of DPs, because only two experimental studies considered effects of decorative elements in the context of testing on students' performance systematically: One of the studies showed no significant effect of DPs on performance (Berends & van Lieshout, 2009), the other indicated that decorative additions to RPs were only supportive for students with high prior knowledge levels and harmful for students with low prior knowledge levels (Cooper, Sidney, & Alibali, 2018). Thus, prior knowledge might be a moderating factor of multimedia effects for (decorative) pictures in testing. Since no studies investigated the effects of DPs on affective-motivational outcomes or item processing, it is still an unresolved question in how far DPs actually have the potential to enhance students’ test-taking enjoyment.
1.4. Pictures in different test domainsThe domains of science and mathematics education heavily rely on visualizations, spatial representations and abstract visual models in both learning and testing materials. Investigating how pictures affect testing in these domains is particularly important, because they constitute the core areas in many impactful large-scale assessments (e.g., Cresswell, Schwantner, & Waters, 2015), since students’ achievement in STEM subjects has a high economical and societal significance.Research on RPs has been conducted in both the area of science (e.g., Lindner, Eitel, et al., 2017; Lindner et al., 2018; Lindner, Lüdtke, et al., 2017; Saβ et al., 2012; Saß, Schütte, & Lindner, 2017) and mathematics problem solving (e.g., Berends & van Lieshout, 2009; Cooper et al., 2018; Hughes, Riccomini, & Witzel, 2018; Ott, Brünken, Vogel, & Malone, 2018; Ögren et al., 2017). However, there has hardly been any systematic research on DPs in science so far, while there is first evidence with regard to the functions of DPs in mathematics (e.g., Berends & van Lieshout, 2009; Cooper et al., 2018; Elia & Philippou, 2004). Meta-analytical findings indicate that there might be domain-related differences in the effects of pictures (Hu et al., 2019). However, the underlying data for this conclusion is highly heterogeneous and sparse. The lack of empirical studies did also not allow for a meta-analytic differentiation between types of pictures, which would be crucial for a meaningful interpretation of the domain effects.It is further noteworthy that the traditions of research on pictorial effects in testing and problem solving are not all the same. Especially domain-specific research in mathematics often focuses on rather specific aspects of picture use in problem solving, such as “problematic” word problems (e.g., Dewolf, van Dooren, & Verschaffel, 2017), learning interventions (e.g., Hughes et al., 2018), interactive problem-solving situations (e.g., Elia & Philippou, 2004) or self-envisioned pictures (e.g., Boonen, van Wesel, Jolles, & van der Schoot, 2014), which make the results more difficult to compare with findings in the domain of science, in which most of the research focuses on pictures in standardized testing situations, such as classroom tests and large-scale assessments (see, e.g., Lindner, Lüdtke, et al., 2017; Saβ et al., 2012). Thus, it is important to bring the different research strands together to investigate in how far similar pictures have similar effects across test domains in a typical test context, which can only be reached by targeted experimental research.
