As of 2020, the average global cost of insider threats was $11.45 million USD and the frequency rose by 47% since 2018 (Ponemon Institute 2020). Information systems security (ISS) research has distinguished between malicious insiders, or employees who intentionally cause harm to companies, and non-malicious insiders, or employees who unintentionally cause harm through negligence or technical error (e.g. Predd et al., 2008, Liang et al., 2016). Our study focuses on malicious insiders because, while malicious attacks are relatively less frequent than those committed by non-malicious insiders, malicious insider attacks cost organizations significantly more money compared to those caused by negligence1 (Ponemon Institute 2020). Research in ISS has provided insight with regard to insider attributes (e.g. Liang et al., 2016), motivations (e.g. Willison and Warkentin 2013), detection (e.g. Maasberg et al., 2015), and deterrence (e.g. Chen et al., 2012). However, despite the progress made across these areas of malicious insider research, we know very little about an important sub-group uniquely positioned to influence cybersecurity outcomes within organizations: managers.
Central to our work, managers play a crucial role in deterring insider threats posed by other employees through developing effective policy and appropriately handling insider incidents. Corporate managers readily recognize the difficulty of managing cybersecurity threats, with the National Association of Corporate Directors (NACD) reporting that 58% of corporate board members from public companies found that cyber risks were the most challenging threat that they were expected to manage (Rothrock et al., 2017). With such a central role in organizations, managers across organizational levels (i.e. mid- and top-level managers) have the potential to exert multifaceted influence on organizational cybersecurity outcomes by making fair and just decisions. However, up to this point, managers’ decision-making on cybersecurity misbehavior by subordinate employees has remained largely uninvestigated. We have yet to explore how managers evaluate security misbehaviors of subordinate employees, specifically, if managers demonstrate biases in their evaluation of potential insiders.
One of the most common forms of workplace bias is unconscious gender bias, or the “unintentional and automatic mental associations based on gender, stemming from traditions, norms, values, culture and/or experience” (International Labour Organization 2017, p. 3). Perhaps because of gender stereotypes associated with malicious or criminal behavior (Grabe et al., 2006), scholars in ISS tend to model employee gender as a control variable in predictive studies of computer abuse (e.g. D'Arcy and Devaraj 2012; Kim et al., 2016). The tendency to overlook gender as a focal variable in this body of literature on computer abuse perpetuates a popular yet largely unexplored narrative - that male employees engage in more computer abuse relative to female employees. This narrative is reinforced by high-profile cases of insiders (i.e. Anthony Levandowski who pled guilty to stealing Google trade secrets; Anthony Tripp who was accused of sabotaging computer systems at Tesla), which collectively bolster masculine stereotypes of malicious technology behavior, or computer abuse. At the same time, women are represented as victims of crime rather than as offenders, both in the media and within certain streams of criminology research (Chesney-Lind and Pasko 2013). Overall, the strong gendered stereotypes that persist within our culture reinforce the idea that women are less likely than men to perpetrate crime, which may bias decision-making (Chancer 2014) or may affect how workplace crimes such as malicious computer abuse are interpreted differently for men compared to women.
In our study, we focus on the intersection between managers, employees, gender and computer abuse. We explore how gender of a subordinate employee shapes managers’ evaluation of the respective employees’ computer abuse. Organizations rely on human intervention (i.e. managers) to mitigate insider threats by appropriately dealing with employees who pose risk through computer misuse such as network failure, systems breach, and reputational loss. When software for security information and event monitoring (SIEM) alerts to a potential event, managers often need to evaluate the perpetrating employee's threat to the organization and develop a fitting solution to deal with the employee based on whether the event was intentional or attributed to negligence. However, the efficacy of SIEM in thwarting security breaches hinges largely on effective and unbiased managerial decision-making.
A vital component of mitigating malicious insider threats is proper identification of the actions of co-workers and subordinates associated with malicious acts against the organization (CERT Insider Threat Center 2018). If high-level decision-makers such as managers systematically consider security misbehavior by female employees as less malicious or less harmful compared to male employees, this may enable malicious behavior among female employees and, ultimately, increase organizations’ vulnerability to insider threats. Such differential treatment based on gender is referred to as the chivalry hypothesis in criminological research (Pollak 1950; Anderson 1976). There is strong support for the chivalry hypothesis as a number of studies confirm that women are treated with more lenience in the criminal justice system (see Rodriguez et al., 2006). Herein, we set out to determine if tenets of the chivalry hypothesis hold in the ISS context and investigate whether the gender of the perpetrating employee biases managers’ decisions regarding a potential security threat posed by said employee. Thus, we address the following two research questions in the current study: (1) What are the differences in managers’ perceptions of security misbehavior regarding intent based on the gender of the perpetrating employee? and (2) What are the differences in managers’ perceptions of security misbehavior regarding harm based on the gender of the perpetrating employee?
The findings from our study contribute to research on malicious insider threats in several ways. First, by focusing on managers, a sub-group of employees with significant power and influence, we begin to uncover the various ways in which this sub-group potentially contributes to the ISS problem specifically in terms of decision-making. Second, we find support for the chivalry hypothesis in the ISS context, and empirically demonstrate that there are systematic differences in how male and female employees’ security behaviors are evaluated by managers. Finally, we contribute to the research on malicious insiders threats by further theorizing the problem (Majchrzak et al., 2016) and uncovering how and why issues with detecting and evaluating potential insider threats. We investigate our research questions using an experimental method on a sample of managers with graduate-level executive education. We utilize research from criminology and gendered stereotypes pertaining to technology behavior to inform our hypotheses. Findings from our research indicate that managers tend to perceive men's computer abuse behavior as more malicious but not necessarily more harmful relative to women's computer abuse behavior.
In the next section, we provide background literature on gendered crime and stereotypes and present our hypotheses. Then, we describe our research methods and design, followed by the results of our study. Finally, we conclude by discussing the results and recommending future research questions to advance this area of research.
