This manuscript presents the findings of a workshop designed to promote a stronger integration of the ecological sciences within the discipline of radioecology. The goal of the workshop was to bring together participants from a variety of disciplines in ecosystem science and radioecology to evaluate the rationale, benefits, and obstacles of integrating more ecological methods into the field of radioecology (Integrating Ecosystem Research into Radioecology in the Nuclear Age; Aiken, South Carolina, October 3–5, 2016). A discipline-wide strategic research agenda in radioecology has also expressed the need to integrate ecosystem approaches into radioecology (Hinton et al., 2013).
Some readers might logically ask: “Why is the discipline of ‘radioecology’ striving to find ways to integrate with the broader discipline of ecology?” The answer requires an understanding of how radioecology developed, and the long-standing anthropocentric view taken by international organizations responsible for environmental radiation safety. A bit of that history is appropriate as an introduction to this manuscript. For brevity, and because of its early dominance in nuclear weapons testing, the historical connections between ecology and early radioecology are presented largely from a United States perspective. A similar history was unfolding in Russia and other nuclearized countries such as France and Canada during the same period.
Radioecology emerged as a scientific discipline at the end of World War II, in response to environmental problems from radioactive fallout associated with nuclear weapons testing. Driven by the need to understand environmental issues of radiation, a ‘golden age’ of funding developed between 1950 and 1965 for radioecology (Hagen, 1992). During this period, radioecological research produced new knowledge about the environmental transfer of radionuclides through agricultural systems and the uptake of radionuclides by biota. Ecologists embraced the sub-discipline of radioecology because of the available funding, and because radioisotopes proved to be incredibly powerful tools when used as tracers of environmental processes in field studies. Some historians of environmental sciences claim that the beginnings to the Age of Ecology were due in part, and occurred concurrently, to problems associated with the Atomic Age (Worster, 1994). This viewpoint is supported by the fact that with the advent of radioisotope tracers, ecologists, for the first time, had a tool that allowed them to quantify the rate of material and energy flow through ecosystems. Ecologists Eugene and Howard Odum were at the forefront of this science in the U.S. In Russia, also a dominant early tester of nuclear weapons, Vladimir Vernadsky pioneered the science through his experiments on the uptake of natural radionuclides by aquatic plants in 1929 (see: http://www.iur-uir.org/en/awards). Both countries saw rich, long-standing contributions to radioecology during the early periods of nuclear weapons development.
By the late 1960s, however, the primary funding agencies were no longer interested in supporting large-scale, field research on radiation. Priorities shifted away from radioecology and funding for its research dropped precipitously. Additionally, expanding safety regulations limited ecologists' use of radiotracers in the field, and most ecologists moved to other areas of ecological research. Radioecology became very applied, with an emphasis on human radiation safety and the development of associated environmental transport models based largely on simplified empirical ratios. The environment was recognized, but only as a pathway to human exposure. Research on the effects to the environment was seldom funded, and the ecology in radioecology began to slip away. Funding agencies did not see a need for environmental radiation effects research because international agencies responsible for radiation safety believed that if man was adequately protected, then so was the environment (ICRP, 1977; ICRP, 1991; UNSCEAR, 1996).
The extreme anthropocentric view was criticized sufficiently that in 2005 the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) formed Committee 5 to address environmental radiation safety more directly. The “Reference Animals and Plants (RAPs)” approach developed by Committee 5 to evaluate environmental risk took much inspiration from the European ERICA project which evolved more or less at the same time (Larsson, 2008; Prlić et al., 2017). Based upon the development of quite similar approaches, they are viewed by many as a good start, but one lacking ecological methods to examine effects at higher levels of biological organization (Bréchignac, 2012; Bradshaw et al., 2014). One major shortcoming arises from the important gap between the stated objectives of radiation protection of the environment which are consensual (protecting biodiversity, ecosystems, etc.) and the method proposed to achieve them which is largely based upon dose-effects relationships at individual organism level. While some efforts have been initiated under the IAEA MODARIA program to promote modelling of radiation effects from organisms up to populations (Sazykina and Kryshev, 2016; Alonzo et al., 2016), Committee 5 was abolished by the ICRP in 2017. Although radiological protection has been slowly broadening from a system focused solely on human radiological impacts to one that encompasses non-human biota and the environment itself, there remains a distinct deficit in ecological expertise within the field. Arguably, radioecology has now lost many of its practicing ecologists with state-of-the-art knowledge.
Recognizing the problem, the International Union of Radioecology (IUR) convened an international symposium to assess the status of current radioecology research (Bréchignac, 2016; Bréchignac et al., 2016). A critical issue noted during discussions at the symposium was the paucity of ecosystem scientists now working within the field of radioecology. Consequently, there is limited expertise within the field of radioecology to address the utility and feasibility of incorporating ecosystem level metrics into radiological risk assessments and radiation protection programs.
This gap in expertise was the catalyst for the idea to bring radioecologists and ecosystem ecologists together for in depth discussions of how feasible the integration of ecosystem approaches into the field of radioecology would be, given the current state of our knowledge in both subdisciplines of ecology, and to develop a consensus around the justification and rationale for integration of ecosystem science into the field of radioecology. To develop such a consensus, the authors felt that three primary questions must be addressed: 1) How can ecosystem science support ecological risk assessment? 2) What ecosystem level endpoints potentially could be used for radiological risk assessment? and 3) What inference strategies and associated methods would be most appropriate to assess the effects of radionuclides on ecosystem structure and function? These questions were posed to workshop participants who engaged in discussions over a three-day period to develop consensus viewpoints and a framework for improved integration of ecosystem science into future radioecological research.
