BIM is an important current development in the sphere of architecture and construction (Chen et al., 2019, Rogers et al., 2015). BIM represents a transition from 2D drawings to 3D drawings in architectural design because of its capacity to create object-based intelligent building models (Sabongi, 2009). In the BIM environment, components, such as walls, doors, and windows are used, instead of line, square, and circle geometries (Woo, 2006).
Indeed, the role of the educational process is crucial in making the transition to BIM (Boeykens et al., 2013). The number of BIM experts is likely to increase with the inclusion of BIM courses in architectural education, thereby enabling available BIM trained specialist personnel to be employed in various design and construction companies (Russell et al., 2014, Wu and Issa, 2014). However, although the use of the BIM environment is becoming popular, and its software is undergoing rapid advancement, its use in architectural education programs is being adopted slowly (Macdonald and Mills, 2011). Some universities began to include BIM in their educational programs because the software had become widely used in the construction industry. To be effective, the expansion of BIM technology in architectural education must, at least, keep pace with its adoption by the construction industry and must focus on current and future related problems (Becerik-Gerber et al., 2011).
In recent years, various methods have attempted to integrate BIM within the architecture curriculum. For example, Techel and Nassar (2007) proposed to teach BIM in sustainable design framework; Boeykens et al. (2013) proposed a BIM process for teaching multidisciplinary student teams that consisted of architecture and engineering students; and Guidera, 2006, Vinsova et al., 2015, and Yan (2010) proposed a BIM course model to be carried out with the design studio. However, the teaching of BIM in architectural education is regarded skeptically by some because it is contrary to the principles of design thinking (Berwald, 2008, Deamer and Bernstein, 2011, Kocaturk and Kiviniemi, 2013). Teaching BIM to undergraduate architecture students, particularly at the first stage of the design process, does not seem appropriate. However, the teaching of BIM should a compulsory course because of its importance in the profession. Therefore, universities must find new education models by developing new methodologies that allow instructors to teach architecture along with BIM.
No teaching based on teaching BIM together with construction science is conducted in undergraduate architectural education. Teaching BIM in relation to construction science provides students with a better understanding of the nature of construction science (Hypothesis 1). With such method, the skepticism of BIM teaching in architectural education, which is explained in the background section, is avoided. Therefore, in this study, a novel teaching methodology is developed. Rather than integrating BIM within the architectural design studio, BIM teaching should be performed in a compulsory undergraduate course in which it should be integrated into construction science topics depending on the level of the students’ knowledge. To test hypothesis 1, a questionnaire study was conducted in the student group with which the case study was performed. The results were evaluated statistically.
An improved instruction of the subject will not be limited to the course methodology. Students' interest in BIM programs can also trigger improved understanding and learning. Previous studies, such as that of Pektas and Erkip (2006)'s study on students' interest in computers, support this hypothesis. Therefore, the student's attitude toward BIM also is assumed to affect the learning process. The second hypothesis suggests that if the student has positive attitude toward the use of the BIM program, the efficiency by which construction science is taught by its means will be improved (Hypothesis 2). To test hypothesis 2, correlations among the questions were determined, and the results were evaluated statistically.
The objectives of this study are listed as follows.
•This study aims to create a novel teaching method that intends to teach BIM together with construction science.•This study aims to test the hypothesis that teaching BIM in relation to construction science (the novel teaching methodology) provides students with improved understanding of the nature of construction science.•This study aims to test the second hypothesis that if the student has positive attitude toward the use of the BIM program, then efficiency by which construction science is taught by its means is improved (Table 1).Table 1. Flowchart of the steps followed in the study.Problem statementTeaching BIM in architectural programs is important. However, teaching BIM together with design studio is skeptical. Therefore, new methods should be developed.ObjectiveThis study aims to create and test the efficiency of a novel teaching method that intends to teach BIM together with construction science.HypothesisHypothesis 1: Teaching BIM in relation to construction science (the novel teaching methodology) provides students with improved understanding of the nature of construction science.Define secondary factorsHypothesis 2: If the student has positive attitude toward the use of BIM program, then teaching efficiency will be improved.Test the hypothesisTeaching methodology has been applied to a group of students, and a questionnaire has been conducted.Evaluate the resultsResults were evaluated statistically with one sample t-test and Pearson product moment correlation.
