Parkinson’s disease (PD) is one of the most widespread and most disabling neurodegenerative disorders; it adversely affects the structure and functions of brain areas resulting in a gradual cognitive, behavioral, and functional decline (Ascherio & Schwarzschild, 2016). At present, there is no cure, and the progressive deterioration of the patient can only be somehow managed during disease progression. Nevertheless, early diagnosis of PD could be crucial from the perspective of proper medical treatment to be administered as well as to evaluate the effectiveness of new drug treatments at prodromal stages (Bhat, Acharya, Hagiwara, Dadmehr, & Adeli, 2018). Moreover, the assessment of signs and manifestations of this specific disease is useful for its diagnostic differentiation from similar disorders, and for monitoring and tracking its progression as the disease advances. With this aim, over the years, a growing interest of the community has been observed in computer-aided diagnosis (Ali et al., 2019, Parisi et al., 2018). Such intelligent systems can effectively assist clinicians at the point of care, providing novel decision support tools, while reducing expenditure on public health.
Alterations in the brain caused by PD, such as neuronal loss, synaptic dysfunction, brain atrophy, etc., among others, can result in a malfunction of the motor system and its components. This is particularly manifested in performance impairment of previously learned motor skills. In this view, a unique role in the context of PD assessment can be safely assumed for handwriting. Handwriting is a complex activity involving perceptual-motor as well as cognitive components, the changes of which can be considered a promising biomarker for disease assessment (De Stefano et al., 2019, Faundez-Zanuy et al., 2020, Vessio, 2019). Indeed, there is a growing body of knowledge which provides evidence that the automatic discrimination between unhealthy and healthy individuals can be accomplished through the use of simple and easy-to-perform handwriting tasks, e.g. Ammour et al., 2020, Drotár et al., 2016 and Rosenblum, Samuel, Zlotnik, Erikh, and Schlesinger (2013). Developing a handwriting-based decision support tool is desirable, as it can provide a non-invasive, real-time, and low-cost solution to support the standard clinical evaluations carried out by human experts.
Within this research direction, on-line (dynamic) systems based on the use of a digitizing tablet can be adopted. Such a device allows one to capture not only temporal and spatial variables of handwriting but also the pressure exerted by the pen over the writing surface, as well as measures of pen orientation and inclination. Moreover, this technology can acquire pen movement not only while the pen is in contact with the writing surface, but also when the pen is in the proximity of the surface, i.e. “in-air”. Contrary to off-line (static) features of handwriting, which can be analyzed after the writing process has already occurred, dynamic handwriting analysis deals with those features that can be acquired during the execution of the writing process. This can provide the system with rich dynamic information that can be exploited for disease diagnosis (Drotár et al., 2014).
When designing such a system, a crucial step involves choosing the most appropriate features to describe handwriting. By directly feeding a classic statistical learning classifier with the time-series raw data, as acquired by the tablet, the model would suffer the burden of high dimensionality and thus overfitting. For this reason, several dynamic features have been derived from data in their raw form, ranging from traditional kinematic and spatio-temporal variables of handwriting to less common measures based, for example, on entropy and signal-to-noise ratio, e.g. Drotár et al., 2015, Impedovo, 2019 and Rosenblum et al. (2013). It is worth noting that, to obtain complete statistical representations of the available features, mathematical functions of the feature vector (including mean, median, standard deviation, and so on) are generally computed. However, although this “holistic” approach can help the model find effective decision frontiers in the feature space, on the other hand, it may lose relevant information, as an arbitrarily long sequence is condensed into single-valued features.
Another approach to representing handwritten patterns is to use features automatically learned by deep learning models. Some recent works based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) address the automatic extraction of features from two-dimensional static images by exploiting dynamic information of the handwriting (Diaz et al., 2019a, Pereira et al., 2018). While this approach represents a robust alternative to manually engineered features, it also provides only a holistic view of the handwritten patterns under study; moreover, since it is black-box, this approach obfuscates the meaning of the features employed and their correlation with the concomitant disease.
An alternative way to process the time-series data without losing relevant information, which has not yet been explored to its full extent in this domain, is to apply the sequence-based neural learning paradigm using Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) models. The on-line recordings captured during writing can exhibit unique time-dependent patterns, which can be exploited to discriminate PD patients from healthy controls. Instead of compressing the original data into single-valued features, as done by many researchers, we want to exploit the sequential nature of the data to explicitly take time into account and gain new insights into the dynamic handwriting/drawing process. Although traditional methods have proved useful without explicitly modeling time, RNNs are powerful tools for modeling data with temporal or sequential structures of variable length (Lipton, Berkowitz, & Elkan, 2015). Two commonly used recurrent units include the Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) (Cho et al., 2014). In recent years, systems based on these architectures have shown ground-breaking performance in traditionally challenging-to solve tasks, such as image captioning, language translation, and handwriting recognition, e.g. You, Jin, Wang, Fang, and Luo (2016) and Zhang, Yin, Zhang, Liu, and Bengio (2017).
The research presented in this paper represents a contribution to the state-of-the-art on sequence-based dynamic handwriting analysis for PD identification, extending our pilot study in this direction (Moetesum, Siddiqi, Javed, & Masroor, 2020). More specifically, we apply one-dimensional convolution to the raw sequences (as well as derived features), to take advantage of the abundant temporal information from the handwriting samples. This not only results in a robust feature representation, but also serves to sub-sample these sequences to mitigate overfitting while reducing training time. The resulting feature sequences are then fed to Bidirectional GRU (BiGRU) layers to achieve the final classification. This approach is best suited for capturing the temporal sequence of the handwritten patterns, in which muscle contractions and irregular movements due to Parkinsonism may be reflected. In fact, a significant improvement in the identification rate compared to the state-of-the-art is observed, in a fair experimental comparison carried out on the same dataset, namely PaHaW (Drotár et al., 2016), on a task-by-task basis. Moreover, an analysis of the significance of features is also carried out as a function of the classification rates reported. Finally, it is worth noting that PaHaW is based on samples acquired through a digitizing tablet. To further evaluate the robustness of our method, it was also tested on a dataset acquired via a smart pen, namely NewHandPD (Pereira, Weber, Hook, Rosa and Papa, 2016).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the notable works related to this problem. Sections 3 Materials, 4 Methods respectively describe the materials and methods used in this research. Section 5 reports and discusses the experimental results to highlight the effectiveness of the proposed method, while Section 6 draws conclusions and presents the final remarks.
