The nation's Critical Infrastructures (CI) such as those found in Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Distributed Control Systems (DCS) and generally Industrial Control Systems (ICS) are so essential for day-to-day continued operation of the economy, public's health, defence and Emergency services. Electric power production and distribution, nuclear plants, transportation systems and telecommunications systems are real examples of these CI. However, these ICSs have inherited insure connectivity issues to traditional networks. This paper is an extension of the work originally presented in conference ETFA 2016 [1].
Even though a lot of work has taken place in other critical areas like IoT [29,31], securing and maintaining the high availability of CI is very indispensable to the world economic stability. CI assets are often privately held and maintained. They can cross the borders via industrial and non-industrial networks. For instance, the August 2003 northeast black out in the US, which also caused disruptions in Canada, has shown how CI crosses international boundaries [2]. In June 1999, around 3:30 p.m., a 16‐inch‐diameter steel pipeline owned by The Olympic Pipeline company ruptured releasing 237,000 gallons of gasoline into a creek that flowed through Whatcom Falls Park in Bellingham, Washington [3].
On April 23, 2000, a notorious hacker and former sewage pumps supervisor called Vitek Boden gained unauthorized access into Queensland, Australia's SCADA wastewater management system 46 times, causing severe damages to local residents as well as to the wildlife. During the same month, the “ILOVEYOU” virus rendered a petroleum refinery in Texas inoperable [4]. A December 2002 lengthy report from Mechanical Engineering cites similar examples of these “wardriving” into SCADA-controlled utilities [4]. Few years later, a computer virus was blamed for bringing down train signaling systems throughout the eastern U.S in August 2003. The signaling outage caused a brief disruption of service that affected the entire CSX system, which covers 23 states east of the Mississippi River [5]. In May 2004, UK's coastguard stations were severely hit by a computer worm that brought down their whole IT system. The Sasser worm hit all 19 coastguard stations and the main headquarter, causing a major service disruption while leaving staff reliant on paper maps and pens to operate [5]. This service outage cost the coastguard around $500m in damages. Lastly, in mid-2010, the notorious computer worm, Stuxnet, targeted Siemens automation products. After this attack, the ICS security was thrust into the spotlight and all the automation products suppliers had to revisit their business approach to cybersecurity, eliminating gaps previously viewed as low risk and improving practice in general [6].
Given the evidence presented in previous examples, industrial control equipment remains a prominent target to computer-based attacks regardless of the motivation.. Therefore, it may be concluded that a computer-based equipment used in industrial automations needs proactive protection against relevant attacks. A very widely adopted approach to computer security is based on security in depth meaning that the computer system is treated as a layered structure and a security measure is introduced at each of the layers. With this approach, even if the attackers gain access to the defence of the outer layer, their chances of having automatic access to all devices inside that network are very narrow as each device has its own additional layer of security protection.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section III, a short introduction to IC and PLC is provided. The IEC 61131-3 standard is introduced in section IV. Section V analyzes in depth the Stuxnet virus. All related to security standards information is in detail presented in section VI. The proposed approach is well presented and documented in Section VII. Finally, Section VIII concludes our work.
