Phospholamban (PLN) is a transmembrane sarcoplasmic reticulum phosphoprotein and is a major regulator of calcium homeostasis in cardiomyocytes. Mutations in the gene encoding this protein are known to cause cardiomyopathy, including arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) and dilated cardiomyopathy.1 Carriers of mutations in PLN are at increased risk of developing malignant ventricular arrhythmias and end-stage heart failure, leading to high mortality.2, 3, 4
Low QRS voltages have been reported as the electrocardiographic (ECG) hallmark in PLN mutation carriers.5 Two large Dutch cohort studies reported low-voltage ECGs in 46% and 41% in 52 (van der Zwaag et al1) and 295 (van Rijsingen et al2) patients, respectively. Additionally, repolarization changes on the ECG, in particular T-wave inversions in the lateral leads, are frequently seen in PLN p.Arg14del mutation carriers. van Rijsingen et al2 reported T-wave inversions in 40%, while van der Zwaag et al1 reported T-wave inversions in 57%. A Canadian cohort study by Cheung et al6 reported 53% in 50 patients. Additionally, PLN is known to cause ACM and one of the diagnostic criteria for ACM is frequent ventricular extrasystoles (>500/24 h).7 This was present in 48% of the carriers in the van Rijsingen cohort2 and in 65% of the Holter that were evaluated by van der Zwaag et al.1
PLN p.Arg14del cardiomyopathy is a rare disease, with a prevalence of 0.08%–0.38% in selected cardiomyopathy cohorts.8 Other PLN gene mutations have been described, mostly in case reports and small cohorts, while Hof et al8 reported data of over a thousand p.Arg14del mutation carriers in the Netherlands alone, making p.Arg14del the most common PLN mutation in the literature to date.4 Most general cardiologists do not routinely see patients with PLN-associated cardiomyopathy and consequently may not recognize the ECG features associated with this disease. The standard for diagnosing a PLN p.Arg14del mutation is genetic testing. However, when a patient is suspected of having a gene mutation causing structural heart disease, the ECG can increase (or decrease) the probability of having a mutation, assisting the clinician in early decision making regarding the diagnosis and possible therapy. Early diagnosis is of major importance because PLN-associated cardiomyopathy is among the most malignant cardiomyopathies necessitating early ICD implantation.2,7
In the past few years, the use of machine learning (ML) and, more specific, deep learning (DL) methods in medicine has increased significantly.9 An advantage of DL is that it can automatically learn features from raw data, allowing the discovery of previously unknown relationships.10 Within cardiology, DL is used for the detection of a variety of cardiac arrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation, in which the models outperform cardiologists, thereby positioning DL as a powerful tool for ECG analysis.9,11 The increased accuracy of DL models often comes with the downside of the lack of interpretability. However, new techniques have been developed, making it possible to visualize the features a DL model uses and thus can be used to identify new features.12,13
In this study, we aimed to develop ML and DL models and study their accuracy compared to expert cardiologists in diagnosing PLN p.Arg14del cardiomyopathy on an ECG. We aimed to present a proof of concept to show how ML-enabled ECG analysis is of added value, specifically when it concerns a rare disease that is often missed simply because it is rarely seen.
Moreover, we aimed to identify specific regions of ECGs that could give insights for improving diagnosis of this disease and be used for better understanding of PLN mutation cardiomyopathy in general.
