Internet of things (IoT) is an active research domain which is playing an essential role in the development of society. The term IoT was introduced by Ashton in 1998. He highlighted the importance of the IoT to change the world as the Internet did in early 1990s. MIT Auto-ID center was pioneer to present vision related to IoT in 2001. Later in 2005, ITU Internet report formally introduced the concept and technology of IoT. IoT is usually defined as the Internet of Things which allows people and things to be connected anytime, anyplace, with anything and anyone, ideally using any network and service. IoT devices are interrelated and are connected through the internet and cover almost every field of life, such as transportation, safety, home automation, and different wearable gadgets. Fig. 1 shows the statistics of globally connected IoT devices. The main components of IoT include sensors, devices, gateways, cloud, etc. IoT is expanding at high speed and the worldwide market for IoT solutions is expected to grow up to $7.1 trillion by 2020 [1]. There are many challenges in IoT such as installation and maintenance of centralized cloud server farms, firmware updates to millions of smart devices regularly from security and maintenance point of view [2]. Moreover, the lack of trust has also become the main research problem in IoT especially after the leaks of Edward Snowden user data, used for a mass surveillance programs and closed source code in IoT which was stored by the internet and telecommunication companies that lead to the lack of trust. There are fifty four IoT application domains and seven major characteristics in the IoT based on their study such as intelligence, time considerations, architecture, size considerations complex system, space considerations, and everything-as-a-service. The main challenges in IoT are security and privacy [3].1Download : Download high-res image (389KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Global Number of Connected Devices.
The research domain of Blockchain began when Satoshi Nakamoto released a white paper in 2008, introducing a purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash known as Bitcoin. Blockchain technology is defined as a combination of cryptography, game theory and peer-to-peer networking without central co-ordination. There are several consensus algorithms which are applied in Blockchain related research which are divided into two main types: proof-based consensus algorithm and voting-based consensus algorithm. Blockchain technology is categorized into two types: private and public Blockchain. Private Blockchain is controlled by a single company and as a result does not correspond to the independence principle of the Blockchain. The proof-based consensus algorithm is applied in public Blockchain, whereas the voting-based consensus algorithm is applied in private and consortium Blockchain [4]. Blockchain is a combination of diverse technologies which are considered as standard technologies for quite long period of time. These technologies are simply combined in a new and creative way to provide a new platform on which one can start building diverse solutions. Generally, Blockchain looks like a network of node computers where data is no longer stored in a central place, but distributed across a global ledger, using the highest level of cryptography. The main components of Blockchain are Ledger, Peer Network, Membership Services, Smart Contract, Wallet, Events, Systems Management, and Systems Integration. When any transaction is conducted on Blockchain, it is posted across tens of thousands of computers around the globe which are the part of this Blockchain network. These transactions are then recorded as blocks. Further, these blocks are joined using the information of adjacent blocks in a chain. It has three main features, namely Decentralized control, Immutability (written data is tamper-resistant, and the block is ordered) and Independent ability to create & transfer assets. Blockchain was first used for financial transactions in a cryptocurrency Bitcoin, but currently it is emerging in several research domains. At the same time, the Blockchain technology has been applied to many fields, including medicine, economics, Internet of things, software engineering, healthcare, voting, election reforms, supply chain, value chain, Walmart [5].
Blockchain is contributing to the Internet of Things. The decision to determine whether Blockchain is required in IoT is based on several factors [7]. Among those the first factor is related to decentralization, if decentralization is required in IoT or there are privacy and security issues, then Blockchain can play a very important role to address these issues. Secondly if peer to peer (P2P) system is required in IoT, then Blockchain is a good solution. P2P communication is only required for applications such as mist computing and intelligent swarms. The third factor is the requirement of the payment process in IoT. In such cases, Blockchain may be a good choice as Blockchain got famous because of a payment system such as Bitcoin that eliminates the need to trust any third party, such as a bank. It is expected that Blockchain technology will automate the payment process in cryptocurrency [8]. The fourth factor is related to the requirement for keeping a log of sequential transactions, if required Blockchain can be used. Finally, if traceability is required in the IoT systems then Blockchain will be very helpful. Traceability can be required for different reasons, such as for auditing purposes. Blockchain merged with the Internet of things is referred to as BIoT. Although the first application of Blockchain was Bitcoin; however, it was not limited to just Bitcoin; it found its applications in smart contracts. Later, it evolved into applications where coordination was an important factor. Blockchain can be used in many cases and in many fields where IoT is involved, such as management of identities, data storage, in different sensors, for timestamps [9], daily life applications like smart homes [10], wearables, supply chain management and cyber law. It has been proposed by some researchers to control and configure the IoT device remotely for that Blockchain based system can be really helpful. The main challenges in IoT and the main features of Blockchain relate each other and opened ground for researchers to work in this domain. Hence the number of publications in this domain is increasing. The research topics in this domain include edge/fog/cloud computing, industrial IoT [6], methodologies, security and privacy, healthcare, management, etc. Expansion of Blockchain by 2022 according to IDC spending guide is shown in Fig. 2.Download : Download high-res image (160KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. IDC's Worldwide Semi Annual Blockchain Spending Guide [11].
Bibliometric analysis is defined as the statistical analysis of books, articles, or other publications to measure the output of individuals/research teams, institutions, and countries, to identify national and international networks, and to map the development of new multi-disciplinary fields of science and technology. As the number of publications in the BIoT domain is increasing, therefore, there is a need to provide an overview of the research published in this domain by systematically collecting, characterizing and analyzing research papers related to the BIoT. For this purpose, the research study uses bibliometric methods to examine the academic research in the domain of BIoT to reveal insights to the active scholars and practitioners in the BIoT domain. The web of science (WoS) core collection database is used in this research study for bibliometric analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follow. Section 2 describes the research methodology followed in the research. Section 3 presents a comprehensive bibliometric analysis of BIoT. In Section 4, we provide answers to the research questions before concluding the research work and sharing potential future research directions.
