Do-it-Yourself (DiY) science has come to represent the activities of independent community-based science research hubs often set up and managed by scientists, science enthusiasts, volunteers and communities with a genuine desire to learn, experiment and get involved in the world and practice of science, technology and innovation. Echoing the ethos of Galilean and Newtonian times where the raw pursuit of knowledge drove the mostly independent science researchers to scientific experimentations of theories (Gallopin et al, 2001), increasing consensus is forming that DiY science, not embedded in rigid hierarchies, is opening ‘an avenue back into the scientific research experience for the engaged layperson’ (Scheifele and Burkett, 2016, p.84). Challenging the near monopoly of traditional universities and research institutions as the fundamental locus for practising science (Downes et al., 2013), in recent years DiY science practices have increased exponentially due to the availability of open-source-garage-cheap equipment, advancements in information technology and web-based communities (Fox, 2014).
The practice, in recent times, is not only attracting a significant number of science enthusiasts and talented lay people within and beyond the borders of universities and traditional research institutions, but has also caught the public imagination as well as the attention of governments, policymakers and academics. This is due to the potential it has come to hold for synthetic biology (Landrain et al., 2013), for democratisation of innovation (Von Hippel, 2017), for fostering a citizen science and for demystification of science (Meyer, 2013). Predominantly funded by philanthropic organisations and members of the general public (Scheifele and Burkett, 2016), it possesses certain neoliberal epistemological characteristics – interdisciplinary, design and use of cost effective tools and equipment, open source and open science innovation (Seyfried et al., 2014; Rognoli et al., 2015) – which can serve as a springboard for innovation and scientific progress at the grass roots level (De Roeck et al., 2012). In this regard, the socio-economic and cultural significance of DiY science cannot be overemphasised. For some commentators, DiYbio and e-waste hacking, for example, challenge both the closures and the precarious material conditions resulting from post-industrial capitalism in the age of the internet (Delgado and Callén, 2017); to others, through ‘craft production and consumption’, DIY science reconfigures conventional producer-consumer relations (Watson and Shove, 2008). Elsewhere, others opine that DiY spaces and practices have the potential to reconfigure ‘librarianship’ (Fourie and Meyer, 2015) and ‘museums’ exhibition and research processes’ (Davies et al., 2015). Meyer (2012) posits that DiY science constitutes ‘a material re-distribution, a democratisation and an alternative to established technoscience’.
Despite its praiseworthy attributes, the dominant narratives around DiY science consist of multiple understandings, beliefs and expectations, entangling different views on themes such as innovations, ethics, new technologies, education, employment and risk assessment (Ferretti, 2019). As promising as DiYbio, for example, could be, studies have argued that its largely unregulated feature implies risks for not only its practitioners, but also human health and the environment (Schmidt, 2008). Thus, a welter of security concerns about DiY forms and arenas of scientific experimentation is raised. Among them, others have posited that allowing amateurs and novices to tinker with scientific experiments outside of traditional institutions could be a potential threat to global security (Schmidt, 2008). The lack of skills implied in synthetic biology may encourage the design of criminal weapons by, for example, ‘DiY malefactors’ (Gorman, 2011). Also, with regards to synthetic biology, Ahteensuu (2017) identifies that the spread of the required know-how and the improved availability of the techniques, instruments and biological parts raise biosecurity and safety risks. This may be due in part to the fact that DiY participants, being mostly inexperienced scientists and young non-scientists, may not always be in tune with biosafety procedures. In summary, the divergent literature contains many examples on the one hand of how DiY science could serve as a potential means to pushing scientific frontiers, but on the other hand highlighting the perils of hacking or underlying security and ethical implications of DiY practices.
It is, however, not the aim of this study to comprehensively cover all the historical and developmental aspects of DiY per se. To seek to achieve such an aim would require far more space than is available here. Besides, DiY embodies so many indicative themes of relevance that its pursuit to the core could make its treatment quite intractable. Nevertheless, a useful purpose is served by seeking to provide an integrative review of the existing canon of works. The aim of our survey, therefore, is twofold: first, we seek to provide a helpful guide to recent literature on the DiY landscape for those interested in the broader open science movement but for whom the DiY topic is new. This aim is informed by the fact that most of the DiY narratives carried especially by the media appear to be anecdotal and speculative. Our second aim is to contribute to the dynamism concerning the expansion of the DiY movement by pulling together into a single document and discussion the relevant but scattered aspects of the literature that highlight the determinant factors fuelling the flourishing of DiY science, the relevance of DiY practices, the positive promise of DiY for innovation, as well as the risk-factor discussions associated with the phenomenon. By doing so, we seek to provide a knowledge repertoire and thus guidance for policy making which can potentially improve the quality and effectiveness of policy measures targeted at the DiY science practice.
