With two global biodiversity hotspots (Mittermeier et al., 2011; Williams et al., 2011), numerous endemic Australian species have either become extinct or threatened since European settlement (Woinarski et al., 2015). This is exacerbated by limited conservation funding (Ritchie, 2013; Gallo-Cajiao et al., 2018), low human population density, and a large geographic area of interest, meaning very few Australian threatened species are monitored adequately (Legge et al., 2018). Inadequate monitoring impedes our capacity to identify species declines and their causes, prioritize research, inform management decisions, evaluate management effectiveness, and adhere to international policy agreements such as the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Citizen science (i.e., public involvement in scientific research that may or may not be coupled with direct conservation actions) offers a growing opportunity to extend professionally derived monitoring data (Devictor et al., 2010; Theobald et al., 2015). A growing body of research demonstrates the utility of appropriately-analysed citizen science data, particularly at large spatial and temporal scales (Conrad and Hilchey, 2011; McKinley et al., 2017). For example, citizen scientist-led monitoring of shorebirds in Australia ultimately led to the detection of significant population declines (Hansen et al., 2018).
Supplementing professionally-led monitoring with citizen science may allow for more strategic use of scarce conservation funding. Furthermore, biodiversity-focused citizen science projects can potentially persist much longer than conventional research projects by leveraging community support in place of limited research funding cycles (Theobald et al., 2015; Hansen et al., 2018; Steven et al., 2019). Importantly, citizen science projects are diverse in their objectives, as are the methods selected to achieve those objectives (Kelling et al., 2019). This was further illustrated in a review of citizen science projects relevant for threatened species in Australia (Steven et al., 2019), which found most projects were based on citizens (or volunteers) having an opportunity to contribute incidental observations of threatened species using unstructured methods. Kelling et al. (2019) highlighted the statistical pitfalls of analysing these types of data, but also that much can be remedied with the collection of at least some additional information from said citizens.
Despite the potential benefits of citizen-derived data, it is often biased towards areas with high human population density (Mair and Ruete, 2016). Nevertheless, much biodiversity, including many threatened species, occurs near centres of human activity (Ives et al., 2016), providing an efficient opportunity for citizen science to contribute to the recovery of at-risk species. The distribution of citizen science activities across Australia related to threatened species is poorly quantified. An evaluation of the distribution of citizen science coverage can highlight opportunities for improved mobilisation of citizens in threatened species monitoring and recovery, as well as guiding where additional professional surveys are needed (Tulloch et al., 2013).
Here, we examine the spatial distributions of citizen science projects relevant for threatened species populations in Australia. We use the geographic coverage of citizen science projects relevant for threatened species and threatened species distributions to map citizen science project density (and therefore potential coverage) at a continental scale. We identify gaps in the current extent of citizen science as well as areas where citizen science is unlikely to compensate for inadequate professional scientific research activity. Identifying knowledge gaps will help prioritize future investments to ensure that limited resources are efficiently used, maximising our ability to track changes in threatened species populations and distributions.
