The Apollo missions carried scientific instruments for deployment onto the lunar surface and long-term operations after the astronaut’s departure back to Earth. The Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (ALSEP) was a self-contained system designed to sustain the scientific experiments for at least one year and transmit data directly to Earth. The scientific objectives were to obtain lunar geophysical and environmental data with varying experiments between the missions. A detailed overview of the various experiments can be found in NASA ALSEP, 1971. A central station contains the power distribution (excluding the radio-isotopic power source) and data subsystem as well as the back-end electronics of some of the scientific experiments. The experiments themselves are satellite stations around the central unit, interfacing it with umbilical cables. Until today, the rich data sets obtained by ALSEP are the only source of long-term observational data from the lunar surface. However, these data sets are limited to the lunar near side.
The Apollo missions 12 and 14 to 16 deployed ALSEP including seismometers forming a triangular network with approximately 1000 ​km baseline. Apollo 17 deployed a small Y-shaped array of four geophones with a base length of approximately 100 ​m (Haase et al., 2019). The purpose of this array was to record signals from explosive packages deployed by the astronauts (Cooper et al., 1974), the impact of the Apollo Lunar Module ascent stage and Saturn IV-B stages, meteorite impacts, and other natural seismicity in the vicinity of the Apollo lander.
Since then, seismology and the used instruments have evolved and latest instrument technology is used on Mars InSight mission (Lognonné et al., 2019). Scientific findings about the Moon’s mantle are based on the seismic data gathered by afore mentioned ALSEP stations. Today, a state-of-art seismic network equipped with more advanced technologies would add to this knowledge base. Especially a lunar far side seismic network, e.g. in Schrödinger Basin, would thereby complement these Apollo near side data sets, as it is currently unknown if seismic activity on the far side of the Moon exists at all, and if the far side crust has the same overall structure as the near side crust. The lunar farside has been suspected to have a higher thickness than the nearside crust ever since it was found that the Moon’s center of figure is offset from its center of mass towards the far side (Wollenhaupt and Sjogren, 1972). High resolution gravity data supports a difference in thickness of tens of kilometers (Wieczorek et al., 2013). The obvious absence of large maria on the farside and the presence of the Procellarum KREEP terrane on the nearside (Joliff et al., 2000) can be modelled in terms of an asymmetric thermal evolution (Laneuville et al., 2013) according to which the structure of the farside crust is actually the typical one. In view of coming initiatives for renewed lunar exploration the deployment of new networks such as proposed by Kawamura et al. as “Autonomous Lunar Geophysical Package” dubbed ALGEP in response to the long-term plan of the ESA Science Program.
Another lunar surface science case candidate under discussions by its stakeholders is the astronomy case, although this case has not yet a similar back log like the Apollo-based seismic network observations. Nevertheless, there is much consensus (Foing, 1994; Crawford, 2008; Silk, 2018; Harwit, 1994) among the science community that the lunar far side provides a suitable and stable ground for the deployment of radio science observatories. For the radio science case this site profits from the shielding of Earth radio emissions creating a radio quiet zone. Lack of Earth atmosphere enables low frequency observations below 30 ​MHz. Less consensus is in the astronomer’s community regarding the suitability of the lunar surface for optical or infrared observations. Mentioned advantages are that observations would profit from the very cold thermal background, the absence of atmospheric disturbances. Opinions differ about the adverse impact of lunar dust which is recognized as disadvantage compared to free-flying observatories (Crawford 2008). Oppositely, dust and cleanliness are not regarded as prohibitive factors by Harwit1994 given the 20 years (at date of his publication) of experience with the Apollo deployed laser reflectors. This assessment is backed by recent results and the operational experience of China’s Chang’e 3 mission about environment-related performance degradation, reported by Wang et al., (2015). Particularly interferometric observations could benefit from a very geologically stable surface. Such optical interferometric installations require the deployment of an array of telescope and have been described over the past years by several working groups, e.g. Rayman and Saunders (1996), and Schneider et al. (2019). Proposed array dimensions are in the order of 100 ​m and are in that regards similar to the Apollo 17 geophone array set-up.
The effort for the installation of astronomical observatories is regarded as a major disadvantage which can or must be traded as well against the costs and benefits of orbiting observatories. The potentially high installation effort is recognized as well by the geophysical community although there is obviously no alternative to be traded against such surface installation. In response to these scientific needs a system engineering study and a field-testing campaign was done with the two main objectives:
The first objective of this engineering study was the conceptualization of a long living and lunar-night operating surface station. This station shall become robotically deployable for the purpose to set up scientific networks within the framework of a larger lunar surface operations concept. The reference mission scenario into which the presented study results are assumed to be embedded is introduced in chapter 2. Here the concept of operations is provided together with the reference scientific instruments. The investigated scenario and the later functional demonstration in an analogue environment are limited to surface operations, thus excluding launch, cruise and landing phases. The baseline design of the monitoring station is then outlined in chapter 3. It addresses basic questions on thermal and power subsystem design with regard to lunar night time survival. It shows the conceptual design of observatories for a reference mission equipped with a notional payload consisting of a seismometer and astronomy instruments together with the resulting overall systems budgets for mass, power and data.
The second objective of the project was to validate a surface exploration mission concept involving several robotic assets with a field tests. Chapter 4 summarizes the implementation of the relevant mission elements as bread boards and functional mock-ups and their testing in a Moon analogue environment on Mt. Etna/Sicily. In this context, the concept of operations and its functional building blocks are validated. Additionally, the chapter provides insight into the needed effort for the installation of such system. The hardware implementation is however limited to the core unit of such observatory with a set of geophones for a functional end-to-end demonstration.
