Academic journals are viewed as essential platforms for exchanging scientific knowledge and spreading the latest thoughts and research, and journal ranking provides a critical reference for allocating research funds and determining personal promotion (Hall, 2011). Many factors affect journal ranking, such as the number of journal publications and citations. It is noteworthy that journal subject categorisation is also a significant foundation for evaluating journal impact and ranking journals, which in addition affects research performance evaluation, promotion, rewards, and funding of scholars (Campanario & Cabos, 2014). Hence, journal subject categorisation has become an increasingly important research focus in academia.
The approaches to classify into subject categories journals include citation analysis, peer survey, and many other methods which consider aspects of the journals, their publications, and expert opinion (Boyack, Klavans, & Börner, 2005; Carpenter & Narin, 1973; Pinski & Narin, 1976; Price, 1965; Tahai & Meyer, 1999; Wang & Wolfram, 2015). Journal editors are located at the top level of “the hierarchy of power emerging from the current configuration of scientific communication” (Oleinik, 2014), and they can affect and even control the knowledge development of disciplines (Bedeian, Van Fleet, & Hyman, 2009). Also, editors are the gatekeepers of scholarly journals (Crane, 1967), and have the right to judge and determine which manuscripts are suitable for the journal’s subject orientation and appropriate for publication (Baccini & Barabesi, 2011). Consequently, it is meaningful and appropriate to classify the subject sub-categorisation of IS–LS journals based on editorship information.
For quite some time, most research has focused on the journal subject classification of the Web of Science, seeking to enhance its academic and practical value. As the most popular database, the Web of Science has a well‑established Journal Citation Reports (JCR) subject classification system, which divides journals into more than 240 JCR categories by considering the factors of citation, keywords, and user feedback (Boyack et al., 2005; Katz & Hicks, 1995). Although JCR subject categorisation is far-reaching in research performance evaluation, some studies have called into question the appropriateness and applicability of JCR journal subject classification and journal ranking (Abrizah, Noorhidawati, & Zainab, 2015; Bensman & Leydesdorff, 2009; Harzing, 2013; Jacsó, 2012). The primary problem with this is that two or more subjects may be combined into a single JCR subject categorisation (Huang, Shaw, & Lin, 2019). Therefore, researchers have tried to enhance the accuracy of the JCR subject classification system. For example, Glänzel and Schubert (2003) used the “pragmatic” approach with co-heading frequency to assign journal classification. Moreover, Loet Leydesdorff and his collaborators did considerable research using methods such as content-based classifications and aggregated journal‐journal citation relations (e.g., Leydesdorff, 2006; Leydesdorff, Bornmann, & Zhou, 2016; Leydesdorff & Rafols, 2009; Rafols & Leydesdorff, 2009).
In addition, researchers have investigated the journal subject classification of the IS–LS field, which has become the most controversial group in the JCR category (Abrizah, Zainab, Kiran, & Raj, 2013; Levitt, Thelwall, & Oppenheim, 2011). For instance, Sugimoto, Pratt, and Hauser (2008) utilised methodological research triangulation to select the top-ranked MIS and LIS journals, and then found various relationships between the two fields, especially in research goals. Moreover, Tseng and Tsay (2013) identified the subfields of IS-LS journals through journal bibliographic coupling. Their results showed that there are five subfields including MIS (Management Information Systems), IS (Information Science), LS (Library Science), SM (Scientometrics), and other peripheral topics; they also found that MIS has differences in its intellectual base compared to the other subfields, which was verified by Wang and Wolfram (2015). Ni, Sugimoto, and Cronin (2013) used the venue‑author‑coupling (VAC) method to identify four subfields: MIS, Specialized, LS-focused, and IS-focused research. Abrizah et al. (2015) surveyed experts using a stated preference study to test the sub-categorisations of 83 journals in the IS-LS field. In their paper, the journals were classified as IS, LS, ISys (Information Systems), or “do not know/undecided”. More recently, based on the classification results of Abrizah et al. (2015) and other journal classification systems such as SCImago, Huang et al. (2019) classified 88 IS-LS journals into four categories: MIS, IS, LS, and SM.
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that some studies have paid attention to editorial boards, especially interlocking editorship information. For example, Ni and Ding (2010) mapped 48 LIS journals into four subfields via interlocking editorship information that is observed as an intersection of scholars on editorial boards. Baccini and Barabesi (2011) applied the information of interlocking editorship to reclassify the IS-LS field, and then the two main subfields of LIS and MIS were identified. Ni, Sugimoto, and Jiang (2013) and Abrizah et al. (2015) also considered the role of gatekeepers in classifying journal subjects. Even though increasing attention is being paid to editorship data, there is still a lack of editorial information mining for journal subject categorisation. The central premise is that a journal editor is hired because that person’s subject-related information indicates research interests in line with the subject orientation of the journal; this implies that the subject-related information of editors may be an appropriate approach for classifying subject categories. In addition, some papers have found differences in the IS-LS subfields from other points of view, such as author affiliations or journal impact (Huang et al., 2019; Sugimoto et al., 2008). In parallel, a few studies have discussed the distribution of IS-LS or LIS journals’ editorial team characteristics (Schlögl & Petschnig, 2005; Walters, 2015, 2016). However, little research explores the differences between the IS-LS subfields based on editorship information.
The objective of this study is to introduce a new approach to classify into subject categories journals and demonstrate the differences between the subfields from this new perspective. In this study, we use the subject-related information of a journal’s editors (research interests, research experience, professional identity, and affiliated departments) to deduce the journal’s subfields. In so doing, the 77 IS-LS journals are divided into five journal groups: MIS, IS, LS, SM, and “Others” (Abrizah et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2019; Tseng & Tsay, 2013). Among these groups, IS journals, LS journals, and SM journals are classified as LIS, for comparison with MIS journals.
Although there are publications that relate to editorial team characteristics (Petersen, Hattke, & Vogel, 2017; Mazov & Gureev, 2016; Zsindely, Schubert, & Braun, 1982), few papers focus on comparing these characteristics for different subfields’ journals. The indicators relating to editorial team size, gender, and countries/regions are regarded as the primary demographic characteristics (Aguinis et al., 2010; Metz & Harzing, 2009; Nisonger, 2002). Based on the journal classification results, we further explore the differences in these editorial team characteristics between the IS-LS journals’ subfields.
The present study is organised as follows. The second section describes the research questions. The third section presents the data about journals and editorial boards, while the fourth section shows the methods used in the following study. The fifth section contains the data analysis for each journal subject category, after which, the sixth section offers an additional descriptive-comparative analysis of editorial teams. The final section closes the paper with the major conclusions and discussion.
