In the last few decades, due to the progress in artificial intelligence, a revolution and sudden change has been observed in the technology both in hardware and software. This change is seeping and taking over in our lives up to a certain extent, affecting how we live, work and entertain ourselves such as employing domestic robots servants, healthcare uses, electronic trading, remote sensing, expert systems, traffic control systems, autonomously-powered self-driving vehicles, and from behavioural algorithms to suggestive searches, etc. In the same way, gaming is a widely recognized part of our cultural landscape and as old as our human ancestors. The earliest computers were very slow and the interaction with the user was limited to basic principles. In the early '1940 s, computers evolved, and programmers commenced to develop new virtual worlds and surprising ways of interaction between the user and the machine. But now due to advancements in technology such as GPU’s [1], TPU’s [2] and the revolution in deep neural networks [3] it has become possible for artificial intelligence to step-in in video games as well where massive graphical data in the form of frames, or to be more specific a huge amount of multidimensional data is required to be processed and executed [4]. In the recent past, machine learning techniques and methods were employed in Atari games for training agents, where later, the agents performed on 49 different Atari games with better and improved results. However, most of these Atari games took place in 2D environments that were fully observable to the agents [5]. Currently, it is of extreme significance to employ such machine learning techniques and methods in 3D environments such as Doom [6] a first-person shooter game shown in Fig. 1, StarCraft [7] a third-person shooter game based on real-time strategies, and sandbox open-world games such as Grand Theft Auto V [8] and Minecraft [9] because the research community in AI think and consider that computer video games are the best test-beds for testing different artificial intelligence techniques, methods, and algorithms before evaluating them in the real world. Thus, in this paper, state-of-the-art machine learning techniques that were before partially tested in 2D environments are now employed in a 3D environment known as Doom, to train, differentiate and compare agents performances, such as advantage actor-critic (A2C) [10], advantage actor-critic long short-term memory (A2C-LSTM) [11], asynchronous advantage actor-critic (A3C) [12], Deep Q-network (DQN) [13], Deep recurrent Q-network (DRQN) [14], Double deep Q-network (DDQN) [15], C51-DDQN [16], Dueling deep Q-network (DDQN) [17], and Reinforce [18] whereafter applying them most of the agents are found useful and effective. In addition, this paper presents one of the 4 best techniques that performed well on the VizDoom Game-AI research platform [19]. It was suggested that making such research available is beneficial for the community researching on first-person shooter games which may set up a base for further research and improvement.Download : Download high-res image (155KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A sample screen from Doom showing the first-person perspective.
1.1. The academic motivation of AI in gamesWhy use machine learning (AI) techniques and algorithms to research on games? because the future belongs to artificial intelligence in games, particularly machine learning has immense potential and role in games designing and development. The possibilities abound, however, the challenges are also innumerable. Without a doubt, game development will experience a proliferation of these machine learning concepts, which is only a matter of time.In addition, the more primary use of AI in games is to train games agents or bots in an intelligent way so that they could perform and act intelligently similar to human being’s. By achieving such objectives, it creates more fun, challenge, and understanding to human players as for as playing or interacting with games is experienced and concerned. While playing against skilful human players AI agents or bots need to understand what a player does and how a player feels during the play. To gauge and enhance AI agent’s vs human player’s in-game experience, machine learning scientists, practitioners, games researchers, and developers use machine learning methods, such as reinforcement learning, supervised learning like support vector machines or neural networks to build and train the models to make them more effective and intelligent. Such advancements are particularly significant for the progress and development of computer video games industry.
