A time series is a sequence of numbers that represent the time characteristics of an event at any point in time (Morris and Trivedi, 2009). It exists in all areas, for example in medicine (the heart rate data, the intensity breathing data and the neurotoxicity of the brain for a period of time), in meteorology (the daily temperature and humidity of a location), in sales (daily, weekly, monthly or annual sales) and in other different areas. It has three important features. (i) High-dimension. A time series can include hundreds or more members which occupy high memory space and increase the data mining computation time. (ii) Data-dependency. The value of each member of a time series depends on the value of its former members, such that this feature plays a significant role in time series data mining. (iii) Continuous updating. Some time series are constantly updated in most real-time applications (Fu, 2011, Keogh and Kasetty, 2003, Sangeeta and Geeta, 2012, Lin et al., 2004).
On the other hand, data mining is a useful tool for discovering knowledge from a wealth of data. Various data mining techniques such as classification, clustering, discovering attractive and repetitive patterns and outlier (anomaly) detection have been widely used in different domains such as medicine, meteorology, sales and etc (Fu, 2011). These techniques are mainly designed for non-temporal data. Therefore, applying these techniques for time series data mining is a challenging task and requires some modifications in the corresponding algorithms (Liao, 2005). These changes include reducing the dimension and choosing an appropriate similarity measurement method. The purpose of reducing the time series dimension is reducing the calculation time and the required memory space. It should be conducted in such a way that the amount of lost knowledge due to the reduction of the time series does not prevent achieving the right result (Lin J. Keogh et al., 2003). A survey of various types of dimension reduction methods was carried out by Aghabozorgi et al. (2015). Choosing an appropriate similarity measurement method is another important and effective factor in the quality of results and it is one of the issues that have been considered in time series data mining research in recent years (Muller, 2007, Ding et al., 2008). Generally, time series data mining desperately needs an appropriate similarity measurement method (Salvador and Chan, 2007, Chen and Ng, 2004).
Many similarity measurement methods have been proposed to measure the similarity of time series, but the Longest Common Subsequence (LCSS) and Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) are the most widely used and the most effective ones in relation to time series data mining (Aghabozorgi et al., 2015, Wang et al., 2013). LCSS has been intrinsically designed to measure the similarity of two sequences of characters, which was later developed to measure the similarity of time series by defining and determining the similarity threshold (Aghabozorgi et al., 2014). In LCSS, the value of similarity threshold has a tremendous impact on the quality of time series data mining and this is a major drawback of this method.
Due to the importance and the influence of similarity measurement method in the quality of time series data mining results and LCSS shortcoming, a new method of measuring similarity for univariate, discrete and finite time series based on LCSS method has been proposed. The new method has two similarity thresholds. Comparing the results under this method with the results under LCSS method on time series datasets represents that there is less sensitivity to similarity thresholds and better results would be achieved. In general, a comprehensive review of the performance of the proposed method with LCSS and DTW methods has been conducted on a number of time series datasets consisting of univariate, discrete and finite time series, all of which show the superiority of the proposed method over these methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, LCSS method, famous and common similarity measurement methods, and LCSS based methods would be discussed. Then, the proposed method and its specifications will be described. Finally, the 1-Nearest neighbor and K-medoids clustering techniques are conducted under DTW, LCSS and proposed methods for the time series datasets and the results would be analyzed.
