Recently, the volume and variety of online frauds have been more clearly expressed through official crime statistics and surveys (BCS, 2016; Reep-van den Bergh and Junger, 2018). They describe the emergence of a new wave of crime or “cyber-volume crimes”, perceptible to the public, which requires a rapid and structured response. By whom and how it should be organised between public and private stakeholders remains unclear, however (Dupont, 2017; Loveday, 2018).
Several professional and academic communities are developing integrative models for dealing with cybersecurity and potentially covering the issue. Their aim is to ensure better protection and resilience of infrastructures, as well as an effective response to computer security incidents, whether at individual, organisational or even national levels (Cichonski et al., 2012; CMM, 2016; NIST, 2018). They mainly adopt a technical and information technology risk management vision, but also incorporate legal or social aspects intrinsic to these problems. The inclusion of forensic science within incident response practices was also considered early in these models (Kent et al., 2006). At the same time, a “digital forensics” community was emerging, supporting the detection, collection and management of digital evidence in judicial processes (Pollitt, 2010). Beyond this traditional scope of forensic science, a forensic analysis approach has also proven to be essential to decipher the modus operandi of the attackers, and thus gather the knowledge to better protect an infrastructure (Casey and Nikkel, 2020). Cybersecurity and digital forensics are now routinely implemented as specialized departments in private and public organizations or as services. Digital Forensics and Incident Response (DFIR) is considered to be a sub-domain, which is involved in particular when a rapid response to incidents is required.
However, these developments are predominately technical and are primarily focused on high-profile cases such as major crimes, state-sponsored cyberattacks, and theft of large amounts of money or personal information. Although DFIR processes, practices, and tools play an important role in dealing with cybercrime, they are not sufficient for dealing with new forms of high volume crimes enabled by the technological infrastructures that have become ubiquitous in everyday life (Loveday, 2018). A wide variety of online frauds are among these crimes that have become part of a digitally transformed society in which human factors play the central role. The coronavirus has shown how suddenly new online modus operandi can appear when the social context changes and people's routine activities are disrupted.1 Online fraud is therefore difficult to model and mitigate entirely using a DFIR approach. It is preferable to integrate a strong crime analysis component bringing new insights from criminology. A new stream of criminological research is attempting to better delimit the size of the problem and its forms (Button, Lewis and Tapley, 2009; Reep-van den Bergh and Junger, 2018), to adapt existing theories in an attempt to explain them ( Leukfeldt and Yar, 2016), to characterize the phenomenon more specifically ( Leukfeldt et al., 2017; Wall, 2010), study it from the victim's perspective ( Button et al., 2014a; Button et al., 2014b; Cross, 2018; Whitty, 2019) or consider the kinds of possible responses (Holt and Bossler, 2016).
From a practical perspective, the police, in particular, are expected to respond in a professional manner to an increasing number of solicitations from the victims of these frauds. This is not only about creating new specialized structures. The whole organization has to adapt, from the field officers in charge of receiving complaints and communicating with the public, to a more central, specialized or managerial level (Loveday, 2018). New partnerships need to be created. Forensic science and crime analysis, both as disciplines and as structures, must also find their place in these changes (Rossy and Ribaux, 2020).
A practical case concretizes remaining challenges in combining different views and approach to online fraud, both from an R&D and a practical point of view. On August 6, 2019, members of the School of Criminal Justice at University of Lausanne, were the target of an online fraud consisting of email masquerading as the Director in order to obtain money from them in the form of digital gift cards. Both authors of this paper were directly concerned by the fraud. The first being the Director of the school, and the second as a professor of digital forensic science. They both worked together to deal with this fraud in real time.
This case-study is decomposed in four chapters, by similarity with typical incident response methodologies (Cichonski et al., 2012): (1) fraud detection; (2) crisis management; (3) post-incident analysis and (4) reporting to communities. Lessons learned from this case are eventually integrated into a broader discussion of the central role of forensic science and crime analysis in dealing with online frauds.
