The issue of the automation of structuring and interpretation of digital text collections is of ever-growing importance because of both practical needs and theoretical necessity. This paper concerns an aspect of this, the issue of generalization as a unique feature of human cognitive abilities. Among various meanings of the term, we focus on two definitions from the Merriam-Webster dictionary: the verb “generalize” means “to give a general form to” (1) or “to derive or induce (a general conception or principle) from particulars” (2a) (see [21]).
The existing approaches to computational analysis of structure of text collections do not usually involve generalization as a specific goal. The most popular tools for structuring text collections are clustering and topic modelling. Both operate with features at the same level of granularity as individual words or short phrases in the texts, and thus do not have generalization as an explicitly stated goal.
Nevertheless, publications on text analysis frequently point to the hierarchical nature of the universe of concepts and meanings, thus somehow involving generalization. One can distinguish between at least three directions in which the matter of generalization is addressed, be it more or less explicitly:
(i)Activities related to developing taxonomies, especially those involving what are referred to in linguistics as hyponymy/hypernymy relations: a hyponym is a concept whose semantic field is part of the semantic field of another concept, its hypernym (see, for example, [36], [37], [42], and references therein). A recent paper [39] should also be mentioned here, as it is devoted to supplementing a taxonomy with newly emerging research topics.(ii)Conventional activities in text summarization. Usually, summaries are created using a rather mechanistic approach of sentence extraction. There is, however, also an approach for building summaries as abstractions of texts by combining some templates such as Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) triplets (see, for example, [19], [28]).(iii)“Operational” generalization. This refers to using generalized case descriptions involving taxonomic relations between generalized states and their parts to achieve tangible goals, such as improving the characteristics of text retrieval (see, for example, [27], [40].)
We, however, neither develop nor change taxonomies. Rather, we use a taxonomy for straightforwardly deriving a general conception within the taxonomy from particulars that are also parts of the taxonomy, although of a greater granularity. We assume that a straightforward medium for such a derivation, a rooted tree of a taxonomy of the field, is available. The tree represents a main hyponymic/hypernymic relation in the domain, so that an A-tagged node is the parent of a B-tagged node if the relation “B is an A” is true. We are concerned with a case in which we wish to generalize a fuzzy set of leaves of the taxonomy that represent the essence of some empirically observed phenomenon. Specifically, one may be interested in patterns of novel research in a domain like Data Science, a newly emerging area of Computer Science. The most popular Computer Science taxonomy was manually developed by the world-wide Association for Computing Machinery, an authoritative representative body in the field. The latest release of this taxonomy was published in 2012 as the ACM Computing Classification System (ACM-CCS) [1]. We consider the part related to Data Science, in a slightly modified form obtained by adding in a few leaves, as described in [11]; see also a somewhat reduced version in [25].
Information on research being conducted in Data Science is taken from a collection of research papers published relatively recently in a number of journals representative of the domain of our concern. We extract tight clusters of ACM-CCS topics using the papers in the collection, each representing core tendencies of the development of the domain as reflected in the collection. It should be expected that the clusters are fuzzy, in accordance with the fuzzy nature of semantics. We are interested in finding a most appropriate generalization of such a cluster, following an approach illustrated in Fig. 1(a).
Fig. 1(a) depicts a fragment of a taxonomy, with a query represented by a leaf cluster comprising all the children of the parental node A. Of course, the taxonomy concept assigned to A is a most natural generalization of the cluster, in this case suggesting an interpretation of the cluster as all those topics that fall in the concept A. We then extend this approach to generalize less obvious cases, such as that in Fig. 1(b), and consider how this approach can be applied to real-world scenarios.Download : Download high-res image (104KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A taxonomy fragment with black boxes corresponding to a query set; a straightforward case (a) and a more complex case (b).
The rest of the paper is organized accordingly. In Section 2, we present a mathematical formalization of the generalization problem as one of parsimoniously lifting a fuzzy set of leaves representing a given query to higher ranks of the taxonomy. We then provide a recursive algorithm that finds a globally optimal solution to the problem. In Section 3, we describe an application of this approach to deriving tendencies in the development of Data Science; these are discerned from the abstracts of the 17,685 research papers published over a recent 20-year period in 17 Springer journals related to Data Science. After a brief description of the state of the art in the analysis of research papers, we describe our approach to finding and generalizing fuzzy clusters of research topics. Specifically, the taxonomy of Data Science (TDS) used in this paper is presented in Section 3.2.2; a method for developing a matrix of topic-to-paper relevance values based on automated processing of the text collection is described in Section 3.2.3; in Sections 3.2.4–3.2.6, we describe a spectral method for finding fuzzy clusters of research topics from TDS using relevance and co-relevance data; the three most homogeneous of six fuzzy clusters found are presented in Section 3.2.7; in Section 3.2.8, we present the results of lifting these clusters in the TDS taxonomy; then, in Section 3.2.9, we present our conclusions on the tendencies in the development of the corresponding parts of Data Science suggested by the lifting results. Section 4 concludes the paper.
