The aim of using phenomenology in research is to better understand the lived experience by describing or interpreting phenomena (Munhall, 2012; Polit and Beck, 2017). Nurse researchers have used phenomenology to understand diverse phenomena because it is congruent with the holistic approach of the nursing profession and adds to the body of knowledge. Other disciplines, medicine, business, psychology, psychiatry have used phenomenology for decades to better understand phenomena (Campbell, 2018; Zahavi and Martiny, 2019).
Understanding the philosophical underpinning of phenomenology and selecting the appropriate methodological approach assists researchers to answer research questions about the lived experience in diverse settings (Dowling and Cooney, 2012). The phenomenological inquiry does not provide evidence to support a hypothesis; it seeks to understand the feelings, values, and meanings of an experience as lived by participant of a phenomenon. Phenomenology is attributed to the work of Edmund Husserl (Husserl, 1952) and later on was expanded on by others such as Heidegger (1972) and Merleau-Ponty (1962).
Husserl (1952)'s descriptive phenomenology is concerned with questions of epistemology. This allows for bracketing of a researcher's previous knowledge or preconceptions about a phenomenon with the intention of identifying the “essence” of a phenomenon. Heidegger (1972)'s hermeneutic or existential phenomenology emphasizes an understanding and meaning of “being” based on interpretive sciences, which focuses on ontological questions. He posits that the presuppositions or pre-understanding are part of being, and disregards the use of bracketing.
Van Manen's philosophical underpinnings of phenomenology comprise of descriptive and interpretive or hermeneutic phenomenology about the human lived experience of phenomena (van Manen, 2014). He states that “phenomenology describes how one orients to lived experience, hermeneutics describes how one interprets the “texts” of life, and semiotics is used to develop a practical writing or linguistic approach to the method of phenomenology and hermeneutics” (van Manen, 1990, p. 4). According to van Manen (1990), researchers engage in human science methodology by questioning participants to obtain understanding about phenomena.
Van Manen offers the human science method, which provides researchers with guidelines for data collection and data analysis. He posits that human science may also be referred to as hermeneutic, or phenomenology and explained that the concept of “lived experiences possess special philosophical and methodological significance when social science methods are adapted to do phenomenology then it is common practice to speak of human science phenomenology” (2014, p. 311). Phenomenological research for human science research originates in practice and influences practice (Dowling, 2007; Van der Zalm and Bergum, 2000).
The purpose of the integrative literature review was to explore and summarize the use of van Manen's human science method in understanding the lived experience of nurses in clinical practice settings. To employ the human science method, researchers engage in the six non-linear actions. Researchers (a) turn to the nature of lived experience, (b) investigate experiences as lived, (c) engage in hermeneutic phenomenological reflection, (d) engage in hermeneutic phenomenological writing, (e) maintain a robust and oriented relation, and (f) balance the research while exploring the parts and whole (van Manen, 1990, p. 30–31).
