Let g be a simple complex finite-dimensional Lie algebra and let λ∈P+ be a dominant integral weight. Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand [3] introduced a complex giving a resolution of the simple module L(λ) by direct sums of Verma modules of the form M(w⋅λ), where w∈W is an element of the Weyl group and w⋅λ is the ‘dot action’ defined by w⋅λ=w(λ+ρ)−ρ. Here ρ is half the sum of positive roots. This resolution is known as the BGG resolution, and the k-th term of the BGG complex is⨁{w∈W|ℓ(w)=k}M(w⋅λ). On the character level, this gives the Weyl character formula:(1)chL(λ)=∑w∈W(−1)ℓ(w)chM(w⋅λ).
Several applications of the BGG resolution have been obtained in different domains. For example Gabber-Joseph [10] constructed a resolution of certain primitive quotients of U(g). Certain kind of vanishing theorems and character formulas for Ext-groups in the BGG category O can be obtained from the resolution, as explained in [12]. One can also study certain differential operators on homogeneous spaces (see [1]), where morphisms between Verma modules are interpreted as differential operators. It also appeared in geometric representation theory, for example in [9] where complexes similar to BGG complexes are constructed using local systems on the blow-up of configuration spaces. Recently a BGG-type resolution was even constructed for quiver-Hecke algebras and Cherednik algebras in positive characteristic in [4].
Our main motivation was the work of Lachowska and Qi [15], which described the Hochschild cohomology of the small quantum group as the cohomology of certain coherent sheaves on the Springer resolution. By Bott's theorem, such cohomology groups can be computed using equivariant Lie algebra cohomology. Lachowska-Qi created an algorithm involving the BGG resolution to compute the Lie algebra cohomology, and could compute the dimension of the center of the small quantum group for sl3 by hand and sl4 with the help of code in Python written by Bryan Ford for this specific case.
As the rank grows, the algorithm quickly becomes too complicated to compute by hand. In this paper we propose a computer implementation of this algorithm. Let h⊂b⊂g be a Cartan subalgebra contained in a fixed Borel subalgebra of a complex finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra g. Using the BGG resolution, our computer algorithm computes the equivariant Lie algebra cohomology H•(b,h,E), for a given b-module E. These groups can be interpreted as the sheaf cohomology groups H•(G/B,G×BE), and this description includes the G-module structure too. The algorithm can also be used to compute the maps in the BGG resolution, which are of independent interest. The algorithm is implemented in SageMath [21] and the code is available at https://github.com/RikVoorhaar/bgg-cohomology. In a separate paper we will focus on applications to the small quantum group.
One of the main applications in this paper is computing the Hochschild cohomology of flag varieties. This topic is not well-studied. In addition to our work, the recent preprint [6] obtained interesting results for generalized Grassmannians, including vanishing results and explicit computation of the g-modules structures of HH•(X) using spectral sequences. Many interesting questions in this area are still open.
The outline of this paper is as follows: in section 2 we recall basic facts about the BGG resolution. In section 3 we explain the relationship with the cohomology of flag varieties and work out two examples. In section 4 we present our algorithm, and give some relevant details about its implementation. Some potential extensions and improvements to the algorithm are discussed in section 5. Finally, in the section 6 we present several computations obtained with our computer algorithm.
AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Anna Lachowska for suggesting the project and for many useful discussions. We also wish to thank Pieter Belmans for feedback and useful discussions, Luis E. Solá Conde for useful discussions, and finally we would like to thank the referee for their valuable feedback. This publication was produced within the scope of the NCCR SwissMAP which was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation. The authors would like to thank the Swiss National Science Foundation for their financial support.
