Starch thermally processed in aqueous solution undergoes a transition process named gelatinization, which progressively involves the deconstruction of original molecular structure and an eventual collapse of granules (Palav & Seetharaman, 2006; Sakonidou, Karapantsios, & Raphaelides, 2003). Gelatinization is crucial for starch in food industries. Hence there have been multiple characterizing methods developed to deeply investigate its performances and subsequent mechanisms, such as optical microscopy (Mazumder, Xiang, Qiu, & Kao, 2017; Schirmer, Zeller, Krause, Jekle, & Becker, 2014), differential scanning calorimetry (Molina, Leiva, & Bouchon, 2016), rheology analysis (Ji et al., 2017), X-ray diffraction (Planchot, Colonna, & Buleon, 1997).
Microscopy equipped with hot-stage is one of the most popular and simple tools to investigate gelatinization in situ and in real time under controlled heating conditions. It enables a direct study of the simultaneous process of granular destruction and the birefringence disappearance under both normal and polarized light (Zobel, 1984). The most widely accepted definition of gelatinization has been proposed on the basis of number of starch granules that show birefringence under polarized light (Atwell, Hood, Lineback, Marston, & Zobel, 1988). The morphological and internal structure of starch granules during thermal gelatinization are dynamic and show significant changes during the progress of gelatinization. A detailed study of the structural change is vital for revealing the underlying mechanism of gelatinization. In addition to the direct morphological observation using microscopy, there are also conventional graphic analysis software developed to better qualify starch granule morphology, including LUCIAG 4.0 (Chmelík et al., 2001), SPOT (Patel & Seetharaman, 2006), JEDA 801D (Cai, Cai, Zhao, & Wei, 2014), Nano Measurer (Chen et al., 2017) and Gun Image Manipulation (Chen, Yu, Kealy, Chen, & Li, 2007; Chen, Liu, Zhang, Sangwan, & Yu, 2015). After a combined utilization of microscopy and graphic software analysis, some key parameters, such as Feret's diameter, granule size distribution, sectional area and morphology change have been provided. To improve accuracy, image optimization is performed prior to a further data analyzing in some cases. For instance, Muñoz, Pedreschi, Leiva, and Aguilera (2015) optimized the image quality by a series of operations, including enhancing the contrast, reducing noise by median filtering, before enhancing boundaries by a sharpening filter. Subsequently, Feret’s diameter and the area of granules were measured through the binarization algorithm. Likewise, Ovalle, Cortés, and Bouchon (2013) also used the similar strategy for classifying granules according to their sizes. However, the current combined techniques have some disadvantages. Since all these measurements depend largely on the ideal granule geometrical model, a desirable result could only be achieved for particles with regular shapes. In addition, other disadvantages include inefficient manual measurements, low throughput and prone to subjective errors.
Image processing generally consists of image capturing, image segmentation and image analysis. Image capturing creates a digitally encoded representation of an object's visual characteristics (Thote et al., 2014). In the past years, image segmentation, as a traditional computer vision technology, has been dramatically improved and widely applied (Cai, Huang, Zeng, Ding, & Paisley, 2018). It provided a possibility to study different visional objects accurately, to efficiently separate the foreground from the background. Recently, some image processing softwares have been applied in the field of biology with a few computer vision algorithms, e.g., ImageJ (Tan & Balasubramanian, 2017), Amira (Rao, Leng, Zeng, Lin, & Zhu, 2019), NIS-Element (Šárka & Bubník, 2009). They provide the functions of binarization, edge detection, image filtering and object measurement. Aimed to simplify image analysis by drastically compressing the total data and simultaneously preserving the useful structural information about the object boundaries (Meng, Zhang, Yin, & Ma, 2017), Canny edge detection and mathematical morphology operation, as two popular tools in image segmentation, are used. Although Canny detector can detect a single pixel row edge for high-quality images, it usually misses the edges of poor quality. To solve the problem, mathematical morphology, which is a rigorous mathematical theory based on the shape-based image analysis disciplines, has been combined to achieve more accurate detection performance, especially for images containing transparent or translucent objects absent of distinct edge information (Serra, 1983; Zhang, Yang, & Hao, 2010). However, to the best of our knowledge, such methodology has not been used in food science, especially for studying thermal gelatinization of starch.
The aim of this work is to propose a new methodology to achieve an automatically and quantitative characterization of starch granule swelling during gelatinization. By analyzing the amount of pixels to reveal the granules area changed, an image segmentation combined with edge detection and mathematical morphology were used to improve credibility and ensured robustness of the task by computer recognition. This study provides a new strategy for investigating starch gelatinization behavior, which might be potentially useful for a precise control of physiochemical reaction of starchy materials.
