The low carbon steel is vulnerable in front of chemical attacks. Application of chemicals as corrosion inhibitors is one of the most cost-effective and simple ways to prevent or at least lower the corrosion rate of steel. These chemicals can protect the metal surface via forming protective barrier films through chemisorption and physisorption processes. The real concerns in using typical corrosion inhibitors are their carcinogenetic properties. The carcinogenetic and toxic consequences of hazardous compounds such as hexavalent chromium and phosphates have been proved in a number of studies (N.T. Program, 2011; Costa and Klein, 2006; Alibakhshi et al., 2018; Dehghani et al., 2019a; Majd et al., 2019a; Salehi et al., 2017). Hence, authorities have put pressure on the industries and researchers to find suitable non-toxic alternatives.
Among the last decades, it was found that various parts of medicinal plants and aromatic herbs are precious sources of the effective organic compounds. Being biodegradable, eco-friendly, available, cost-effective and so many other privileges have made the plants as favorable case of study. This type of inhibitor usually shows desirable performance in the acidic media (Ramezanzadeh et al., 2018; Bahlakeh et al., 2019; Hohenberg and Kohn, 1964; Kohn and Sham, 1965; Frisch et al., 2009; Tomasi et al., 2005; Reed et al., 1988; Asadi et al., 2019; Bahlakeh et al., 2017a; Olasunkanmi et al., 2015; Verma et al., 2016; Abboud et al., 2007) but represents poor performance in neutral environments (Majdi et al., 2017). Moreover, the low carbon steel is very sensitive against chloride containing solutions due to the pitting corrosion occurrence. One way is to use inorganic metal cations besides the plant extract. As a result, a synergistic impact would occur between the organic and inorganic species to form insoluble complexes and chelates.
Salehi et al. used the extract of Urtica Dioica (U.D) leaves as the corrosion inhibitor for the corroding MS sample in 3.5 wt. % NaCl solution. The inhibition efficiencies of about 68% and 45% were calculated by EIS and polarization tests data in the presence of an optimum concentration of U.D leaves extract, while in the presence of zinc cations, the inhibition efficiency has reached 92% (Saxena et al., 2018). Ramezanzadeh et al. applied Nettle leaves extract in a chloride solution and observed that it can lower the corrosion up to 71%. Adding Ce3+ to the U.D containing solution have brought about a 95% inhibition efficiency (Liu et al., 2009).
Esfand (often called Syrian/African rue) is a glabrous perennial herb which belongs to the Zygophyllaceae family (Reed et al., 1988). The seeds contain effective β-carboline alkaloids and N-based organic compounds like tetrahydroharmine, harmalol, harmine, vasicinone, vasicin, harmane, dihydrouridine, harmalin, serotonin, and harmol, each of which is depicted in Fig. S1.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no report on considering the synergistic impact between the Esfand seed extract and metal cations. In this work, we surveyed the synergism impact between the organic compounds of ESE and the zinc cations in 3.5 wt. % NaCl solution. Surface characterizations of the low carbon steel were carried out using FE-SEM, EDX, UV–vis, FT-IR, GIXRD, AFM and contact angle (CA) measurements. Electrochemical investigations were accomplished by EIS and polarization analyses. Moreover, to examine the adsorption properties of the inhibitors on the steel substrate the MC and MD simulations were utilized. The formation of complexes and their reactivity were assessed by QM computations.
