Inquiry is the process of asking questions, creating strategies to research these questions, following these strategies, collecting data, analyzing and interpreting the data, drawing conclusions, applying the results to the original problem and following the new questions (Krajcik et al., 1998; National Research Council, 1996). It is also a critical component of the science education program at all grade levels (National Research Council, 2000). Inquiry-based learning is one of the effective approaches to develop an in-depth understanding of science (Wu & Wu, 2011). By participating in the inquiry learning activities, students become aware of the process of producing, testing and reviewing scientific knowledge and the criteria for evaluating scientific claims (Smith, Maclin, Houghton, & Hennessey, 2000). At the same time, scientific inquiry can be seen as a set of skills that will be learned by students and used together in the process of conducting scientific research, or as a cognitive output to be acquired. In other words, scientific inquiry includes both the performance required for conducting research and the logical principles (Lederman, 2006). Inquiry skills are basic skills such as selecting and controlling variables, planning operations and interpreting evidence (Kuhn, Black, Keselman, & Kaplan, 2000). Without them, students are not able to engage productively in inquiry and this might interfere with students’ ideas about how scientific knowledge is constructed (Wu & Wu, 2011). Students' participation in scientific practice is one of the main methods of learning science through inquiry (NGSS Lead States, 2013).
When learners interact with the world in a scientific way, they find themselves observing, asking questions, hypothesizing, predicting, researching, interpreting and communicating. They are often called the “process skills” of science (Ash, 2000). Scientific Process Skills (SPS) form the basis of scientific inquiry (Carey, Evans, Honda, Jay, & Unger, 1989). These skills are transferable intellectual skills that must be learned for valid induction and deduction using concepts and principles (Gagne, 1965; Tobin & Capie, 1982). SPS are organized in a hierarchy, starting with observation and each part of the hierarchy depends on the previous one. They focus on the thinking patterns that scientists use in the production of information, the presentation of ideas and the communication of information which enables students to solve problems better, learn by themselves and value science more (Chiappetta, 1997; Taylor, Rogers, & Veal, 2009). Padilla (1990) examined the scientific process skills under two groups as basic and integrated skills. Basic skills provide a basis for learning more complex integrated skills. Basic skills are; observation, measurement, classification, inference, communication and prediction and the integrated skills are; operational definition, hypothesis creation, data interpretation, experiment and model building. This classification was used in the research.
Harlen (1999) emphasizes that one of the main aims of science education is the acquisition of SPS. Although not all individuals will be scientists, the acquisition of SPS is important in many ways like making rational and correct decisions on controversial issues in social contexts (Yang & Tsai, 2010). Inquiry skills and SPS are closely related to each other (Padilla, 2010). Therefore, participation in scientific inquiry activities is effective in developing students' SPS (Germann, 1989; Mattheis & Nakayama, 1988; Basaǧa, Geban, & Tekkaya, 1994; Wilke & Straits, 2005). Learners’ ownership and commitment to open-ended problem-solving in different contexts makes inquiry authentic (Hume & Coll, 2010). Through authentic scientific inquiry, “learners can investigate the natural world, propose ideas, and explain and justify assertions based upon evidence and, in the process, sense the spirit of science” (Hofstein & Lunetta, 2003). In an authentic inquiry-based science activity, students actively participate in the learning process; they engage in scientific research processes such as hypothesizing, experimenting, and evaluating evidence, and use resources to help them understand field-specific knowledge (de Jong, 2006). This brings two main advantages; students develop knowledge and understanding of the scientific phenomena that they observe in the physical world and describe how to perform the stages of scientific research like scientists (Bell, Urhahne, Schanze, & Ploetzner, 2010). But the scientific inquiry tasks provided in schools are insufficient to reflect the basic features of authentic scientific inquiry (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002). Students often find it difficult to formulate appropriate research questions, plan their research and draw conclusions (Krajcik et al., 1998; Zimmerman, 2007). Moreover, simulated experiments used in classrooms simplify the experiment process to alter the important epistemological characteristics of the actual experiment. Using such simplified experiments, students may acquire an unrealistic form of logic by real scientific reasoning (Chinn & Malhotra, 2001), or may not correct the scientific theories gained from students’ misconceptions, so called “naive science” (Vosniadou, 2003). At this point, the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) can solve the problem.
1.1. ICT and scientific process skillsICT, in particular the internet, provide access to a wide range of up-to-date information resources and tools, enhancing the quality of student work far beyond what school resources can provide. It allows learners to associate their work with the real world, work with real data and collaborate with peers and scientists (Osborne & Hennessy, 2003). Web-based learning environments contain diverse perspectives and rich information to discuss controversial issues and support inquiry-based discovery processes. In addition, they offer many alternative ways for group learning and peer interactions simultaneously or asynchronously (Tsai, 2008). According to Songer (2007), the use of technology in the process of guiding scientific inquiry offers; (a) an organized dialogue to develop collaborative understanding with peers and/or scientists, (b) a scaffolding for the development of scientific explanations, or (c) reflection on procedures and referral to more open-ended queries. Similarly, Hopson, Simms, and Knezek (2001) emphasize that technology-rich learning environments can facilitate the development of high-level thinking skills such as analysis, synthesis and evaluation, which are directly related to scientific process skills. It can also support the formation of learning communities by allowing students to share their ideas (Novak & Krajcik, 2006), improve student and teacher communication, and help students conduct research and develop products (Krajcik, Czerniak, & Berger, 2002).Portable devices bring new possibilities for authentic inquiry and contextualization of science. Students can now go to the place where science takes place instead of simulating science within class boundaries (Novak & Krajcik, 2006). So the use of portable technology allows learners to collect, analyze and model real-time data. Unlike computer simulations that reflect scientific processes, scientific inquiry processes carried out with real-world materials give learners greater flexibility in selecting variables and testing alternative models (Chinn & Malhotra, 2001). Because of their portability, they can support inquiry-based learning in different contexts as they are always used by the student (Jones, Scanlon, & Clough, 2013).
1.2. Mobile LearningThe term mobile learning is associated with the use of portable technologies that enable flexible learning in terms of time and space by allowing the learner to stay in motion. Mobile technologies have the potential to be used outside in specific and fixed locations (Price, 2007). Mobile learning allows learners to create individuality and collaborative content and context while providing personalization and surrounding social connectivity (Cochrane, 2010). The main difference that distinguishes mobile learning from other learning activities is the assumption that the learner is constantly in motion. We learn throughout in different venues; the individual applies to or develops the ideas and the learning resources acquired from one location to another location. We learn through different times; we use our existing knowledge in different contexts and even develop a lifelong learning framework through ideas and strategies that we form from a broader perspective. We learn throughout the topics; rather than following a curriculum, we manage a series of learning projects (Sharples, Taylor, & Vavoula, 2007). It is possible to say that the world in which we live in mobile learning constitutes a learning curriculum because it provides the individual with the opportunity to access information at anytime and anywhere (Kress & Pachler, 2007). Mobile learning provides increased collaboration among learners, access to information and deeper learning.With its rich learning content, mobile technologies can enable learners to transfer information effectively during learning activities and mobility makes learning more distributed (Jeng, Wu, Huang, Tan, & Yang, 2010). Mobile devices allow users to communicate easily with their peers as well as to control and own their own learning (Laurillard, 2007). At the same time, these technologies can support a wide range of different levels of engagement (Churchill & Churchill, 2008) and offer opportunities for learning in an authentic context (Frohberg, Göth, & Schwabe, 2009). Today, mobile devices perform various functions through applications. Mobile applications enable users to control and filter the flow of information through mobile devices (Motiwalla, 2007). The use of mobile applications during teaching and learning brings three main advantages: speed, safety and convenience (Khaddage & Lattenman, 2013).Although the literature outlined above points to the positive effects of mobile learning based on mobile technologies; it is difficult to say that there is enough work to speak confidently. In particular, no studies have been made for the purpose of developing scientific process skills. Zydney and Warner (2016) reported that mobile learning applications that focus on scientific process skills and, hence, problem solving skills are inadequate as a result of their extensive literature review. However, the positive results obtained from the studies motivate new studies on this subject. In this context, in this study, the effect of scientific inquiry applications, supported by mobile devices on scientific process skills, was investigated.
