WCE is a relatively new technology when compared to conventional endoscopy methods for visualization of the digestive tract. It was introduced in 2000 and approved in 2001 by Food and Drug Administration for clinical practice due to its portability and ease of usage for healthcare services [1]. In a WCE procedure, a pill-sized capsule with camera attached at its head is swallowed by the patient. The camera captures the video stream and transmits it to a portable device called “image recording unit”, which is attached to the patient’s body along with an antenna array of several leads [2]. The expelling time of capsule from human body in a natural way, is approximately 72 h, of which the video stream corresponding to the initial eight hours is important for visualizing the GI tract [3]. An average of 50,000 frames are captured in the eight hours’ duration depending on the capturing rate of the underlying capsule. It is widely accepted in this area that all the collected frames are not diagnostically important because there is significant redundancy and non-informative frames. The reason for this redundancy is the explosion of capsule to turbid fluids and other food particles of GI tract when passing through the tract [4]. Traditionally, the patient needs to visit the hospital, where the endoscopy set is dispatched, and video data is copied to the system for diagnostic process. For a complete guide about WCE, readers are referred to [5].
Considering the huge amount of video data and its inherent redundancy, it is unfeasible for gastroenterologists to localize their desired diagnostically important frames due to the excessive time needed for manual inspection. According to [6], a clinician needs on average two hours to view around 50,000 images and issue a diagnostic recommendation for a single patient. In addition, the sharing of this large amount of data with doctors for patients in remote areas is challenging for ‘in-time’ observation and diagnosis. In this context, it is necessary to have a degree of automation for such huge-sized data, which can discriminate the important frames from the non-important ones. Video summarization/prioritization is a mechanism that can solve this problem by eliminating and discarding the redundant and non-informative frames, respectively [7], [8]. Besides prioritization, automatic methods are needed for segmentation [9] and anomaly detection [10], [11], [12] in the WCE frames for better analysis. To this end, researchers have conducted several studies for segmentation, detection, and classification of WCE data using the publicly available datasets given on GASTROLAB site [13] and used in [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20].Download : Download high-res image (133KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Video summarization-assisted WCE procedure for personalized and smart healthcare [4]; (a) Redundant frames are discarded on-the-fly using patient’s smartphone because a lightweight redundancy removal method is employed for this step. The classification process is offloaded to cloud due to its excessive power usage and critical nature because the frames classified as “diagnostically important” will be directly observed by gastroenterologists for diagnosis. (b) An overview of working scenario of WCE with smartphone for smart healthcare.
The recent progress in sensor technologies has resulted in new smart devices for medical field, especially for e-health from which patients in remote areas with limited access facilities to hospitals can greatly benefit [21], [22]. For instance, gait analysis is a medical diagnostic process with numerous applications in healthcare, but needs to be performed in a laboratory, which is not accessible for majority of the population in developing countries. Many contributions in the literature have addressed this particular issue. For instance, Feng Lin et al. [23] developed “Smart Insole”, a wearable sensor device that is lightweight and comfortable and can unobtrusively perform gait monitoring for remote patients. Consequently, gait analysis can be used in diagnostic process of numerous diseases i.e., Parkinson’s disease, Huntington, and stroke [24], [25]. Similarly, Sundaravadivel et al. [26] presented “smart-long”, an automated nutrition monitoring system supported by IoT platform. Their system can be mainly used for either infants at home or at daycare facilities, thus taking a step further on current healthcare systems for nutrition monitoring. Besides smart sensors, the improved processing capabilities of smartphones have enabled them to perform different healthcare operations, which can contribute to the cost-effectiveness of remote healthcare systems. For instance, the patient’s smartphone can be used to perform lightweight processing for the data generated during an ongoing diagnostic process, such as the identification and discarding of redundant video frames during WCE. A representative system in this context is presented in [4], with its main framework illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The process is personalized by using the patient’s smartphone and adjusting different parameters related to its operation, such as the required energy for processing, transmission cost, or smartphone’s battery life among others alike (see Fig. 1(b)).
To motivate researchers towards intelligent WCE video analytics, this prospective survey reviews the existing literature and divides methods reported so far into four different domains: segmentation/detection, redundancy removal/summarization, classification/recognition, and personalization. All the existing methods are targeting one or multiple of these domains using different AI-enabled techniques. In this manuscript, we provide a brief overview of all WCE video analysis methods, towards identify their major achievements and limitations. In addition, we also present a comparative analysis of our survey with existing reviews in the literature gravitating on WCE video analytics. Furthermore, we shortlist the publicly available datasets used for the evaluation of WCE. Finally, we identify current challenges that remain insufficiently addressed in this research area, and provide future directions and recommendations for interested researchers to overcome these challenges. The main contributions of this survey can be summarized as follows:Download : Download high-res image (347KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. A Taxonomy of WCE images and video analytics methods into four major domains and a further sub split into two Machine Learning (ML)/image processing based methods and Deep Learning (DL) based methods. On top of them, the Taxonomy also illustrates that some methods targeted multiple domains of WCE images/video analytics.

1.A detailed critical review of existing WCE methods is provided along with their targeted domains, key accomplishments, and major limitations. Unlike other existing works, we perform a comparative analysis of this survey with existing ones, benchmark datasets and their usage, and most importantly, current research trends and recommendations for the future of the area.2.We establish a taxonomy that organizes WCE video analytics as per four different domains: segmentation/detection, redundancy removal/summarization, classification/ recognition, and personalization. The main aim of this division is to show the basic workflow of each domain, and develop the interest of researchers towards these research areas. In addition, it also stimulates the development of hybrid-personalized methods that include all these facilities to deal with remote patients for smart healthcare services.3.Current challenges of all domains of WCE images/videos analytics are provided and discussed in depth, stepping on the main drawbacks and research niches observed in our review of existing literature. Based on our conclusions and prospects, we also advocate for several practical guidelines and recommendations for the research community to steer their contributions in proper and fruitful directions along all domains of WCE analytics.
The remaining study consists of five sections. Section 2 provides the comparative analysis of our study with existing WCE surveys. Section 3 presents an in-depth review of WCE methods and their division into four different domains. The publicly available datasets and current challenges with future recommendations are discussed in Section 4 and Section 5, respectively. Finally, Section 6 concludes this survey with its key findings.
