There is a growing interest in improving the success and performance rates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics courses (STEM) at the university level (Bybee, 2013). These courses often have a problem of low student motivation (Borrego et al., 2017; Ross and Bell, 2019). In order to improve the motivation, creating a positive emotional environment has been proposed in order to make the teaching-learning process more attractive (Mellado et al., 2014).
Some possible techniques for creating this positive emotional environment and for improving the motivation are gamification (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2017c; Zamora-Polo et al., 2019a) and Game Based Learning (Papastergiou, 2009). Gamification is defined as the use of game elements and game-design techniques in non-game contexts (Deterding et al., 2011), to engage people and solve problems (De-Marcos et al., 2014; Warmelink et al., 2020; Zamora-Polo et al., 2019a). The design of games for educational purposes is called Game Based Learning (GBL) (Ebner and Holzinger, 2007; Papastergiou, 2009).
Although gamification is not restricted to the educational field, in fact gamification techniques were born in economic, financial and marketing areas (Deterding et al., 2011; Sánchez-Martín et al., 2017c). Nowadays, their use in education is a tendency (Menon and Romero, 2020; Rodrigues et al., 2019).
The use of gamification, as well as increasing the students' motivation (Deterding, 2012; Fotaris and Mastoras, 2019; Hamari et al., 2016), allows students to develop interesting skills (Menon and Romero, 2020). To this end, they need to develop both specific competencies (directly related to their profession) and transversal competencies, which, apart from being used in the professional world, can be used in the exercise of a critical and committed citizenship (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2017d; Zamora-Polo et al., 2019b; Zamora-Polo et al., 2019d). Market and employers highly value these latter competencies (Zamora-Polo et al., 2019c; Zamora-Polo et al., 2016).
Many of the works published in the scientific bibliography on gamification are related to technological aspects (Fotaris and Mastoras, 2019; Kayımbaşıoğlu et al., 2016; Rodrigues et al., 2019). However, game is more than technology (Deterding et al., 2011). In fact, traditional games such as table top, card or board games are currently used in gamification contexts (Clarke et al., 2016).
In order to optimize the educational outcomes of the games; Garris et al. (2002) proposed the “Input-Process-Game model” (cited by Menon and Romero, 2020). In this model, instructional content and game characteristics are used as input variables. The process considers the game cycle and outputs the learning outcomes.
In this paper, the use of the gamification1 technique known as escape room, is analysed in university context. The escape room consists on a recreational activity in which a group of people is confined to one or more rooms from which they have to escape in a certain time. To do this, they must solve a series of puzzles, quizzes and challenges in order to obtain a mechanism to escape the room (Zhang et al., 2017). Escape rooms are in their infancy (Warmelink et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017), so studies related with the topic are not very common and the analysis of these experiences under a pedagogical, didactical point of view are scarce.
According Nicholson (2015) escape rooms could be defined as:
“Live-action team-based games where players discover clues, solve puzzles, and accomplish tasks in one or more rooms in order to accomplish a specific goal (usually escaping from the room) in a limited amount of time.”
The first documented reference to an escape room came from Japan in 2007 (SCRAP, 2007) and spread rapidly to other parts of the world in 2012–13 first in Asia and, then in Europe, Australia and North America (Nicholson, 2015).
Although the escape rooms were created for recreational purposes, they can be used for educational purposes by developing skills such as teamwork, lateral and critical thinking, communication, working under pressure, etc (Nicholson, 2015; Pan et al., 2017; Shakeri et al., 2017).
Nicholson (2015) laid the foundations for the systematic escape room study. Other authors have focused their research on how escape rooms participants search information (Choi et al., 2017), how the escape room design affects teamwork and collaboration in both the purely physical escape room (Pan et al., 2017) and escape room that combine the physical and virtual world (mixed reality) (Warmelink et al., 2017), the application to the elderly sector (Zhang et al., 2017), tourism (Kolar, 2017) or crowdsourcing.
Regarding how to integrate escape rooms into a formal educational context, there are just a bunch of he references. An interesting review has been recently published (Fotaris and Mastoras, 2019). Vörös and Sárközi (2017) used escape room in order to teach Fluid Mechanics. With pre-university students, Bassford et al. (2016) created a scenario-based learning experience in order to engage young people in STEM courses by investigating a traffic accident and Batzogiannis et al. (2018) use the co-creation of escape rooms for improving Greek students' motivation. Most of the experiences in the field of education are developed in the context of higher education (Fotaris and Mastoras, 2019). In this area, Borrego et al. (2017) successfully implemented an escape room activity in a course entitled Information and Security and Computer Networks of the degree in computer science at a Spanish university; Lopez-Pernas et al. (2019) applied the escape room activity in a programming course, Friedrich et al. (2019) design an interprofessional escape room. Additionally, Eukel et al. (2017) designed an escape room addressing the issue of diabetes in the Pharmacy degree, López (2018, 2019) used escape room for teaching English at university context. Finally, Clarke et al. (2016) carried out a pilot experience with university teachers. Other successful escape room experiences have been related to medical studies (Kinio et al., 2019) and nursing education (Morrell and Ball, 2020).
An important issue in escape rooms design is the choice of the theme and narrative (Nicholson, 2015). In the bibliography several themes were described (López, 2019; Nicholson, 2015; Pan et al., 2017; Shakeri et al., 2017): modern era, a place in the time, horror, fantasy, a place related to Science such as a laboratory, the murder of a doctor and so on. Once the theme is selected, the puzzles and quizzes should be designed. There are a variety of puzzles that can be incorporated into an escape room (Nicholson, 2015; Shakeri et al., 2017). Selection will depend on the objectives previously selected and the experience of the designer. Finally, equipment should be designed and implemented. It is necessary to select the space where it will be developed, the implementation of the puzzles, the use or not of actors, etc (Clarke et al., 2016). Although it is more than evident that the live-in experience is the most strong way for profiting the Escape room tool, this is not always possible because it requires a large number of resources (physical space, working in small groups, and materials such as puzzles and other attrezzo materials). Because of that, perhaps a good way of working with this educative tool may be the virtualization of the experience through computer-aid applications. Some relevant works have already been published (Mystakidis et al., 2019) and surely there will be more promptly.
Escape room activities seem to be a promising tool for education and educators and some scientific publications can be found up to now (Pan et al., 2017). The emotions experienced by students in this type of activities can be positive for example: joy, gratitude, interest, favoring the process of teaching learning; or negative emotions such as fear, anxiety, competitiveness, etc., the latter emotions can harm the process of teaching learning. In this way, it is essential to know what kind of emotions students' experience (Jeong et al., 2018).
The fact that the emotional performance is important for the cognitive yield is not new and it has been referred previously (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2018). Both variables are clear and directly in relationship, as Mellado et al. (2014) already pointed out: the higher the emotional performance is, the better academic marks are obtained. And it is also relevant to point out that one of the best ways of improving the student's motivation for science and technology domains is the application of ludic, recreational activities, as Martínez-Borreguero et al. (2018) reported. These authors described better acquisition of difficult scientific concepts when they were taught through recreational experiences.
Particularly, the use of gamification and game-based learning as a teaching method was identified as a successful practice for improving the motivation and the emotional yield of the students (Sánchez-Martin et al., 2018), ahead from other teaching methods (orally-based exposition or audiovisual-supported explanation). The impact of gamification in the motivation and, consequently, in the academic performance of the students, has been thoroughly studied (Buckley and Doyle, 2016). It is clearly stated out that gamification is one of the most interesting educative techniques for enhancing the emotional experience of learning (Mullins and Sabherwal, 2018).
On the other hand, previous studies have pointed out that there are gender differences in the student's opinion about the use of the gamification in education (Clarke et al., 2016; Lopez-Pernas et al., 2019); nevertheless, these differences were not found in the use of escape room (Clarke et al., 2016; Lopez-Pernas et al., 2019; Nicholson, 2015). Finally, it is important to know what competencies the students believe they have developed. Clearly, knowing this in a reliable way is very difficult, but this must be the horizon of an efficient way of evaluating the quality of the education process. This work aims to address these issues.
1.1. Research objectivesThe main goals of the current work can be exposed in the following terms:(1)To describe and report the use of escape room in formal education, in the university context, as a tool for improving the acceptance of courses that are perceived as difficult ones by university students.(2)To analyze the students' opinion and emotional performance, identifying significant differences between Engineering and Education students, and between male and female students.
