In 2014, Barack Obama, President of the United States of America, promoted a ten-year plan for educational innovation as an important developmental direction for the country and emphasized the infusion of knowledge and practice in learning (The White House, 2014). Many researchers have stated that infused learning of science and technology can enhance students’ creativity, problem-solving skills, and interest in science fields (Madden et al., 2013; Perignat & Katz-Buonincontro, 2019; Thuneberg, Salmi, & Bogner, 2018). In the education field, teaching innovation aims to train a new generation of students to cultivate their talents and hone their skills. Learning methods and environments have become more diverse as the era has evolved. Various teaching innovations have been proven effective for promoting students’ creativity, problem-solving and active learning (Liao, Kung, & Chen, 2019; Lo & Chen, 2016; Walder, 2014). Intaros, Inprasitha, and Srisawadi (2014) stressed that education should focus on improving students’ abilities to think and solve problems, overturning previous teaching strategies that advocate repetitive practice. Teaching innovations have replaced the traditional style, which relied on rote learning (Hidalgo-Cabrillana & Lopez-Mayan, 2018).
Escape rooms, which involve a game in which a team of people must “escape” from a room filled with challenges within a given time limit, have grown in popularity in recent years (Wiemker, Elumir, & Clare, 2015). Wiemker et al. (2015) stated that multiple strategies and skills, including searching, observation, discernment, correlation, memorization, math, words, pattern recognition and compartmentalization, are applied during an escape room game. Such games are consistent with the concept of learner-centered, problem-solving-oriented, cooperative, and interdisciplinary learning (Brown, Darby, & Coronel, 2019; Cain, 2019; Gómez-Urquiza et al., 2019; Kinio, Dufresne, Brandys, & Jetty, 2019) because they require players to identify and solve problems through observation, logical thinking, and integration. Problem-solving ability and thinking ability are critical skills that prepare children for future challenges (Sung, 2017). Given the benefits of teaching innovations and game-based learning for students, the popularity and rapid expansion of escape rooms among the general population and the challenge, thrill, and motivation such activities produce, together with the lack of evidence related to the use of this game-based, learner-centered, and problem-solving-oriented method in elementary teaching, it is potentially useful to develop such a teaching activity for use in science classes.
In summary, the aim of this study is to investigate the effect of digital escape rooms on learning performance, learning motivation, and problem-solving ability when a DER was applied as a teaching game and to assess the impact of the DER learning experience on studying. Ultimately, DERs could provide an exciting and engaging addition to teaching innovations in education programs.
1.1. DER teaching approachThe current trend of integrating creative teaching into education reflects the innovative classroom model, which alters the learning process (Lai, Hsiao, & Hsieh, 2018; Zainuddin, 2018). Keller (1983) stated that strategies such as game-based learning and other hands-on methods that involve learners with the material or subject matter can be adopted to encourage the active participation of students. Since then, game-based educational activities have become an important strategy to improve students’ learning motivation and performance. Pontual Falcão, Mendes de Andrade e Peres, Sales de Morais, and da Silva Oliveira (2018) emphasized digital games as one of the most promising innovative teaching approaches currently available in education. The abovementioned studies indicate that digital games represent the current trend of innovative teaching. However, the DER proposed in this study is an innovative teaching approach different from regular digital games. First, DER uses the digital tool as a medium to present questions. Through tablet computers, teachers can conveniently pose questions, and students can be assigned tasks, find clues, and answer questions. Second, by using physical escape rooms and real games, DERs allow students to carry out scientific experiments related to the teaching context based on the subject of the course, thereby differing from simple game-playing and problem-solving on a computer. Third, DERs can enrich students’ learning process in embodied cognition and provide an immersive learning environment for students. In other words, the DER is an innovative teaching approach incorporating digital materials with reality.An escape room is an interactive game played by a team of people in which they are locked into a room and must collaborate to solve a series of puzzles to escape from the room within a set time limit. The escape room teaching game is a dynamic option for assessing theoretical and practical knowledge, and it may also promote teamwork and performance abilities (Gómez-Urquiza et al., 2019; Kinio et al., 2019).The DER teaching approach applies game-based learning though an escape room activity. It involves a learner-centered, problem-solving-oriented teaching design using digital teaching materials in which the DER is infused with teaching in the class.The principles of DERs are based on designing tasks for the escape rooms that are based on the course content to improve students’ learning performance; such tasks should generate a tense but exciting atmosphere and joy created by the confined space, time limit, and story design to motivate students to complete a series of tasks and solve problems. DER uses digital materials to overcome the limitations of traditional classroom teaching. During the problem-solving learning process, students cooperate with each other to find clues and solve problems. Through teamwork, they have more opportunities to learn problem-solving. The features of DER include the following. 1) Students receive information and answer questions on tablet computers, which makes the learning process more convenient. 2) The escape task from a closed space, which is arranged according to the course theme, can motivate students to solve problems. 3) Completing DER tasks within a time limit generates a certain level of pressure, which can stimulate students’ learning potential. 4) The experience of solving puzzles and escaping from the escape room through team cooperation can improve students’ problem-solving skills.Before the incorporation of an innovative strategy in the classroom, an introduction is clearly needed to increase students’ participation. In this study, the DER activity using digital materials was introduced into science teaching in an elementary school. For this activity, the students were guided by the teacher to find clues and information about the scenario as well as to complete the tasks at each course level on a tablet. This approach was designed to overcome the limits of using teaching media in a typical classroom environment. The proposed gamified innovative classroom approach, which merges DER games with classroom teaching, may prove to be an innovation that improves students’ potential.
1.2. DER and learning performanceMany teaching innovations involving a move towards a learner-centered approach have been effective in promoting students’ creativity, critical thinking, learning motivation, and problem-solving; they help students construct their own knowledge and have direct implications for learning development (Amponsah, Kwesi, & Ernest, 2019; Chan, 2016; Dearn, 2010; Liao, Chen, Chen, & Chang, 2018). Leite and Dourado (2013) believed that conceptualizing the process of science learning as a problem-solving process can foster students’ development of problem-solving skills in a science course. Consequently, the present research focuses on teaching innovations that simultaneously nurture students’ learning motivation and problem-solving ability in the DER classroom and promote their science learning performance with intensive activities aimed at strengthening their learning experience. The following section discusses the relationship between the teaching innovations of DER and learning performance in more detail.Moutinho, Torres, Fernandes, and Vasconcelos (2015) analyzed science teachers’ conceptions regarding science teaching through problem-solving-oriented methods by applying a semistructured interview. The teachers stressed that a problem-solving-oriented methodology that builds on problems to develop new knowledge can also be useful in helping students learn science. Solving problems requires a variety of skills, including explaining information, planning, checking results, and trying alternative strategies (Intaros et al., 2014). Problem-solving is a critical ability that learners must develop to face future challenges (Rovers, Clarebout, Savelberg, & van Merriënboer, 2018). To promote more effective learning, problem-solving-oriented methods could be important to enhance students’ use of problem-solving-ability strategies.The limited number of empirical studies investigating the effects of escape room activities on learning performance, learning motivation, and problem-solving have mostly found positive relationships. Escape room games are becoming more popular among education programs as a means of engaging students in their learning environment (Kinio et al., 2019). Wiemker et al. (2015) mentioned that at its core, an escape room puzzle uses a simple game loop: a challenge to overcome, a solution (possibly concealed), and a reward for overcoming the challenge; to complete the task and successfully escape the room, the players must identify a problem and solve it.Game-based learning has recently been validated for use in medical and pharmacy management courses (Brown et al., 2019; Cain, 2019; Gómez-Urquiza et al., 2019). For example, Brown et al. (2019) investigated the relationship between an escape room activity and clinical simulation learning. Their results showed that the escape game contributed to learning: nursing students applied concepts learned in class and analyzed patient data to obtain clues. In another study, Cain (2019) conducted the exploratory implementation of an escape room in a pharmacy management class. The findings revealed that student perceptions of the activity were generally positive and indicated that the students who participated in the escape room were more engaged in thinking about the problems and enjoyed the escape room more. In their descriptive study, Gómez-Urquiza et al., 2019 analyzed nursing students opinions and learning motivations after using a nursing escape room game. At the end of the course, the students reported that the escape room activity stimulated their learning and motivated them to study.Thus, when students participate in an escape room game activity aimed at promoting a learning experience, they are likely to engage in meaningful learning. The present study proposes that teaching innovations based on DER learning can be characterized by three dimensions: game-based learning, learner-centered, and problem-solving orientation. It is reasonable to assume that the enhancement of students’ learning experience as a result of participation in DER learning will have a positive impact on their learning performance, learning motivation, and problem-solving ability.
1.3. The present studyThe above discussion shows that the use of escape rooms for educational purposes is an innovative teaching method with the potential to improve the students’ learning experience, motivation, and problem-solving abilities (Cain, 2019; Gómez-Urquiza et al., 2019). In recent research concerning the infusion of escape room activities into teaching, the study subjects were mostly young adults, such as nursing students, pharmacy students, and medical students (Brown et al., 2019; Cain, 2019; Kinio et al., 2019); such studies have rarely included elementary school students. In addition, teaching experiments in previous research involves only a single group of students without a comparison group, and as a result, it was impossible to implement comparisons for internal and external validity. Moreover, with regard to teaching materials, previous research used traditional teaching materials rather than high-tech digital materials.In previous studies, adults outperformed children in most experimental manipulations: the children performed more slowly and less accurately than the adults (Bauer, Martinez, Roe, & Church, 2017; Church, Bunge, Petersen, & Schlaggar, 2017). Compared with children, the age and cognitive flexibility of adult subjects are easier to manipulate in experiments.In DER activities, the ability for individuals to express themselves is very important because students cooperate with each other as a team through discussion and communication. Previous studies have shown that second and third graders are neither able to explain the deduction process clearly nor express themselves smoothly when sharing and presenting their ideas in science courses. This finding might be attributed to their immature cognitive development with respect to what is required for learning (Honig, 2009). Seah, 2016 assessed the ability of fourth-graders to understand and express concepts in science courses, and the results indicated that the fourth-graders were in a stage suitable for improving their abilities to carry out scientific observation, speculation, and expression.In Taiwan’s elementary school system, the first and second grades are lower grades, the third and fourth grades are middle grades, and the fifth and sixth grades are higher grades. Regrouping classes of students regularly occurs every two grades. Yeh and Chang (2014) believed that the fourth-graders did not experience academic pressure and more easily adapted, whereas the regrouping of the fifth graders might affect both their ability to adapt and their learning performance.Considering the above factors, a quasi-experimental approach was applied to infuse DER into science teaching for fourth-graders in an elementary school. The experimental course was designed and manipulated according to the concept of game-based, learner-centered, and problem-solving-oriented learning. After the course, the students’ learning performance, learning motivation, and problem-solving ability were evaluated to determine the effectiveness of the DER teaching approach. The proposed approach abandoned the traditional teaching mode and used a digital technology-aided approach through the use of tablets, which was designed to overcome the limitations of the classroom learning environment and bring convenience to educational practice.Due to the recent advent of the escape room, there is a paucity of published information on the value of such educational games for primary education and of their infusion into teaching. This study proposes to fill this knowledge gap and assess the impact of DER on intermediate primary grade students’ science learning, including learning performance, learning motivation, and problem-solving skills. Based on the above discussion, the research questions are as follows.(1)To what extent can a DER intervention affect students’ learning performance, learning motivation, and problem-solving ability in an intermediate primary grade science course?(2)What feedback do the students have about their learning process with DER, and what level of satisfaction do they report?
