At the end of 2019, a novel coronavirus pneumonia, COVID-19, began to rapidly propagate due to widespread person-to-person transmission [1]. By April 5th, 2020, there were over 1 million confirmed COVID-19 cases, and tens of thousands of people lost their lives. The epidemic of 2019-nCoV pneumonia poses an enormous threat and challenge to the global population.
Key to fighting against COVID-19 is diagnosing infected patients as soon as possible and providing them with proper treatment and care. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is considered to be the gold standard for diagnosing the disease [2]. Some respiratory specialists have suggested that a nucleic acid test was not required to confirm the disease if typical imaging findings of coronavirus were present [3]. Volumetric CT chest images of the lungs and soft tissues have been investigated in recent studies for detecting COVID-19 [4]. However, the high radiation doses and costs limit the use of CT, especially for pregnant women and children [5]. Chest X-ray, a non-invasive chest exam with a low radiation dose, can completely image the lungs and is more time and cost efficient than CT. Therefore, X-rays can serve as an effective method for the early detection of COVID-19. However, COVID-19 may share some common radiographic features with other pneumonias, making its discriminability difficult for radiologists.
Currently, artificial intelligence using deep learning plays an important role in the medical image area due to its excellent feature extraction ability. Deep learning models (DLs) accomplish tasks by automatically analysing multi-modal medical images. Computer vision refers to using DLs in processing images or videos and how a computer might gain information and understanding from this method. Advanced computer-aided diagnosis schemes are mostly based on state-of-the-art methods, such as fully convolutional neural networks (FCNNs) [6], VGGNet [7], ResNet [8], Inception [9], and Xception [10]. Some examples of the application of AI include cancer detection and classification [11], the diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy [12], multi-classification of multi-modality skin lesions [13], polyp detection during colonoscopy [14], etc.
Since COVID-19 has become widespread, many researchers have dedicated their efforts to the application of machine vision and deep learning in the diagnosis of the disease based on medical images and have achieved good results. Ozturk et.al. [15] proposed a model that uses DarkNet as a classifier and obtained a classification accuracy of 98.08% for binary classification (COVID-19 vs. no findings) and 87.02% for multiple classification (COVID-19 vs. no findings vs. pneumonia). Khan et.al. [16] proposed a deep model based on the Xception architecture to detect COVID-19 cases from chest X-ray images, which achieved an overall accuracy of 89.6% and a recall rate for COVID-19 cases of 93% in classifying COVID-19, healthy conditions, bacterial pneumonia and viral pneumonia. Narin et al. [17] employed three state-of-the-art deep learning models (ResNet50, InceptionV3 and Inception-ResNetV2) and obtained the best accuracy of 98% with a pre-trained ResNet50 model for 2-class classification. However, they did not include pneumonia cases in their experiment. Moreover, there are several deep learning models that use CT images to detect COVID-19. For example, ResNet-18 was used as the CNN to diagnose the diease from chest CT, which achieved an area under the curve of 0.92 and had equal sensitivity to a senior radiologist [18].
Computer-aided detection (CAD) is a common occurrence in hospitals. Bai et al. [19] found that artificial intelligence (AI) can help clinicians distinguish COVID-19 from other pneumonia on chest CT. Moreover, it is not easy to distinguish soft tissue with poor contrast on X-ray. To overcome these limitations, CAD systems have been implemented to assist clinicians in automatically detecting and quantifying suspected diseases of vital organs on X-rays [20]. Notably, deep learning can automatically detect clinical abnormalities from chest X-rays at a level exceeding practising radiologists [21]. Due to the lack of available data, however, almost all previous study data originated from open datasets on the net, and thus it is unknown how well their corresponding models would perform with real-world data. To the best of our knowledge, there are few studies about localizing the disease. In this paper, we developed an efficient and accurate deep learning model-based computer-aided detection scheme for automatically localizing COVID-19 from CAP on chest X-rays. The novel CAD scheme comprised two different DLs: the first DL is utilized to automatically recognize and collect X-rays belonging to COVID-19 patients (i.e., the X-rays differentiated from CAP patients), and the second DL is utilized for detecting localization of left lung, right lung or bipulmonary in each X-ray radiograph. The details of this work, including the structure of the CAD scheme and performance evaluation, are manifested in the following sections.
