Cancer is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, according to the World Health Organization [1] and it imposes a big challenge for the researchers and the scientific community. Cancer cases overall reached 17.5 million in 2015, alongside 8.7 million deaths. The occurrence rate expanded by 33% from 2005 and 2015. At present, cancer growth is the second reason for death worldwide and is relied upon to hit 27.1 million individuals by 2030 — particularly in developed nations [2]. The funds invested by National Cancer Institute (NCI) itself totaled $5.94 billion, reflects an increase of 10.3% from the previous year [3]. The financial costs of cancer are high for both the person with cancer and for society as a whole [4]. Complex problems like cancer cannot be solved by a single research institute using traditional methods. The fight against cancer requires the collaborative efforts of multidisciplinary institutes and research labs across the countries.
Approaches like Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) [5], multiscale modeling, quantum chemistry, systems biology etc. are being utilized in the studies of proteins like p53, RAS, BRAF, BRCA1, BRCA2, p16 etc. which are widely studied worldwide [6] for cancer research. The multiscale/enhanced sampling simulation approaches have been used to study the wild-type and cancer conditions. The simulations require intense computation and interprocess communication. The information of rich biological data from various sources is posing challenges in integration and analysis. The advancements in multiscale modeling are able to capture rare events in the various biological processes. The role of modeling and simulations is significant in understanding physico-chemical principles of complex biological processes such as protein folding, RNA folding, cancer biology, drug-design/repurposing [7], various bio-molecular interactions in structural biology. All these advancements from genomics to molecular modeling and simulations with the use of high performance computing (HPC) in the range of peta- and exa-flops together, would be able to solve grand challenge problems in the area of cancer research by providing a common platform for integrated research.
The National Cancer Informatics Program (NCIP) [8] launched by National Institutes of Health (NIH) [9] supports biomedical informatics in cancer research. NCIP offers among other resources the NCIP Hub [10], a science gateway for helping to accelerate innovation in the cancer research community. The collaborative work requires an internet-based platform to support the research and collaboration and communication among various research communities working in the area of cancer. Since NCIP Hub supports already crucial features for collaboration, sharing data and starting jobs in a web-based user interface for cancer research, it was selected by the ICTBioMed consortium. The NCIP Hub is based on the science gateway framework HUBzero [11]. It allows for the creation of projects sharing data and running data analysis with different tools such as 3D Slicer [12], an open source software platform for medical image informatics, image processing, and three dimensional visualization.
The ICTBioMed consortium applies the NCIP Hub to combine efforts of a variety of knowledge and expertise benefiting the cancer research. ICTBioMed is a consortium of domain researchers, experts in HPC and organizations concerned with applications in health informatics. The ICTBioMed team is working with the HUBzero team for enabling a Docker [13] execution host model, which integrates into the HUBzero platform. ICTBioMed has created Docker containers with preconfigured workflows used by cancer researchers. Example data sets are included in the Docker container for the proof of concept. The enhancement will provide a seamless approach for execution of cancer related workflows and will be available to all projects in the NCIP Hub. The science gateway opens new avenues for future collaborations across the countries to solve common problems and gives stronger opportunity to fight cancer.
