Cleft lip and palate (CLP) surgery aims at the restoration of optimal function and esthetics. Maxillary hypoplasia is common in cleft patients and is most probably the combined consequence of intrinsic factors and factors secondary to surgery [1], such as, among others, age at surgery, surgical technique, use of orthopedic and/or orthodontic devices and experience of the surgeon.
One step often incriminated in the occurrence of maxillary hypoplasia is the early closure of the alveolar cleft [2], [3], [4]. The two most commonly used techniques are: (1) gingivoalveoloplasty (GAP) alone and (2) GAP with alveolar bone graft or bone substitute. There is currently a debate on the effects of early GAP on maxillary growth and on its efficiency on alveolar bone reconstruction [5]. Some authors support the use of GAP at the same time as hard palate closure, that is at 18–36 months of age, as an effective method for alveolar bone reconstruction, without or with mild negative impact on mid-facial growth [6], [7]. We referred to this procedure as “early secondary gingivoalveoloplasty” as described in the literature [8], [9]. The term referred to two specific characteristics of the protocol: (1) secondary meant that the alveolar surgery was secondary to an initial procedure involving soft tissues only and (2) early reflected the fact that alveolar cleft treatment was earlier than in other techniques performed during mixed dentition.
In most studies evaluating maxillary growth after CLP surgery, maxillary shape assessment relies on linear measurements [10]. Geometric morphometrics is a set of statistical tools allowing quantifying and comparing non-standard shapes [11]. This approach consists in modeling shapes using sets of landmarks, super-imposing the landmarks of the included subjects and computing mean shapes, that are then assessed using principal component analyses. Variation patterns within and between groups can thus be studied and quantified.
A retrospective descriptive study has been conducted using geometric morphometrics based on 3D CT images in order to describe the maxillary shape at the end of pubertal growth, after early secondary GAP, in a cohort of patients with unilateral CLP, operated on according to a standardized protocol. The study group has been compared to an homogeneous group of control patients.
