Scholars pay increasing attention to Citizen Science (CS), the direct involvement of the public in scientific research. Studies of CS appear in a broad range of fields and outlets, revealing different views of opportunities and challenges (e.g., Bonney et al., 2014; Franzoni and Sauermann, 2014; Khatib et al., 2011; Wiggins and Crowston, 2011). While some see CS primarily as a means to increase the productivity of traditional scientific research, others see it as an opportunity to democratize science by opening traditional institutions (Irwin, 1995; Nielsen, 2011). In this paper, we argue that these two views reflect complementary aspects of Citizen Science that give it the potential to help address sustainability problems, i.e., complex challenges to meet the needs of the present without jeopardizing the needs of future generations (United Nations, 1987). Such sustainability problems may relate to aspects of the natural environment such as preserving biodiversity or conserving natural resources, but also to socioeconomic issues such as health, poverty reduction, and other aspects of welfare and peace. The severity and the scope of today's sustainability problems are evident in the seventeen UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs; Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (849KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Source: https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/.
To discuss how Citizen Science can help address sustainability problems, we integrate two streams of literature. The first includes research on Citizen Science that discusses how the general public can get involved in all stages of the research process (Bonney et al., 2009; Irwin, 1995; West and Pateman, 2017). This work demonstrates that citizens can increase the production of valuable scientific knowledge by contributing significant effort and knowledge resources to projects. At the same time, CS can allow citizens to shape the direction of research, learn, and advocate more effectively for socio-political changes.
The second stream encompasses work on sustainability transitions (STs) – transformation processes through which socio-technical systems shift to more sustainable modes of production and consumption (Hölscher et al., 2018; Markard et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2005). This literature informs us that STs are often enabled by new scientific knowledge and technologies in areas such as renewable energy, efficient transportation systems, sustainable agricultural methods, or vaccines and public sanitation (Geels, 2006; Jury and Vaux, 2005; Mowery et al., 2010). However, technological innovation needs to co-evolve with social and institutional structures. Attention to this socio-technical intermingling is required both to understand sustainability transitions and to manage them (Geels and Schot, 2007; Markard et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2010).
Drawing on both literatures, we argue that Citizen Science can support sustainability transitions through three important pathways: (1) Helping identify sustainability problems and setting research agendas; (2) Mobilizing resources in the form of effort and knowledge; and (3) Facilitating the co-evolution of socio-technical aspects of transitions. Notwithstanding this considerable potential, we also identify important challenges for Citizen Science that emerge especially in the context of STs: (1) Increasing the diversity, levels, and intensity of participation; (2) Addressing technical as well as social aspects of sustainability problems; and (3) Reducing tensions with the traditional institution of academic science. We discuss these challenges, clarify how they affect each of the three pathways connecting CS and STs, and assess the evidence regarding potential solutions.
Our discussion builds on the scholarly literatures on CS and STs, related policy documents, as well as published case studies of CS projects. We also synthesize discussions at several International Citizen Science Conferences1 as well as a workshop of the EU COST Action “Citizen Science to promote creativity, scientific literacy, and innovation throughout Europe”.2 In that workshop, participants identified key opportunities and challenges for Citizen Science in an iterative way by clustering insights derived from brainstorming and visual mapping. Co-authors also contributed to this article insights from their experiences as initiators of CS projects, several of which included participant surveys and feedback meetings with citizens and other stakeholders.3 In addition, we had discussions with leaders of large CS platforms such as Zooniverse.org, Experiment.com, and Scienceathome.org to learn about their experiences and ask about topics such as participation challenges, project outcomes, and the relations between professional and citizen scientists. Finally, we gained insights through interactions with citizens outside of particular CS projects. For example, one co-author mentored high school students who developed a framework to engage young citizens using CS approaches.4 Other co-authors interacted with citizens in their capacity as leaders of public engagement with science efforts at a Natural History Museum. To learn about the perspectives of citizens who have not yet participated in CS, we also gathered input through a survey on the MTurk platform.5
Citizen Science has raised great hopes among scientists, civil society groups, and policy makers. For example, the European Citizen Science Association's (2015) strategy sets an explicit goal to contribute to sustainability transformation, the European Commission (2017) recommends to mobilize citizens for research in order to enhance the impact of EU research and innovation programs, and the U.S. Federal Citizen Science Initiative (2018) also seeks to foster citizens’ involvement in research. Although some of the prior literature takes a strong normative stand (Felt and Fochler, 2008), our goal is to develop a systematic and balanced understanding of the opportunities and challenges of Citizen Science in the particular context of sustainability transitions.
