Now a days, the desire of automating every process and use of advance technology with complex design, for a very small gadget to a critical industrial process make the whole system prone to numerous bugs and threats. Bugs could affect everything from small to advance devices and could be exploited to steal information, insert rootkit, wipe data, manipulate desired results and compromise the critical industrial plants [1]. These bugs are used as a tools for cyber war [2] which range from very small program that just display annoying messages or a very complex program that can physical damage the system like as Stuxnet [3]. A bug in a software is an error, failure, flaw, produces an unenviable result, behave in an undesirable way or might allow malicious user to bypass restriction to access the privileged control of the system [4]. Bugs are not viruses but they may allow the installation of backdoor, malware or compromise the whole system, e.g., a patient was died in a radiation therapy in 1980 due to a bug in Therac-25 and a Chinook helicopter was crashed in 1994 due to code bug in its control computer [5]. According to computer crime and security survey 74.3% of total financial loss related to information incident are caused due to hardware theft [6]. This shows increase trend of hardware implants in future.
1.1. Related workDefending against hardware implants are extremely difficult. Despite the lack of supporting evidence and refuting the reports of hardware implants, concerns in the security industry rises that such implants were used by state agencies and advance state actors. NSA,s digital catalogue reveals several sophisticated tools of hardware espionage, which was exposed in Der Spiegel, the German weekly newspaper and these tools were used to conduct the espionage operation around the world [7] as shown in Fig. 1. Hardware implants are more feasible due to simplified design and cost effectiveness [8].Intel Management Engine (ME) is the creek behind the Intel Active Management technology (AMT) which is present in almost all version of desktops, laptops and servers in Intel chipsets since 2008 [9]. ME 11 is based on Intel Quark x86-based 32bit processor with MINIX 3 operating system, independent from the main processor and operating system [10]. Every modern computer is based on Intel architecture with an Intel management engine (ME) having powered capabilities, full access to operating memory, out-of-band network management and running of CPU independently even in shutdown state (connected with battery or power supply) [11]. These capabilities allow proprietary remote management of the system and allow Intel to implement different features and technologies [12], while on the other side remote managements tempt hacker to target Intel ME for exploitation, installation of backdoors, stealing the important information and compromising the critical infrastructures [13]. Intel ME is a firmware, stored in a serial peripheral interface (SPI) flash memory along with BIOS using embedded flash file system, with an isolated, power full, privileged and stealthy execution environment [14]. Management Engine firmware module uses Huffman encryption algorithm for the security of boot code that make it quite difficult to reconstruct [15]. Intel admitted that the active management technology platform services are vulnerable to multiple security threats which are reported by external security experts [16]. Hacker can attack the machines having AMT features through AMT VNC-server, AMT web-server, AMT HTTP protocol, AMT HTTPS protocol and AMT serial over LAN. Security experts and critics like electronic frontier foundation say that ME is a backdoor with privacy concern and worries of full access to memory without parent CPU knowledge, can send and receive packets independently of operating system and thus have no hurdle of any sort of firewall and antivirus [17], [18]Theoretical analysis of these compromised systems are carried out by utilizing the strength of epidemiology modeling of threat propagation [19], [20]. The control strategy of these compromised nodes are very difficult because they implant backdoors, install malicious utilities, gain admin rights, work as a legitimate program or infect with viruses. Due to increase in the use of Internet and advancement in technology with inbuilt hardware implants, poses a great challenge to the security of system connected with critical infrastructures. Geopolitical tensions increase the frequency of attack for compromising the enemy country system, installation of backdoors, and sabotaging the critical infrastructure of the opponent [21]. Hardware based implants are common in these days gadgets for exploitation of opponent resources. Exploitation of hardware based implants are easy with better control, also the revelation time of these spy chips are very difficult [22], [23], [24].Download : Download high-res image (554KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Digital tools of espionage through hardware implants.Mathematically modeling of compromised hardware models provide a platform for profound understanding of the problem and give us a path to device a flexible, stable and robust controlling strategies. The state of many biological systems at given time depends on the states of the system at some previous times, so fractional derivatives are the natural methods for the solution of biological modeling arising in various disciplines. In this regards, mathematicians, computer scientists, physicists and biologist put efforts to design a mathematical model for understand the behavior of the virus or implants such as classical Kermack and McKendrick epidemic susceptible, infected and recovered model [25], [26], time delay models [27], stochastic behavior analysis models [28], modified susceptible, infected and susceptible models [29], P2P networks models [30] and models that discuss the topological aspects of the network [31], [32]. A mathematical model used for the compromised hardware is effective to analyze the spread of the malicious code in the infrastructure of any organization. Theoretical analysis of the malicious codes can be carried out by the competency of epidemiology modeling of virus propagation dynamics [33], [34]. The control strategy of hardware implants is tedious because of unknown nature at any instant and one may have full access to system hardware, execute CPU code and work as a legitimate program. The advancement in technologies creates several challenges to the security of the infrastructure of the nations in the presence of vulnerability and the development of smart viruses [35]. The global median dwell time of attackers are decreasing and targeting prey become easy due to bugged hardware, therefore, detail dynamical analysis of hardware implants and their devastation pattern with control mechanisms looks promising domain to be investigated by the research community. Utilization of fractional calculus concepts and underlying theories to solve these complex mathematical model give us a rich dynamic as compare to integer order counterparts [36], [37]. In fact, fractional calculus is extensively utilized for the solution of problems in many other disciplines such as damping, chaos, fractals, biology, modeling and identification, chemistry and physics [38], [39], [40], [41], [42]. The rich heritage of fractional calculus is exploited to develop a fractional order bugged, compromised and patched model (FO-BCP) in order to depict the spread of malicious code in a compromised hardware due to bugged nodes.
1.2. Innovative contributionIn this study, a FO-BCP based mathematical model is presented to analyze the very fast transients as well as super slow evolutions of the virus spread and exploitation of system resources in compromised hardware. The contributions of the proposed FO-BCP model are briefly narrated as follows:•A novel FO-BCP based epidemic mathematical model is designed for embedded tiny chip based mini-computer infiltration within another computer type vulnerability by exploiting the legacy of fractional calculus theories and concepts.•Disease free and endemic equilibria measures are used for theoretical analysis of the FO-BCP epidemic model by derivation of basic reproduction number as well as global and local stability conditions for integer order scenarios.•Strength of numerical solver based on Grunwald–Letnikov fractional derivative is exploited for numerical analysis of FO-BCP model by varying infectious contact rate, loss of immunity rate and efficacy of patching.•Results of numerical experimentations for distinct fractional order terms in the model endorsed that fractional regimes provide enrich dynamics as compared with integer order counterparts by observing the super-fast transients and super slow evolutions of the steady-state.
1.3. OrganizationRest of the paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 presents an overview of fractional calculus preliminaries, in Section 3, an overview of Grunwald–Letnikov numerical solver is described, Section 4 narrated the formulation of FO-BCP model, in Section 5, theoretical analysis is presented, in Section 6, results of numerical simulations are illustrated along with necessary interpretations while concluding inferences are listed in the last Sect.
