Comprehensive literature reviews are essential to synthesize the accumulated scientific knowledge of a field, and the breadth and quality of the gathered literature can identify gaps and ongoing concerns in the literature. The systematic reviewing of empirical evidence also informs practice (i.e., Evidence-Based Practice). For example, health practitioners can critically summarize the available randomized controlled trails to make decisions for patient care, and academic librarians can gather existing evidence for decision-making related to collections and services.
A typology by Grant and Booth (2009) lists 14 review types and associated methodologies, including systematic reviews and meta-analyses. A systematic review involves well-established steps (e.g., inclusion criteria and quality assessment) to identify, appraise, and summarize all relevant studies on a particular topic (Xu, Kang, & Song, 2015), while a meta-analysis refers to a series of statistical techniques used to combine the effect sizes. Meta-analysis is often an optional part of a systematic review. Scholars in the Library and Information Science (LIS) field have been encouraged to use systematic review and meta-analysis methods in the field (Ke & Cheng, 2015; Xu et al., 2015). However, in a study on the diffusion of synthesis research methods in LIS, the authors found that qualitative synthesis was still in its infancy (Sheble, 2016).
Qualitative synthesis, or meta-synthesis, is a method used to synthesize the findings of multiple qualitative studies (Finfgeld-Connett, 2010), although, sometimes, both qualitative and quantitative studies are included in the analysis (Dixon-woods et al., 2006). As a counterpart to meta-analysis, meta-synthesis takes advantage of qualitative research and explores deeper insights to help achieve a broader understanding of a phenomenon across contexts, identify research gaps, generate new concepts and models, and inform policy and practice.
The first qualitative synthesis approach, meta-ethnography, was developed by Noblit and Hare (1988) in the field of education. Since then, qualitative synthesis has been widely used in psychology, medicine, nursing, and management. For example, 381 synthesis studies examining qualitative research were identified from 1994 to 2011 in the health field (Tong, Flemming, McInnes, Oliver, & Craig, 2012). However, in the field of LIS, a meta-synthesis approach has only been explored in a few areas. For example, using a meta-ethnographic approach, Duggan and Banwell (2004) analyzed 20 relevant studies and summarized the key factors in effective information dissemination. In addition, Everhart and Johnston (2016) combined six studies conducted by a research center supporting school librarian leadership. Given the relatively few studies that have been examined, Urquhart (2011) suggested that meta-synthesis would help to make more sense of information behavior research, citing women's information behavior as an example.
Given that the meta-synthesis method has the potential to benefit LIS research and practice, and that it is a relatively new method in the field, a study is needed on how this method is currently used and how to encourage its use. In particular, LIS researchers could benefit from the contributions of a meta-synthesis study. A better understanding of the characteristics of meta-synthesis approaches would also help researchers understand the application of these approaches. These concerns raise the following research questions:
RQ1. What are the research contributions of meta-synthesis studies in LIS?RQ2. How has the meta-synthesis method been used by LIS scholars?RQ3. What are the main research topics of meta-synthesis studies in LIS?
