In the last fifty years, the topic of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has received renewed attention from academic scholars. The Dartmouth Research Project defined AI as the problem of “making a machine behave in ways that would be termed intelligent if a human being behaved like this” (McCarthy et al., 1955).1 Therefore, AI has to be understood as the ability of a system to act intelligently and to do so in ever wider regions (Nilsson, 1983), correctly interpreting external data and using these teachings to attain specific objectives and activities by a flexible configuration (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019). In this sense, the AI is a different concept from the Internet of Things (IoT) and Big Data, albeit connected. The IoT allows the acquisition of external data to be used as input for AI, while Big Data includes data collected by any means (Kaplan, 2012, Kaplan and Haenlein, 2016). Furthermore, intelligent systems can faithfully reproduce human behaviours, “which have cognitive, emotional and social intelligence” (Haenlein & Kaplan, 2019, p. 6).
In the same way, AI and machine learning are available in several ways (Brynjolfsson & Mcafee, 2017). Still, the aim is to provide and manage intelligent products, services and experiences through the sharing of information for cooperation or creation of optimal and sustainable value (Gretzel, Sigala, Xiang, & Koo, 2015). However, AI is still in its infancy, and it is difficult to predict what will be the future of AI. For a better understating and implementation of AI, the world must consider AI requirements and expectations, i.e., enforcement, employment, ethics, education, entente and evolution (Kaplan and Haenlein, 2019b, Kaplan and Haenlein, 2019a).
Thus, AI has not only changed the way to generate and use information for decision-making (Mikalef, Framnes, Danielsen, Krogstie, & Olsen, 2017). AI has also revolutionised the ways of doing business (Schneider & Leyer, 2019), influencing trade and management practices in several sectors that offer increasingly competitive and sustainable products or services (Govindan et al., 2019, Kuo and Smith, 2018, Ding et al., 2019, Garbuio and Lin, 2019, Tuan et al., 2019, Wirtz and Müller, 2019). Indeed, the interaction between artificial technologies and human intelligence bases on algorithms that should help managers make the right decisions, generating a cultural drift in which a large number of data, connections and interactions become part of the standard management of organisations (Schneider & Leyer, 2019). These mathematical models simplify the work of managers. They have well catalogued and organised information sets, so much so that previous research has even shown that in many situations, these models are more efficient than human decisions (Kahneman, Rosenfield, Gandhi, & Blaser, 2016). Sousa and Rocha (2019) proposed a model of skills need development – innovation, leadership, and management – for disruptive business managers because AI has applications to business, i.e., intelligence processes.
In this context, Knowledge Management Systems (KMS) promote the management of intelligent work (Johannessen, Olsen, & Olaisen, 1999) because they bring together human, organisational and technological factors in the process of creating value through the sharing of knowledge (Tsui et al., 2000, Hlupic et al., 2002, Thomas et al., 2001). KMS constitute the channel for the formation of a corporate culture (Liebowitz, 2001) that exploits AI for the improvement of operational processes and business models (Hoeschl & Barcellos, 2006) through symbiotic cooperation between man and machine (Miller, 2018).
This trend can help companies to find a connection between innovation and sustainability (Kuo & Smith, 2018) aimed at integrating AI into decision-making processes as well (Duan, Edwards, & Dwivedi, 2019) for the achievement of the SDGs. The business sector is at the centre of strategies for achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals for 2030 because it drives the growth of the economy. In fact, companies of any size or production specialisation can develop more responsible business models, giving a decisive boost to the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through investments in technological innovation and multi-partnership involvement. Innovation is the engine of business because through innovative technologies, it is possible to implement sustainable models of production and consumption, perfectly in line with the goals of the UN 2030 Agenda, in particular with the SDG#12 (responsible consumption and production – ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns)2. New social and environmental needs must integrate the standard of the company with neoclassical economic theory (Brenner & Cochran, 1991; Key, 1999, Stormer, 2003), protection of the ecosystem and people, and ensuring social equity (Stubbs & Cocklin, 2008). This has led to the spread of sustainable business models in which sustainability consists of balancing all three dimensions (economic, environmental and social) that are “indissolubly connected and interdependent” (Bansal, 2002, p. 123). Moreover, several authors have shown that SDG outcomes depend on the interaction between human, technical and natural systems (Nilsson, Griggs, & Visbeck, 2016). With this systematic literature review (SLR), we try to understand if and how the introduction of AI contributes to SDGs. More precisely, we investigate the role that KMS should play in redesigning SBMs by fuelling a cultural drift that considers AI not only as a result but above all as a tool capable of redefining operational and decision-making processes to create value. We try to bridge the literature gap by answering the following research questions:
(i)What is the role of AI in the development of SBMs from the perspective of the SDGs, in particular the SDGs#12, through KMS?(ii)How does AI for SBMs generate a cultural drift (CD) which, through KMS, involves the company’s operational and decision-making processes to create value?
To answers these questions, this paper examines the results achieved in this academic field by employing a bibliometric analysis of 73 articles in English with publication dates from 1990 to 2019. This study offers a comprehensive review of AI and SBMs through KMS literature in light of SDGs. The key contribution of this study is to provide insights into the state of the art of AI and SBMs, as well as future research directions. According to Boobier (2018), there might not be a problem conceptualising or crystallising what can be done with AI; however, how AI can be effectively and sensibly deployed may be problematic. The main objective of the paper is to examine the role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in creating sustainable business models (SBMs). The main motivation is to conceptualise the role of AI in the development of SBMs from the perspective of the SDGs using KMS. First, there have been recent updates to the UN 2030 Agenda for SD, especially to SDG#12 that discusses artificial intelligence in current and future trends in business, including its association with the cultural drift (CD) in the SBMs. Second, the role of AI in SBMs internationally is a permanently hot topic among governments, practitioners, politicians and academics. It is worth discussing developing and testing the role of AI in SBMs through KMS. Finally, there are rare studies on this topic in academic literature. This study intends to help practitioners and policymakers in understanding the importance of AI in SBMs.
In addition, this paper is one of the pioneers that discusses the role of AI in SBMs. Although the study on the relationship between AI and SBMs is not new, few studies document the role of AI and SBMs through KMS, particularly in light of SDGs. Thus, this paper contributes to the literature by providing valuable insights into AI and SBMs. Findings reveal that the existing literature covers only some aspects involved in sustainable development through AI, especially achieving high sustainability standards by introducing advanced AI technologies to improve the technical-scientific quality of the production systems.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a framework for AI in the SDG perspective. Section 3 introduces a theoretical framework for AI and SBMs through KMS. Section 4 describes the method used to conduct the research and the software used for data analysis. Section 5 presents the results, and Section 6 the discussion. Finally, Section 7 puts forward the conclusions and limitations of the study, revealing practical and theoretical insights obtained.
