Cyber-attacks have exponentially increased in the last decade. Threat actors are continuously improving their cyber weapons to timely and effectively exploit vulnerabilities, misconfiguration of IT systems and new technologies such as Internet of Things and Cloud Computing Report. Since the cyber security landscape is rapidly changing, organisations must keep pace with emerging threats in order to be resilient against cyber attacks.
In this context, the management of cyber security risks is a key business objective for every organisation. To help and support management of cyber security risks, several standards and frameworks have been proposed, e.g. the Cyber Essentials scheme from NCSC in UK (National Cyber Security Centre, b), the NIST Cyber Security Framework National Institute of Standards and Technologies, the IEC 62443 International Electrotechnical Commission for industrial control system and the ISO 27001 International Organization for Standardization for information security. These standards guide in the identification, and assessment of the risks posed by cyber attacks to an organisations assets, and also support in the selection of related procedural and technical security controls and countermeasures. One of the key countermeasures that these standards advise an organisation to deploy is education and awareness of organisations’ employees. As said by Kevin Mitnick (probably one of the most infamous computer hackers of all time): “A company can spend hundreds of thousands of dollars on firewalls, intrusion detection systems and encryption and other security technologies, but if an attacker can call one trusted person within the company, and that person complies, and if the attacker gets in, then all that money spent in technology is essentially wasted”. As a matter of fact, employees are a critical component of any organization and they may introduce new vulnerabilities that are often exploited for perpetrating cyber attacks: they click on a link on a email, they visit a malicious website, or accidentally disclose sensitive information. However, unlike computers and software, employees cannot be “patched” when a new vulnerability is discovered. Therefore, it is fundamental for organisations to ensure that all employees are educated on the risks posed by even the simplest cyber attacks, and on how to make more secure decisions to avoid or mitigate these risks (Trickel et al., 2017). The most common method of delivering security education and awareness used by organizations is fact-and-advice training that can be either instructor-led or computer-based. While this type of training provides a good theoretical start, it is not enough and practice is essential for mastering the high complexity of cyber security concepts (Trickel et al., 2017).
In the last few years, serious games have been proposed as a new approach that can complement instruction-led or computer-based cyber security education and training. Serious games provide a fun, enjoyable educational environment where the participants learn theory and concepts in cyber security and put them into practice through the game. In particular, the participants learn how to attack and exploit vulnerabilities in a dynamic setting, and how to react to attacks by developing, on the spot, defences and countermeasures. This results in participants’ faster learning and mastery of cyber security concepts (Trickel et al., 2017).
A number of serious games have been proposed with the aim of educating on different topics in cyber security: secure software development (Beckers and Pape, 2016), Microsoft, risk estimation (Williams et al., 2010), incident management (Graffer et al., 2015) and threat awareness (Thompson and Irvine, 2011). However, some of these games only educate on a specific category of threats like social engineering (Aladawy et al., 2018) or network attacks (Gondree and Peterson, 2013), or they increase awareness on attacks and defences specific to a given application scenario like industrial control systems (Graffer et al., 2015), cyber physical systems (Frey et al., 2017) or hospitals (Yasin et al., 2019). This prevents them from being easily adapted and modified to be used in different scenarios. Moreover, with few exceptions (Graffer, Bartnes, Bernsmed, Haggman), most of the games either educate players on how to think like an attacker or how to react to an attack but not on both.
Due to the complexity and rapid change of the cyber security landscape, it is therefore fundamental to design a serious game that exposes players to a wide range of cyber security attacks and related countermeasures from industrial and government standards and that allows them to practice attacks and defence strategies through the game. Moreover, the game should be easily modifiable to different training needs (Haggman, 2019).
Contribution. In this paper we propose Riskio, a board game where participants build their knowledge on cyber security attacks and defences by playing both the role of attackers and defenders of critical assets in a fictitious organisation represented on the board. The game is played with attack and defence cards that cover a wide range of attacks and countermeasures from industry and government standards that make the game adaptable to a variety of contexts and scenarios. In order to provide participants an active learning environment, the design of the game is based on the principles of constructivism learning theory where learners build knowledge through experiences (Bada and Olusegun, 2015). The presence of a game master facilitates the construction of such knowledge by making players reflect upon their attack and defend strategies, fostering discussion among the players, and providing immediate feedback on the correctness and effectiveness of their strategies.
We conducted a series of experiments with employees and graduate students to assess the perceived efficacy of Riskio in increasing cyber security awareness. The evaluation shows the effectiveness of the game and points out trade-offs in terms of design and playing experience that can allow the game to better fit different audience.
Outline. Section 2 introduces the literature on serious games for cyber security. Section 3 presents the design principles of Riskio. Section 4 describes Riskio main components and rules to play. Section 5 presents the results of the experiments that we ran to evaluate our game. Section 6 discusses the lessons learned during the design and evaluation of the game. Section 7 concludes the paper.
