Writing a paper on education in wind science and engineering is a daunting task even for an author who has dedicated his entire life to this discipline, and has always given priority to the dissemination of knowledge towards the young generation, perceiving the academic role and the possibility to live among students motivated and eager to learn as a rare privilege. Certainly, the author considers this task much more difficult than discussing the state of the art of a familiar topic, or even more than presenting the results and prospects of a project to which the author himself and his research group are continuously working (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (588KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. ERC THUNDERR Project monitoring network: (a) ultra-sonic anemometer; (b) LiDAR scanner.
The difficulty of treating the education in wind science and engineering in a critical and rational way comes first of all from the fact that this discipline, in its whole, can still be considered as relatively young. It first devoted its efforts to the scientific and technical development of arguments that span an exceptionally broad field, perhaps as in no other sector, and only later, and thus quite recently, has given growing space to education and dissemination. This has been done first in a rather uneven way, almost always linked to local realities where research activities were carried out, then, little by little, in a more systematic and capillary way. Accordingly, gathering and disseminating this information is not easy as there is still a limited tradition to refer to.
Well beyond this problem, which remains essential, the author would avoid the risk of debasing and trivializing this treatment in an attempt to collect and systematize the almost inextricable web of what is happening worldwide - with the certainty of describing only a limited part of it and not to give credit to highly appreciable initiatives of which he does not know the existence - losing sight of the opportunity to seize this moment as a reflection upon the entire matter. On the other hand, by transposing the objectives of this article on this plan, the difficulty of dealing with this subject in an organic and comprehensive way is strengthened.
Trying to put order in his own thoughts, and aiming to organize them more broadly, the author believes that an education of adequate level, even more so in a discipline as vast and articulated as wind science and engineering, cannot fail to recognize first of all the origins, developments, fundamentals, advancements and prospects of the discipline itself. However, this cannot be limited to a simple historical and perspective reconstruction, but should grasp the cultural and interdisciplinary matrix that generated the matter and constitutes its imprint.
From this approach it emerges the vision that such a retrospective view can and must enhance a clear collection and a critical classification of the current state of education in wind engineering, aiming to identify its limits, gaps and strengths, the hard core of knowledge that should constitute the common basis for consolidating a mature and modern discipline, and the curricular paths that can radiate from this vision, giving rise, according to circumstances and opportunities, to figures endowed with broad visions and specialized skills.
Equally, a vision can and shall take shape, which may enhance advanced strategies for exploiting technological evolution and communication systems, rationalizing co-operative educational programs on wide territorial scales, involving different competences as in-depth as they are varied in the wind science and engineering community, reaching those who need to establish and consolidate this culture, but do not have the opportunity to personally experience the multiple initiatives in the discipline, seizing the interest of planetary community towards the themes of wind science and engineering, spreading its culture and knowledge even outside the scientific and technical context, to the point of bringing it into everyday life and into society.
Retracing these considerations, three distinct but at the same time linked moments emerge that represent the core of the topics addressed in the three following sections: a retrospective look at the past (Section 2), a critical and proactive acknowledgment of the present (Section 3), and a view projected into the future (Section 4).
