Forming a comprehensive understanding of patterns and relationships in multivariate data, where the phenomena under investigation are influenced by multiple factors, is integral to unlocking the full potential of today’s vast data sets, especially in scientific domains. Whether interpreting the output of deep learning algorithms or exploring historical climate observations, scientists require interactive tools to develop a comprehensive understanding of large, multivariate data sets.
Developing new and improved multivariate visualization techniques for data exploration has captured the attention of many researchers as evidenced by a recent survey from Liu et al. [1]. However, real world analysis of such data remains a significant challenge for several reasons. One challenge is rooted in the technical difficulties of exploring increasingly large volumes of data. Another lies in equipping scientists with effective sense-making techniques (e.g., visual representations, interactive queries) for multivariate patterns. In practice, multivariate data sets often contain heterogeneous data types, missing values, and quality issues, which exacerbate the problem. Even with moderately sized data sets, heterogeneous data types represent a significant barrier to thorough data exploration. But when data sets are large and contain a mixture of data types (e.g., numeric, categorical, temporal, and image data) with problematic values, developing an adequate understanding of the data with the tools at hand becomes increasingly difficult, especially when coupled with the scientist’s desire to freely navigate alternate paths during their analytical journey. To develop a comprehensive understanding, scientists need comprehensive solutions that address these challenges.
Visual analytics offers a viable approach for coping with these issues [2], [3]. By blending interactive visualizations with computational guidance, well-designed visual analytics systems harness human and computational strengths to improve the outcomes of data-driven studies. Yet, the number of visual analytics techniques that are readily available to non-visualization experts for practical use with large, heterogeneous, and multivariate data, which are ubiquitous in modern scientific studies, is low, especially when a combination of capabilities is desired.
In light of these and other practical challenges, we have developed the CrossVis visual analytics system (shown in Fig. 1) in collaboration with domain experts. CrossVis expands the parallel coordinates plot (PCP) [4] to support new axis representations for several non-numeric data types, embedded bivariate PCP axes, linked supplemental visualizations, focus+context axis scaling, and views that vary the level of detail. A progressive rendering algorithm and an optimized data model provide support for large data sets. These features are motivated by feedback from domain experts in multiple scientific domains. This paper presents the design and integration of these methods into a flexible system that enables comprehensive multivariate data exploration. The main contributions of the current work include the following:•New visual representations of numerical, categorical, temporal, image, and bivariate PCP axes that, when combined with linked supplemental visualizations and interactive queries methods, reveal trends and patterns in heterogeneous, multivariate data•Functional design considerations related to the visual representations provided by CrossVis including discussion of alternative approaches•An overview of CrossVis describing the incorporation of several PCP extensions (visual representations and interaction techniques) into a comprehensive system that is greater than the sum of its parts•Feedback from domain experts following their application of CrossVis to practical scientific data analysis scenariosDownload : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The CrossVis system presents several interactive views of multivariate data that are coordinated using a single tabular data model. The main view, an extended version of the parallel coordinates plot, is supplemented with scatterplots, correlation visualizations, and image views to foster creative exploratory data analysis. CrossVis’s interactive query capabilities help uncover key patterns, which are revealed through the various visual representations.
