Recent initiatives to improve the quality of science education in Sri Lanka have been aimed at enhancing student learning (Ministry of Education, 2018). Emphasis has been placed on constructing science laboratories, recruiting and training science teachers, introducing science in English as the medium of instruction, and establishing ICT laboratories (Central Bank, 2018; Wedikkarage, 2018). Despite these initiatives several studies have indicated that there are still many challenges in secondary schools, such as the lack of laboratory resources, the overloaded science syllabus, and the shortage of well-qualified science teachers (e.g., Aturupane, Dissanayake, Jayawardene, Shojo, & Sonnadara, 2011: Jayawardena, van Kraayenoord, & Carroll, 2019). So far, however, there has been little discussion about what factors influence Sri Lankan secondary school students’ science learning. Therefore, the present study aimed to examine the factors that influenced students’ science learning in Sri Lanka.
A number of studies have identified student and school factors related to students’ achievement using the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) and the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) data. For example, among studies using the PISA data, Areepattamannil and Kaur (2013) examined individual and school-level predictors associated with the science achievement of immigrant and non-immigrant students across Canada. The findings revealed that home resources (e.g., home possessions) and gender differences in favour of males were associated with immigrant and non-immigrant students’ science achievement. In addition, Areepattamannil and Kaur (2013) found that students’ attitudes, engagement, motivation in science, self-concept, and self-efficacy in science were positively associated with the immigrant and non-immigrant students’ science achievement. With regard to school-level variables, Areepattamannil and Kaur (2013) found that the teacher shortage in Canada was associated with the immigrant students’ science achievement, whereas school size was associated with non-immigrant science achievement.
In the same vein, Sun, Bradley, and Akers (2012) investigated factors that influenced students’ science achievement in Hong Kong. At the student level, Sun et al. (2012) found that male students, students with high socio-economic status (SES), students with higher motivation and higher self-efficacy, and students whose parents valued science highly were more likely to demonstrate high science achievement. With regard to school-level factors, the researchers found that instructional quantity positively influenced science achievement. Instructional quality also led to better achievement. Examining both individual- and school-level data obtained from the PISA 2006 survey, Perera (2014) found that parents’ attitudes towards science had a positive effect on the students’ science test scores. Moreover, she found that students with low SES appeared to benefit more from positive parental science attitudes than the students with high SES.
There are several studies that have used the TIMSS data to investigate factors influencing students’ science achievement. For example, Mohammadpour (2012) investigated the science achievement of Malaysian secondary school students by examining relations among student-level (e.g., gender, science self-concept,) and school-level factors (e.g., school location, class size). Using the 1999 and 2003 TIMMS data, and after controlling for the school-level factors, Mohammadpour (2012) found that gender (in favour of boys) was the strongest factor associated with achievement, followed by science self-concept. However, when using the 2007 data, valuing science was more important than self-concept. Mohammadpour (2012) also found that there was no significant association between home educational resources and science achievement in the 1999 and 2003 data, whereas these variables were significantly correlated in the 2007 data.
Based on TIMSS 2015 data, Prinsloo and Harvey (2018) explored the relationship between language non-equivalence and science achievement of South African students in Grade 9. The results revealed that the use of English language instruction and resource availability positively influenced students’ achievement. The barriers to the students’ science achievement were the use of the home language as the medium of instruction, the lack resources in the schools and students with low SES who had limited access to books in the home.
Using the 2007 TIMSS data, Lay, Ng, and Chong (2015) examined several affective factors of Malaysian and Singaporean eighth-grade students and their influence on science achievement. There was a weak positive correlation between the index of students’ valuing of science with science achievement for both student groups. Lay et al. (2015) also found that students’ valuing and expectations towards science had statistically significant predictive effects on science achievement for both student groups. The findings revealed that student-related affective factors such as attitudes and values/beliefs contribute to the shaping of achievement in science.
Other studies have also indicated that a variety of school-related factors have influenced students’ science learning. For example, Areepattamannil, Freeman, and Klinger (2018) investigated the perceptions of factors affecting the school engagement and performance of 15–18 year old Indian and Indian immigrant adolescents in India and Canada. The findings revealed that the adolescents from both countries cared about school and academics for a variety of reasons such as getting good grades, entering good universities, getting jobs, and securing scholarships. However, adolescents from both countries also perceived their classroom learning environments as controlling and demanding. When the Indian immigrant adolescents in Canada were asked whether or not they had the freedom to choose their own assignments and to work at their own pace, the majority of them reported that they did not have opportunities to choose what to do. These students referred to the lack of teacher-student interaction during instruction and to the lack of informative feedback and positive encouragement from their teachers. The findings from this study indicate that the importance of the teachers’ classroom practices that promote learner autonomy which in turn lead to students’ science achievement.
The previously mentioned findings related to teaching practices that influence students’ science achievement were supported by Kang and Keinonen’s (2018) study involving data from the Finnish sample in the PISA 2006 study. They found that instructional methods positively influenced students’ science achievement. Kang and Keinonen (2018) found that open inquiry-based learning was a strong negative predictor of students’ performance and had a statistically non-significant effect on their interest, while guided inquiry-based learning was a strong positive predictor of students’ performance and had a statistically significant positive effect on their interest. Kang and Keinonen (2018) found discussion-based science approaches were negative predictors of both achievement and interest. The results suggested that when teachers connected science content with students’ life-related issues, students demonstrated better achievement and more interest in science.
Taken together the above-mentioned studies suggest that a substantive body of literature exists on the factors affecting students’ science learning. Many of these studies however, investigated factors related to science learning based on data from the PISA or TIMSS. In addition, these previous studies have not taken place in non-Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, such as Sri Lanka. The review of the literature also indicates that while extensive quantitative research has been carried out on factors affecting students’ science learning, so far, there have been few qualitative research studies. Therefore, the present qualitative study was designed to investigate the factors influencing students’ science learning in Sri Lanka.
