Cyber–physical Systems (CPS) [1], [2] are engineered systems involving a cyber component that controls the physical components. The cyber elements include embedded systems and network controllers, which are usually modeled as discrete events. Whereas, the physical components exhibit continuous dynamics, such as the physical motion of a robot in space or the working of an analog circuit, and are commonly modeled using the differential equations. CPS are widely used in advanced automotive systems (autonomous vehicles and smart cars), avionics, medical systems and devices, industrial process control [3], smart grids, traffic safety and control, robotics and telecommunication networks etc. For example, the smart (self-driving) cars are considered as the highly complex autonomous CPS composed of an array of sensors and actuators that interact with the external environment, like the road infrastructures and often internet.
To study the continuous dynamical behavior of the physical components of these CPS, their differential equation based models need to be analyzed. Transform methods [4], which include the Laplace [5] and the Fourier [6] transforms, are widely used for analyzing these differential equation based models. These transform methods are the integral based techniques, which convert a time varying function to its corresponding frequency domain representation, i.e., s and ω-domain representations based on the Laplace and the Fourier transforms, respectively. Moreover, this transformation converts the integral and differential operators in the time domain (differential equation) models to their corresponding algebraic operators, namely, division and multiplication, in the frequency domain and thus makes the arithmetic manipulation of the resulting equations quite straightforward. These algebraic expressions corresponding to the differential equations can further be used to perform the transfer function and the frequency response analysis of these systems. The Laplace transform is used for analyzing the systems with causal input, whereas, in the case of systems with non-causal input, the Fourier transform is used.
The conventional techniques for analyzing the continuous dynamics of CPS include paper-and-pencil proofs, computer-based numerical methods or symbolic techniques. However, these techniques suffer from their inherent limitations, like human-error proneness in the case of paper-and-pencil proofs, discretization and numerical errors in the case of numerical methods and the usage of unverified simplification algorithms in symbolic tools [7] and thus cannot ensure absolute accuracy of the corresponding analysis. Due to the safety critical-nature of CPS, accuracy of analyzing their continuous dynamics is becoming a dire need. For example, the fatal crash of Uber’s self-driving car in March 2018 that killed a pedestrian in Tempe, Arizona, USA was found to be caused by the sensor’s anomalies [8]. A more rigorous analysis of CPS could have avoided this incident.
Formal methods [9] have been used to overcome the above-mentioned inaccuracy limitations for analyzing the continuous dynamics of CPS. There are mainly two types of formal methods, i.e., model checking [10] and higher-order-logic theorem proving [11] that can be used in this context. Model checking involves the development of a state–space based model of the underlying system and the formal verification of its intended properties that are specified in temporal logic. It has been used (e.g., [10], [12], [13]) for analyzing the continuous dynamics (differential equation based models) of CPS. However, this kind of analysis involves the discretization of the differential equations based models and thus compromises the accuracy of the corresponding analysis. Moreover, it also suffers from the state–space explosion problem [14]. Higher-order-logic theorem proving [11] is a computer based mathematical analysis technique that requires developing a mathematical model of the given system in higher-order logic and the formal verification of its intended behavior as a mathematically specified property based on mathematical reasoning within the sound core of a theorem prover. The involvement of the formal model and its associated formally specified properties along with the sound nature of theorem proving ascertains the accuracy and completeness of the analysis. Based on the same motivation, the Laplace transform has been formalized in the HOL Light theorem prover and it has been utilized to conduct the transfer function analysis of the Linear Transfer Converter (LTC) circuit [15], Sallen–Key low-pass filters [16], Unmanned Free-swimming Submersible (UFSS) vehicle [17] and a platoon of the automated vehicles [18]. Similarly, the Fourier transform [6] has also been formalized in the same theorem prover and has been successfully utilized for the frequency response analysis of an Automobile Suspension System (ASS) [19], Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMs) accelerometer [20] and an audio equalizer [20]. However, both of these formalizations can only provide the frequency domain (s or ω-domain) analysis of these systems. To relate the s-domain analysis of CPS to their corresponding time domain models, i.e., linear differential equations models, we have recently formalized Lerch’s theorem, which provides the uniqueness of the Laplace transform and utilized it for the formal analysis of 4-π soft error crosstalk model for the Integrated Circuits (ICs) [21].
In this paper, we further extend our formalization of transform methods in higher-order logic [17], [19], [20], [21] with the formal verification of the uniqueness of the Fourier transform, which plays a vital role in solving the linear differential equations in the ω-domain and thus relates the ω-domain analysis of the continuous dynamics of CPS to their corresponding time-domain analysis (linear differential equations based models), which was not possible with our earlier formalization of the Fourier transform. Thus, it can be utilized to completely analyze the differential equation based models of CPS with non-causal input. Moreover, based on our contributions of formalizations of the Laplace and the Fourier transforms, we also propose a framework to analyze the continuous dynamics of CPS in this paper. For illustration, we utilize our proposed framework for formally analyzing the continuous dynamics of some widely used physical components of CPS, i.e., a positional controller of an industrial robot and an equalizer used in telecommunication, using HOL Light.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

•Formalization of the Uniqueness of the Fourier Transform: The formal verification of the uniqueness of the Fourier transform, which plays a vital role in solving the linear differential equations in the ω-domain and thus relates the ω-domain analysis of the continuous dynamics of CPS to their corresponding time domain analysis.•A Novel Framework to analyze the continuous dynamics of CPS: Based on our contributions of formalizations of the Laplace and the Fourier transforms, we propose a novel framework to formally analyze the continuous dynamics of CPS.•Formal Analysis of an Industrial Robot and an Equalizer: We utilize our proposed framework for formally analyzing the continuous dynamics of some widely used physical components of CPS, i.e., a positional controller of an industrial robot and an equalizer used in telecommunication.•Tactics for Automating the Proofs/Analysis: We develop tactics for automating the formal analysis of an industrial robot and an equalizer. Similar tactics can be developed for the formal analysis of most of the real-world systems. This fact makes the proposed framework quite interesting from the practical point of view as the expressiveness of higher-order-logic theorem proving can be benefited from without the overwhelming task of manually guiding the proof process.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We provide some related work regarding formal analysis of the continuous dynamics of CPS in Section 2. Section 3 presents a brief introduction about theorem proving, the HOL Light theorem prover and the multivariable calculus theories of HOL Light, which act as preliminaries for the proposed transform methods based analysis of CPS. Section 4 provides the proposed framework for analyzing the continuous dynamics of CPS. We describe the formalizations of the Laplace and the Fourier transforms in Section 5. Section 6 provides the formal verification of the uniqueness of the Fourier transform, which enables us to completely analyze the continuous dynamics of CPS. Section 7 presents our formal analysis of the industrial robot and the equalizer. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper.
