The rapid technological convergence of brain science, bionics and artificial intelligence, has enabled EEG-based information processing and control to emerge as a promising industrial application domain that has significant potential to improve the life quality of the elderly and the disabled. EEG signals are electrical signals generated by biological brain activity of human. Elderly and disabled people can wear specific devices that collects EEG data to generate control signals through motor imagination, so that they can remotely operate household appliances and other facilities with ideas. A large number of studies have confirmed that EEG signals have different characteristics in different states, which can be identified and classified by machine learning methods. As a channel established between the brain and external devices to transmit information, BCI collects and extracts EEG signals generated by the brain to recognize the human mind, so as to achieve message transmission and instruction control [1], [2], [3]. Therefore, most of researchers are more concerned with how to use machine learning methods to realize the applications of EEG signals and brain-computer interfaces, such as smart home [4], intelligent medical [5], etc., but few people pay attention to the privacy and security of EEG data itself.
It is assumed that a specific wearable EEG device, for example, Emotiv Insight, is used to collect the EEG data of one user through motor imagination in an IoT application scenario. The collected data is sent to the corresponding terminal for classification and recognition, and then subsequent operations are performed according to the recognition result, such as controlling TV program switching and adjusting the air conditioner temperature and so on. However, the scenario mentioned above is built on the premise that there are no malicious attackers. Actually, such an EEG-based IoT application system is vulnerable, and the attacker can easily achieved by launching passive and active attacks: 1) Passive attack means that the attacker can listen to the channel and obtain the data transmitted in the channel; 2) Active attack means that the attacker can forge the EEG data or tamper with the EEG data sent by the user, so as to release the command to the device and complete the operation required by the attacker. Furthermore, we introduce another application scenario that if a hospital wants to use the patient's EEG data to predict the possibility of epilepsy, but this work may be left to the prediction service provider (such as cloud service). Therefore, this process may reveal patient-related information. In such a situation, we not only require accurate prediction capabilities, but also pay attention to ensuring the privacy and security of the data. Both of the above cases have exposed some serious problems, that is, the security and privacy of user data cannot be guaranteed. Under general circumstances, when the training of the neural network model is completed, the user can adopt the model to make prediction tasks, however the sample imported by the user is the original data, which will generate potential security and privacy risks. Therefore, how to effectively handle encrypted EEG data has become an urgent problem to be solved.
Aiming at the security problem mentioned above, some researchers have started to focus on the application of homomorphic encryption algorithms to the field of machine learning. Although using homomorphic encryption to process EEG data can effectively curb various attacks, there are still exist some challenging problems. Firstly, the full homomorphic encryption algorithm is the most ideal choice because it supports both multiplication and addition operations, but its high time overhead causes there is a large gap from the practical application. Secondly, although the semi-homomorphic encryption algorithm is much lower in time complexity and implementation difficulty than the full homomorphic one, most of them cannot directly deal with the decimal problem. Thirdly, the classifiers used in the existing solutions may not be applicable because most researchers use complex artificial feature extraction methods, and the instability of these methods would probably further affect the accuracy of encrypted EEG signals classification.
The above challenging problems motivate us to design an effective scheme distinguished from current solutions, which takes classification accuracy, implementation efficiency and security & privacy into account. Therefore, our contributions in this paper can be summarized as follows:
(1)To ensure the privacy and security of EEG data in practical applications, the semi-homomorphic encryption algorithm is adopted to encrypt and decrypt EEG data for the purpose of low time cost, and meanwhile the data is converted to integers through appropriate scaling, which effectively solves the decimal problem in the encryption process.(2)To improve the accuracy and stability of encrypted EEG data classification, the feedforward neural network is used as the classifier, which does not require artificial feature extraction. Furthermore, in order to enable the feedforward neural network to better handle encrypted data, the approximate function is employed instead of the activation function, so that it can still maintain a certain homomorphism after processing the encrypted data.(3)Through hyperparameters adjustment such as the size of hidden layer neurons and the learning rate in the simulated annealing algorithm, the best parameters are achieved for the purpose of keeping a balance between the precision and time consumption. In addition, the proposed solutions are analyzed and verified from the perspective of time complexity and security, and the performance is evaluated by the confusion matrix and F1-score. Compared with other solutions, the feasibility and effectiveness of our proposal is demonstrated.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the relevant research work; and Section 3 describes the classification method of encrypted EEG data based on neural network, which includes the improvement of homomorphic encryption algorithm and neural network model; the experimental analysis and discussion are illustrated in Section 4; finally, Section 5 concludes the whole paper.
