From the beginning, science, somehow has been dedicated to human health care in various ways in order the life expectancy can be enhanced. In present times, research is being performed in various fields like electromagnetic engineering, digital signal processing (DSP), computer science, and many others. The purpose of continuing the research is to design and develop smart devices and systems that can help in improving the health care system. Moreover, many studies ensured that difficult economic situations can be tackled nicely by making healthcare IT a major area for investments [1], [2]. For the significant transformation of the healthcare industry, many entities like payers, health care experts, consumers, and policymakers take health information technologies into consideration. The technology includes electronic health records (EHR) and computerized provider order entry of patients [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]. Managing information is a crucial task for delivering health care [9]. However, in spite of being very complicated and precise, conventional medical solutions and treatments lack in meeting several key necessities for both present and future applications. These days, a dramatic increase can be seen in the requirement of pervasive and non-invasive healthcare services due to their effect on the normal lies of patients [2], [11]. Advancements made in nanotechnology introduced in electronic textiles (e-textiles). These textiles are capable of measuring biometric parameters in a non-invasive manner. Although, progress in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) communications offered a lucrative solution that supports pervasiveness and broad coverage which in turn assists in developing remote patient control and automatic alert detection in real-time based on healthcare measurements. Still, there is a need for a healthcare IT system to assure platform interoperability in a way that standardized access and storage of data, confidentiality, and safety of the patient is the prime concern. Besides this, the model should be devoted to patient-centric care. As it is known that blood tests, written reports and image study are not only the medical information these days. A huge amount of genomic data is received by wearable devices. Effective use of this new data could enhance the options available for treatment. Apart from this, health insurance companies can scrutinize the data to offer discounts to the people for “healthy” behavior. In addition, AI is proved as beneficial technology for the healthcare field because the précised data given to the system can contemplate the trends from the data which is further used to produce population-level insight in order that the health status of the population can be attained. However, a critical integration is needed for perfect scrutiny of data by securing the patient’s data against hackers [12]. In recent times, many applications of artificial intelligence, internet of things, computer vision and machine learning, are being developed to provide assistance to the clinical practitioners and doctors in diagnosing and treating chronic diseases [13]. In this field, a number of technologies have been utilized and one of the novel technologies is the “blockchain”. It is a digital structure that comprises a shared, immutable ledger. This architecture assures the provenance, resilience, management, and traceability of health data. Blockchain is known as a revolutionary technology [14]. A blockchain is the decentralized online ledger/database that was firstly developed to store an ascending record [15]. The working principle of the block is that it replaces the trusted third-party signatories of a transaction with a computational/cryptographic mechanism for validating the transactions. The validation is performed by the network of users who holds the rules previously implemented by the software. Cost and meditation are saved by using this method as there is no mediator in the blockchain and it saves the cost of reversing transactions during disputes because blockchain performs irreversible transactions.
Following are the major reasons that showed the rise in the usage of blockchain technology: [16] Table 1 Table 2.•Many entities own it that makes it decentralized.•Data is stored cryptographically.•Immutable feature of blockchain avoids the tampering with the data stored in blockchain.•It provides the option to track the data as it is transparent.Table 1. Benefits of Blockchain and Use Cases.BenefitBiomedical/Health Care Use CaseDecentralized ManagementEnhanced data-sharing and analysis without relinquishing controls: “Blockchain is a decentralized infrastructure by design. Any institution should retain full control of its own computing resources while cooperation with other research institutions in the perspective of data sharing and scrutiny [111].Immutable Audit TrailPatient generation data's traceability and time stamping: 'This model may be further modified using Blockchain in such a way that personal patient data available to researchers can be tracked with time marks in the testing process. [112]Data ProvenanceEvidence of provenance for medical records: “MedRec (the electronic health record system based on Blockchain)… Enabled with core provenance properties [113].CostThe elimination of intermediate agents saves on transaction chargesSpeedUnnecessary method of verification of transactions between financial institutions; transactions managed 24 h a daySimplicityThe single distributed database includes all existing history of balance and transactionRobustness/AvailabilitySuperior quality of health care information: “Blockchain will ensure continued transparency and access to information in real time. Improved access to information will increase coordination of clinical treatment and strengthen clinical attention in medical emergencies. Real-time data can also permit scientists and public health personnel to easily identify, isolate and drive modifications to public health environmental conditions.”[114].Security/PrivacyInformation sharing in a secure way by maintaining its confidentiality: “Use of Blockchain for HC. It has the potential to include millions of people, health care professionals, health services organisations and medical scientists with assured safety and privacy protection and insights into huge quantities of genetic, nutritional, lifestyle, and health data.” [115].Table 2. Limitations of Block chain [127].TechnologyBlockchain has been continuously developed and optimized in its early years.IntegrationIf existing financial systems initially have to coexist, overtime must be implemented.CostInitial costs for organizations are raised in the implementation of emerging technologiesRegulationPublic bodies have yet to address administrative issues about software blockchainCultureAdopting the technology would take significant global community participationEnergyA network of node is needed for BC maintenance that in turn consumes significant computing powerPrivacyEmergent problems of cyber security must be resolved before people offer information to a public blockchain.
In this paper, an organized literature survey is presented that explained the evolution of health care. The conventional methods are upgraded by involving e-healthcare in the industry. There are several other technologies developed to enhance the performance of the health care systems that assist in keeping the record of the patients in a secure way to utilize it in an efficacious way. Blockchain technology has been utilized as an effective method to the aforementioned concerns. The paper delineated the roles of health care, e-healthcare, and introduction of blockchain in the medical field.
