Melanocytes, a type of skin cell whose uncontrolled growth under the skin can be responsible developing skin cancer. Skin cancer is becoming most common type of malignancy among people with high mortality rate [1]. As per the statistics of 2018, 91,270 new melanoma cases with 9320 estimated deaths were predicted [2]. Nowadays, with the advent of some recent diagnostic techniques like spectroscopy, analyzing images by expert radiologists have resulted in an increased survival rate of 95% of early stage melanoma but only 15% for advanced-stage melanoma [3]. Such incoherence highlights the importance of early diagnosis of skin cancer.
A popular in vivo diagnostic technique for accurate and effective screening of lesions is called dermoscopy. It uses polarized light to inspect skin lesions unobstructed by skin reflections. It helps dermatologists to identify pigmented skin lesions based on characteristic morphological features. Although dermoscopy is used for performance improvement in conventional methods using ABCD criteria [4], accurate and fast lesion segmentation remains a daunting task. Many of the below-mentioned obstructions can be the reasons for inappropriate lesion segmentation from the dermoscopic images. First, the homogeneity of the lesion to normal skin (background) makes it difficult to segment the region of the lesion accurately. Second, the presence of various artifacts like gel bubbles, hair occlusion, illumination conditions, contrast changes obstructs the normal flow of lesion delineation. Third, the insufficiency of training data poses a problem for accurately classifying the lesion. Fourth, the region of lesion occupies a relatively small area as compared to the background, which interferes with the segmentation performance. The publicly available dermoscopic datasets come with the aforementioned occlusions. Fig. 1 depicts some of those images depicting various hurdles in accurately predicting the lesion boundaries.
An end-to-end digital solution for automatic delineation of the lesions is therefore critical and the need of the hour. Many state-of-the-art methods perform these serial operations with the dermoscopic images; image pre-processing, image segmentation, feature extraction and image classification. Using hand-crafted or basic edge-detection, thresholding [5], active contour models [6], or level-set methods usually cannot accurately segment the lesions. In recent times, the convolutional neural network (CNN) [7], [8] has emerged as the CADx technique for end-to-end image segmentation, specifically bio-medical image segmentation. These methods classify image pixels into lesion or non-lesion classes to achieve final segmentation. Olaf et al. [9] developed, U-Net, a CNN-based architecture for bio-medical image (cell) segmentation based on the concept of FCN [8]. A method, Mimicking Expert Dermatologists’ Segmentation (MEDS), proposed by Peruch et al. presented combined thresholding and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [10]. Karthik et al. [11] presented work on ischemic lesion segmentation utilizing the Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) with Leaky ReLU in the last layers of the model framework. The framework produced better and comparative results against the conventional algorithms. Yu et al. introduced a stack representation of residual units in deep residual network with more than 50 layers for image segmentation [12]. Such methods enhance the manual delineation process; however, accurate and precise lesion segmentation remains a challenge. Another aspect of attention mechanism or attention gates are also analyzed, which extracts minute details (in the form of edges) of the image. Many works on attention mechanism [13], [14], [15], [16] have proved to be effective in enlightening the diminished areas, point of focus, and excellent positioning capabilities in the image.
Therefore, the concept of AGs with the use of baseline U-Net for automatically segmenting the dermoscopic images is incorporated. Despite making some novel pre- and post-processing techniques, focus on developing a suitable network architecture and training techniques to effectively handle the images under heterogeneous image acquisition conditions is entertained. In this study, a tailored U-Net (inspired by the works of [9]) is proposed that effectively uses AGs with GN in the encoder and decoder paths with TL as the output loss function. The in-depth contributions in the article are as follows:Download : Download high-res image (474KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Sample images of skin lesion from ISIC 2018 dataset having intra-class variations due to intensity variations ((a),(d),(l)), fuzzy boundaries ((b),(d),(e),(f),(h),(l)), inhomogeneity ((b),(i),(f),(h)), presence of hair (g) and low contrast (l) which adds complexity to automatic image segmentation.

•An end-to-end automatic dermoscopic image segmentation model is introduced for easy and effective lesion boundary delineation.•The two modules that are added in the proposed network are GN and AG. AGs can replace hard attention based approaches that are used for image segmentation (pixel classification) networks.•Loss function, TL [17], which focused on small and crucial lesion boundaries, is utilized. It helped in appropriately segmenting the lesion and improved segmentation performance. The model is evaluated on different parameters (different loss functions combined with GN) for investigating the effect of employed modules.
Paper organization: Section 2 details about the related work for the dermoscopic image segmentation. Section 3 details about the proposed architecture and the constituent modules. Experimental setup in detail is explained in Section 4 with Section 5 describing in-depth results obtained by the proposed methodology. Final conclusions are drawn in Section 6.
