Computer-based learning is one of the most established and powerful tools used widely in contemporary higher education. This type of learning increases students’ motivation to acquire new knowledge and simplifies the evaluation process (Huang & Oh, 2018; Woo, 2014). The development of IT infrastructure in universities (Kirkup & Kirkwood, 2005), the active learning approach (Prince, 2004), and collaborative and lifelong learning (Adams Becker, Cummins, Davis, Freeman, & Hall Giesinger, C. Ananthanarayanan, 2017) are significant trends that mark the new challenges of education development. Still, it is clear that any IT system becomes educationally efficient only if it is enhanced by human participation (Gros, 2007; Molin, 2017). Students are not robots, and creative and collaborative involvement in the process of computer-assisted learning can be used to multiply the efficiency of the educational process.
Unlike 20th-century education, which concentrated on skills and knowledge, the education of the 21st century is aimed at developing creativity, collaboration, and other “soft skills” as key qualities for student improvement (Burnard, 2006; Hamidi, Wennberg, & Berglund, 2008). This challenges pedagogical instruments and approaches (Armbruster, Patel, Johnson, & Weiss, 2009; Brush & Saye, 2000; Cornelius-White, 2007; Jones, 2007) and facilitates changes in enduring pedagogical tools. A diverse group of particular applications of computer-based education—e.g., educational software, educational networks, online courses, computer educational games, etc.—is being developed toward integration with educational instruments that promote collaboration and creativity (Sawyer, 2004) and create value in the classroom (Díaz-Méndez & Gummesson, 2012; Ghinea, 2013). Moreover, soft pedagogical instruments like creativity and collaboration become one of the cornerstones of educational efficiency (Burde, Kapit, Wahl, Guven, & Skarpeteig, 2017; Greenhow, Robelia, & Hughes, 2009; Razzouk & Shute, 2012).
These trends define the importance of educational problems such as integration of computer-based education, collaboration, and creative learning. How can the “human face” and “creative spirit” of IT-based technologies enhance the educational process? Are there any new meanings of educational efficiency in the case of integration of computer-based education and soft pedagogical instruments? What educational outcomes bring forth the integration of such methodologically different educational techniques in the pedagogical process?
Previous studies show that digital simulations and games as well as co-creation are very important sources of professional experience. However, none of the studies investigate the combination of digital and co-creation approaches in terms of learning outcomes and students’ professional development and intention. Our study aims to fill this gap. It is based on a particular case of such integration in social science education and discusses the issues of digital simulation-based learning accompanied by the co-creative approach. The main purpose of this research is to investigate the educational effects of co-created digital simulation implementation and to compare them with the implementation of digital games in the educational process without a co-creational approach.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews contemporary approaches to digital simulation games and co-creation as sources of professional experience in social science education. Section 3 describes the methods and procedures used in our recent pedagogical experience of co-creation in the development of a particular form of computer-based education (i.e., digital simulations) within a particular university course. Section 4 reports major results, both quantitative and qualitative. Some concluding remarks and discussion in section 5 close the paper.
