The fourth industrial revolution, also called Industry 4.0, has brought numerous changes in organizational processes, methods of work, and staff structure in organizations (Vogel-Heuser & Hess, 2016). Macurova, Ludvik, and Žwakova (2017) point out that organizations transitioning to Industry 4.0 will be at risk of having workers who are not skilled at preparing, implementing, and using technologies associated with Industry 4.0, since higher educational institutions lag behind in developing adequate educational programmes, both formal and informal. In the same time, Industry 4.0 could have a short-term negative impact on the decreased demand for the low-skilled workers (Weber (2016). A future challenge will be to restructure jobs and educational programmes (Kane, Palmer, Phillips, & Kiron, 2015) simultaneously. Therefore, it is crucial for manufacturing organizations, not only to prepare for the restructuring of their production processes (Ivanov, Dolgui, Sokolov, Werner, & Ivanova, 2016), but also to analyse job profiles prevalent in Industry 4.0 organizations, in order to determine the required employee competencies for such an organization (Imran & Kantola, 2018; Pecina & Sladek, 2017).
Due to the relevance of Industry 4.0, it has become of the upmost importance to develop a deep insight into the required knowledge and skills for this rapid changing area. Nevertheless, how we should gain up-to-date insight into the skills and competencies relevant for Industry 4.0 organizations? What is the best way, not only to gain insight but also to monitor trends in this area? In our paper, we shed some light on these questions using text mining approach to analyse job advertisements published on a website, for the purpose of uncovering required knowledge and skills of Industry 4.0.
Current research of the skills and knowledge needed by the Industry 4.0 is scarce. Several authors wrote about the job profiles in Industry 4.0, based on secondary sources, such as scientific papers (Hecklau, Galeitzke, Flachs, & Kohl, 2016; Pecina & Sladek, 2017). Pinzone et al. (2017) develop job profiles for Industry 4.0, based on the in-depth interviews and focus groups with managers working in Industry 4.0 organizations in Italy. However, these researches generate their conclusions mainly using the literature review analysis, but due to the fast changes in Industry 4.0 organizations, an approach that is more dynamic is needed. Since changes in job characteristics in areas such as Industry 4.0 are rapid, fast tool for analysis of job advertisements is needed. Job advertisements are a relevant source of information about the required skills and knowledge, which can be used in order to provide fast insight into the changes in job profiles. Two main methods for analysing job advertisements are manual content analysis (e.g., Todd, McKeen, & Gallupe, 1995) and automated text analysis, often referred to as text mining (Amado, Cortez, Rita, & Moro, 2017). Text mining has relevant advantages compared to manual content analysis, such as less required time and human work needed for the analysis (Guo, Vargo, Pan, Ding, & Ishwar, 2016). In addition, with this paper we contribute to the growing body of research focusing to the utilization of social media for extracting knowledge relevant for gaining competitive advantage in various organizations (Kapoor et al., 2018; Shiau, Dwivedi, & Yang, 2017), as well as improving the efficiency of marketing efforts (AlAlwan, Rana, Dwivedi, & Algharabat, 2017; Dwivedi, Kapoor, & Chen, 2015). Text mining methods has been widely used for the purpose of analysing the information stored at social media websites, such as Facebook posts (Shiau, Dwivedi, & Lai, 2018).
Against on this background, the purpose of this paper is to clarify the competencies required for Industry 4.0 specialists, using a text mining analysis of job advertisement from LinkedIn, the leading website that publishes job advertisements (Skeels & Grudin, 2009). We have downloaded job advertisements published on LinkedIn, which contained on of the two key-terms: Industry 4.0 or Smart Factory. Downloaded data was cleaned and transformed, using lemmatization algorithm. The list of key words has been extracted, which were further classified into phrases and topics. Text mining has been conducted using the specialized text mining software WordStat Provalis ver. 8. Results of the text mining analysis were discussed in relation to the landscape of knowledge needed in Industry 4.0 organizations.
The rest of this paper is structured in the following manner. In the second section, we introduce the background for the research done in this study, by looking at concepts of Industry 4.0, research done on future job profiles in Industry 4.0, as well as the use of text mining techniques to study online job profiles. In the third section, the methodology for data gathering is outlined. The fourth section focuses on the results, which consist of descriptive analysis, text mining, phrase extraction, and topic mining. The fifth section presents the discussion of our results in the context of the theoretical and practical contributions. Finally, in the concluding section, we summarize the results and look at the limitations of the study and recommend further research.
