In order to help medical doctors, in hospitals or clinics, in offering an accurate and faster diagnosis, it is desirable to develop better tools that can provide a trustworthy diagnosis. Some examples of existing related works can be found in [1], [4], [14], [17], [22], [28], [29], [34]. In the present paper, Diagnosis Systems (DS) are defined as tools that help the diagnosis based on machine learning methods, which can be designed with statistical models, numerical methods or can also be designed with artificial intelligence models, for example artificial neural networks, or fuzzy systems that can also be optimized by meta heuristic algorithms.
The present paper is focused on Diagnosis Systems based on Fuzzy Logic, specifically in Diagnosis Systems based on Type-2 Fuzzy Models, because they offer the capability of uncertainty handling in real world phenomena. The design of Interval Type-2 (IT2 FDS) and General Type-2 (GT2 FDS) Diagnosis Systems is presented, and then an analysis of their performance improvement with respect to Type-1 is outlined. Finally, the impact of the uncertainty of IT2 FDS and GT2 FDS is measured, by looking for new criteria to decide which kind of Fuzzy System offers a better diagnosis.
The main contribution of this paper is finding out which Type-2 Fuzzy Diagnosis approach is better and under which conditions (of uncertainty and implementation environment), as both fuzzy logic approaches have the ability to handle uncertainty. However, General Type-2 Fuzzy Systems demand more computational resources than Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Systems. It is then relevant to find out which of them provides better results in the context of diagnosis problems and how much of the uncertainty is handled in comparison with respect Type-1 Fuzzy Systems. In addition, a methodology for automatic design of Fuzzy Diagnosis Systems based on data is proposed.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines a brief introduction to Type-2 Fuzzy Systems, then Section 3 explains the steps for Fuzzy Diagnosis System generation, then Section 4 reports the experimental results, then Section 5 presents the analysis of results and finally Section 6 offers conclusions and possible future works.
