Innovation’s positive role in advancing economic growth and benefitting society has been long established [1,2]. However, recent studies have expressed concerns of an innovation slowdown with deleterious consequences [3,4]. Chief among the challenges are the difficulty of measuring the novelty and impacts of innovation outcomes, the unpredictable nature of the innovation process, over regulation by governments, the diversity of innovation stakeholders, lack of organizational readiness for disruptive innovations, difficulties of scaling digital innovations, and the lack of strong, coordinated commitments by industrial, academic, and governmental entities to enable and support an entrepreneurial culture of innovation and risk-taking [[5], [6], [7]].
In particular, the rapid growth of new information technologies (IT) has created a focus on digital innovation (DI) as the appropriation of digital technologies in the process of and as the result of innovation. Digital innovation emphasizes combinations of digital and physical components to produce novel products. The phenomena of DI encompasses new digital technologies, information digitization, digitally-enabled generativity, entrepreneurship, and innovation management with a greater range and reach of innovation across organizational boundaries [[8], [9], [10], [11]]. Surveys show that organizations across a wide range of disciplines view DI to be of vital importance [12,13].
The goal of this research essay is to propose a novel process model of DI that supports a richer understanding of different types of entrepreneurship for the investment of DI in organizations. We ground our ideas in the rigorous paradigm of Design Science Research [14,15]. Thus, we motivate our research by addressing a key gap identified in a recent review of DI research in the IS field [16]. The authors state:
In sum, design science is a long-standing research tradition in IS that has recently gained renewed momentum but has traditionally not been considered a research stream within digital innovation. At the same time, other management disciplines are increasingly recognizing the importance of design science research, which provides IS with a unique and compelling contribution as an important reference discipline [17]. (p. 208)
Design science research in IS is, at its essence, about digital innovation. The goal of a DSR research project is to extend the boundaries of human and organizational capabilities by designing new and innovative sociotechnical system artifacts [18,19] in the form of constructs, models, methods, and instantiations [15,20,21]. Broadly speaking, DSR aims to add to knowledge of how things can and should be constructed or arranged (i.e. designed), usually by human agency, to achieve a desired set of goals. With its focus on the design and deployment of innovative digital artifacts, DSR is ideally positioned to make both research and practice contributions to the field of DI.1
An important challenge to effective DI in organizations is the goal of ambidextrous entrepreneurship; i.e. entrepreneurship of different types [[22], [23], [24]]. Ambidextrous organizations should be capable of both exploring new opportunities and working diligently at exploiting existing capabilities [25]. To illustrate, a large bank is successfully using a ‘labs’ approach with many innovation techniques such as rapid prototyping and co-design with users to achieve the goal of getting new digital products and services to market in 12 week cycles [26]. At the same time, the bank has to implement new advances in platform technologies to serve as a base for the innovative applications that are developed in these short cycles. The new platform development work is considerably more substantial, expensive, longer-term, and relies on rigorous design practices of a professional IT staff. A McKinsey report describes this situation as ‘two speeds’ innovation, with rapid cycle innovations occurring alongside slower, more substantial innovation activities [27]. However, no detailed advice is given as to how to bring about this ‘two speed’ strategy. Our initial exploratory field work has shown that managers in digital innovation labs can be largely unaware of the longer term innovation strategies at play elsewhere in the organization.
A further example of the need to recognize different types of DI comes from the personal experience of one of the authors. In some countries organizations can claim tax write-offs for expenditure on research and development (R&D). Where the claimed R&D is for a large software development project, many tens of millions of dollars can be involved. In one country the legislation as to what constitutes R&D is cast very much in the terms of the traditional scientific method, which can be translated to being equivalent to mainstream DSR and equivalent to the advancement quadrant in the matrix discussed later in this essay. However if the organization does not take care beforehand, then their project could easily be viewed as in the exploitation quadrant in which there is no claim to new knowledge and, thus, not scientific R&D. More thought beforehand could mean the project can be positioned as being in one of the research oriented quadrants in the matrix, with advantage in terms of tax benefits and the ongoing accumulation of explicitly documented knowledge within the organization (see [28]).
We argue the need for a higher order, sense-making process model that defines, structures, and manages multiple innovation strategies in an ambidextrous entrepreneurship portfolio. We see an opportunity to build on prior influential work on portfolio approaches to innovation (e.g. the ambidextrous approach as in [25]) combined with recent thinking that the strategic management of innovation should be based on “innovative design activities” [29].
Further, we posit that the pervasiveness of DI means that the individuals involved in bringing it about have many diverse backgrounds, including application domain specialists, software engineers, data scientists, business managers, economists, venture capitalists, various user groups, and entrepreneurial leaders as co-designers. This range of backgrounds means that DI, even more than traditional innovation, requires many different perspectives on the methods and tools to be used in the development of effective and evolvable complex systems incorporating DI. Thus, there is need for a new conceptual model with resulting strategic guidance that allows the various entrepreneurial roles2 involved in DI to make sense of this diverse landscape and to understand when and how different strategies for innovation can best be employed.
In building our novel process model, we draw on our prior stream of research on digital innovation over a period of some years; combining work in design science research (DSR) [15,21] and the application of DSR concepts to digital innovation as presented in [[30], [31], [32]]. Based on this background of synergistic experiences with DSR and DI, we define and explore four entrepreneurial strategies: invention; advancement; exaptation; and exploitation. The research contributions of this research essay will provide a common language and process model that can be understood and used by people with many different backgrounds in entrepreneurial activities. In particular, it highlights the multiple entrepreneurial roles required to successfully conceive, design, implement, deploy, and evolve digital innovations in complex sociotechnical systems [18,19].
