The eruption of the severe acute respiratory syndrome COVID-19 continues to grow where over (25, 414, 924) worldwide cases of confirmed infections are reported at the end of August 2020, according to Worldometer [http://worldomet-ers.info/coronavirus/].
To control the spread of this virus, screening large numbers of suspected cases for appropriate quarantine and treatment has become an urgent priority. Most tests to check for COVID-19 relied on tests done at a laboratory for pathogen testing, which is the most accurate test possible. Still, it is time-consuming with significant false-negative results [1].
Patients suspected of having respiratory infection or pneumonia are admitted to the hospital under consideration of specific diagnostic procedures with laboratory and other non-laboratory tests to identify the cause, location, and severity of the infection. The laboratory tests include standard procedures, like blood gas analysis tests, complete blood count (CBC), and pleural effusion [2], in a procedure that needs transporting samples from the hospital to the lab, which takes up valuable time. On the flip side, the non-laboratory tests are the computer-assisted imagery analysis techniques used to inspect/registrate the lung regions using digital chest radiography (or standard 2D X-ray) or CT scan. On the contrary to the conventional 2D X-ray; which uses a fixed X-ray tube that does not provide much detail. 3D CT scan is a nondestructive scanning technology that has the advantage of providing a very detailed view of the lung of bone, soft tissue, and blood vessels [2]. Advantages of CT imaging include low cost, wide availability, high spatial resolution with current multi-slice scanners, short scan time and higher sensitivity. Disadvantages include: Inferior soft tissue contrast compared to MRI and X-ray-based radiation exposure [3].
Various methodologies in computer vision have been proposed to deal with different sides to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, including segmentation and classification methods [4]. These approaches can be classified into two fundamental classes: Classical Machine Learning and Deep Learning methods [5].
In general, Image segmentation has become an increasingly important task in radiology research and clinical practice. The goal of segmentation is to separate regions or objects of interest from other parts of the body to make quantitative measurements. More specifically, obtaining further diagnostic insights, including measuring the area and volume of segmented structures. The main challenges of segmentation algorithms exaggerates due to intensity in-homogeneity, presence of artifacts and closeness in the gray level of different soft tissue.
Various aspects of segmentation algorithms have been explored for many years. Existing segmentation approaches can be classified into three main classes: manual, semi-automatic, and fully-automatic. Manual segmentation methods are time-consuming, monotonous, and can be affected by inter and intra-observer variability. Semi-automatic approaches are already widespread and integrated with publicly available software packages. Finally, fully-automatic procedures do not need user intervention. Each of these methods has its advantages and limitations. However, even now, the investigators try to make segmentation steps as easy as possible with the help of automatic software tools. Still, the problem of segmentation remains challenging [6], because (1) no general solution can be applied on a large and continually growing number of different regions of interest (ROI), (2) vast variations of ROI properties, (3) different medical imaging modalities. Lastly (4) associated changes of signal homogeneity; mainly variability and noise for each object [7]. Besides, as noted in Shi et al. [8] (a) while plenty of Al systems have been proposed to assist in diagnosing COVID-19 in clinical practice, there are only a few works related to infection segmentation in CT scans [9]. (b) most of COVID-19 imaging data-sets focus on diagnosis, only one data-set providing segmentation labels, and (c) the qualitative evaluation of infection and longitudinal changes in CT scans could thus offer useful and vital information in fighting against COVID-19.1 However, these methods are not applicable when we have a tiny data-set. In this paper, we focus on a segmentation system to automatically quantify infection regions of interest (ROIs) and measure the volume of the infection area.
In [10], the author presented a broad survey of computer vision methods to combat the challenge of the COVID-19 pandemic. Some examples of image segmentation and classification methods in COVID-19 applications are summarized in Table 1 along with results obtained of each approach.Table 1. Summary of a combined COVID-19 lesion segmentation-classification approaches.AuthorsDatabase usedApproach usedObtained resultsHighlightsZheng et al. [12]499 +131 CT volumesU-NetAccuracy of 0.901-Rapid COVID-19 lesions diagnosis - Great potential to be applied in clinical applicationCao et al. [13]2 patientsU-Net architecture–-Quantitative PipelineGozes et al. [14]Testing set of 157 patients (China,U.S).Deep Learning CT Image Analysis0.996 AUC 92.2% specificity-Heat map of a 3D volume display -Measures the progression of disease overtimeJin et al. [15]1136 cases 723 positivesUNet+, CNNsensitivity of 0.974 specificity of 0.922-The system automatically highlighted all lesion regions for faster examinationYing et al.[8]88 patients diagnosed with the COVID-19ResNet-50AUC of 0.95, recall (sensitivity) of 0.96-A rapid and accurate identification of COVID-19Shan et al. [8]249 COVID patientsVB-NetDice similarity coefficients of 91.6-A deep learning-based system for automatic segmentation of infection regions as well as the entire lung from chest CT scansShen et al. [16]44 confirmed COVID-19 casesThreshold-based region growingR ranged 0.7679, P<0.05-Moderate correlation between lesion percentage scores obtained by radiologists
In this article, we took advantages of a classical machine learning-based COVID-19 segmentation methods, since (a) it provides a high accuracy while deep networks require large data-sets, (b) computationally cheap, (c) easy to design, interpret, and use, which is helpful for clinicians and consumers communities in developing countries.
Finally, clinical detection and diagnosis of COVID-19 by experienced doctors is often a tedious task, where there is a need to have a simple, fast, working on low power computational devices (including cellphone) an automated method that can provide segmentation and quantification of infection regions of the patients every 3–5 days and monitoring progression the infected patients using lungs CT scans images. The qualitative evaluation of longitudinal changes in CT scans could thus offer essential information in fighting against COVID-19. To address the above issues, this paper proposes a novel tool for automatic COVID-19 Lung Infection segmentation and measurement using chest CT images. The presented architecture has the potential to be quantifying the COVID-19 infected regions and monitoring longitudinal disease changes. The presented system will be very beneficial in developed countries to help Africa through the COVID-19 pandemic [11].
Therefore, the expected outcome of the proposed work is to take into account the coronal-view of the CT scan for a better experimental interpretation. Although there are several approaches for medical image segmentation, few studies have been done and tested on an image with COVID-19 lesion to observe its ability to segment the lesion precisely [8]. Subsequently, those algorithms may not be the best choice for searching for smaller homogeneous regions in medical images that may contain the features of a disease such as COVID-19. This challenge motivates us to observe the performance of some state-of-the-art algorithms proposed in the literature for tackling the COVID-19 lesions area. Besides, it leads us to offer a robust scheme that has an excellent ability to segment the COVID-19 lesion in an accurate way.
The proposed framework is developed and investigated within the Matlab® environment, and the essential CT Scan images of COVID-19 is collected from the COVID-CT-Dataset [17]. Also, a data-set from the EL-BAYANE center for Radiology and Medical Imaging which include a data CT images on a person who got two times CT images. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
•A new image contrast enhancement algorithm by combing linear and logarithmic stitching parametric algorithms.•An improved image-dependent multilevel image thresholding method.•Method to compute the number of image-dependent multilevel k.•An image segmentation approach to minimize the over-segmented regions.
The remaining part contained in the present paper is organized as follows. After briefly reviewing the related works on the segmentation of COVID-19 in Section 1. Section 2 outlines the proposed pipeline and measurement comparison both on objective and subjective perspectives (in Section ) and in terms of the coloring of a segmentation algorithm (in Section 3 also). We conclude by highlighting the outcome achieved (in Section 4).
