Cities and urban agglomerations are particularly vulnerable to the expected impacts caused by climate change, such as urban flooding, heatwaves, and storms (United Nations, 2014; IPCC, 2014). A building-resolving urban climate model as a tool for urban planning can contribute to their preparation. Such a model enables demand-oriented and practical actions for climate change adapted development in urban planning. The application of models for the simulation of urban atmospheric boundary layers, however, requires large computational resources, a strong background in boundary-layer meteorology, and often times serves purely scientific purposes. Urban planners, in turn, need a tool that is capable of developing feasible adaptation strategies, runs on standard technical infrastructure, and also facilitates the application for non-expert climate modelers, who have their expertise in other spheres of knowledge. So far, such tools are rare (Halbig et al., 2019).
The German research program [UC]2 - Urban Climate Under Change aims at the development, validation and application of an innovative high-resolution urban climate model (PALM-4U) for entire cities (Scherer et al., 2019a). The UseUClim project is part of one of three modules and responsible for reviewing PALM-4U's practicability and usability (see Fig. 1). According to the project call, PALM-4U should fulfill the following essential characteristics (BMBF, 2015):•performance of microscale simulations of horizontal domain sizes of up to 1′000–2′000km2,•building-resolving simulation at a grid spacing of ≤10 m,•integration of digital surface model data,•coupling with regional and global climate models (nesting),•multivariate data output interfaces, such as NetCDF or ASCII,•applicability on desktop computers as well as on massively parallel computer clusters,•user-friendly and self-explaining graphical user interface,•straightforward and self-descriptive application, as well as output of easily interpretable simulation results.Download : Download high-res image (116KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Overview on the structure of the [UC]2 research program, UseUClim belongs to module C (adapted from Scherer et al., 2019a).
The development of such a technological innovation faces several challenges, as knowledge production in academia and the knowledge request of urban planners need to be brought together. Numerous barriers in different domains including economic, technological and social have been subject to analyses (e.g. Brasseur and Gallardo, 2016; Bruno Soares and Dessai, 2016; Balaban and Senol Balaban, 2015; Lourenco et al., 2015; Matasci et al., 2014). In the context of UseUClim, the most relevant barriers relate to disciplinary terminologies in both climate science and urban planning practice, standardization of information (such as data formats) as well as technological capacities (see also Perrels, 2018; Cortekar et al., 2017; Bruno Soares and Dessai, 2016; Lourenço et al., 2015; Davis et al., 2015; Measham et al., 2011). Additionally, the model developers demanded high standards of the practitioners with regard to the interpretation of model outputs.
To overcome the mismatch between knowledge production in academia and the knowledge request of urban planners to solve societal problems, a transdisciplinary approach is recommended (Hoffmann-Riem et al., 2008). In UseUClim's case this modus operandi is necessary in order to support the development of an urban climate model that is also usable for non-scientists or non-expert climate modelers and, thus, supports cities and municipal urban planners – as well as other stakeholders – in their daily work (see Steuri et al., 2018). This approach allows to integrate relevant stakeholders from the very beginning to ensure that their requirements and the true value points are identified as well as thoroughly addressed in the model development. Thus, the new urban climate model PALM-4U has not been developed in the basis of a one-way supply of scientific information, but on a “two-way collaborative process of knowledge production” (Vincent et al., 2018). Such processes are gaining increasing attention, because they make services and products more effective (Ballon et al., 2018; Voorberg, 2017; Gascó, 2017). There are numerous examples of these collaborative processes in a variety of societal domains including (public) transport, urban development, health care, or combinations of the aforementioned (e.g. Cellina et al., 2020; Mück et al., 2019; Leminen et al., 2019; Giordano et al., 2019; Petterson et al., 2018; Nishida et al., 2017). More focused on the specific filed of climate services, Brasseur and Gallardo (2016) mentioned that knowledge produced hand in hand by scientists together with end users reconciles several advantages. Thus, it is expected that this transdisciplinary setting will enhance the applicability of findings as well as the willingness to use the new model PALM-4U in urban planning practice.
The co-development process of this innovative and likewise practical urban climate model is implemented through the living lab approach (e.g. Hossain et al., 2019; Ståhlbröst, 2012; Westerlund and Leminen, 2011; Higgins and Klein, 2011) and consists of three stages: exploration, experimentation, and evaluation. This paper focuses on the exploration phase of the UseUClim project and its crucial role as a neutral intermediary actor between the scientific model developers and the potential end users in urban planning practice (hereinafter referred to as end users).
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides an overview on UseUClim's overarching living lab approach; Sections 3 and 4 present and discuss selected results; And sections 5 and 6 provide a summary as well as an outlook to the upcoming project phases.
