Video games are becoming more and more widespread, and their presence in our daily life is growing. According to the Q4 2017 GameTrack survey,1 periodically run in four European Countries, the percentage of 6–64 year-olds who play games ranges from 44% (Spain) to 65% (France). The survey also reports a growing spread of gaming among 35–44 year-olds (from 36% in 2010 to 46% in 2016) and among 45–64 year-olds (from 21% to 27%). Similarly, the Pew Research Center’s American Trends Panel2 reports that about 43% of adult Americans play video games “sometimes” or “often”. The phenomenon, therefore, interests a large proportion of the Western population alone, with a potentially tremendous impact on its culture.
In light of this pervasiveness, it’s no wonder, that social sciences research into video games and gaming has devoted considerable attention to investigating their influence on both the individual and society at large. Major research threads being explored include the possible psychological effects of games [1], their potential for education, training and behavioural change [2], [3], and their cultural and ethical implications (e.g. [4]). Given the high level of interest, the EU has funded numerous games-related research initiatives over recent years, from highly-focused domain-specific projects to broad-scale networks of excellence devoted to (serious) games per se. The overarching objective of these efforts has been to explore effective ways of channelling the proven motivating power of games to trigger ‘purposeful’ benefits, with particular emphasis on learning and behaviour change [5].
In 2016, the European Commission also funded a project, called Gaming Horizons (www.gaminghorizons.eu), to investigate video games and society from a more social sciences perspective, and to propose alternative framings for the role games might assume in society. The project considered digital games and digital gaming in a broad sense, covering not just entertainment-oriented games of various kinds and genres (including those produced with artistic aspirations), but also so-called serious games (those designed and/or adopted for purposeful ends) and gamification (i.e. the use of game design elements in a non-gaming contexts; [6]). In its investigations, Gaming Horizons explicitly pursued a participatory approach directly involving a broad range of stakeholder groups like game developers, policy makers, researchers, educators, players, and parents of players. It was also mandated to implement Responsible Research3 principles. This paper describes some of the core results and outcomes the project generated.
1.1. Setting the sceneThe present study examines the relationship between social sciences academic research, digital gaming and game development. In order to explain why we decided to focus on this topic, we will begin by illustrating how, in the initial phases of the Gaming Horizons project, the considerable gap between these two sectors became apparent, the extent of which we did not anticipate before project investigations got underway [7].The issue became immediately evident when analysing the results that emerged from the very first major project undertaking, namely an umbrella review of social sciences research on games and gamification. One of the key aims of this literature review was to identify whether academic authors, when discussing their research results, (a) make specific recommendations about what steps could or should be taken to address any (problematic) issues they identified, and (b) what kind of recommendations they make and to whom. We found that where they did so, their recommendations were disproportionately directed towards (other) academic researchers, with few directed towards other stakeholder groups such as developers or policy makers. Specifically, out of 81 recommendations identified in the papers we selected for the review, 38 (46%) were directed to researchers, and only 11 (12%) to game developers, despite the fact that the studies dealt (in more or less detail) with issues related to the concerns of those who design and produce digital games, whether of the purposeful or entertainment-oriented variety. This was especially true for games-related articles derived from the psychological literature, in which author recommendations are mostly suggestions for future research avenues; here, recommendations directed to stakeholders other than researchers are almost totally absent.The landscape was slightly different when considering published research exploring the educational perspective of games and gaming. In this case, authors directed recommendations to developers, policy makers, and educators. These mostly regarded the need to develop more effective games for educational use (e.g. [8]) and to better align existing ones with learning goals and students’ needs [9], [10]. Additionally, some papers focusing on the question of inclusion provided some specific recommendations for developers (e.g., [11]).Nevertheless, the overall picture gained from the review of research literature, at least that published in peer-reviewed journal articles, is that the games-related academic discourse is mostly carried out internally, and possibly self-referential; those producing this (substantial) body of knowledge seem fairly unconcerned about reaching practitioners outside the academic community. This apparent lack of impact is further compounded by the fact that even those research questions attracting considerable academic attention, such as whether or not frequent gaming generates cognitive benefits, are still largely unresolved and necessitate more evidence [12]. Conclusions drawn from existing studies are usually rather tentative, offering very few definitive answers to research question. As a consequence, few guidelines and recommendations are issued to external practitioners.At the same time, it should be acknowledged that caution is an important principle of scientific endeavour, and one not to be totally discouraged. That said, it is understandable how it could be off-putting when viewed through the lenses of game developers, who would find definite research results particularly informative when making practical decisions, especially when they are seeking hard scientific evidence to back (sometimes critical and/or contentious) game design decisions. Indeed, the lack of design and/or policy-relevant recommendations combined with tentativeness in drawing conclusions often leads to considerable difficulty in identifying research findings with practical applicability.The risk of social sciences research on games becoming isolated from game industry [13] is troubling, since it would limit the beneficial impact that (potentially significant) scientific findings might have on those outside academic circles, and especially on those very individuals who devise and develop such important and pervasive cultural artifacts as digital games [14]. Such a gap could widen into a chasm if researchers fail to get a firmer grasp of the dynamics that drive game development in its various guises, especially regarding the constraints and opportunities games offer [15], [16] and the issues that could arise from specific development strategies (e.g. [17]).This paper reports on findings from the Gaming Horizons project that regard the relationship between social sciences academic research and game development; it discusses the most critical aspects of this relationship, the factors that seem to inhibit beneficial cross-communication flows, and how relevant stakeholders believe such issues could be tackled to strengthen mutual ties.
