Adding to the two traditional forms of astronomy, observational and theoretical, the past two decades have produced a new kind—the data-driven astronomy. Progress in detector and telescope technology has enabled wide and deep surveys, both ground-based and space-borne, that are producing extremely large datasets. These range from imaging products, to photometric and spectroscopic catalogs derived from the data, and also streams of alerts about object brightness changes. Meaningful analysis of such rich datasets, both in volume and complexity, requires entirely new methodologies that borrow heavily from statistics, machine learning, computational mathematics, or generally, “data science” (e.g. Bauer et al., 2019).
Examples of past and current surveys include SDSS (Sloan Digital Sky Survey, 2020), Pan-STARRS (Chambers et al., 2016), DES (Abbott et al., 2018), and Gaia (Brown et al., 2018). Many more and larger datasets will be produced shortly, e.g. Rubin/LSST (Ivezić et al., 2019), Roman/WFIRST (Roman Space Telescope, 2020), Euclid (Euclid Space Telescope, 2020) (photometry), SKA (Square Kilometer Array, 2020) (radio), and DESI (Aghamousa et al., 2016a) and MSE (Hill et al., 2018) (spectroscopy). LSST in particular will radically improve on the time axis of any previous survey, re-visiting every part of the visible sky about a 1000 times in ten years, and producing a flood of 10 million magnitude change alerts nightly. This new dimension to the data complexity requires entirely new tools for data processing and analysis, and the automated interconnection of many facilities for meaningful follow-up observations.
The need to disseminate survey data products to the broad astronomical community was recognized early; only together and without arbitrary access barriers can we as a field make significant progress. For example, science papers based on HST archival data are outpacing HST observer papers every year since 2003 (HST Library Staff, 2018). SDSS data have led to over 7,700 papers1  in 20 years, most of them from outside the collaboration. And the Gaia Data Release 2 has generated ∼500 publications in just its first year. Access to highly valuable and large datasets without the burden of costly hardware purchases for store and compute is the great democratizer in modern astronomy. Staying ahead of the data avalanche is no longer the prerogative of large and well-funded institutes and its staff (Olsen et al., 2019).
In recent years the most exciting development toward this goal has undoubtedly been the Science Platforms. These are systems integrating similar base components: massive and performant data store, powerful software abstractions that facilitate easy access to the data via APIs and front-ends, and means of running user code for data filtering and analysis remotely. That is, physically close to the data, for instance in executable “notebooks”.
One of the early science platforms is Data Lab2 
  (DL). It was conceived at the National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO) in 2014 and launched publicly in mid-2017. Now under the auspices of NSF’s new National Optical-Infrared Astronomy Research Laboratory (NOIRLab), its primary mission is to enable access to very large public datasets obtained with telescopes operated by NOIRLab facilities, and co-located analysis of these data. The initial focus of DL was on data produced by the Dark Energy Camera (Flaugher et al., 2015) which is operated at CTIO/Chile. The specification of the Data Lab science platform has evolved in several ways since then, and DL now hosts many times more data than the Dark Energy Survey alone. The main reasons for the continuous development and scope adjustment have been: (i) evolving user community needs, (ii) the more recent enthusiasm of large surveys to provide their datasets to the astronomical community, (iii) developments in hardware pricing and performance, and in software technologies, and (iv) the resources available for development and operations at NOIRLab’s Community and Science Data Center (CSDC), which houses Data Lab.
Other institutions also develop, to a varying degree, science platform functionality for astronomical data. Among them are SciServer/CasJobs (Taghizadeh-Popp et al., 2020), various NASA archives (e.g. MAST, HEASARC, IRSA, NED, NEA, NAVO), CADC/CANFAR (Gaudet, 2015), ESA Sky (De Marchi and ESASky Team, 2020), CDS/Vizier (Ochsenbein et al., 2000), and more narrowly focused projects such as the NCSA DESaccess portal (DES Data Management, 2020). The Rubin observatory also currently develops the LSST Science Platform (LSP).
In the remainder of this paper we will motivate the need and outline the science drivers for Data Lab, introduce its infrastructure and individual components, present some of its current and future data holdings, touch on the development and operational processes at Data Lab, analyze Data Lab’s adoption by the community, and elaborate on the equally important efforts to create and foster a user community.
This paper is an update to the original Data Lab white paper (Fitzpatrick et al., 2014), and expands on the Data Lab Astro2020 White Paper (Olsen et al., 2019) and a recent ADASS Data Lab proceedings article (Fitzpatrick et al., 2019).
