Literally, HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. From a medical point of view, if left untreated, HIV is the main factor that can progress to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or AIDS. Unlike some other viruses, the human body can't get rid of HIV completely, even with medical treatment [1,2]. Medically, the HIV virus attacks the body's immune system, which helps the body fight off infections. Over a period of time, the body's immune system is destroyed, and the body loses its ability to fight infections and diseases. The weekend immune system is taken advantage of by various cancers and opportunistic infections and advances to the last stage, which is AIDS, the end stage of HIV infection. At present, there is no major cure for AIDS, but HIV virus can be monitored and controlled with medical care. Antiretroviral therapy or ART is the medicine used for the treatment of HIV. ART can reduce the number of HIV viruses to untraceable amounts in the blood. By keeping the number of HIV viruses under control, HIV positive patients can live long healthy lives and have no risk of transmitting the disease.
Prior to the development and introduction of ART in mid-1990, in just a couple of years, patients with HIV virus could progress to AIDS. Nowadays, with proper treatment, patients can lead a normal, long healthy life in compared to someone who doesn't undergo treatment [3,4]. Understanding the HIV virus atomic structure and virus interaction with the blood structure is important for improving common treatments. In previous works this subject studied and researchers shows, HIV virus can penetrate to blood structure and movement by this flow [[5], [6], [7]]. But the atomic interaction between blood components and HIV virus not described by previous researches. Further, the most frequently found protein in the blood is Human Serum Albumin (HSA), which performs many important biological functions [[8], [9], [10]]. It functions as a vehicle for various types of molecules and proteins, regulates oncotic pressure, and carries out the anti-oxidation cascade in the human body. Chemically, the atomic interaction between HSA protein and HIV virus can be occure by Hydrogen missing in these structures. By occure this atomic procedure, the free bond is detectable and the adsorption sites are created between these two structures. Structures of HSA protein and HIV virus is depicted in Fig. 1 [11,12].Download : Download high-res image (433KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Schematic of a) HSA molecule and b) HIV virus [11,12].
Today, computer simulations have a large volume of studies in science [13]. The representation of the dynamic responses of one system by the behavior of another system modelled after it is known as a computer simulation. A model or a mathematical description of a real system in the form of a computer program is used by a simulation. This model is made up of equations that duplicate the functional relationships within the real system. When the program is activated, the analogue of the behavior of the real system is formed by the resulting mathematical dynamics, and the results are represented in the form of data. Molecular Dynamics (MD) method is the most important type of computer simulation that is capable of predicting the atomic behavior of a variety of structures [[14], [15], [16]]. Today, this computational method is widely used in living structures simulations [17,18]. In this work, theoretical calculations were performed to predict the HSA protein and HIV virus interactions at various temperatures (300 K–350 K). The equilibration molecular dynamics method, which controls the temperature of the atomic structure, is a powerful and convenient method for predicting the temperature-dependent dynamical manner of atomic structures [19,20].
