The way that the forensic laboratories are operating within the police and the criminal justice system hasn’t evolved much during the last decades, despite the changes in our society and the multiple scientific developments currently happening in the forensic arena. In the recent past, independent analysis has shown several shortcomings. In particular, the report from the National Academies of Sciences has made it clear that the current forensic science service providers in the USA suffer from a high fragmentation [1]. There is a wide variability in capacity, oversight, staffing, certification and accreditation across federal and state jurisdictions. A number of actions have been designed to bring the laboratories back up to speed and to provide a foundational validity to some forensic disciplines (see also [2]). However, work is still on its way [3]. New challenges have been added to the action plan in the meanwhile. Although the study focused on the USA, similar situations can be seen in other parts of the world, where also fragmentation of the forensic science delivery occurs and scientific foundations in several forensic disciplines are lacking.
The fragmentation is not only due to the size of the jurisdiction which is being served by the forensic laboratory, but it is also connected to the large diversity of the forensic disciplines and techniques available. The strong specialisation in Forensic Science makes that only a few or a single forensic scientist is competent for some forensic disciplines. Regional forensic networks such as ENFSI, AFSN and ANZPAA/NIFS have overcome this problem by establishing the necessary structure to connect the scientists working in one particular forensic discipline [4]. The thus created possibility for scientists that work either in a small team or solely in a forensic discipline can exchange information with colleagues in other laboratories is crucial in providing an objective delivery of forensic expert opinions. This objectivity has become more and more important as a number of borders (e.g. within the EU) have disappeared and transnational crime has become more and more important. Mutual trust in one other’s findings is important if expert opinions generated in one country need to be presented in the court in another country. An additional problem remains as operational continuity cannot always be guaranteed as well as a short reporting delay. It has to be regretted that not all the smaller labs are able to fully engage in these exchanges as financial means are lacking.
Taking another angle of approach, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is administrating the operation of the Organisation of Scientific Area Committees (OSAC) for Forensic Science which are developing technically sound, science-based standards in order to strengthen the delivery of forensic science and provide guidance to the laboratories [5,6]. Also, the ISO Technical Committee 272 on Forensic Sciences is currently developing a series of standards for application in the forensic arena.
Apart from above mentioned shortcomings, our society evolves quickly and so do the challenges the forensic community faces. In this article we will give an overview of the numerous changes which can be anticipated or are already happening [7]. Given the extensive list, it is questionable if the majority of the forensic laboratories will have the necessary resources to provide an adequate answer to them. Hence, time has come to reflect on a better way of organizing the way that forensic science services are provided so that the available resources are better used, and a continued and even better support can be given to the criminal justice system. Academia has also noticed several changes which are happening or will have an impact in the near future and are looking at the risks and opportunities this poses [8].
The easiest solution would be to provide additional means to the publicly funded forensic laboratories to overcome most of these challenges. However, these means are not always available. If they are, they will put the public laboratories on an advantage compared to privately funded laboratories. Given that a number of these challenges require important investments, while others relate to phenomena which must be considered on a global level, we have opted for a structural solution which concentrates the less frequently used forensic disciplines in one particular laboratory so that a more cost-effective and sustainable provision can be achieved. If such a solution can be created on an international level, the resulting network of forensic science providers is able to provide the best forensic expert opinions for all criminal investigations. Time will become available for new tasks, different from the traditional case-to-case approach, as are required in [8].
This article provides an overview of the multiple challenges forensic science providers are currently facing. The current and foreseeable scientific challenges will be presented in Section II of this paper. In Section III, the economic challenges are addressed. A proposal to overcome these challenges is presented in Section IV. In Section V, we will provide an example of an operating structure which is quite similar to our proposal for the forensic laboratories and which is already operating: the metrological laboratories. This paper concludes with general considerations on the way forward.
