The calculation of integrals in symbolic form is one of the most demanded problems that are generally successfully solved in computer algebra systems (CAS). These successes are primarily due to the fact that back in the 1960s, it was possible to create algorithms for the symbolic integration of elementary transcendental functions, essentially relying on Liouville work in the 1830s, and to implement them in CAS, see Moses (1971); Bronstein (2005); Parisse (2011). In the 1980s, after these first successes, the question arose about the development of computer programs that would allow symbolic integration of algebraic functions or, equivalently, the calculation of Abelian integrals, see Baker (2005). In Refs. Davenport (1982), Trager (1984) and Bronstein (1998) algorithms were developed to clarify whether a given algebraic function can be integrated in terms of elementary functions. In the case of a positive answer, a complete algorithm to build such expression is presented in Trager (1984). Kauers (2008) proposed a new method for finding the logarithmic part of an integral using very interesting observation by Czichowski (1995). Nevertheless, the final set of developed algorithms seems to be too complicated to be implemented in CAS as a package of programs. To verify this, we will illustrate in section 2 how built-in functions of standard integrators in CAS deal with symbolic integration of algebraic functions. We will consider two popular CAS, namely, Maple and Wolfram Alpha.
The problem about integration in algebraic functions can be investigated as partial case of the more general and unsolved problem about solving of ordinary differential equations in algebraic functions, see Vo and Winkler (2015); Christopher et al. (2007); Chèze (2011); Malykh et al. (2019); Glazkov (2018). For an autonomous first order ODE of the form F(y′,y)=0, Aroca et al. (2008) given an optimized bound for the degree of its algebraic general solutions and an algorithm to compute an algebraic solution if it exists.
On the other hand, it should be noted that this form of integrals is very common to users. The obvious source of such integrals is dynamical systems. These systems can only be solved in the finite form if they admit algebraic conservation laws. Using these laws, the users could reduce the problem of solving the system to the problem of solving a set of “quadratures”, which are integrals of algebraic functions, see Whittaker (1917); Goriely (2001). Therefore, the question of the possibility of calculating such integrals in their finite form and, in general, of their properties arises very sharply. It should be emphasized that the law of energy conservation in mechanical problems usually involves a quadratic function with respect to velocities; therefore, reduction to quadratures, e.g., by the Liouville method for Hamiltonian systems (Whittaker, 1917, §148), certainly requires the extraction of roots, i.e., it goes beyond the scope of rational functions, even if the original problem had a rational potential.
However, the problem of the possibility of calculating the integral of an algebraic function in the class of algebraic functions (see Problem 2 below) is important not only for this stage of the study of dynamical systems, but also for searching for algebraic conservation laws. The problem of finding all the algebraic integrals of motion for a dynamical system was formulated long ago, but has not yet been completely solved, see Goriely (2001); Chèze (2011); Christopher et al. (2007); Vo and Winkler (2015). Generally speaking, it is possible to find all the integrals of motion, the degree of which does not exceed a certain given value, e.g., according to the method of M.N. Lagutinski implemented in Sage by Malykh et al. (2019) and Math Partner by Glazkov (2018). A nice exception is the many-body problem, in which Bruns was able to list all the algebraic integrals. Bruns's approach, presented by Painlevé (1975), gives a constructive way to find all the algebraic integrals of mechanical problems whose Hamiltonian is a sum of the kinetic and potential energies, namely, reduces this problem to the problem of the possibility of calculating the Abelian integral in terms of algebraic functions. There is sufficient reason to say that this procedure is very widely used in the study of a class of dynamical systems., e.g., the system describing the motion of a gyroscope can also be investigated in this way, see Polubarinova-Kochina (1940).
In many cases, a dynamical system doesn't have sufficient number of integrals to reduce to quadratures, or, as, e.g., in the case of the Kovalevskaya top these quadratures are too complicated (Golubev, 1960, ch. 4). Such systems are usually investigated numerically using the finite difference method. Standard finite difference schemes, including the very popular 4th-order Runge-Kutta schemes, do not take these integrals into account, that is, when discretizing the initial dynamical system, we lose all its characteristic properties and can introduce artificial ones instead, including numerical dissipation. The desire to construct explicit difference schemes, the calculation of which does not deduce the solution of a dynamical system from an integral algebraic variety, leads one again to the theory of Abelian integrals, see Ayryan et al. (2019).
Mathematicians of the 19th century considered the theory of Abelian integrals as a necessary completion of mathematical analysis, however, after the First World War this theory was forgotten for a long time, about which Klein (1926) wrote with regret. Unfortunately, the development of this heritage is still in its infancy. Bronstein (2005) admitted that he was not familiar with the works of Ostrogradskiy, and apparently the works of Ptaszycki (1888) and even Weierstrass (1902). We believe that developing this heritage can enrich computer algebra with new ideas.
In the present paper, we investigate the possibilities provided by the normal representation of Abelian integrals, described in the Lectures of Weierstrass (1902) for solving two classical problems of integration about integration in terms of algebraic or elementary functions. Remark 1For a variety of circumstances described by Pokrovsky (1900), these lectures of Weierstrass were not published in a timely manner. They were published by Hettner and Knoblauch only in 1902. The text of the lectures is continuous, it lacks the statement of theorems, examples, any comments that allow the reader to evaluate the result. Wirtinger (1901), while writing a review for the Encyclopedia of Mathematical Sciences, commented with surprise that this idea gives a new and very simple way to integration of algebraic functions.
In Section 2 , we tried to show that the algorithms for integrating algebraic functions implemented in modern CAS are not able to solve a significant number of classical problems. In our opinion, the key problem is how to find a standard representation for Abelian integrals, which, on the one hand, would not be too cumbersome, and, on the other hand, would allow an immediate answer to a number of questions about the integral. We believe that it is natural to use the representation of the Abelian integral in terms of the integrals of three kinds, described in the Lectures by Weierstrass.
In Section 3 , we descried the normal representation of an Abelian integral itself. In Section 4 , we discussed the integration in algebraic functions with the help of the normal representation. We presented the observation of Wirtinger (1901) as Theorem 19. In Section 5 , we discussed the integration in elementary functions. Here we have proved that the algebraic part of the normal representation coincides with the algebraic part of Liouvillian representation (Theorem 20) and presented the necessary and sufficient conditions for integration in elementary functions (Theorem 25) using coefficients of normal representation. In last section, the discussion and conclusions are given.
