Human dipeptidyl peptidase 4/CD26 (hDPP4) is a serine protease with high specificity and is widely expressed in various tissues such as lung, brain, pancreas, and kidney and by many different cell types. It recognizes peptides with proline or alanine as the second amino acid from the N-terminus [1]. The most significant substrates of hDPP4 are incretins such as glucagon-like peptide-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide [1]. These incretins increase postprandial insulin secretion (insulin secretion activity); thus, functional inhibition of DPP4 is expected to improve blood glucose control in type II diabetic patients. DPP4 inhibitors such as sitagliptin, vildagliptin, saxagliptin, and alogliptin have been developed previously and have been used clinically since 2007 [2]. From the perspective of functional food, Atlantic salmon skin gelatin-derived DPP4-inhibiting peptide has been reported to improve blood glucose levels [3]. These findings indicate the potential of DPP4-inhibiting substances as active ingredients in medications and functional food. In order to develop a more potent DPP4-inhibiting component, it is useful to thoroughly understand the mechanism of inhibition.
With X-ray crystallography analysis, the interactions between DPP4 and small molecule inhibitors have been well studied at the atomic level. DPP4 encompasses a relatively large substrate binding pocket composed of four subsites (S1, S1′, S2, S2 extensive), and most existing inhibitors stably bind to DPP4 by fitting into multiple subsites [4]. In particular, the S1 and S2 pockets are at the core of the binding, and central scaffolds of all Class 1, 2, and 3 inhibitors bind to these pockets [4]. Moreover, additional interaction at the S2 extensive subsite contributes to improved affinity. For example, when hydrophobic interactions in this region were strengthened in teneligliptin-related compounds, the inhibitory activity increased approximately 1000-fold [5, 6].
In contrast to DPP4-small molecule inhibitor interaction, the hDPP4-peptide co-crystal structure has only been described in three reports [7, 8, 9]. Although all of these structures display salt bridges between the N-terminal amino group of the peptide and Glu205/Glu206, the binding pattern to DPP4 differs for each peptide. For example, when Pro is the second amino acid from the N-terminus, the Pro side chain binds to the S1 pocket [7, 8]; when Pro is the third amino acid from the N-terminus, the amino acid side chain of the N-terminus binds to the S1 pocket [9]. Thus, the binding pattern to DPP4 differs depending on the amino acid sequence of the peptide. Furthermore, the structural binding mechanism with regards to the interaction at the peptide C-terminus is still not well understood.
Multiple DPP4-inhibiting peptides have been found in various food protein hydrolysates by FitzGerald et al., Li-Chan et al., and other research groups [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. The current consensus is that substrate-like peptides with Pro or Ala as the second amino acid from the N-terminus have high inhibitory effects. Our research group previously conducted a comprehensive analysis of a dipeptide library to elucidate a full picture of DPP4 inhibition [15]. We endeavored to identify the amino acid residue associated with the inhibitory activity based on the attained results. Although we observed a high inhibitory effect of dipeptides containing Trp at the N-terminus, we could not obtain an overall definitive rule. The mix of competitive inhibition and uncompetitive/non-competitive inhibition as the inhibitory mechanism of dipeptides signifies the presence of multiple dipeptide binding sites on DPP4. For this reason, we most likely could not find a definitive rule with direct interpretation of the comprehensive analysis results [16, 17].
To fully understand the DPP4-inhibiting mechanism of peptides, it is necessary to conduct a comprehensive analysis from a new perspective. In this study, we therefore focused on dipeptides and tripeptides in which the structure-function correlation can be relatively easily analyzed, and we investigated their interactions with DPP4 using in silico docking studies, which have contributed to the identification of new DPP4 inhibitors in the past [18, 19]. First, with the hypothesis that all dipeptides exhibit competitive inhibition, we constructed a calculation protocol that can reproduce the inhibitory activity of the dipeptide. A certain level of calculation precision could be achieved with this approach presumably because most of the potent DPP4-inhibiting peptides display competitive inhibition. From the DPP4-dipeptide docking poses obtained through the calculation protocol, we extracted characteristic interactions of dipeptides possessing a high inhibitory activity. Next, we analyzed tripeptides with various amino acids added to the C-terminus of dipeptides with high inhibitory activity (Ile-Pro and Val-Pro) with docking studies using the same protocol and hDPP4 inhibition assay. By integrating the results from these studies, we identified additional interactions at the S1′ subsite that contribute to the elevation in inhibitory activity. Dipeptides and tripeptides are abundant in food and are close in size as small molecule drugs. Thus, findings obtained in this study may be useful in designing molecules that are competitive inhibitors of DPP4.
