The Next generation photon science experiment requires surface radiation hard thick pixelated p+n Si pixel detector. These thick detectors are capable enough to give maximum detection efficiency up to 25 KeV X-ray energy at Synchrotron facilities. The dynamic range of the detector used for the application should be very high for e.g. up to 104 photons of 12.4 keV per p+ pixel [1] (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (183KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Peak brightness (1023photons/s/mrad2/mm2/0.1%BW) as a function of photon energy in (eV) for existing FELs compared to synchrotron sources [2].
Within the AGIPD collaboration at EuXFEL, DESY, Hamburg, Germany, it was reported that the used p+n Si pixel detector withstand the maximum X-ray dose of 1GGy for the three year of operation since commissioning of experiment. It has been noticed from the experimental results, fixed oxide charges (Nfixox) increases with an increase of X-ray dose up to 10 MGy and after that Nfixox starts decreasing with an increase of higher doses to 1 GGy.
Several experiments have been performed on the test structure for e.g. CMOS capacitor, Gate controlled diode in order to extract the microscopic parameter. These microscopic defect parameters have been used in the Technology Computer Aided Design (TCAD) simulation for the analysis and optimal design of pixel sensor for the AGIPD of the Eu-XFEL [2].
In our previous TCAD results, the zero E-field region in the detector is recorded that can be the cause of e-h plasma effect in the irradiated detector and as a response a delayed charged transportation occurs towards the p+ electrode.
In order to overcome this drawback, a good surface radiation hard design and very high bias voltage is required for the maximum collection of charge carriers, that further depends upon the application and material used to design the detector. Hence, it is a challenging task to design a high voltage surface radiation hard X-ray pixelated detector for the application, in order to get low noise and high charge collection.
The aforesaid result and sensor design idea is used for the designing of the detectors.
The radiation damage induced by X-ray (energy threshold < 300KeV) is called surface damage. The surface damage leads the following microscopic defects in the detector 1) build up of fixed oxide charges in the oxide 2) Interface traps (Nit) at Si-SiO2 interface 3) Surface generation current (Isurf) [3], [4], [5]. These defects degrade the performance of the detector used in the experiment.
The microscopic defect Hamburg model can be used in the Cogenda simulation [6] in order to understand the surface radiation damage performance of the detector.
The test structure Si microstrip detector used as a first step for the designing of the pixel detector. The current–voltage (I/V) and capacitance–voltage (C/V) characteristics of a few of set of prototype Si microstrip detector are measured at TIFR, Mumbai, India. The comparison of the experimental results and simulation data has been done in order to see fabrication technology and avalanche breakdown voltage (VBD) performance of the detector. On the basis of the analytical calculations, TCAD result and experimental measurement, we are proposing a radiation-hard p+ n silicon pixel sensor design, process and device parameters and specifications of the radiation hard pixel detector design for the next generation photon science experiment.
