It is generally acknowledged that robot activities can express their emotions and languages. Intelligently understanding the quality various human activities has lot of application. For example, contactless operative video reading system (COVRS), a special device for capturing hand motion images to recognize movements, is a significant application in medical domain. The quality score can guide the performer of human hand movement professionally and skillfully. Besides, for some sport activity like figure skating, the skating rink is usually huge and thus it is difficult for the trainer to inspect the action details of each skater. In this way, we expect an intelligent system that can automatically assessing the quality of human movement, and accordingly feedback the trainer for adjusting their activity. In the literature, there are two directions of robot activities recognition. The first direction is simply based on images/videos. It involves three main steps: action components discovery, shallow/deep feature extraction, and feature classification. Among them, action components discovery attempts to localize robot body parts which influence the activity attributes. The shallow/deep feature extraction engineers the feature for each action component and subsequently combine them to represent each human activity. Such representation is finally classified into different categories. The second direction is to employ Kinect for representing human/robot skeleton, which characterizes informative feature to understand each robot activity. Distinguished from the conventional visual appearances, the Kinect-based human/robot skeleton is free from the noisy backgrounds and partial occlusion. Moreover, it can be robustly predicted by the hardware-friendly model. In the literature, many Kinect-based human activity understanding frameworks have been proposed and some have even been commercialized. However, it is still difficult to directly use the Kinect-based skeleton for assessing robot activities aesthetic quality due to the following reasons:

(1)Human–computer interaction (HCI) plays an important role in human daily life, such as autonomous vehicles, smart home service robot. For example, manipulator control of smart home service robot can help the elderly or the disabled to place things, as shown in Fig. 1. Existing robot can only accomplish a single task; however, with the development of artificial intelligent domain, more intelligent home service robots are required. Off-line-based smart robot cannot effectively cope with some situations that when the posture or appearance of target object changes. Reinforcement learning can help the interaction of manipulator control and the environment. However, when the object’s pose changes, the algorithm needs to relearn and get a new controller, so the adaptability to the task is poor.(2)Manipulator control is a hot research topic in human–computer interaction and intelligent systems. Vision-based manipulator has been widely used in autonomous robot, which can capture human gesture or actions for recognizing human command. Existing robot with Kinect sensor can capture both RGB color image and depth image to perceive the environment, and manipulator can make corresponding actions such as grasp and placement. However, existing algorithms cannot effectively cope with the changes of target objects. In recent years, reinforcement learning is used to improve the accuracy of manipulator control. In deep reinforcement learning, the trained neural network can be used to control the manipulator by strategy search. However, only using the deep learning method cannot control the manipulator independently. Algorithms are needed to provide the training data set of neural network and supervise the neural network in the training process. In reinforcement learning, value function based method and policy search method have been widely used in manipulator control. Instantaneous difference method does not need the transfer probability model of known environment, and has high learning efficiency, so it is widely used in the manipulator control [1]. Compared with value based method, policy search method can well exploit prior information, which is helpful for manipulator control. Kober et al. [2] leveraged the path integral method based on the optimal control to update the strategy parameters, so that the manipulator can learn to play table tennis. In the strategy gradient based manipulator control method, Finn et al. [3] built a depth prediction model and trains the cyclic neural network under the strategy search algorithm based on the prediction control, so that the neural network does not rely on the supervision algorithm in the training. Under the control of the trained neural network, the manipulator can push different objects to the designated target position.
To our best knowledge, modern smart home service robots have autonomous learning ability and adaptability to the placement of objects. Since reinforcement learning cannot directly leverage high-dimension input such as images, the system has weak ability to perceive the environment. While deep learning based methods have strong ability to learn various samples, thus the combination of deep learning and reinforcement learning is significant for manipulator control. Thus, in this paper, we leverage deep reinforcement learning scheme to achieve an end-to-end manipulator control. Specifically, we design a policy search algorithm to achieve automatic learning of manipulator. To avoid relearning of manipulator, we design convolutional neural network control scheme to remain the robustness of manipulator. The main contribution of our proposed method is summarized as follows: (1) we design deep reinforcement learning algorithm structure and the interaction between strategy search and convolution neural network; (2) we conduct comprehensive experiment to verify the effectiveness of the application of convolutional neural network control strategy in manipulator control.Download : Download high-res image (172KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The applications of smart home service robot.
