Artificial intelligence (AI) is becoming increasingly prevalent in society, with recent applications emerging in the healthcare sector. Pathology is one of the most rapidly growing areas where in deep learning is used for analyzing the medical images (Litjens et al. (2017)). In one study, a pathologist and an AI-based algorithm were given images of lymph node cells and were assigned the task of determining whether or not the cells were cancerous. It was found that the results were more accurate when they were derived using both of the sources than when either of the sources was used, and an error rate of 0.5% was achieved (M. Holden and Smith (2016)).
South Korean government has been promoting research in AI by increasing research funding and making large investments in the AI industry. Since 2018, the Ministry of Health and Welfare in Korea has been supporting three AI platform projects aimed at paving the way for the rapid application of AI in clinical diagnoses by focusing on building a training dataset for AI researchers.
The Pathology AI Platform (PAIP) (PAIP (2019)) is a free research support platform of pathology-related AI. The main goal of the platform is to construct high-quality pathology learning datasets, which are provided by the Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, and SMG-SNU Boramae Medical Center. These datasets are collected over three years (2018–2021) and include over 3000 whole-slide images for six diagnostic cancers. The PAIP Liver Cancer Segmentation Challenge is the first image analysis challenge to apply the PAIP datasets. In this challenge, participants were tasked with using analytical data and statistical metrics to evaluate the performances of automated algorithms in determining liver cancer segmentation or viable tumor burden (TB) estimation. PAIP has submitted the “PAIP 2019 Challenge” as a part of the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Society (MICCAI) 2019 Grand Challenge for Pathology, which aims to generate new insights into and identify common themes for future cancer research. This was an effort to counter the lack of challenges that have been done to address Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) diagnosis using digital pathology. Despite changes in the population demographics, the prevalence of liver cancer, specifically, has not yet been addressed by medical image challenges. Currently, only computed tomography scans are available for use in research.
1.1. Related work1.1.1. Liver cancer / tumor burden estimationThe liver is a multi-functional organ in the abdomen that plays a major role in the synthesis and detoxification of biomaterials in the bloodstream from the Gastrointestinal tract to the heart. HCC represents the most common histology of primary liver cancer and is originated from hepatocytes, which account for 60% of the liver volume. HCC is the most commonly found cancer in liver cirrhosis or chronic liver diseases (Akbar et al. (2019)) associated with alcohol, viruses, or metabolic diseases such as obesity or diabetes mellitus. Instances have increased by 75% between 1990 and 2015 due to changing age structures and population growth, which are the leading factors that contribute to cancer mortality globally (Longo (2019)). The tumor is composed of heterogeneous cellular components. Neoplastic hepatocytes are the main cells involved in HCC, while the remainder is composed of neoplastic tumor cells in the stromal tissue, blood vessels that feed on cells, and inflammatory cells that infiltrate the individual tumor cells. The latter represents the so-called “tumor environment,” which plays a major role in tumor growth, response to treatment, and patient prognosis (Seok et al. (2012)) (Song et al. (2015)). Other components of the tumor mass involve a secondary change that may result from pretreatment, tumor characteristics, or tissue artifacts due to tissue manipulation. Ischemic necrosis, tumor necrosis, hemorrhages, and cystic changes are examples of such secondary changes.The tumor burden was used in radiology to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of treatment following treatment. In pathology, the tumor burden is an important parameter used to estimate treatment response and the performance of molecular testing. In classical pathology, there is no protocol for TB assessment. Recently, a detailed pathology protocol to determine the residual cancer burden in a breast cancer specimen was published by the MD Anderson Cancer Center using a number of tissue sections and manually-estimated cellularity (A.C. (2019)).Necrosis in HCC is usually induced by pretreatment embolization or radiofrequency ablation before the operation. The protocol of the College of American Pathologists recommends reporting a treatment in terms of the percentage of necrosis that occurs (Sanjay Kakar and Washington (2017)). Although the extent of necrosis in a pathologic evaluation can be valuable for correlating with radiologic images (Yao et al. (2008)), the direct prognostic relevance in terms of the outcome of the patient is not known (Cotoi et al. (2012)).1.1.2. Digital pathology image analysisDigital pathology (DP) is the process by which histology slides are digitalized to produce high-resolution images (Janowczyk and Madabhushi (2016)). There have been studies on how to acquire, process, and interpret the digitalized pathological slide images (Gurcan et al. (2009)). Technological advances have created a paradigm shift from digitalized slide images towards digital pathology. The combination of the whole-slide imaging (WSI) technology and big data analytics has enabled access to unprecedented details about data from the subcellular to the tissue level (Bhargava and Madabhushi (2016)). The variety of image analysis tasks in the context of DP includes detection and counting (e.g., mitotic events), segmentation (e.g., nuclei), and tissue classification (e.g., cancerous vs. non-cancerous) (Janowczyk and Madabhushi (2016)). Increasing usage of TB in pathology combined with advances in digital scanning technology has led to increased attempts to measure TB using automated algorithms with higher accuracy and precision. S. Akbar et al. compared two methods of automated TB measurement in breast cancer slides: a hand-engineered feature approach using traditional image processing techniques, and a ”deep convolutional neural networks” approach in which image features were automatically extracted. The two automated methods showed a strong correlation with pathologists’ assessments (Akbar et al. (2019)).
1.2. Medical image analysis challengeThe PAIP 2019 challenge attempts to suggest solutions to important problems of AI applicability in clinical use. Firstly, an environment was created using digital pathology, which most pathologists utilize to diagnose cancer. This challenge provides the contestants with whole-slide images rather than small image tiles. These whole-slide images create technical hurdles for image analysis, but their use was an important component in the application of AI for clinical purposes. Secondly, a task was designed for viable tumor burden estimation. The viable tumor burden is the ratio of the viable tumor area to the whole area of the tumor. The need for the evaluation of the viable tumor burden has increased based on the assessment of the response rates toward chemo-radiotherapy or the proportion of tumor cells determined via genetic testing using tissue samples. Traditional pathologists either use a semi-quantitative grading system to determine the residual tumor burden or report the portion of necrosis, thereby indirectly indicating the viable tumor burden. The main problem with the evaluation of the viable tumor burden is the uncertainty concerning the extent of the tumor as a whole relative to the extent of the viable tumor cells.The determination of tumor cells and necrotic cells using whole-slide images has been achieved by experienced pathologists. This process is labor-intensive, in addition to being unsalable to translational and clinical research studies that involve hundreds of resected specimens. Machine learning and AI-based diagnoses have improved the process of tumor diagnosis and enabled the possibility for quantitative studies of the mechanisms and progression of the disease. In this paper, we will present an overview of the PAIP 2019 challenge, addresses the prediction results, and discuss some of the research problems addressed in the medical image analysis challenge.
