Chemists call the activity by which they produce claims about the structures of molecules structure determination or elucidation. The “Instrumental Revolution”, as it was dubbed by the chemist-historians Dean S. and Ann T. Tarbell,1 refers to a transitional period lasting roughly from the 1940s through the 1960s during which powerful new sources of evidence for molecular structure were introduced in the form of modern spectroscopic instrumentation. The United States was the epicenter of these changes. Techniques such as nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, infrared and ultraviolet spectroscopy, gradually displaced the chemical reaction as the principal source of evidence for molecular structure. These techniques permitted a massive increase in the productivity of chemical analysis work and also provided access to new kinds of information on molecular structure and dynamics. Not only did the techniques change, but so did the skills needed to employ them. Cheap glassware was replaced by expensive machinery, and wet chemical skills were replaced by machine operation skills.
Historians writing about the Instrumental Revolution have advanced different views on whether and in what sense it might have been a genuine scientific revolution. On the side of those who think it was, Tarbell and Tarbell (1986) characterize it as the introduction of more powerful methods of purification and structure proof.2 Morris and Travis (2002), for their part, characterize it in Kuhnian terms, as the overthrow of the ruling paradigm by a new one.3 Baird (2002), on the other hand, points out that the revolutionary phase of Kuhn's Structure of Scientific Revolutions starts with a crisis, when normal science encounters a problem that its established methods cannot solve.4 Baird argues that at least as far as analytical chemistry was concerned, there was no such crisis. To the contrary, the new methods were developed in order to solve problems the established methods could already solve, but better—more efficiently, with smaller samples, greater sensitivity and lower limits of detection. Hence the Instrumental Revolution does not qualify as a revolution in Kuhn's sense.5
Baird goes on to examine other criteria for revolutionary status. First, he considers those advanced by I. B. Cohen (1985) in Revolution in Science. Baird finds that the episode does not fit Cohen's model for the stages of a revolution in science, which always begins with a private mental event. Such a model misses the core feature of the revolution, the introduction of an “instrumental-outlook” into the methods of analytical chemistry. Baird argues that a more promising model is to be found in Hacking's (1987) notion of a “big revolution”, which privileges wide-ranging changes in cultural practices and institutions in the search for scientific revolutions. Baird argues that the Instrumental Revolution fits Hacking's model, and therefore qualifies as a genuine scientific revolution.
On the side of the skeptics, Laszlo (2002) claims that there was no sudden change in the mid-20th century: the origin of organic spectroscopy should be located in the 1880s rather than the 1950s. Reinhardt (2006) concurs with Baird that the lack of anomalies and crises accompanying the changes disqualify it for the status of a Kuhnian revolution. He argues that the notion of an “Instrumental Revolution” neglects the “hidden continuities and step-by-step transition processes” that made the use of the new methods in chemistry possible.6 According to Reinhardt, the key to assuring continuity was the emergence of a community of scientists, the “method makers”, who acted as mediators or “middlemen” for the importation of methods from physics to chemistry, by way of industrial instrument-makers. The upshot of Reinhardt's account is that the Instrumental Revolution failed to be a real revolution because the transfer of technology from physicists to ordinary chemists resulted neither in the reduction of chemical theory to physics nor in a loss of chemistry's disciplinary autonomy.7
The general models of scientific revolution that have dominated this discussion single out changes in theories, concepts, cultural practices and institutions, but are silent on how scientific practice is altered by the specific characteristics of machines, usually lumping scientific machines under generic categories like “instrument”.8 But machines are not simply complex instruments. At least since the Industrial Revolution, they have tended to replace and displace human labor, which can have significant effects on the organization, and potential for technical progress, of the labor processes in which they are incorporated. The debate on the revolutionary status of the Instrumental Revolution has so far not considered the possibility that the revolutionary character of this event may lie in this specific characteristic of machines. Failure to do so may partially explain why neither Laszlo nor Reinhardt finds that the technology transfer brought about a revolution. Though the Tarbells note that “[t]he paucity of experimental methods and instrumentation available to organic chemists began to change with increasing speed in the 1930s”, they do not comment on the causes of the speed-up, other than to point to discoveries in physics underlying the use of the new instruments.9 Hacking's model posits four characteristics of “big revolutions” that have little to do with machines as such: discipline formation, the establishment of new social institutions like national science academies, large-scale social changes like the rise of capitalism, and changes in the “texture” of the world, such as when a probabilistic world-view displaced deterministic conceptions of the world.10
In this paper, I argue that the Instrumental Revolution bears a striking resemblance to the industrial one.11 I begin by offering grounds for thinking that the resemblance is not fortuitous, but rather reflects a general pattern of development caused by the mechanization of the labor process, drawing largely on evidence from structural organic chemistry. Though my focus will be on the latter, I will also draw evidence from analytical chemistry, which in some ways was more profoundly affected because its professional identity was based on methods of analysis.12
My analytical approach here is inspired by two authors. First, I draw on philosopher Maurice Mandelbaum's notion of an ‘analogical approach’ to comparative historical studies.13 This approach consists of two complementary subtypes. The ‘phenomenological form’ “rests on analogies drawn between instances that resemble one another with respect to certain overall characteristics of structure, such as the sequence of stages in revolutions, or some interrelated set of attributes that, taken together, are seen as constituting a specific ideal type.”14 The phenomenological form can be complemented by the ‘analytical form’, which invokes underlying relationships in order to explain the similarities the phenomenological comparison merely describes. My ‘phenomenological’ claim in this paper is that the Instrumental Revolution resembles the industrial one with respect to eight structural properties that the two events have in common.
A few remarks on the intended scope of the analogy are in order here. I intend the analogy to apply to routine structure determination in organic chemistry. Since defining precisely what is meant by “routine” can be difficult, I will instead characterize it in terms of “subjective” and “objective” aspects. The subjective aspect of routine structure determination post-Instrumental Revolution is that it does not require, of the organic chemist, research and expertise on the methods, instrumentation, and theory of the instrumentation used to determine structures. I have in mind the kind of chemist who would be intended by the following statement of aims from a textbook on spectrometric identification of organic compounds:
We aim at a rather modest level of expertise in each area of spectrometry, recognizing that the organic chemist wants to get on with the task of identifying the compound without first mastering arcane areas of electronic engineering and quantum mechanics. But the alternative black-box approach is not acceptable either. We avoid these extremes with a pictorial, nonmathematical, vector-diagram approach to theory and instrumentation. Since NMR spectra can be interpreted in exquisite detail with some mastery of theory, we present theory in corresponding detail—but still descriptive.15
The objective aspect is that the instruments have to be black-boxed, in the sense of Latour (1999) who defines black-boxing as:
An expression from the sociology of science that refers to the way scientific and technical work is made invisible by its own success. When a machine runs efficiently, when a matter of fact is settled, one need focus only on its inputs and outputs and not on its internal complexity.16
The invisibility of the machine's internal complexity makes it capable of being operated by someone who is not an instrument expert. Indeed, it is precisely this capability of the instruments discussed in this paper that makes possible the black-box approach resisted by the textbook quoted above. For example, another textbook claims that “[i]t is possible to treat the NMR spectrometer as a ‘magic box’ and simply memorize a few rules that suffice for deducing the structure of a compound from its spectrum.”17 My focus on black-boxed instruments entails that I will be concerned with the use of standard tools like a tabletop infrared spectrometer rather than with that of a high-end research instrument like a 1 GHz NMR machine.18
These constraints on the scope of the analogy exclude, for example, researchers who use NMR to study large biological macromolecules, which does indeed require mastery of, and research on, the methods, instrumentation and theory of the instrumentation. I will also not be concerned with the methods used to produce the final instrument commodities (e.g., mass production versus custom manufacture) nor with extending the analogy to the social groups involved in the research, development and production of the instruments.
My second inspiration is Marx's analysis of the Industrial Revolution, which I draw on to formulate my ‘analytical’ claim. Unlike traditional Marxist historiography of science, however, my concern here is not primarily with the social origins of a particular scientific development.19 Rather, I focus on changes in the labor process internal to the field. In Capital, Marx argues that the extensive, rapid and indefinite application of science and technology to productive processes under capitalism was made possible by the emancipation of factory production from the limitations imposed by native human abilities. This emancipation was brought about by the modification of the labor process, in particular the modification of what I will call “strategic functions” within the process. The modification of the function of tool-bearing in particular permitted a sequence of further transformations that exploited science and technology. My analytical claim is that something similar happened in chemistry, namely that the Instrumental Revolution also involved the emancipation of data production from the limitations imposed by humans' native epistemic abilities. The strategic function in this case was that of detection.
The paper is organized as follows. I describe structure determination before and after the Instrumental Revolution in section 2. In section 3, I describe Marx's analysis of the evolution of technology under capitalism. In section 4, I lay out my phenomenological claim, focusing on analogies and disanalogies between the Industrial and Instrumental Revolution. In section 5, I make the case for the analytical claim. In section 6, I address objections to my interpretation of this episode. I offer concluding remarks on the value of the analogy for the study of scientific change, insofar as it affects the nature of scientific work, in section 7.
