Gender stereotypes about who can be, should be and is usually good at science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) have long-lasting consequences for engagement with and motivation towards STEM domains. These stereotypes emerge in childhood (Cvencek, Meltzoff, & Greenwald, 2011) and are reinforced in adolescence by the presence of male teachers in STEM subjects and an imbalanced classroom gender composition (Riegle-Crumb, Moore, & Buontempo, 2017). Crucially, these stereotypes persist in to the work place and broader society, making an impact on representation of women in the STEM fields. There is a need to challenge ideas about STEM ability based on gender, which contribute to disparities in gender representation in higher education and employment. For example, in the UK, women make up only 22% of the STEM workforce (WISE, 2018) and in the US, women make up only 24% of STEM workforce (Noonan, 2017).
Informal STEM learning settings (ISLS; e.g., museums, science centers, zoos, aquariums) provide an opportunity for children and adolescents to engage with STEM outside of the classroom, but also to interact with counter-stereotypical educators (i.e. women, people from ethnic minority backgrounds). The present study, for the first time, examines STEM gender stereotypes across development from early childhood to adolescence, exhibited in informal STEM learning settings. Second, this study also examines the potential influence of interactions with informal STEM learning educators on children's and adolescent's STEM gender stereotypes.
STEM gender stereotypesGender is one social category where stereotypes begin to emerge from an early age. Gender is a central factor that children use to categorize and compare themselves in relation to others from the preschool years (Liben & Bigler, 2002; Renno & Shutts, 2015). At the same time that children become aware of these categories, their broader interactions with adults can reinforce gender-typed behaviors (Ruble, Martin, & Berenbaum, 2006). Consequently, from as young as two-years-old children understand gender labels (Ruble et al., 2006) and begin to develop ideas about gender groups that are generalized in the form of stereotypes shortly afterwards (Mulvey, Hitti, & Killen, 2010). By two-and-a-half years, children are aware of gender stereotyping (Miller, Lurye, Zosuls, & Ruble, 2009), and begin to develop their own stereotypes related to gender-typed activities, careers, and roles (Blakemore, 2003). While these explicit stereotypes decline in middle childhood, implicit measures have revealed that gender stereotypes persist beyond this point into late childhood and adolescence (Steffens & Jelenec, 2011; Wilbourn & Kee, 2010). One key application of the extensive research conducted on developing gender stereotypes has been to understand the development of gender stereotypes related to STEM.Gender stereotypes related to STEM ability have important consequences for STEM engagement and motivation in later life. Gendered stereotypes regarding who can succeed in STEM threaten the career choices of women and can help explain why women who do pursue a STEM career may eventually leave their chosen field (Beasley & Fischer, 2012; Cundiff, Vescio, Loken, & Lo, 2013). Evidence suggests that science ability can be viewed as gender innate (Mascret & Cury, 2015); that is, that men are simply “born” to succeed in the STEM world. Such stereotypes have damaging consequences related to women's STEM self-efficacy and career motivation (Cundiff et al., 2013; Schuster & Martiny, 2017). For example, research with adolescents has demonstrated that STEM stereotypes are a significant predictor of STEM self-efficacy, which in turn predicts future career aspirations (Garriott, Hultgren, & Frazier, 2017).These stereotypes emerge in childhood, with recent evidence demonstrating that children between three- and five-years-old show less support for counter-stereotypical STEM career choices (e.g., a girl who wanted to be an engineer; Mulvey & Irvin, 2018). Similarly, using both implicit and explicit stereotype measures, six- to ten-year-old children have been shown to hold the stereotype that math is for boys, with male participants identifying more strongly with math on both types of measure (Cvencek et al., 2011). This is especially concerning in light of meta-analytic evidence that suggests that girls and boys do not, in fact, perform differently in measures of math ability (Lindberg, Hyde, Petersen, & Linn, 2010). These stereotypes then are not founded in any real gender performance or ability differences (Wang, Eccles, & Kenny, 2013), and yet can lead to the social exclusion of girls and women from childhood through to adulthood.While children's gender stereotypes emerge early, in middle childhood there is evidence that ideas related to gender roles become more flexible (Liben & Bigler, 2002). That is, children begin to understand that men and women can fulfill different roles, independent of their gender. Despite this, in middle childhood, there remains a belief that ‘masculine’ careers have a higher status than ‘feminine’ careers (Liben & Bigler, 2002). Therefore, it is important to examine these stereotypes from early childhood into middle childhood. In early adolescence, gender attitude and behavior flexibility continue to develop, with an intensification of the need to conform to gender roles especially apparent amongst males (Bartini, 2006). Given this developing gender flexibility between early childhood and early adolescence, the present work, for the first time, examines gender stereotypes in the context of STEM across this developmental span. As evidence has shown that gender role intensification is particularly apparent amongst males, we expected to observe greater adherence to STEM stereotypes amongst male, compared to female participants.
Informal settings & educatorsIdeas about who can succeed in STEM have a powerful influence on the representation of marginalized groups in the science workforce, with such stereotypes leading to women not choosing STEM careers, or leaving the field early (Beasley & Fischer, 2012; Cundiff et al., 2013). However, greater representation can in turn affect ideas of who can succeed in STEM. Data from over 60 countries has demonstrated that where there is a higher representation of women employed in tertiary STEM education positions (community college and above), explicit and implicit national gender stereotypes are more flexible (Miller, Eagly, & Linn, 2015).Stereotypes about STEM may be fostered or challenged in formal learning environments, as youth have frequent opportunities to learn STEM in formal settings. Although STEM ecosystems change from primary school to high school, the Next Generation Science Standards highlight the importance for prioritization of the same core components (crosscutting concepts, science and engineering practices and disciplinary core ideas) across developmental periods (NGSS Lead States, 2013; WISE, 2019). However, this does not mean that the same messages about STEM stereotypes are communicated in different settings or in different developmental periods.Evidence from formal learning settings indicates that interactions with counter-stereotypical STEM educators can challenge the consequences of stereotypes. For example, in computer science classrooms, girls report greater concern about being negatively stereotyped than boys when they have a male teacher; however, the presence of a female teacher alleviates this concern (Master, Cheryan, & Meltzoff, 2014). Male students can also be positively influenced by interactions with counter-stereotypical teachers and peers. In one examination of an engineering classroom, male participants (17–18-years-old) who were taught by female teachers, in classrooms with a higher number of female peers, demonstrated a reduction in male-biased gender stereotypes over a year compared to those who had male teachers and less female peer representation (Riegle-Crumb et al., 2017). The number of female teachers in STEM in the US has increased from 43% in 1988 to 64% in 2012 (Nguyen & Redding, 2018), suggesting that, in formal settings, children increasingly have access to opportunities to interact with STEM educators who challenge gendered norms. However, a visual analysis of STEM materials used in formal classrooms confirmed that science learning materials reinforce stereotypes associating science with men (Kerkhoven, Russo, Land-Zandstra, Saxena, & Rodenburg, 2016). Thus, even if children are provided with counter stereotypic STEM teachers, they may still receive implicit input suggesting that science is for boys and men. Importantly, children's and adolescents' STEM learning does not solely take place in formal settings, and less is known about how interactions in informal settings may influence ideas about gender equity in STEM.Informal STEM learning settings (ISLS) provide opportunities for children and adolescents to learn outside of the classroom (Dierking & Falk, 2018). Research indicates that a great deal of learning about STEM and who STEM is “for” occurs in in informal STEM settings (National Research Council, 2009). Informal STEM learning has been shown to promote positive science attitudes (National Research Council, 2009), which may be especially useful in countering the pervasive stereotypes about ability and STEM. This may be in part because these sites also offer opportunities to interact with a variety of STEM educators, who may represent a broader cross-section of society than the small number of STEM teachers with whom children and adolescents interact in formal settings. While research on learning in informal settings has documented that these informal environments can scaffold science learning for youth from non-dominant backgrounds, such as girls and women (National Research Council, 2009), less is known about if and how quickly informal STEM learning opportunities can promote attitudes countering STEM gender stereotypes. Informal settings provide an opportunity to explore the dosage that is required to observe the effects of diverse representation on gender stereotyping. Typically, an interaction with an educator in an informal site will be much shorter and shallower than the relationship formed between student and teacher in formal educational settings. We know that long-form interactions can challenge the consequences of STEM gender stereotyping. However, we do not yet know what the minimal form of interaction that can serve to challenge STEM gender stereotypes looks like. Therefore, a second aim of this study was to examine whether a short interaction with a counter-stereotypical educator had any bearing on responses to STEM gender stereotypes.
The present studyThe present study extends existing work related to STEM gender stereotypes by examining the development of these stereotypes between early childhood and adolescence. We examined children from early childhood where explicit gender stereotypes about STEM domains have been shown to emerge (Cvencek et al., 2011), through middle childhood where gender role flexibility increases and rigid gender stereotypes begin to decline (Liben & Bigler, 2002). Further, we extend this examination into adolescence, where we know that these gender stereotypes have a measurable impact upon STEM engagement and motivations (Song, Zuo, Wen, & Yan, 2017). In particular, we focus on whether explicit stereotypes change in to adolescence and in what way. Further, this study provides the first examination of the potential influence of educators in ISLS on children's and adolescents' explicit STEM gender stereotypes. Participants were visitors to one of four ISLS, who were surveyed after visiting a pre-selected gallery or exhibit, where they either interacted with an educator, or no educator was present. We measured participants' gender stereotype awareness, endorsement, and flexibility.
HypothesesH1Responses to STEM gender stereotype awareness, endorsement and flexibility measures were expected to become more equitable (i.e., less biased towards one gender group over another) between early childhood, middle childhood, and adolescence.H2Female participants' responses to STEM gender stereotype awareness, endorsement and flexibility measures were expected to be more equitable (i.e., less biased towards one gender group over another) than male participants' responses.For both of the above hypotheses, when participants' responses were less equitable we expected this to be due to an increase in male-biased responses.We also examined whether participants' STEM gender stereotype awareness, endorsement and flexibility varied following an interaction with a female educator, compared to a male educator, or a situation where no educator interaction took place. Given the strength of STEM gender stereotypes, it was an open question as to whether a short-form interaction with an educator would have an effect on stereotypes or not.
