Smart grids and associated energy clouds are supposed to provide cheaper power management and easier peer to peer transactions [8]. However, security has been a major concern specially when dealing with energy cloud infrastructure. Denial of Service (DoS) attacks have been identified as one of the most important potential threats to cloud-based energy management [13]. Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) was deemed high impact attack on smart grids that might result in communication failure preventing urgent signals that could put the smart grid at risk [21]. Asri et al. [9] proved through realistic simulation that DDoS is a very dangerous threat to the smart grid ecosystems.
Denial of service against cloud of energy is usually perpetrated through Bots or automated scripts [11]. Bots are one of the major concerns for many communication networks, because of their ability to send large number of requests to servers or clouds. In addition, they can be used for manipulation of online surveys, review and polls, including the results of elections [4]. Therefore, several efforts have been made to identify human users from automated programs or bots. In 1950, the researcher Alan Turing hypothesized that machines could pose as humans. To prove that, he designed a test where an evaluator could tell human from machine based on simple questions. The evaluator had to evaluate the answers from both respondents and decide which is human. Failure to do so proved that machines could pose as human [5].
In 1997, Anderi Broder came up with the idea of using a “puzzle” to distinguish between bots and human users [26]. In 2000, Yahoo! approached Carnegie-Mellon University and described their chat-room problem, where bots would pose as human and get information from users [16]. Luis et al. started setting some criteria for a test that can be used to tell computers and human apart. This is when the term CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Human Apart) came about. For a test to be considered a CAPTCHA, the code and the data must be publicly available. The idea was to have a test that will prevent bots from gaining access to services even if all people know what the code is and how the CAPTCHA works [3]. Besides preventing automated machines from registering to websites, CAPTCHA is effective in slowing DoS, spam email, and password brute force attacks [5].
The earliest puzzles from the 2000 CAPTCHA project started with using distorted texts. Later researchers have classified CAPTCHA methods into three classes: OCR-based, visual non-OCR-based and non-visual [28]. The OCR-based method uses the shortcomings of the Optical Character Recognition (OCR) system to make it harder for automatic computer programs to read the CAPTCHA. Visual non-OCR-based methods use computer systems deficiency in identifying types of objects within images. Non-visual methods use other forms of CAPTCHA such as audio.
Another classification of CAPTCHA made by researchers was text-based, sound-based and image-based schemes [32]. The text-based is the same as the earlier OCR-based method, where the text is distorted and rendered unreadable to bots. Sound-based schemes fit in the area of the non-visual method, and image-based scheme corresponds to the visual non-OCR method of the grouping done by Mohammad and Sajjad [28].Download : Download high-res image (371KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Examples of OCR-based CAPTCHAs.
Most modern CAPTCHAs are either solvable by machines, difficult for users, require technical resources, processing power or other requirements. In this paper, we proposed a new CAPTCHA technique: Flash-based gaming CAPTCHA, which requires fewer resources, easier for all users to solve, but still difficult for machines to pass. In order to evaluate the proposed CAPTCHA, the framework developed by Jakob Nielson [19] was used. The learnability, efficiency, memorability, errors, and user satisfaction were measured. In addition, known attacks and technical requirements were added to the evaluation criteria.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 surveys the related work. Section 3 describes the proposed method while the evaluation and results are described in Section 4.
