BCI is an arrangement that allows brain to connect with peripheral devices and provides the communication of medium for physically challenged people. It also converts the message in EEG signals instead of passing the brain pathways. Such models can improve the life of subjects and minimize the cost of care that need to be taken care by the subject. This attracts many researchers towards BCI. BCI interaction can be performed on two controllers as the brain of user and BCI itself, where signals are measured by BCI generated from the brain. BCI analyses brain signals based on four different phases such as EEG data collection, EEG signal processing, feature extraction, and classification.
BCI systems are of three types; where type one represents dependability that is classified as independent and dependent. Type two represents invasiveness that is classified as invasive, semi-invasive and non-invasive. Type three is about synchronization which is further classified as synchronous and asynchronous methods [1,2]. In invasive method, the electrode is fixed inside the skull to get the data. In non-invasive methods the electrodes are fixed outside the skull to extract the data. The EEG signals which are generated in non-invasive methods are weak as compared to invasive methods. But invasive method requires surgery to fix the electrodes. Hence most of the researchers prefer to use the non-invasive methods to avoid the surgery. There are different methods to extract the electrophysiological signals as neurosurgery, electrocorticography (ECoG) and Multi-Electrode Array (MEA). All these methods are considered to be invasive, where non–invasive methods are considered to be magneto encepholography (MEG), electro encephalogram (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). From the above methods, in BCI, fMRI and MEG are expensive and less responsive with rapid communication, where EEG works in all environments with good response. These EEG signals are used to measure the brain electrical activity of different neurons. EEG signals are categorized in to different range of frequencies with Alpha, Beta, Gama and Delta. The Alpha frequency lies in the range of 8–13 Hz. The beta frequency lies between 13–30 Hz, Gamma frequency lies between 30–100 Hz and Delta is the rage of 4–8 Hz [3].The main disadvantage of EEG signals are low frequency with noise [4]. The recent developments in lie detection attracts many researchers and scientific community because it plays important role in judicial, ethical, and medical implications. To differentiate the truth and lie response, poly graphic test is extensively used these days. This test depends on various parameters such as heart rate, respiration and blood pressure. But this test is not reliable, due to deficiency in well-trained subject during interrogation. To overcome this problem many neurophysiological signals have been extensively examined such as ERP, fMRI etc. Therefore, we cannot depend on single polygraphic test as proof as convict the subject to punishment.
The event related potential is deeply investigated with P300 (P3) wave with positive deflection has a delay of 300 ms–1000 ms from stimulus start. It can be observed that the minimum occurrence at front lobe (Fz), maximum occurrence at Partial lobe (Pz) and intermediate occurrence at central lobe (Cz). Fz, Pz and Cz are the scalp plots of the skull. Using P300, various applications such as seizure diagnoses, speller, lie detectors etc., can be examined [5]. In the field of BCI processing the signal is one of the most important works for signal analysis [6]. Now a days, the analysis of EEG signals based on machine learning has been investigated with accurate and related modalities. The classification of event related potential (ERP) is one of the EEG, which is important for BCI applications. The single type ERP based application limits the classification performance of BCI applications. The changes in EEG signal requires more analysis [7].
In the current scenario, new research direction of EEG signal analysis is proposed as BCI EEG big data analysis and collaborative EEG analysis [[8], [9], [10]]. Signal analysis can be improved by considering the activities of multiple persons. Wang et al. [9] studied on 20 subjects and concluded that increase in number of subjects leads to improvement in accuracy of EEG classification. The concept of big data is derived from huge volume of structured and semi structured data with five “Vs” [11]. To address the neurophysiological big data, there is a need to develop new scalable tools for modelling and analysing the distributed multi-scale neurophysiological data. Spark is an open source cluster computing engine for efficient processing of large scale data in a distributed platform frame work. Fault tolerance and in-memory computing are the main features of the Spark [12].
In recent years, different methods have been proposed for EEG signal classification for deceit identification. Vahid et al. [13] proposed genetic algorithm (GA) based feature selection for the classification of guilty and innocent subjects with 86 % accuracy. GA generally suffers from repeated solution, called degeneracy which affects the accuracy. Junfeng et al. [14] proposed a novel test with support vector machine (SVM) and independent component analysis (ICA) to achieve good accuracy as 84.29 %. In this method, CA requires more time to train the model which reflects in system performance. N. S. Dias et al. [15] modified Principal component analysis (PCA) for feature selection on EEG signals to give the input for linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and tested on BCI datasets with 83 % accuracy. But, LDA is sensitive to over fit. As ERP signals are more important for identifying the subjects, Simbolon et al. [16] started using P300 for lie detection using SVM. The main disadvantage of SVM is to set several key parameters to achieve the best results of a given problem. Nakamura et al. [17] proposed a feature selection method with bioinspired algorithms. In this, the authors used bat optimisation algorithm to select the features of EEG signals for classification. This method supports to improve the accuracy of the model. In this method, bat optimization algorithm is used to select the features, whereas weighted feature extraction is more effective than normal feature extraction as presented in proposed method. Ren et al. [18] proposed a hybrid feature extraction for EEG classification using binary practical swarm optimization (BPSO) to find the global optimal value. LC Cheong et al. [19] used discrete wavelet transform for filtering the EEG signals into different frequencies to extract the features. These extracted features are passed through the Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) and achieved the accuracy of 86 %. In the process of adjusting the error the gradients have a tendency to become smaller in backpropagation. This leads to slow learning rate, which results in time consuming and also decrease in accuracy [30].
Hossani et al. [20] proposed the Internet of things based BCI for EEG big data analysis using optimised Deep learning. In this model, the authors tested different subjects to demonstrate good accuracy. With advancement of technology such as smartphones, big data are one of the important concepts of novel application in the era of information technology. In this work, the authors studied seizures on EEG data. Rosenfeld et al. [21] conducted concealed information test with five groups of subjects and studied P300 signal response. In this model, the authors presented the response of P300 signals in target subjects and their countermeasures by using traditional statistical techniques. De Wang et al. [22] proposed a novel concealed information test and applied min max normalization to smooth the EEG signal and non-parametric weighted method to extract the features. Using these extracted features, the authors constructed the knowledge base to classify the unseen EEG datasets to study the P300 signal, where this model performs well on single electrode. The main purpose of proposing a new method and validating on Spark platform is to handle the computational data with lightning speed by overcoming the above drawbacks mentioned in literature. From the results it is observed that this classification method demonstrates good accuracy. As per our knowledge, implementing Spark and Rule-KNN based Scalable Machine Learning Framework is a Novel and the very first attempt.
