Precision is one of the most important aspects of optical manufacturing. High precision creates high imaging quality, reliability, and added value for optical elements. In the past decades, remarkable advances have been achieved in the area of high-precision optical elements, where form accuracy is approaching the nanometer level, and surface roughness is approaching the atomic level.
Aspherical surfaces have been widely used in optical systems to provide improved imaging performances as well as reduced size and minimized weight. Form accuracy of aspherical surface is one of the most important factor to affect the imaging performance. For example, Our research team has produced a SiC aspherical mirror with a diameter of 4 m, a form accuracy of 18 nm RMS, and a surface roughness of 1 nm [1,2].
In recent years, diffractive optical elements (DOEs) have played an important role in the field of imaging systems [3], X-ray focusing [4], laser beam shaping [5], information storage [6], and optical system testing [7]. A computer generated hologram (CGH) is a special-designed DOE that can generate reference wavefronts of arbitrary aspherical surfaces. Therefore, it is a convenient and efficient “ruler” used in testing the form accuracy of aspherical lenses [8]. There is a saying that the highest accuracy of the aspherical surface depends on the precision of the CGH “ruler.” However, it is very hard to fabricate a CGH to the nanometric level with surface roughness at the atomic level.
CGHs can be divided into amplitude and phase types. The former has chrome patterns on glass, while the latter has patterns etched into glass. Because the diffraction efficiency of a phase CGH is theoretically four times that of the amplitude type, it has obvious advantages in aspherical testing. Phase CGHs are usually fabricated by laser-direct lithography on a photoresist layer, followed by reaction ion etching (RIE) on fused silica substrate. The former step controls the horizontal positions of the CGH patterns, while the latter determines its vertical depth. It is proved that CGH patterns on a photoresist layer could be realized using high-precision laser-direct lithography. Nevertheless, it is difficult for RIE to simultaneously achieve both an accurate etching depth and a high uniformity when etching a large substrate. Generally, the depth uniformity achieved by commercial RIE equipment for a diameter of up to 100 mm is typically not better than 5%; hence, the wavefront accuracy of the RIE etched CGH is 13–17 nm in RMS, which could not be used directly in high-precision testing.
The etching depth error and substrate error of CGH can be canceled by subtracting the first-order measurement results from the zero-order results to achieve a CGH with an accuracy of 1 nm [9]. However, not all CGH can calibrated using this method, especially those designed for an off-axis aspherical mirror. In fact, this kind of aspherical mirror, with high steepness and large off-axis, relies heavily on CGH during optical manufacturing. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a high precision etching method to improve the wavefront accuracy of CGH.
Moreover, chemical reactions etching (RIE) process will worsen the roughness of the etched area [10,11]. Having a rough etching area is equivalent to introducing both amplitude error and etching depth error, which directly affects the accuracy of CGH [12,13]. Therefore, to achieve high precision phase CGH, the etching roughness should be rigorously restricted to being sub-nanometric [14,15]. In addition to the RIE method, inductively coupled plasma (ICP), and focusing ion beam (FIB) are common methods for DOE etching, but they have similar problems of limited processing range and low etching efficiency [16], [17], [18]. Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of these etching methods for CGH fabrication.Table 1. Comparison of different etching methods.Etching methodsPrincipleAdvantange in CGH etchingDisadvantage in CGH ethcingRIEChemical reaction &Physical sputteringHigh etching rateWorse etching roughnessICPChemical reaction &Physical sputteringHigh etching rate and accuracyLimited processing rangeFIBPhysical sputteringDirectly etching microstructureLimited processing range&efficiency
To solve these problems, we develop a new method called scanning ion beam etching (SIBE) to simultaneously improve the etching depth uniformity and the surface roughness. SIBE is a physical etching method based on the movable inductively coupled radio frequency (RF) ion source, which can provide stable and pure plasma [19]. In this paper, first, we present an etching depth calculation method based on the imperfect Gaussian distribution of the ion source. Second, designed experiments are conducted to verify the etching performance by testing and analyzing all the characteristic parameters. Finally, a phase type CGH with an 80 mm aperture is fabricated. Nanometric accuracy wavefront and a sub-nanometric surface roughness are achieved. Therefore, the fabricated CGH could be directly used in high-precision aspherical testing. The results also indicate the feasibility and effectiveness of the SIBE method for etching DOE microstructures with extremely high precision.
In Section 2, the principle of the SIBE method is explained in detail. In Section 3, experiment are conducted to demonstrate the etching performance of SIBE. In Section 4, an 80 mm CGH is fabricated using the SIBE, the wavefront accuracy is tested and the error of this CGH are discussed.
