Today the material science is emerging as a new processing technique in the field of various research and development, but the volume of data rate in the material science is growing rapidly [1]. The growing rate of data in the material science is the major challenge like data collection, data storage, data processing, data indexing, data retrieval, data sharing, data exchange, and data analysis. The above challenges need to be addressed in the material science for the knowledge mining and discovery of new materials using better data storage management, visualization, analysis, and predictive approach [2]. Most of the data generation takes place in the materials science either from the experiment or new computation (combining more materials properties). The experimental data needs to be stored in the appropriate form, to explore the characteristics of the materials [4]. However, the increasing data volume and it’s characteristics arises need of data-driven approach, to accelerate materials discovery and deployment. In the context of material science, data analysis is taking part to analyze the properties of data, trends of data, and discovery of new materials [6]. In material science, data gets collected from heterogeneous sources and compared with existing data. The researcher in material science generates large volume of data from the experiments and simulations [10]. For example, The Spalation Neutron Source (SNS) in Tennessee carried out hundreds of material science experiments each year, and generates hundreds of gigabytes of data in single experiment.
1.1. Paradigm in material scienceThe development of materials science consists of four different paradigms which is shown in Fig. 1. The first paradigm started when science was purely empirical, that includes various ages of the material science viz., stone, bronze, iron, and steel). The second model came with the theoretical models, where various laws were formed using mathematical model (for example thermodynamics). But the theoretical model became too complex in many scientific research problems. With the advent of computer science, third paradigm came into existence and became popular. The third paradigm successfully solved various scientific problems which was not resolved during second paradigm. In third paradigm complex problem gets resolved using simulation (for example density functional theory (DFT)). The amount of data generation by these experiments and simulation raises the need for fourth paradigm of computational science. The fourth paradigm has emerged as material informatics, where materials can be organized and analyzed.Download : Download high-res image (62KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The four paradigms in material science.
1.2. Big data in material scienceBefore moving further, it is required to explore the features of Big Data, and how it is beneficial in the context of material science. Apart from the large volume of data in material science, the various features collection, storage of data, retrieval of data, analysis of data, and visualization of data is a major challenging issue in the context of material science [6]. For example, the collection of data may be from heterogeneous sources, can have different types, may have inconsistencies and dependencies among the data, may have missing or irrelevant data. It may happen due to the data generation rate is higher than the traditional system can accommodate, may have different privacy issue etc. These issues can be easily approached by the Big Data using their veracity, visualization, velocity, variety, volume, and variability which is shown in Fig.2. The volume, velocity, and variety are the issues which is specific to Big Data. These issues can be easily handled by the Big Data management and analysis [11]. The variety and complexity in data of material science are getting available these days (chemical, mechanical, structural, electronic, thermodynamics, physical) by the different sources which require the Big Data approach in the material science informatics, to provide better analysis. These experimental data needs to be analyzed before the new material creation and for generating better understanding of the data trends.Download : Download high-res image (103KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The 5 V model define Big Data.
1.3. Big data paradigm for knowledge discovery workflow in material informaticsFig. 3 depicts workflow of materials informatics. The variety of data may be added to the database possibly in different formats. To perform the better analysis, the primary step is to understand the format of data and its representation, and take the necessary preprocessing approach to ensure the quality of data [13]. The preprocessing approach is required to deal with missing value, noisy data, outlier data, duplicate data, etc. The underlying approach removes the unsuitable data from the large amount of data sets. The data preprocessing technique includes sampling, attribute type conversion, feature extraction, data discretization, feature selection, etc. The data processing techniques can be either supervised or unsupervised, based on the target attribute dependency [4].Download : Download high-res image (178KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. The knowledge discovery workflow in materials informatics.The appropriate data pre-processing can be used for the modelling using supervised learning for predictive modelling. The caution need to be taken while splitting the data sets into training and testing, else the model may be prone to over-fitting and can show over optimistic accuracy. If the target attribute is numeric then regression approach can be applied, if the target attribute is categorical then other classification approaches can be applied [1]. There are some ensemble learning approach that combines the various learning approach to maintain the results and accuracy. Apart from predictive modelling, one can also apply data mining approach for relationship mining dependency, and clustering to discover similar materials or hidden pattern associated with in the data.
1.4. Big data techniques for knowledge discovery in material scienceThere are various techniques that can be applied for Big Data analysis. These are the specific techniques that are frequently used in Big Data analysis for material sciences.1.4.1. StatisticsIn material science data collection, organization, and interpretation is required after each experiment. The statistical techniques are used to make a decision about the dependency between variables (Data). For example statistical techniques can be applied to determine what types of materials can increase the revenue, strength & desirable property of materials the most.1.4.2. Machine learningThe underlying techniques are applied to turn observation data into model and can also be used to predict analogy about the unseen data. The machine learning is the core of data analysis for material science insights. Today machine learning is used to analyze new material from massive heterogeneous data collections.1.4.3. Data miningThe data mining technique explores and analyzes large volume of data to discover meaningful patterns. The underlying technique uses pattern-recognition rules, statistical rules, and rules drawn from machine learning model. Data mining has wide range of applicability in security analysis in material science. The data mining includes association rules learning, classification and regression, cluster analysis.1.4.4. Visualization techniqueThe multidimensional visualization is highly approachable in the material science for data analysis to provide better insight & knowledge discovery. The visualization technique is also useful in identifying relationship among variables, trend of data. Visualization can reflect the entire data volume effectively.
