Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder that affects approximately 1 in 500 adults [1]. The diagnosis is a clinical one, based on the clinician detecting the presence of a slowness of movement termed bradykinesia, together with at least one of rigidity, rest tremor or postural instability (United Kingdom Parkinson's Disease Society Brain Bank Criteria) [2], [3], [4].
Clinician assessment of the presence and severity of bradykinesia is visual, and almost always includes an observation of finger tapping. In this test, a patient is asked to repetitively tap their forefinger against their thumb as wide and quickly as possible. The clinician will typically observe ten finger taps whilst looking for impairment of speed, amplitude or rhythm, often including a progressive ‘decrement’ seen over the duration of the test [4], [5].
However, this visual clinical judgment is inherently subjective, and there is no objective measure of bradykinesia in routine clinical use. Given both the imprecise definition of the term, and the difficulty for human observers to quantify small differences in movement, it is little surprise that inter-rater agreement of assessment of bradykinesia is moderate at best [4], [5]. Current evidence suggests that human observers prioritise changes in movement amplitude over changes in tapping frequency or rhythm [4].
Given the fundamental importance of bradykinesia to diagnose and monitor Parkinson's, and the relatively small group of neurologists trained to assess it, an automatic and objective method of determining the level of bradykinesia has the potential to improve early diagnosis and to standardise follow-up assessment, including home monitoring.
Other approaches have previously been suggested for objective bradykinesia assessment [6], [7], [8], [9]. However, all require either sensors that may not be readily available, or patient interaction with a specific computer program or smartphone app. To our knowledge, only one previous report used standard video to measure finger tapping bradykinesia, but featured only participants with advanced stage Parkinson's and required video recording of the face [10]. Here we propose a solution that uses the ubiquitous smartphone video camera to capture the relevant data during standard clinical assessment of finger tapping.
Our primary aim is to provide proof-of-concept that the assessment of bradykinesia can be automated using simple camera input, negating the impact of inter-rater variability and providing easily accessible clinical decision support. We also investigate the potential to predict diagnosis of Parkinson's itself. We describe how the video signal is processed and how pertinent features may be extracted to predict both bradykinesia and the presence of a Parkinson's diagnosis. Finally, we present initial results from a case-control pilot study.1
