Science parks (SPs) are managed area developments that provide accommodation for knowledge-based firms and institutions to conduct knowledge-intensive activities (e.g. Albahari et al., 2016; Westhead and Batstone, 1999). Within the innovation policy research, SPs are considered as more traditional supply-side innovation policy measures, aimed at contributing to networking among co-located actors and subsequent innovative and economic activities (Edler and Georghiou, 2007). SPs appear in many forms, providing a large range of facilities and services to higher educational institutions, research institutes and firms from various business development phases (Ng et al., 2019a). Moreover, it is argued that SPs enhance the performance of firms and ultimately contribute to more competitive regions (Bigliardi et al., 2006). Early SP models originated from the US in 1950s, when universities sought new opportunities to collaborate with industry through research, such as Stanford Research Park (Saxenian, 1996). Early SPs in the 1960s, include Cambridge Science Park in the UK and Sophia Antipolis in France (Storey and Tether, 1998). SPs benefit from regional planning as a result of market failure and the potential loss of finite high-tech resources (Taylor, 1983). Initially, policy-makers used SPs to encourage industrial development of economically weak areas (West, 1998). After their adoption in Europe around the 1990s, SPs are widely seen as highly effective policy instruments that could create and support new technology-based firms, generate new jobs and therefore stimulate both the local and regional economy (Van Geenhuizen et al., 2012). Early SP models were established to be bridge the gap between academia and commercial markets (Quintas et al., 1992). Modern SPs are envisioned to aid the knowledge-based economy through networks that enhance innovation capabilities (Van Geenhuizen et al., 2012). The current paper is focused on the Dutch context. In the Netherlands, the larger science parks are established on or near the four technological universities and eight university medical centres.
Since the 1990s there has been considerable academic attention given to proving the impact that SPs have on firms, which was often studied through comparing on- and off-park firms (Hobbs et al., 2017). However, univocal evidence has not been found for their positive impact on performance of on-park firms (Albahari et al., 2010; Lecluyse et al., 2018). Some authors addressed the need for additional research on perceptual measures such as perceived benefits or values of SP firms (Albahari et al., 2019; Lecluyse et al., 2018). The lack of evidence regarding positive SP impact could be caused by disregarding the proper measures to assess this impact. Therefore, perceptual measures might also explain a part of the SP impact not captured by the traditional performance indicators. The study on tenant firms’ perceptual measures of SPs include important location motivation decisions (Van Dierdonck et al., 1991), perceived benefits of the management function on SPs (Westhead and Batstone, 1999) and the perceived benefits of the SP location (Dettwiler et al., 2006). Other perceptual SP studies include the relation between growth rates of start-ups and perceived location benefits (Ferguson and Olofsson, 2004), perceived value of SP facilities and services among Swedish SP cases (Albahari et al., 2019) and the link between different types of SP facilities and services and different types of perceived benefits (Ng et al., 2019b). These studies are characterised by their focus on a limited number of attributes (i.e. SP location or other SP aspects) and the link between these SP attributes and perceptual measures. Compared to performance measures, perceptual measures are suggested to be more able to account for the different objectives among different firms (Lecluyse et al., 2018). Moreover, additional research on perceptual measures can complement evaluation research by revealing which types of performance indicators are important from the perspective of the tenant firms and could be considered in future SP evaluations. It provides for more detailed input for how SP managers can make area developments designated for knowledge-based firms more effective and future-proof. As SPs are often realised through financial support of public bodies, well-functioning SPs are desirable for society (Monck and Peters, 2009).
To address the demand-side, this paper will explore attribute-benefit links on relevant attributes that SP management can provide to attain specific benefits for tenant firms. A means-end approach, originating from marketing literature, is used to investigate the links. This theory proposes that individuals acquire products not for the product itself, but for what the product can do for them (Ter Hofstede et al., 1998).
There is little prior empiric research exploring the relationship between attributes and perceived benefits this way. Previous work of Ng et al. (2019b) explored the link between SP attributes on facility and service level and perceived benefits related to these facilities and services. Moreover, they distinguished different tenant types through organisational characteristics with each type having different associations. The authors showed that tenant firms on SPs are a heterogeneous group with different needs. This study by contrast focuses on a much larger range of SP attributes beyond facilities and services and includes more benefits derived from existing SP evaluation research, in order to provide an overall view of what an SP could mean for a tenant. Due to the broad scope, this is an exploratory study without the intention to generalise the findings with regard to firm characteristics or firm types. Specifically, the research question is: ‘Which perceived benefits are important according to SP firms and which SP attributes are associated to attaining these perceived benefits?’ This study on the perceived added value of SP attributes contributes to both academia and practice. The theoretical contribution leads to a further understanding of the SP concept and knowledge-based area development in general with a focus on the needs of tenants (Mora-Valentín et al., 2018). A negligence of tenant needs might affect their performance as a result of inadequate attributes that affect their core business activities. Furthermore, this study contributes to theory as to which attributes are useful to attain which benefits from the perception of tenant firms. In addition, the inclusion of perceived benefits derived from existing SP evaluation research allows for the exploration of benefits that tenants might want to achieve and their importance. This could lead to recommendations of new research directions for future SP evaluation research. Moreover, for urban planners and SP management, the user-focused approach supports more effective SP planning and management and SP configurations that align with current tenants’ needs.
In preparation of the empirical data gathering, SP attributes and perceived benefits are derived from previous empiric SP literature (e.g. Albahari et al., 2016; Ferguson and Olofsson, 2004). In the next sections the SP concept is categorised in proximity, real estate and managerial attributes in order to show how SPs can be configured. Moreover, prior SP evaluation research is reviewed to highlight potential benefits tenant firms might perceive. Next, the approach and the empirical results are discussed, followed by the conclusion, limitations and recommendations for future research.
