The Internet of Things (IoT) is an emerging technology which has great technical, social, and economic significance. Current predictions for the impact of IoT are very impressive. It is anticipating that 100 billion connected IoT devices will be used by 2025 (Taylor et al., 2015). It will also have a global economic impact of more than $11 trillion(Suryadevara and Mukhopadhyay, 2018).
Data is central to the IoT paradigm. IoT data is collected to serve many different types of applications such as smart home, smart city, wearable, healthcare, smart grid, autonomous vehicles, smart farms, industries and manufacturing, and retail sector(Al-Fuqaha et al., 2015). Therefore, numerous heterogeneous sensors exist to measure a variety of parameters. The collected data from these IoT sensors can be useful for different stakeholders. For instance, air quality measurements are of interest to governmental organizations, application developers and inhabitants of the relevant spaces. However, many challenges arise when organizing this data sharing as these IoT devices, which are typically resource-constrained, require efficient mechanisms to guarantee the data integrity and to enable proper processing and security(Liyanage et al., 2020). Due to the large number of IoT devices, scalable deployment, and maintenance costs(Al-Fuqaha et al., 2015) should also be taken into account.
Currently, almost all the sensor systems use centralized cloud-based solutions to share sensor data with different stakeholders. IoT manufactures often use these third-party cloud service providers for storage, access control or even implementing their business intelligence services (Hou et al., 2016). In that case, both data producers and consumers have to trust the third-party service provider and also need to pay some fee for their services. In addition, it is needed to establish an agreement between the data producers and consumers about the pricing and the amount of data shared. Moreover, these agreements can be even established without the consent of the IoT sensor (Gubbi et al., 2013). Most of these agreements are static and takes significant time and administration to be established. For instance, the sensor data consumer has to pay the correct amount or buy a subscription to access data, which requires the involvement of other trusted parties such as banks. It will result in a significant increase in time before the actual data sharing can be realized (Karafili and Lupu, 2017).
On the other hand, the trustworthiness of the sensor data is also an important issue to bear in mind. Untrusted or third-party entities can alter information according to their own interests, so the information they provide might not be completely reliable (Reyna et al., 2018). Data consumers need to be sure that the information provided by IoT devices and by other external entities, such as data producers, has not been tampered or altered in any way. Thus, the current centralized architecture model in IoT systems does not provide any solution for enhancing trust and will also struggle to scale up to meet the demands of future IoT systems.
In order to further monetize from the sensor data, auctions are used in the marketplace. The open ascending price auction is possibly the most common form of auction in use today. Most of the online auction platforms that currently exist are based on one centralized operator. They rely on proprietary and closed software (domraider whitepaper). As a result of this centralization, these auctions often lack transparency and bidders have no way to ensure the legitimacy of a higher bid.
Our Contribution: To solve the issues, the decentralized and consensus-driven blockchain technology and the underlying cryptographic processes behind it can offer an intriguing alternative. Thus, we propose a novel architecture, that uses blockchain in combination with a cloud service provider for the trading of the sensor data. We also propose a proxy re-encryption scheme to ensure the confidentiality and integrity of the data. The advantage of using blockchain to sell the sensor measurements with different entities is that the corresponding financial transactions are automatically managed through the agreed smart contract, stored on the blockchain. We also present a smart contract-based open ascending bid auction for selling the IoT data on competitive prices. Consequently, compared to the current IoT platforms where the data is stored in a cloud-based infrastructure, there is no need for manual verification of the payments and the predefined requirements. Also, disputes on these aspects are completely avoided.
To the best of our knowledge, our proposal is the first to use a hybrid architecture of combining blockchain with cloud storage to solve this particular issue of sharing data. Moreover, we discuss the different aspects of the implementation of the proposed scheme. On the one hand, we propose a very efficient proxy re-encryption scheme to be used as the security mechanism and how it allows that the data is only visible by the owner and the person present in the smart contract. On the other hand, we discuss the practical points such as the use of a smart contract, the storage of data and the communication between the cloud server provider and the blockchain. In order to verify the viability of the proposal, a prototype implementation of the hybrid architecture and proxy re-encryption scheme is done on a test bed. We used off-the-shelf devices and a commercial cloud service provider for the prototype implementation. Moreover, a detailed performance analysis is provided to demonstrate the scalability and performance metrics of the approach. To validate the generalization of our solution, implementation of the scheme in this paper was done using a public Ethereum blockchain i.e. Rinkeby Test Network (rinkeby testnet) and later on permissioned IBM Hyperledger Fabric. To further understand these blockchain platforms, we compare their respective performances and transactions costs and also discuss their limitations in the end. The conference paper published earlier proposed the basic Proxy Re-Encryption Scheme and included implementation only on private Ethereum network without performance or security analysis.
The remainder of this paper has the following structure. Section 2 provides the background information and Section 3 presents related work. The proposed scheme is explained in Section 4. The security aspects and security analysis are presented in Section 5 and Section 10. Section 6 and Section 8 present the implementation of the proposed scheme on Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric. The performance analysis results are presented in Section 7 and Section 9. Discussion and practical limitations are presented in Section 11. Finally, Section 12 presents our conclusions.
