Because safety-related accidents can cause great casualties, economic losses, and environmental pollution (Yang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018), they have adverse effects on the sustainable development of environment, society, and economy (Chen et al., 2019). This indicates that safety is a vital dimension for debates on human health, loss prevention, environmental protection, sustainability, and cleaner production. In fact, numerous studies have shown safety is closely connected to environmental protection, sustainability, and cleaner production. Huang et al. (2019), and Dong et al. (2018) proved that safety is closely connected to pollution prevention and cleaner production. Zhang et al. (2017) and Wang et al. (2018a) found that accidents of hazardous materials can pose serious environmental damage to the natural environment among other aspects. Magnusson et al. (2015) highlighted that safety is the precondition and foundation for sustainability, and Tripathi (2017) proposes that urban sustainability can be achieved through the creation of a safe city. Moreover, sustainable development relies on several principles to frame its actions, many of which are clearly related to safety (Taubitz, 2010). In addition, from a resource perspective, a common goal of safety, environmental protection, sustainability, and cleaner production is loss prevention (Ceccato and Lukyte, 2011). Therefore, developing efficient safety strategies to reduce safety-related accidents and their adverse impacts is a top priority in areas of human health, loss prevention, environmental protection, sustainability, and cleaner production. In this study, we focus on the information strategy for safety from the perspective of safety informatics.
Ever since humanity entered the information age, information science (including information technologies and devices) has influenced and changed various respects in an amazing way. For example, there are numerous examples of the integration of information technology with specific applications (e.g., online shopping, e-commerce, 3D film, 3D printing, digital manufacture, virtual manufacture, smart city, face recognition, etc.) (Yu, 2018). Moreover, information science has triggered a revolution in many scientific disciplines; various interdisciplinary fields of information science and other disciplines (such as earth informatics, medical informatics, material informatics, molecular informatics, and bioinformatics) emerged in the information age (Yosipof et al., 2016). Similarly, information science has a great influence on safety science. At present, in the field of safety science, the concept of safety information from a perspective of system has been proposed, Wang and Wu (2018a) defined it as the aspect that shows the system safety state and its changes, as safety information is an essential strategy for safety, and safety informatics has become a major research interest and relevant issue (Luo and Wu, 2018).
Safety informatics is a scientific discipline that studies the safety information phenomenon and its movement laws. Its purpose is to address the problem of the lack of safety information in safety management (Wang and Wu, 2018a). This new interdisciplinary field combines safety science and information science, and is recognized as a landmark branch of safety science in the information era. In previous decades, safety informatics has rapidly developed and its research has been useful. Since 2017, we have also conducted many studies on safety informatics.
Theoretically, keeping a record of the historical development and research progress of a certain discipline should be the foundation to ensure the scientific development of this discipline. Unfortunately, there is no review on the development process and research progress of safety informatics, which impedes its future development, research, and practice. Therefore, this paper introduces the research progress and development process of safety informatics, and proposes limitations and future directions for the same. This study will not only help researchers and practitioners better understand the historical development and research progress of safety informatics, but will also lay a foundation for its future development.
