The internet has completely revolutionized the world in business transactions, source of information, communication and socialization, among others. It has contributed immensely to nations’ economic growth and has greatly impacted the numerical growth of computer network users [10]. However, the internet usability increase is inherently bogged with information systems security which increases in sophistication daily [2,18].
The computer network technology is advancing and changing every day with its increasing popularity. Topology, media, protocol, and security are vital components of computer network; the biggest concern, however, has been security. The network and its security are of paramount importance in the present data communication environment. On the other hand, whole security breaches blockage appears at present unrealistic, but intrusion attempts could be detected so that action may be taken to mitigate attack impacts on the network damage [4,11].
IDS becomes a necessity when it is clear that intrusion prevention systems such as encryption, access control and firewall, among others are not sufficient in curbing the menace of computer and network security. The critical design terminologies of IDS in terms of their efficiency and analysis are paramount issues to focus on. It is paramount when considering machine learning, as an offshoot of Artificial Intelligence (AI), in design detection technique such as Neural Network and Naïve Bayes [21].
The goal of AI via machine leaning techniques relative to the work is to build an intelligent IDS model for computer network security as a second line of defense. This intrusion detection is a process of overseeing the events happening in a computer system or network and analyzing them for marks of encroachment. It is essential to strive for full level protection that ensures safe and trusted information in this era of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Therefore, computer networking is evolved with the development of new protocols, applications in securing and promoting its use in order to accommodate more users; also, there is an increase in the number of attacks and sophistication. All these have resulted in changing and increasing the network traffic. This necessitates the need for constant update of intrusion detection models based on machine learning algorithms for effectiveness premised on current realities of network traffic.
In the last three decades, data mining and machine learning techniques have been subjected to extensive research in developing IDS using different intrusion detection datasets, most prominent among them are the KDD99 and NSL-KDD intrusion detection datasets. Several machine learning techniques used on these datasets are rough sets, k-Nearest Neighbor [2,18], Bayes, Neural Network, Decision tree and k-means [5,18,21].
This study develops an intrusion detection model using information gain feature selection technique and artificial neural network (ANN) on recent UNSW-NB15 intrusion detection dataset that reflects currents trends in today's network traffic. The IDS introduced in this research is an anomaly IDS which is capable of detecting known and novel attacks. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 is literature review followed by material and methods in Section 3. Section 4 gives the experimental setup, results and discussions with conclusion in Section 5.
