In the beginning of the 1970s, Prof. Samuel Eilon of the Imperial College of Science and Technology examined the existing high-quality management journals and was increasingly disenchanted with their narrow orientation [1]. One direction was specialized in mathematical modelling and was far from reality. The other direction was focusing solely on current practical business problems, with little theoretical contribution. He attempted to enhance the mutual understanding between academics and practitioners and launched the first issue of Omega-The International Journal of Management Science (Omega) in 1973 [2]. The publisher was Pergamon Press, which was later acquired by Elsevier. Omega intended to publish papers that were not only attractive to academics but that were also readable and accessible to practitioners and managers [3]. With its insistence on publishing original ideas, as well as its efficient review process, Omega stood out in the management science field a few years later and attracted high quality papers from a wide range of countries [4].
As a founding Editor-in-Chief (EIC), Prof. Eilon managed Omega for the first 21 years (1973–1993). The second EIC was Prof. George H. Mitchell, who served in the position for seven years (1993–2000). The third EIC was Prof. Lawrence M. Seiford from the University of Michigan, who served for three years (2000–2003) [5]. In 2003, Prof. Benjamin Lev from Drexel University became the EIC, and separated the Editorial Board into Associate Editors, an Editorial Advisory Board and an Emeritus Editorial Board. In 2009, he introduced Area Editors and eliminated the Emeritus Editorial Board category. Prof. Lev's aim was to diversify the Editorial Board geographically and raise the rate of female editors, which brought an upsurge in submissions. The total submissions increased from 728 in 2009 to 1391 in 2015 [6]. During the leadership of successive EICs, and the contributions from Area Editors, Associate Editors, Editorial Board, referees, and authors, Omega has grown considerably and has evolved into the leading scientific journal in the field of management science. The impact factor (IF) of Omega shows a steady increase over the recent years. According to 2019 Journal Citation Reports (JCR) of Clarivate Analytics, Omega has an IF of 5.341 and was ranked 2 out of 84 in “operations research & management science (OR&MS)”.
Since the first issue of the journal, the purpose of Omega has been to provide a venue for reporting developments in management science, operational research and managerial economics, including research results and applications. Over the last four decades, the aim and scope of Omega have changed little. Now Omega has four focal aspects, including the following: (1) production management, scheduling and logistics; (2) optimization, health care systems and applications; (3) supply chain management, and business analytics applications; and (4) data-driven decision making and analytics, and sustainable operations.
In the literature, it is common to provide a retrospective of a journal's development after a certain period. Reflecting on where a journal comes from and evaluating where the journal currently is in a field arguably paves the way for the challenging task of identifying future directions and trends [7]. After over 40 years of existence, Omega has gained a high reputation in the management science field and contributes considerably to the scientific research; therefore, it is time to look back and look forward. To achieve this aim, the following four intriguing questions were addressed:
(1)What does the basic bibliometric overview of Omega consist of?(2)What collaborative relationships does Omega have?(3)How does Omega link to other journals?(4)What are the thematic trends in Omega?
To address the above four research questions, bibliometric techniques are used to outline a profile of Omega. The findings of this study will shed light on the academic community and help journal editors to design new policies and modify the current policies by examining the types of studies that have more impact. For researchers, this study is helpful to select research topics after knowing which themes are most likely to be the “winners” and “losers” in terms of importance and publication potential in Omega. Regarding the benefit for readers, they can easily obtain information from the abundant bibliometric data on areas of interest. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section gives a brief description about the methods and materials. Section 3 presents the basic bibliometric results in Omega. Section 4 visualizes the collaborative relationships and shows how Omega has linked to other journals over the past 40 years using the VOSviewer software. The co-occurrences of keywords are analysed and strategic diagrams are built in Section 5 to reveal the thematic trends in Omega. The main findings are summarized in Section 6.
