Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) or electronic waste (e-waste) is one of the fastest-growing waste streams all over the world due to high consumer demand for new featured products, technological uptake and shorter replacement cycles of the electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) (StEP, 2019b). Both developed and developing countries are struggling to combat this considerable waste stream (Islam and Huda, 2019b; Mahmoudi et al., 2019; Shumon et al., 2014). According to the United Nations University (UNU), in 2016, 44.7 million metric tonnes (Mt) of e-waste waste generated out of which only 20% (8.9 Mt) was collected and recycled within a proper channel (Balde et al., 2017). The undocumented e-waste flow is continuously increasing, and, according to the 2015/2016 annual report by Solving the E-waste Problem (StEP), approximately US$ 40.6 billion worth of recoverable materials were lost in the year 2014 (StEP, 2016). In the global context, secondary raw material circularity from e-waste (as one of the significant waste streams having potential of reusing, recycling, and remanufacturing) has been understood significantly and resulted in evolutionary concepts, such as the circular economy (CE). European Union (EU) proposed holistic action plans in recovering the material as it aims to reduce the dependence of imports of material and metals by 53% by the year 2050 (StEP, 2016). Under the CE concept, consumers or users play the most crucial role in determining the final destination of the waste products (MacArthur, 2013). However, to select the appropriate path and understand the importance of material value, as well as potential negative environmental impact of improper disposal, consumers must be aware of this specific kind of waste and have a critical role in the overall management scenario (Islam et al., 2016; Islam and Huda, 2018a). Household-level e-waste generation is significantly higher compared to other sources (Islam and Huda, 2018a, b). Consumer awareness is among the success factors for long-term strategic e-waste management system development (Borthakur and Govind, 2017).
Australia is part of the developed Organizations of the Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and a net importer of various kinds of EEE (Islam and Huda, 2019a). As per United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Australia is among the top 10 countries, which has a high Human Development Index (HDI) and considered one of the major developed nations in the world (United Nations Development Programme, 2019). According to Global E-waste Monitor (GEM) 2020 report (Forti et al., 2020) by the UNU, Australia is also one of the top e-waste generating countries after Germany in 2019. Considering the HDI and purchasing power of the consumers, Fig. 1 shows that except Norway, Hong Kong (China) and Singapore, purchasing power is relatively similar to all the major economies. The figure also reflects that despite the comparable purchasing power characteristic, e-waste generation varies substantially across the countries. In 2019, per capita, e-waste generation in Australia was 21.7 kg, which was slightly lower than Norway (26 kg/capita) (Forti et al., 2020).Download : Download high-res image (213KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Consumers’ purchasing power and e-waste generation in 2019 in major developed nations and Hong Kong, China (Forti et al., 2020; StEP, 2019a).
According to Bovea et al. (2018), consumers behavior about e-waste can be broadly characterized as consumption behavior, disposal behavior, storage behavior, recycling behavior. After the possession lifespan (from purchase to the end of active use), a large number of inactive EEE products are being stored at households by the consumers. Kahhat et al. (2008) and Kahhat and Williams (2012) mentioned that hibernation is one of the significant characteristics of e-waste disposal in developed countries. Several reasons could contribute to the behavior. For example, Kurisu et al. (2020) identified that lack of knowledge on where to dispose of waste personal computers (PC) and misunderstanding the current waste PC collection scheme among the consumers in Japan created a large stock of PC residing at homes of the residents. The aspect eventually resulted in a low collection volume under the scheme. Golev et al. (2016b) mentioned that mobile phones kept in storage (not being in use) in Australia has been gradually increasing, that reached 50% of the total phones in between 2012 and 2014.
In Australia e-waste is growing three times faster than general municipal solid waste Australia (Blue Environment, 2018). In Australia, specifically, around the 2006–2008 period, e-waste was growing rapidly and very little of it (roughly 1–4%) was being recycled (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2006; Total Environment Centre, 2008). However, in 2011, under the Product Stewardship Act 2011, the National Television and Computer Recycling Scheme (NTCRS) commenced, diverting thousands of tonnes of WEEE (mainly computer, television, and IT peripheral product) from landfills (Islam and Huda, 2019c). The scheme is a “free of change” system by which households and small businesses can dispose of their waste items at 1800 collection points across Australia. The NTCRS shares similarities with leading WEEE management programs: material recovery target (Japanese program), allocation of roles and responsibilities to stakeholders (Swiss program), recycling and collection target (European Union program) (Dias et al., 2018). However, is a distinct approach compared to Switzerland in what refers to customers needing to pay advance recycling fees at the point of purchase of any WEEE components (Islam et al., 2018), and here, according to Morris and Metternicht (2016) and Dias et al. (2018), there is a significant opportunity to raise awareness among the consumers in Australia towards the appropriate disposal of e-waste.
This study aims to understand the level of awareness with a focus on young consumers regarding the current e-waste management system, knowledge about the NTCRS collection and recycling system, and general consumption, and disposal behavior of television sets, desktop computers, and laptops. It must be understood that the products mentioned above were selected because they are under the coverage of NTCRS. The reasons for selecting the consumer segment are: 1) the consumer group is representative of the society, and they are considered as long-term electronic product users; 2) due to technological advancement, the consumers have the strong consumption ability and finally, 3) the group is exclusively unrepresented in the academic research (Ramzan et al., 2019; Yadav and Pathak, 2016). Although consumer knowledge and awareness and subsequent consumption and disposal pattern have been discussed for quite some time in the academic literature, a limited number of studies focused on young consumers, specifically when it comes to e-waste. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first systematic attempt investigating the issues from the context of Australia.
Thus, this study performs an explanatory survey on university students (as young consumers) with the following specific aims to:
1)investigate the knowledge regarding e-waste, its hazardous and valuable metals content2)understand the consumers’ awareness about the current e-waste management system in Australia3)examine the consumption of electronic devices such as television sets, laptops and desktop computers, and the storage, disposal and recycling behavior of the e-waste generated from the items5)identify statistical relationship between consumption and recycling behavior with various socio-economic variables of the respondents
Research contributions of this study are as follows:
•The study provides a detailed understanding of the consumers’ perspective (using survey data) that may render valuable information to the policymakers and stakeholders of the present NTCRS system so that the overall system can be improved, and more customer-oriented service provided. (See literature review in Section 2). With this research, young consumers’ perceptions and opinions regarding the present Australian e-waste management system were revealed for the first time, which could be utilized devising future policies and awareness-building strategies (Section 4.2.1).•“Number of family members in the household” and “number of items in use” within the household provides an essential indication of per capita possession of EEE, by which stock-level assessment can be made. With this study, it was identified which products are being used the most and the penetration rate. In the academic literature, such data is relatively scarce in Australia, specially acquired from a survey. The data gathered could be utilized by analyzing the national-level EEE consumption pattern (Section 4.2.2).•Average device storage time and reason for storage were identified which could be used developing appropriate collection strategies (See section 4.2.4).•Product lifespan-related data is crucial for future e-waste and stock estimation. This study gathered such data for the first-time using survey for academic research from the Australian context (see Section 4.2.3.1). Moreover, parameters (shape and scale factor) of the Weibull distribution are essential for various estimation models (such as sales-stock-lifespan, stock-lifespan, and others), which were determined using the firsthand survey.•Multiple correspondence analysis (MCA) as a statistical analysis technique was previously applied to other research fields such as tourism (Richards and van der Ark, 2013), cross-cultural study (Kahma and Toikka, 2012), and health services (Choulakian et al., 2013). However, according to the authors’ knowledge, no previous study has been conducted in the e-waste-related survey in Australia, which may be helpful for future researchers. Recently, Kurisu et al. (2020) used MCA for analyzing hibernating behavior of desktop computers in Tokyo, Japan for general households. Detailed analysis using the method can be found in Section 4.2.5.•The target groups (in terms of socio-economic variables such as income, age, household size) were identified which would further ease the policymakers’ effort organizing future awareness-raising campaigns (Section 4.2.5.1)
