The Corona Virus Disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic has been very disastrous. As this manuscript was written, nearly 18 million cases were detected (World Health Organization, WHO, 2020). The magnitude effects of the virus have been very catastrophic; one of the effects is the school closures from the playground to Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). Responding to the pandemic, more than 100 countries around the world regulated national school closures. Even though, there has been no clear evidence that school closures could be effective to decrease the spread of viruses (Isfeld-Kiely and Moghadas, 2014). The closure has caused a massive use of online technology to improve distance learning.
The necessary to use technologies for educational purposes in education during the pandemic is inescapable; some current studies have addressed this issue (Mailizar et al., 2020; Kerres, 2020; Wang et al., 2020). One of the technologies used during the Covid-19 is e-learning, a media integration for instructions that utilizes a centralized platform to organize communication processes during instructional activities. E-learning from a computer-managed learning to collaborative online learning applies innovative technology platforms, such as Edmodo, Social media, Blog, Coursera, or specific platforms developed by HEIs. By using e-learning, students are expected to make significant development in doing their learning activities (Omar et al., 2011; Smith et al., 2008). The development of e-Learning in HEIs is commonly elaborated by two reasons, namely affordable cost and supporting facilities to foster learning effects (Clark and Mayer, 2016).
In normal condition, the aim of e-learning integration is to support face-to-face learning to be more flexible, efficient, and effective. Plethora studies have addressed the use of e-learning as the objects of research (e.g. Megahed and Mohammed, 2020; Kasraie and Kasraie, 2010; Pham et al., 2019; Ramírez-Correa et al.,. 2015; Shi et al., 2020). During the Covid-19, some recent studies regarding e-learning applications in education were also reported (Abbasi et al., 2020; Alamanthari et al.,. 2020; Favale et al., 2020; Radha et al., 2020). Nevertheless, studies regarding e-learning implementation are still limited in developing countries and in specific subject matters. Therefore, this study was conducted to understand factors predicting the use of e-learning through path analyses among Indonesian sport science education students. The study adapted Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) as a guiding academic model to understand the relationships between exogenous and endogenous constructs.
