Benefiting from the increasing scale of data and the continuous innovation of AI algorithms, deep learning achieves an attractive development in recent years. Computer vision and natural language processing have achieved remarkable results in processing large-scale data by introducing deep learning algorithms. Image caption algorithms can automatically generate corresponding text description for the input image and it is of great research value, which enables computers to understand the human world better.
Different from natural image, medical image is collected from medical equipments, which contains pathological information of internal tissues, so that doctors can diagnose patients faster. Hospitals produce a large number of medical images every day, so how to use the data to assist doctors in diagnosis has become a focus research. In the field of image processing, deep learning has shown its powerful recognition ability, and has greatly improved the experimental results of natural image classification, object detection, segmentation and image caption. Thus, an increasing number of studies [1], [2], [3], [4], [5] introducing deep learning to process medical images in recent years. There is a significant evaluation of introducing image caption algorithms into medical image processing, for reducing the workload of doctors, increasing diagnosis efficiency and shortening the diagnostic time. However, medical image is quite different from natural image, and medical images have the coarse resolution, and the blur boundaries of foreground and background. Therefore, the existing medical image caption algorithms need to introduce some pre-processing methods before generating diagnostic report.
BLEU [6], ROUGE-L [7], METEOR [8] and CIDEr [9] are adopted to evaluate the text generated by an image caption algorithm. These methods calculate scores based on the n-grams relationship between generated text and target text, and every word has the same contribution to the final score. But the correlation between medical images and generated diagnostic reports are more important. We expect that the pathological information in the generated diagnostic reports can be described more accurately. For example, if the pathological information of input medical image is gallbladder stone, then we expect that the description of pathological information in the generated diagnostic report should be gallbladder stone, rather than fatty liver or any other diseases. On the other side, crowdsourcing is a common way to construct natural image caption datasets, which leads to the same image have multiple different target texts. However, the diagnostic report of medical image must be written by experienced doctors, so it is difficult to construct a medical image caption dataset by crowdsourcing, and there is only one target text for a medical image. From the two reasons, we can find that the evaluations used in natural image caption are not suit for medical image caption.
Focusing on the problems mentioned above, we propose a new model named SFNet, which can utilize object detection algorithm to automatically separate lesion area from background area in medical image, and then the lesion area is used to get the encoding vector and pathological information, so that the encoding vector can carry more information about the lesion area. Additionally, we extract pathological information in generated diagnostic report and compare it with the ground-truth pathological information to calculate the description accuracy. Our main contributions are as following:
1. We propose a model which can detect the lesion areas, diagnose pathological information and generate diagnostic reports for medical images simultaneously.
2. Our model can learn to fuse pathological information into the generation procedure of diagnostic reports, so that our model can generate reports with higher metric scores and more accurate pathological information.
3. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach which attempts to improve the accuracy of pathological information in generated diagnostic reports, and we have achieved a competitive result.
In the following sections, more details about SFNet will be introduced. In the related work, we will introduce some state-of-art image caption algorithms and some researches attempt to introduce image caption algorithms into medical image processing. We will introduce the calculation process and the training strategies of SFNet in the section of the method. Then, experimental results of our model will be demonstrated in the results part. Finally, analysis of experimental results and disadvantages of our SFNet are introduced in discussion.
