The educational sector in recent decades has witnessed important educational transformations and great criticism of traditional curricula and teaching methods. Among these transformations is the increased interest in the learner as the center of the learning process and the role that the learner should play in the learning process, as well as the role of the teacher in supporting and facilitating learning processes (Dembo, 2010). Keri (2002) pointed that, it is a common criticism that educational curricula, including textbooks and traditional teaching methods, did not take into account the differences between learners and their multiple and varied intelligence among them. In addition, the teacher-centered directly with the less student-centered.
MI Theory introduced in the early 1980s, through Howard Gardner introduced. In a year (1983) Howard Gardner wrote the book (Frames of Mind) in cooperation with other scientists, in which adding to the pluralistic nature of the concept of intelligence the idea that there are multiple domains of intelligence, that each type of intelligence operates independently of the other, and that from here the individual can be of a high degree or low in one field, regardless of his intelligence. Gardner defines it is the ability to solve problems or create products of value in one or more cultural environments (Gardner, 1983). In his theory of MI, he also sought to expand the field of human capabilities beyond the estimation of IQ (Taase, 2012). MI theory is among the most current changes to learning. He said that the cognitive competence of the individual can be clearly and better described as the expression of a group of capacities, and higher thinking skills called intelligence. He also mentioned that persons possess each of these capabilities to a certain level, but the individuals vary in the level, type skill and degree of own it (Kırkgöz, 2010; Masoomeh & Mahdieh, 2014; Taaseh, Mohebbi, & Mirzaei, 2014). Firstly, Howard Gardner suggested seven basic intelligences, which were seven distinct ways of showing intellectual abilities, including verbal/linguistic, visual/spatial, musical, logical/mathematical, interpersonal, intrapersonal, and body/kinesthetic, after which three other intelligences were suggested, naturalistic, spiritual, and existential, including naturalistic intelligence (Mindy, 2005; Osmon & Jackson, 2002). Taase (2012) refers that the development of human minds is linked to the curricula taught by students in their classes, as it is an essential and important pillar of the educational system, in addition to that it reflects the reality of the community, its philosophy, and its needs. Additionally, textbooks content is one of the main elements of the curriculum through which students are provided with information and knowledge. Furthermore, Checkley, Campbell, and Gardner (1997) said that textbooks have become the most resource in which instructors utilize in language classrooms in our everyday lives; Therefore, school books serve as a go-between feature in communicating learners ' learning goals with the aid of instructors. Then it is important to do analysis and investigation for these textbooks.
1.1. Theory of multiple intelligencesThis theory, established by psychologist Howard Gardner in the late 1970s and early 1980s, indicates that humans possess eight or more fairly independent intelligences. Since its emergence, this theory revolutionized the field of education and learning. It posed a challenge to the traditional concept of intelligence, which recognizes only one form of intelligence, and uses one method in education, which leads to depriving most learners of opportunities for effective education. According to Gardner and Moran (2006), individuals rely on such intelligence to solve problems independently and collectively, or to create value products in one or more cultural environments that are relevant to the communities where they living. Through a review of the literature and studies on multiple types of intelligence, the eight intelligences identified in MI theory include linguistic intelligence, logical-mathematical intelligence, visual/spatial intelligence, musical intelligence, body-kinesthetic intelligence, naturalistic intelligence, interpersonal intelligence, and intrapersonal intelligence (Christison, 1998; Gardner, 1999; Johnson, 2007; Modirkhamene & Bagherian, 2012; Taase, 2012) which summarized as shown in Fig. 1Download : Download high-res image (835KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The eight intelligences (Gardner, 1999; Susan, Julie, & Barbara Slatin in consultation with Howard Gardner, 2005).On the other hand, in his MI theory, Gardner and Moran (2006) indicated that individuals who have some kind of intelligence, will not automatically be similar to the intelligence of another person.In addition, Gardner developed criteria for the determination of valid intelligence, the objective of those criteria purposes for the correct identification of multiple intelligences, Fig. 2. Summarized this criteria Gardner, 2004).Download : Download high-res image (264KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Criteria for the determination of valid intelligences (Gardner, 2004).
1.2. The educational significance of multiple intelligences theoryKornhaber, Fierros, and Veenema (2004) pointed out that multiple intelligences theory explains and focuses on what the typical school program should look like, if we want to develop scientific concepts and inquiry skills for our students, taking into account the consideration of individual differences between them. According to Chen, Moran, and Gardner (2009) and Cocking, Mestre, and Brown (2000) the educational significance of multiple intelligences theory can be clarified as follows:•It contributes to improving the learning and teaching processes by focusing on the students’ intelligences capabilities, which in turn makes learning more vital and active.•The use of multiple intelligences will make instruction and teaching more enjoyable for both instructors and learners.•Improving the performance of teachers through their use and application of various teaching methods and strategies that differentiate students in a manner consistent with the individual differences of students.•It takes into account students' preferences, needs, and interests, which makes their learning more effective.•This theory focuses on motivating each learner to use their preferred type of intelligence during studying.•It focuses on the principle of understanding teaching, which ensures that students learn to think and understand.•The theory helps to take advantage of information technology and important its role in the school, in particular, computer and the internet.•The theory achieves the model of smart schools.
1.3. School textbooks & multiple intelligencesBotelho (2003) and Sinder (2001) referred that the theory of MI has been adopted in the educational curriculum of schools and even higher education institutions like universities. This means that students become more understanding of the topics content that include in textbooks (Sinder, 2001). In Jordan, MI theory entered and adopted the Jordanian Ministry of Education in 1992, before it entered and adopt Jordanian higher education institutions such as universities and educational institutions (Ministry of Education, 2020). The Jordanian Ministry of Education is aware that textbooks are considered one of the most elements of the curriculum which needs continually improved and developing for the successful delivery of education repair. Therefore, it began to center the designing and preparing curricula based on the theory of multiple intelligences due to the significance it, in order to seek to prepare students to have knowledge, creativity, and imagination to solve the problems that face them in their life (Ministry of Education, 2020). According to Checkley et al. (1997), there are five approaches in order to include the MI theory in the curriculum, which are (see Fig. 3):1Design of lesson: using all or several of the intelligences in lessons or asking students’ views about the best way to teach and learn certain subjects.2Interdisciplinary units: Secondary schools usually involve interdisciplinary units.3Projects for students. Students have the ability in learning to “initiate and manage complex projects” when constructing student projects.4Evaluations: Evaluations are designed to allow students to demonstrate what they have learned. Sometimes this comes in the form of enabling each student to devise how they will be assessed while meeting the quality criteria of the teacher.5Apprenticeships: Apprenticeships may allow students to gradually gain a valued skill with effort and discipline over time.Download : Download high-res image (87KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Approaches to curriculum change according to teaching for MI (Checkley et al., 1997).Boulmaiz (2017) pointed out that the needs and potential of learners should be taken into account when designing textbooks. MI theory can perfectly serve the purpose and make a great contribution to teaching and learning topics as it allows for the involvement and consideration of the needs, potentials, styles, and intelligences of the learners. Furthermore, Graves (2000) pointed out that the cycle of textbook adaptation as involving four main steps, with continuous assessment at each step as seen in Fig. 4.Download : Download high-res image (273KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. The cycle of textbook adaptation (Graves, 2000).
1.4. Previous studiesMany studies have been carried out on the inclusion of MI in the school science textbooks content (Al-Zoubi & Adawi, 2019; Ashour, 2016; Ashtarian & Ashtarian, 2015; Botelho, 2003; Ebadi, Sabzevari, & Beigzadeh, 2015; Kırkgöz, 2010; Gürkaynak, 2015; Palmberg, 2001; Masoomeh & Mahdieh, 2014; Taaseh et al., 2014; Taase, 2012; Wattanborwornwong & Klavinitchai, 2016). An analysis of these studies showed that most, if not all eight types of intelligence have been included in the textbook, and that some of the intelligence types predominate in textbooks. Verbal, Linguistic and Intrapersonal Intelligence are frequently represented, while Musical and Natural Intelligences are sometimes not reflected at all (Ashtarian & Ashtarian, 2015; Kırkgöz, 2010; Palmberg, 2001; Taase, 2012; Taaseh et al., 2014). Other studies such as Gürkaynak (2015) indicate that the intelligences types that dominate school textbooks are the Bodily/Kinesthetic and Interpersonal Intelligences. Botelho (2003) said that the activities examined in the textbook mostly cover four intelligences: Verbal/Linguistic, Intrapersonal, Spatial/Visual and Interpersonal. Also, Latha (2012) pointed out that there is a negative correlation between the inclusion of spatial intelligence and student achievement in science. Moreover, Ebadi et al. (2015) referred that Verbal/Linguistic and Spatial/Visual types of intelligence are the most frequently identified types of intelligence in the textbooks examined. The less common types represented in the textbooks were Musical, Body/Kinesthetic, and Natural types of intelligence. In addition, the study conducted by Wattanborwornwong and Klavinitchai (2016) show that different language types used in textbooks, such as Chinese and English, lead to a discrepancy of other intelligences. These analyses vary from previous academic papers, as they study the inclusion of multiple intelligences in all textbook content, and not only in the activities as shown in the previous studies, but also all parts of textbook content including activities, texts, evaluations questions, images, figures, and projects. Additionally Arafa (2014) pointed out that educational activities in science textbooks that included the Verbal/Linguistic Intelligence, Naturalist, and Interpersonal Intelligence were included in weak percentage, and that the rest of the types of intelligence are not included in these books.
1.5. Research objectivesThe purpose of the analysis was to fulfill the following:1Examine the degree of representation of multiple intelligences in the seventh grade science textbook in the Jordanian Ministry of Education.2Determining the level of awareness of science teachers in middle schools in Jordan about the representation of the theory of multiple intelligences in textbooks.3Determining if the degree of science teachers' awareness of representation of the theory of MI in the science grade seventh textbook vary according to their gender, educational level, and experience?
1.6. The importance of the studyThe importance of this study is illustrated as follows:•This study is, maybe according to the researcher’s knowledge, one of the recent studies that dealt with MI and what is included in the science textbooks for the seventh grade of multiple types of intelligence.•Attention to MI and their development in science textbooks and this is in response to the scientific and technological development that this era is going through.•Study and its results may be an add methodology to educational literature on the including of MI theory in textbooks.•This study is considered complementary to studies that dealt with MI and their link to curricula and education.•The results of the study may benefit educational experts and education officials about the importance of MI in developing and improving curricula in the future.
1.7. The problem of research and questionsBecause of the importance of the theory of MI in education, where this theory considers intelligence as the basis of human activity, and the basis for the development of civilizations and nations besides the production of creative human minds. We also know that the development of the human mind is directly related to education through the curriculum, where the textbook is a representative of the educational content, which is an essential element of the curriculum through which students are provided with the information and knowledge they need in their lives. Thus, this study came to examine the degree of representation of multiple types of intelligence in the science textbook, in addition to the lack of studies in the Middle East region in this field. So, this study came to search for the answer to the following questions:1What is the degree of representation of multiple intelligences in the seventh grade science textbook in the Jordanian Ministry of Education?2What is the level of awareness of science teachers in middle schools in Jordan about the representation of the theory of multiple intelligences in textbooks?3Does the degree of science teachers' awareness of representation of the theory of multiple intelligences in the science grade seventh textbook vary according to their gender, educational level, and experience?
