In 2014, the Open Science Grid (OSG) consortium announced to the sites in its Compute Federation that it would base its computing resource management technologies on the HTCondor Compute Entrypoint (CE) [1]. The HTCondor-CE enables remote submissions of acquisition requests to a compute resource. Developed and maintained on top of technologies from the UW-Madison Center for High Throughput Computing (CHTC), this edge service replaced the Globus Gatekeeper adopted by the OSG upon its inception in 2005. The announcement was a major milestone in a project that began two years earlier within the OSG with roots that extended into more than a decade of collaboration with multi-disciplinary projects in Europe, two decades of collaboration between Computer Science and High Energy Physics (HEP), and more than three decades of distributed computing research and experiences. Over time we witnessed processes of translational [2] nature that played a key role in reaching this milestone. Today, more than 170 endpoints at more than 65 sites worldwide use the HTCondor-CE to facilitate sharing of computing resources via remote acquisition.
Like other elements of the evolving HTCondor Software Suite (HTCSS) [3], the HTCondor-CE project has a starting date but has no end date in sight. In the context of our work, successful translational projects start by the articulation of the need for a capability by a committed customer and continue as long as the software artifact is deployed. The commitment that triggered the current translational cycle came with a 2012 assignment by the OSG Executive Team to its “Technology Investigations” activity: under the leadership of Bockelman and in collaboration with CHTC, develop a new strategy for the OSG Compute Entrypoint. The very nature of a software artifact that provides a critical capability in a cyberinfrastructure ecosystem requires a commitment to long term evolution founded on mutual trust and sustainability. The long partnership between OSG and CHTC has been facilitating such a commitment.
The HTCondor-CE embodies principles, ideas and technologies that have been pioneered and developed initially by the Condor Project that started in 1984 [4] and more recently by the CHTC. As a HTCSS element, the HTCondor-CE leverages software components and partnerships that were developed over three decades by the group led by Livny. The hallmark of these partnerships has been the translation of advances in distributed computing into scientific discovery through an open High Throughput Computing (HTC) software ecosystem.
In our experience, the roots of translational projects are typically diverse and run deep. While recent changes in the technology landscape have impacted the evolution of the HTCondor-CE, the abstractions presented and the architecture of the software have been established for decades. The HTCondor-CE includes elements of the HTCSS that were first introduced two decades ago, such as the ClassAds language to describe acquisition requests, and resources, and matchmaking [5] to route requests to resources. As in the case of Translational Medicine, the software delivered by a translational computing project has to be of value and of low risk to the target community. Namely, the software must be dependable, reliable and secure. Achieving and sustaining these goals requires creative software reuse, adaptation of new technologies and disciplined software engineering.
The community served by the OSG is international with a significant involvement of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experiments at CERN [6]. This entails a close relationship with the Worldwide LHC Computing Grid (WLCG) [7]. In 2005, the OSG deployed the gatekeeper software widely adopted by the WLCG. The WLCG would later decide to replace its gatekeeper. The search for an alternate technology that was conducted by the European gLite project [8] offered the Condor Project an opportunity to develop a prototype that would underpin many of the later HTCondor-CE technologies. In 2007 the gLite project eventually selected a different technology for its gatekeeper (CREAM [9]), bringing the previous translation cycle to a halt. At the time the OSG decided not to follow the WLCG.
The HTCondor-CE project builds on a close and productive partnership between the CHTC and the HEP community. It started in 1990 with researchers from Nikhef in the Netherlands [10] and continued in 1995 with researchers from INFN in Italy [11]. A key element of the HTCondor-CE has been developed and maintained by the INFN and the concept of “flocking” across HTCondor pools was developed through the Nikhef collaboration. In the early 2000s, these partnerships expanded to additional organizations and projects and were formalized through three US projects (PPDG, GriPhyN and iVDGL) that led to Grid3 [12] and the OSG and through two European projects led by CERN (European DataGrid and EGEE). This groundwork helped develop capabilities that serves the entire spectrum of open science domains today. A number of WLCG sites in Europe (including CERN) and Asia have adopted the HTCondor-CE.
The paper provides an overview of the motivation, functionality and architecture of the HTCondor-CE and presents the history and elements of the translational project that took a problem statement articulated by a customer and delivered a widely deployed software tool. The project is now eight years old with a history that goes back almost four decades.
