Journal of King Saud University – Science (JKSU-S) is an official refereed publication of King Saud University and the publishing services is provided by Elsevier. Currently it is published 4 times a year. It publishes peer-reviewed research articles in the fields of physics, astronomy, mathematics, statistics, chemistry, biochemistry, earth sciences, life and environmental sciences on the basis of scientific originality and interdisciplinary interest (Elsevier, 2019a, Elsevier, 2019b). After more than 10 years of development, JKSU-S has been highly recognized by professionals in the scientific community. In the 2018 Web of Science journal citation report, JKSU-S has an impact factor of 2.835, ranking 22nd among 69 journals in the Multidisciplinary Sciences category and Q2 in the JCR division.
Bibliometrics is a discipline that is commonly seen in the fields of philology, information science, mathematics, and statistics. It has been widely used due to its own characteristics (Godin, 2006). At present, bibliometrics has been widely used in natural sciences (Fu, et al., 2013), social sciences (Allen et al., 2017, Tran et al., 2018), biomedicine (Liao et al., 2018, Shekhani et al., 2017), management (Merigo and Yang, 2017, Podsakoff et al., 2008) and economics (Bonilla et al., 2015, Nagarajan et al., 2017) and many other fields, and produced many valuable results.
In addition, the bibliometrics method and technology are used to comprehensively analyze all the papers in a particular journal to showcase their research trends and influential publications, which is currently one of the research hotspots in the field of bibliometrics (Calma and Davies, 2015, Glanzel and Moed, 2002, Senel and Demir, 2018). For example, Kamdem et al. (2019) analyzed the research trend of food chemistry through bibliometrics. According to the research of Zeleznik et al. (2017), the number of articles published by Journal of Advanced Nursing is slightly decreased, but there is a positive trend in literature creation. On the 50th anniversary of the European Journal of Marketing, Martinez-Lopez et al. (2018) conducted a bibliometric analysis of its publications in the past 50 years and studied the most prolific authors, institutions and countries.
In summary, bibliometric analysis can be used to measure the progress of journals, determine the factors and performance that affect publishers, and further understand the development of research. A more in-depth analysis can reveal research collaborations between organizations, authors, or countries, as well as the evolution of topics in selected knowledge areas (Glanzel and Moed, 2002, Sugimoto et al., 2019). JKSU-S is an important journal in the field of science, it is necessary to make a systematic retrospective analysis of its development, so as to help scholars in this field have a deeper understanding of JKSU-S journal and provide some references for their research.
In this paper, based on the 543 JKSU-S publications retrieved in the Scopus database, we have carried out bibliometric analysis, which mainly includes the following three aspects:
1.Basic overview of JKSU-S publications over the years, including publication volume, citations, authors, knowledge dissemination, etc.2.The most prolific authors, institutions, and countries;3.According to the changes of key words in different stages, this paper explored the changes of research topics and hot topics.
