Every day we can observe constant development of techniques related to computer networks. More and more information are being transmitted through the network. Users more often pay attention to the quality of transmission. Therefore, it has become an important topic. On regular basis, the computer networks function according to the best-effort principle. Such an approach suggests that the transmission is conducted without any quality assurance, which becomes increasingly insufficient. Customers require some levels of transmission quality and moreover they expect guaranteed transmission quality. Frequently, the network providers are paid for service which is defined only by maximum attainable throughput. This is not a guaranteed parameter, usually it is never achieved. This means that customers spend money on something they will never get. Therefore, various mechanisms, which enable the differentiation between services and QoS parameters guarantee, have been defined. The Pay&Require [1] was put forward as a technique which fulfills this assumption. In this technique the quality of transmission is determined by a few transmission parameters, that is, bandwidth, delay, jitter and packet loss ratio. These parameters should provide information about the overall transmission quality, which is a complex process. The purpose of this study is to indicate the possibility of applying ML in determining the quality of transmission by means of using transmission parameters. Our contributions are as follows:
•data set obtained from users based on their experience,•transmission quality classification in computer networks implemented thanks to ML,•simulation of genetically optimized classifiers coupled with cross-validation and feature selection.
In the presented research, the data set was obtained on the basis of the experience of the users test group and it stands for empirical perception of the data transmission quality. 100 samples were created and 4 users were assessed. One sample means video streaming and web page loading recorded with different transmission quality. It was very important to simulate the application of ML in the assessment of the transmission quality. This simulation consisted of 5 stages:
1.data preprocessing (5 types),2.feature selection,3.cross-validation (2 types),4.ML algorithms (11 types),5.parameter optimization.
The simulation illustrates a new methodology for classifying transmission quality. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the Quality of Service (QoS) technique. In Section 3 state of the art is presented. The overall concept and detailed models are described in Section 4. The next section, Section 5, shows the analysis of experiments and description of results. The discussion concerning the concept and the results are in Section 6. The paper is completed with Section 7 which includes some conclusions and plans for further research.
