The use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in teaching and learning has increased substantially over the last few years in most developed countries (Comi et al., 2017; Falck et al., 2018). Many governments have made large investments in equipping schools with ICT devices and tools. As a result, the use of ICT-related tools (such as computer-based learning, email and websites) in teaching practices has rapidly spread. Policy makers have often been enthusiastic about the positive effects of ICT on learning outcomes. However, research has not found any clear evidence to support this (Spiezia, 2010; Livingstone, 2012; OECD, 2015a). In this context, the impact of ICT on educational achievements has become a highly controversial issue.
Theoretical arguments in favour of a positive effect of ICT on educational achievements point out that they can improve student outcomes by increasing access to information and to a wider range of resources for learning (Spiezia, 2010). Also, the use of ICT may promote individualised instruction and a better monitoring of student progress (Falck et al., 2018). According to views in favour of ICT, technologies would increase students' flexibility and autonomy, whilst also improving their learning attitudes and experiences (De Witte & Rogge, 2014; Alderete et al., 2017). ICT may be used to enhance teaching material, and to make lessons more complete, attractive or interactive (Comi et al., 2017). As a result, the use of ICT would improve students’ educational outcomes whilst, at the same time, serving to reduce educational costs in the long run (De Witte & Rogge, 2014).
In contrast, arguments against the use of ICT for educational purposes claim they may distract students from learning (Spiezia, 2010; De Witte & Rogge, 2014) and undermine the need for work and discipline (Falck et al., 2018). Moreover, ICT are criticised for restricting students’ creativity (Spiezia, 2010). Critical views on the use of ICT in education are also sceptical on the technologically-mediated relation between teacher and learner, and the negative consequences of a reduction in human interaction resulting from ICT (Livingstone, 2012; De Witte & Rogge, 2014). For instance, many ICT-based applications identify which questions students get wrong, but teachers can better identify why students make mistakes and reteach them (Cromley, 2000). Additionally, the benefits of ICT would also depend on the capability of schools to adapt their organisation and teaching methods (Spiezia, 2010), and on the skills teachers and students have for using ICT effectively (De Witte & Rogge, 2014). Taking into account the arguments of both the positive and negative views on the use of ICT in education, Falck et al. (2018) argue that there may be some activities in which ICT-based education is superior to traditional instruction, whilst the opposite may be true for other activities.
The effect of the use of ICT on educational outcomes is still an open question, both from a theoretical and from an empirical point of view. It constitutes a crucial concern for research and for policy making, given the large investments being made in this area (Angrist & Lavy, 2002; Spiezia, 2010; Comi et al., 2017). In spite of this, very few studies have examined the impact of policies on the use of ICT on educational outcomes by using large-scale international surveys. Some experimental analyses have been carried out on this issue, consisting of small-scale ad-hoc studies (mostly at class-level, school-level or regional-level), which limits their external validity (De Witte & Rogge, 2014). Studies based on large-scale international surveys, however, have largely been limited to exploring statistical associations between educational outcomes and individual, school or country characteristics related to ICT, without specific research designs which allow the impact of ICT on educational outcomes to be measured (Biagi & Loi, 2013).
This paper analyses the policy impact of the use of ICT in teaching practices on educational outcomes in maths, reading and science, using data from three different rounds of PISA (2009, 2012 and 2015) for the Spanish regions (Autonomous Communities). The policy impact is analysed by calculating the average use of ICT at school in each year and each Autonomous Community. From this, we evaluate whether those Communities which have taken greater steps in increasing the use of ICT at school have achieved higher improvements in students’ PISA scores. This empirical strategy takes advantage of three characteristics of PISA data for the Spanish Autonomous Communities: 1) PISA provides representative samples for most Communities in all the three rounds under analysis (2009, 2012 and 2015), 2) Communities are autonomous in deciding on the endowments and use of ICT in education, 3) There exists, in practice, broad variability across Communities in the extent of use of ICT at school. Spain is the unique case in PISA in which these three characteristics, which are essential to capture differences in regional policies on the educational use of ICT within a single educational system, are simultaneously fulfilled.1From this approach, this paper contributes to the literature on the policy impact of ICT on educational outcomes by providing evidence on this issue from an internationally equivalent large-scale survey: PISA.
The paper is structured as follows. After this introduction, the next section provides a detailed review of the literature on the relationship between ICT and educational achievements. The third section explains the data, variables and methodology used in our analysis. The fourth section describes the results of the econometric analysis on the impact of the use of digital devices in teaching practices on educational outcomes. The fifth section concludes the study, summarising and discussing the main results obtained, as well as their implications for educational policies.
