Traditionally, English for academic purposes (EAP) for undergraduate students is marginal in China's mainland where “all tertiary education is taught in the L1” and “English is an auxiliary language” (Dudley-Evans and St John, 1998, p. 35). English for general purposes (EGP) has been the mainstream practice under the guidance of the authoritative College English Curriculum Requirements (Ministry of Education, 2007, p.1), which stipulates that English for undergraduate programs aims to develop students' listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills so that they will be able to “engage in effective communication in English” in the future study, work, and social interactions.
In the last decade or so, however, EGP was challenged (Cai, 2014; Cai and Liao, 2010; Sun and Li, 2011) with the issuing of the landmark document “National medium and long term education reform and development plan (2010–2020)” (Ministry of Education, 2010) to internationalize China's higher education, increase the quality of its international publications, and improve the rankings of Chinese universities. Meanwhile, the concept of EAP previously unfamiliar to most college English teachers suddenly turned into a hot topic across China and incurred a heated debate between EAP enthusiasts and opponents (Cheng, 2016). While the concerns about the replacement of EGP by EAP are wide ranging and complex, the key issues in the debate are still around “making decisions about what to teach and how to teach it” (Hyland, 2006, p. 79).
Indeed, EAP for undergraduate students in an EFL context is most “complex and elusive” (Johns, 2009, p.41) because it depends on “a whole range of socio-political, cultural, and historical factors, including their country and institutionally specific contexts” (Storch et al., 2016, p. 482). As shown by numerous EAP practices in EFL contexts (e.g., Afshar and Movassagh, 2016; Dissanayake and Harun, 2012; Kuzborska, 2011; Spector-Cohen et al., 2001; Tavakoli and Tavakol, 2018), EAP practitioners have to address numerous similar issues and challenges. The most common and typical are students' inadequate English proficiency level (Dissanayake and Harun, 2012; Hu et al., 2014; Spector-Cohen et al., 2001), English teachers’ insufficient subject knowledge (Spector-Cohen et al., 2001), and a lack of appropriate textbooks or teaching materials (Harwood, 2005; Kuzborska, 2011).
These challenges were exactly what had to be addressed when a new EAP course was to replace EGP to help promote educational internationalization at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), a typical research university with prestigious science and engineering programs in China's mainland.
To make things more complex, departments and professors insisted that English courses should aim to develop students’ research writing and presentation abilities in their own disciplines. Thus, the vital question that immediately arose was whether a narrow or wide-angle perspective (Basturkmen, 2006; Flowerdew and Peacock, 2001a, Flowerdew and Peacock, 2001b; Hyland, 2002, 2006, 2016) would be appropriate for the course design. It could be argued that a narrow-angle course, focusing on the immediate specific needs confronting learners in their disciplines (Hyland, 2006), would be most cost-effective, but in the situation of BIT, where students are always placed in broad science and engineering classes and English courses are offered in year one and year two when students do not urgently need to learn discipline-specific language, the narrow-angle perspective did not seem to be applicable. The wide-angle perspective, which isolates a set of language and skills and aims “to prepare students for a wide variety of target situation, including diverse disciplines and professions” (Storch et al., 2016, p. 477), would dissatisfy subject departments and professors who tend to think it is no different from EGP.
Apart from the narrow v.s. wide-angle dilemma, it was also a challenge to decide whether a content-based, skills-based, or genre-based approach should be taken for the syllabus design. For science and engineering students, a content-based approach which presents students with discipline-based materials would “increase the motivation of the learner” and “facilitate the acquisition of vocabulary and syntax” in specific disciplines (Flowerdew and Peacock, 2001a, Flowerdew and Peacock, 2001b, p. 180). However, for the somewhat heterogeneous classes consisting of students from a variety of science and engineering disciplines, focusing instruction on the language in any single discipline would be biased and detract from the main purpose of the course.
A skills-based approach, a more traditional form of EAP, defined as focusing on macro and micro skills “associated with study activities” (Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998, p. 41) and aiming “to assist students to overcome deficiencies in language and/or study skills” (Storch et al., 2016, p. 478), would not be applicable to the situation either, because most of the undergraduates' study activities at BIT are carried out in Chinese. Students seldom need to participate in supervision, seminars, and tutorials, or write examination answers, essays and reports in English. Thus a skills-based course in the sense of improving students' studies skills to complete their courses successfully would be far from enough to help achieve the university's ambitious goal of improving its international ranking. However, developing students' macro skills (reading, listening, writing, and speaking) for academic communication should be the core part of any EAP course, especially for freshmen who have seldom received any pre-entry EAP instructions in secondary schools.
A third option would be the more recently developed genre-based EAP pedagogy (Swales, 1990, 2004), which “lays more stress on the linguistic and discoursal features that characterize specific genres” (Charles, 2013, p.141). A genre-based course that uses authentic linguistic data in order to promote students’ awareness of the conventions of research genres such as technical reports and research articles would be most welcome to subject departments and professors, but it would seem both irrelevant and demotivating to freshmen, who have no immediate needs to read or write research genres. In the long run, however, research genres are most relevant to science and engineering students who often need to use English to communicate technical information effectively in their professional careers. It should also be noted that most of the students on the elite programs at BIT continue to pursue an advanced degree on condition they complete the requirements of the undergraduate program, and then they are expected to publish their research in international journals.
Due to these complex factors and dilemmas, a three-pronged eclectic approach was created in the light of existing research about academic discourse (Bhatia, 2004; Bruce, 2008; Hyland, 2009) and the wisdom of EAP practitioners in similar contexts elsewhere (e.g., Parkinson, 2000; Parkinson and Adendorff, 2004; Parkinson et al., 2007; Spector-Cohen et al., 2001). The new approach is eclectic in that it is not confined by the traditional definitions or practices of a narrow and wide-angle course. Instead, it takes advantage of the useful elements of both perspectives. Meanwhile, the course continues to develop students' macro language skills (prong one), selects the genres that prospective scientists and engineers are expected to acquire and develop students' cross-genre awareness (prong two). The course is also intended to facilitate students’ acquisition of scientific information or content by using teaching materials relevant to a variety of science and engineering subjects (prong three).
As 16 credits with a total of 256 h of classroom instructions were allotted to the course to be completed in the four semesters of year one and year two, it was designed as a four level continuum in alignment with students’ English proficiency and technical levels. Four typical genres in scientific communication – science popularizations, semi-popularizations, technical reports, and research articles – which represent a continuum with increasing technicality levels, were selected to be the input materials for the four levels respectively.
In short, the four-level course aims to prepare students for the cognitive and linguistic demand in scientific communication and equip them with the building blocks of scientific discourse. The present paper reports the decision making process for the creation and implementation of the new EAP course, including the analysis of the dilemmas in a situation where the course became urgently in need, the explanation of the new course design approach, and the objectives for each level of the course. Materials selection and tasks design principles are given particular attention and demonstrated with numerous examples.
