Data-driven initiatives aim to analyse large volumes of data from varied sources to improve healthcare delivery by predicting future health risks and treatment responses (Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier, 2014; Murdoch and Detsky, 2013). Examples of such initiatives are machine learning applications that analyse medical images (Sample, 2018) or predict readmissions on intensive care units (PacMed, 2019) and artificial intelligence systems that assist in the diagnosis of cancer (Somsashekhar et al., 2017).
Such initiatives often come surrounded by promissory discourses that emphasize how large-scale or innovative data analysis will result in valid information to be used to enhance healthcare provision. These discourses result in a strong positive rhetoric about data-driven initiatives and as such drives their implementation. However, more cautionary discourses frame these initiatives in more critical terms and see the new initiatives as only a possible (or even a risk) to current epistemic practices in the healthcare field (Stevens et al., 2018).
As fields originating in different disciplines, medical and data scientist communities have diverse epistemic practices, which come together in data-driven initiatives. Epistemic practices guide how members of a field propose, communicate, evaluate and legitimize knowledge. These epistemic practices are part of particular epistemic cultures (Knorr Cetina, 1981) that can be described as sets of specific norms, values, beliefs and traditions, that are “bonded through affinity, necessity and historical incidence” (Knorr Cetina, 1999:1). This means that epistemic cultures are known for specific activities for reasoning and establishing evidence, thereby determining what and how we know in communities.
The literature on data-driven techniques seems to either downplay or overemphasize the epistemic differences between data science and medical fields. On the one hand, data science scholars and some medical professionals easily dismiss their differences (e.g. Amato et al., 2013; Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier, 2014; Murdoch and Detsky, 2013). They imply that it is only a matter of time before the methods and standards of data science become part of established medical practice, thus suggesting an ultimate trajectory of convergence that downplays distinctions between their epistemic practices.
On the other hand, scholars are critical of the evidentiary claims of data scientists and primarily stress the epistemic differences. Some medical professionals explain in detail where and how the methods of both communities differ by theorizing on the specific role of data-driven approaches. They contrast grand concepts like causality and correlations and argue that data science can, for example, only be used to generate hypotheses and to explore valuable research directions (e.g. Khoury and Ioannidis, 2014). They argue for the specific use of data-driven approaches by highlighting the distinctions in terms of methods and evidentiary standards.
The aim of this paper is to study the concrete negotiation of differences in the epistemic cultures of data science and medicine without assuming either absolute incommensurability or deterministic complacency. Earlier studies about technological innovations have shown us that comparing (downplaying or emphasizing) the distinctions with the status quo is not helpful (Janssen, 2016; Smits, 2002; Van Lente, 2012) and we argue that it is more interesting to study where and how the epistemic cultures of data science and medicine overlap and differ. Such an approach is more likely to capture all the nuances, efforts and workarounds in practice. In addition, a more detailed empirical understanding of the negotiations in practice can also provide useful insights into how practitioners from diverse fields find ways to work with each other despite epistemic differences. This has broader implications for interdisciplinary knowledge practices that are increasingly more common and more expected (e.g. large European projects) (Rathenau, 2018).
We conducted a case study of a data-driven initiative in the context of psychiatry. Psychiatry is a particularly interesting case to study the introduction of data-driven initiatives as this field is characterized by considerable uncertainty relating to disease ontology and treatment effects. Moreover, it relies primarily on narratives of patients and qualitative questionnaires to make sense of patients’ conditions and guide treatment decisions. This means that uncertainty related to data collection and use, that is also part of other fields of medicine, is amplified in the field of psychiatry.
The paper is based on an ethnographic, empirical study of the development and implementation of a hospital-based data-driven initiative in the Netherlands. Within this initiative, data scientists were brought into a psychiatric hospital department to develop prediction models of patient outcomes based on machine learning techniques. We approach this initiative through the sensitizing concepts of “epistemic virtues” (Daston and Galison, 2007) and “trading zone” (Galison, 1997). The notion of epistemic virtues enables us to ethnographically focus on the differences in epistemic cultures, while the concept of trading zones allows us to zoom in on how the differences are negotiated. This leads to the following research question: how are epistemic differences negotiated by data scientists and psychiatrists in a hospital-based data-driven initiative?
In the next section, we sketch the theoretical background and elaborate on epistemic differences by introducing the concepts of epistemic virtues and trading zones. We explain how this combination helps analyse the practices in the initiative. This is followed by the case description and methodology. In the results, we introduce the data-driven initiative and present two cases from our fieldwork that illustrate the process of trading epistemic differences. The discussion concentrates on the role of epistemic virtues and how they play a role in interdisciplinary cooperation.
