In recent years, environmental conservation has become a global issue that emphasizes the importance of protecting the environment. Many countries regard environmental education as one of the elementary school learning subjects (Cho & Lee, 2018; Marks, Chandler, & Baldwin, 2017). Environmental education refers to preserving the environment through specific actions that go beyond merely providing information. In order to achieve sustainable development, it is necessary to enable students to make changes to promote environmental attitudes and to preserve the environment (Gough, 1993; Lucas, 1972). In addition, special geological situations, such as Yehliu Geological Park in northwestern Taiwan, are a form of environmental art that we all need to maintain and protect. The concept of environmental art aims to draw people's attention to nature and to improve their environmental behaviors (Brown, 2014; Wallen, 2012; Weintraub, 2012). Past studies have indicated that improving student engagement and attention can effectively improve their learning outcomes (Sun, 2014). Therefore, how to improve students' attention to environmental learning and nature protection is an important issue.
With the development of science and technology, mobile technology and wearable devices such as AR (Augmented Reality) and VR (Virtual Reality) have been widely used in learning activities. Students are not limited by time or space when immersed in the VR learning flow. They can not only learn science knowledge from nature, but can also cultivate related perspectives via the VR technology. The learning situation is an important learning medium in the learning process. Students can observe and learn in a virtual or real environment to improve their motivation and learning outcomes (Giesbers, Rienties, Tempelaar, & Gijselaers, 2013). However, passively receiving knowledge is a common teaching method in traditional schooling environments. To transform students from passive learners to active learners is an important issue in the traditional class. In the meantime, Hwang, Shi, and Chu (2011) argued that it is important to harness appropriate teaching strategies to motivate students to conduct high-level thinking in learning activities. To address this issue, this study attempts to guide students to design a VR project to help them change their learning paradigm from passive to active. Moreover, Bloom, Engelhart, Furst, Hill, and Krathwohl (1956) indicated that creating MCQs (Multiple-Choice Questions) is a way to improve students' high-level thinking skills. In addition, the approach of student-generated questions is more effective in terms of improving students’ understanding of the course material than passively answering MCQs (Bekkink, Donders, Kooloos, de Waal, & Ruiter, 2016). At the same time, students need a certain level of knowledge to design the appropriate scenarios and learning questions. Therefore, this study combined PA (Peer Assessment) with VR projects in the context of a natural science course. In addition, Grainger, Dai, Osborne, and Kenwright (2018) indicated that students who participate in MCQ design and assessment can improve their learning outcomes.
The peer assessment activity is mainly designed to help students reflect and to promote their critical thinking skills through the process of scoring (Topping, 1998). The students play the roles of both assessor and assessee to rate peers' projects and to reflect on their own projects (Topping, 1998; Topping & Ehly, 2001). Past research has pointed out that peer assessment activities can help students get feedback immediately and can save teachers' time correcting multiple student assignments, such as correcting student essays and art works (Cho, Schunn, & Wilson, 2006). Peer assessment can effectively reduce the burden on teachers and cultivate students' ability to adopt the teacher's perspective to review projects (Cho, Schunn, & Wilson, 2006). Moreover, peer assessment activities are a student-centered assessment process that encourages students to interact with each other and to reflect on their peers' comments in order to understand their shortcomings (Wanner & Palmer, 2018). They can achieve better learning outcomes through the process of giving peer ratings and structured feedback (Hsu, Chang, & Liu., 2018). Dochy, Segers, and Sluijsmans (1999) indicated that the main goal of peer assessment is not to strictly require students to give ratings like a teacher, but to emphasize the quality of the learning process itself. In addition, Chang, Tseng, and Lou (2012) reported that students' project scores should also be included in the performance after the peer assessment activities. The peer-assessment activity will therefore effectively increase students' involvement, motivation and incentives through the process of assessment and project production (Chang et al., 2012). Therefore, we leveraged the peer assessment mechanism in the VR project to enhance students' learning performance and critical thinking skills. Moreover, we attempted to promote environmental attitudes and preserve the environment through better understanding of the environment's value and issues.
In addition, the VR technology is considered a project development tool in our study. It helps students combine knowledge and the learning environment and present their knowledge level through the MCQ and material design. However, several studies have indicated that the assessment of students' project outcomes in the traditional course was a major challenge (Barak & Watted, 2017; Meek, Blakemore, & Marks, 2017; Usher & Barak, 2018), because the number of tutors and teaching assistants is limited. Thence, peer assessment is a key to overcoming this problem (Barak, Watted, & Haick, 2016).
This study introduced a peer assessment mechanism into VR design activities to improve students’ learning performance and to help them conduct high-level thinking while completing the peer assessment activity. In particular, we investigated students' learning achievements, motivation, self-efficacy, critical thinking tendency, creative tendency and cognitive load after the learning activity. We also compared the learning performance of the experimental group and the control group after using the two different assessment approaches.
