The emergent coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has led to a significant global crisis owing to the rapid spread and high morbidity and mortality statistics of this virus [1]. This pandemic is related to the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that seems to primarily spread by inhalation of respiratory droplets or direct contact with contaminated surfaces [2].
Several countries, including Jordan, adopted strict Non-Pharmaceutical Intervention (NPI) measures in attempts to achieve containment of the disease and to flatten the COVID-19 epidemiologic curve [3]. Globally, higher educational institutions have, fully or partially, closed their campuses to limit the rapid spread of SARS-CoV-2 infection. This caused massive disruption in teaching and learning [4]. A recent survey by the International Association of Universities (IAU) of higher education institutions across the world (N = 424, 109 countries) showed that more than 90% of surveyed institutions have replaced classroom instructions by remote teaching or are in the process of developing solutions to continue distance teaching and learning [5]. Despite the general perception of distance learning as being of less quality compared to face-to-face classroom learning, emerging works showed the opposite [6]. Indeed, the current advents in internet based-communications, videoconferencing applications and educational blogs have facilitated the delivery of the theoretical educational content [7]. However, practical and clinical courses are designed primarily to ensure students’ competence in routine clinical practice. Such skills and experience cannot be optimally gained without a supervised interactive experience [8].
The shift to online teaching raised important challenges for educational institutions for organizing examinations and ensuring the possibility for students to progress in their studies [9]. Electronic examinations (E-exams) were introduced as an effective mode of assessment with particular importance to provide immediate exams feedback, which is considered challenging for academic staff members due to the increase in students numbers [10]. Currently, E-exams are considered a key element in distance education [11].
A health crisis may accelerate the development and adoption of digital and online technologies that open up promising prospects for student assessment [9]. However, even with leading-edge technological infrastructure, the occurrence of technical failures during E-exams remains possible [12]. Although E-exams were adopted by many educational institutes as the mode of assessment, these were based on in-campus E-exams [13]. Students during in-campus E-exams receive similar treatments in terms of suitability of exam environment, technical support as well as exam invigilation [9]. However, taking remote E-exams means that students will undergo the exam at home that holds many other challenges. Although these challenges were described during routine E-exams, they might be exaggerated with remote application [9]. Among these are the possible technical problems that threaten the validity of an examination and the possible increase in dishonest behaviors among students [14]. It is worth mentioning that most in-campus E-exams were designed as mode of assessment for theoretical materials. However, remote E-exams have additional challenges related to difficulty in assessing practical knowledge and skills, all of which can impact achieving the purpose of learning itself [15].
Regarding students in Faculties of Medical Sciences, there was apprehension among students about the mode of assessment [16]. Additionally, there were concerns of how students' mental health will be affected with months of online learning and revision. Further, worries were raised regarding students’ preparedness as qualified health care providers [16]. Of note, the lack of clinical exposure and assessment of clinical skills has increased student stress and willingness to return to placement when time allows [16]. All these factors are expected to influence the future readiness of junior health care providers [16].
Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST) has adopted remote online teaching as mode of students' education through the COVID-19 crises around mid-March [17]. In addition, remote E-exams were considered as mode of assessment for students' academic performance during the pandemic. Accordingly, this study assessed the experience of students at Faculties of Medical Sciences at JUST with regards to remote E-exams. We have focused on stress experience and factors associated with it as well as the impact of this experience on students' life style and dietary habits. Findings from this study will help to improve the remote E-exams methods and to reduce students' stress experience as well as the potential negative impact on student's health, particularly if traditional teaching activities will remain suspended.
