The web is being loaded with roughly 2.5 quintillion bytes of data every single day, and the population of Internet users has reached 3.8 billion in 2018 (Data never sleeps, 2018). Filtering and utilizing the useful ones for our daily life has become easier for entity-centric search while it has not improved at the same scale for task-centric queries. Semantic search is helping us to get information that is more sensible by answering some of our queries instead of the classic ten blue links as in the traditional keyword search. Knowledge graphs are at the core of semantic search as they store common facts about entities. Big tech companies and search engines such as Google, Bing, and Baidu have built their knowledge graphs to enhance their entity search. However, a good fraction of user queries is not always about entities; rather, they are seeking information on problem-solving tasks, which are known as how-to queries. Moreover, a search log analysis study shows that such task-oriented search queries are repeated 4.8 times on average, compared to 2.1 times for all queries (Yang & Nyberg, 2015). For example; how to aid digestion naturally, how to cook pizza, how to stop nose bleed are task-oriented search queries demanding step by step solution to the problem at hand. Recent advances in knowledge graphs have shown how entity related searches have benefited from entity-based knowledge graphs. However, in situations where the user query is demanding procedural knowledge instead of facts, the current knowledge graphs do not have enough resources to satisfy users’ demand. Most of the procedural knowledge is stored in natural languages and the query seeking such knowledge is usually presented as a verb phrase. Much of the commonsense and expert knowledge about the real world is in the form of procedures or sequences of action for achieving particular goals (Georgeff & Lansky, 1986). Classic search engine results would be more helpful if they are able to respond with the step by step solution rather than giving the usual ten blue links. There is an increasing demand for systems or artificial agents that can interact with a dynamic environment to achieve particular goals. Experiential solutions to most of the how-to queries are freely available on the web via different how-to communities and do it yourself (DIY) repositories, and those resources can be leveraged by search engines to answer users’ task-oriented search queries if appropriate knowledge bases are available. Hence, we envision extracting and structuring such knowledge into a machine-readable format will benefit semantic search to go beyond entity-based knowledge graphs and encompass procedural knowledge.
1.1. Motivation and problemGenerally, this work is based on the following motivations and problems.•We have witnessed the success of many large scale knowledge bases such as Yago (Suchanek, Kasneci & Weikum, 2007), ConceptNet (Speer & Havasi, 2012), Webchild 2.0 (Tandon, De Melo & Weikum, 2017), and Knowledge Vault (Dong et al., 2014) in semantic web. Most of the content of these knowledge bases are declarative knowledge storing information on entities, places, and relations among entities. However, despite the success of declarative knowledge graphs, procedural knowledge has not received enough attention from the semantic web community (Tandon, De Melo, De & Weikum, 2015; Thimm, Gottron, Gröner & Scherp, 2012).•Much of expert knowledge is procedural in nature. Consider the expert knowledge of nurses and health workers in taking care of patients’ daily medical activities like changing surgical bandages. Representing such knowledge of a dynamic environment as procedures, rather than as a set of rules and facts about individual entities and atomic actions, has many advantages (Georgeff & Lansky, 1986).•Many users attempt to satisfy their procedural (know-how) information need by issuing multiple queries, with the expectation that each subquery will contribute to the complete information they need (Yang & Nyberg, 2015). However, this assumption is not correct in today's search engine setting. This calls for search engines to find a way to provide users with relevant information related to the main task rather than expecting the user to break down their information needs into subqueries.To empower semantic search and other intelligent applications (e.g., smart conversational bots), computers need a much broader knowledge of the world including properties of everyday objects, daily human activities and more (Weikum, Hoffart & Suchanek, 2016). Hence, we envision a semantic representation of common human procedural knowledge that will allow the development of systems that can process know-how queries as a whole and improve the results. Potential applications of such procedural knowledge includes semantic search (Yang & Nyberg, 2015), task mining (Liu et al., 2014), activity recognition (Perkowitz, Philipose, Fishkin & Patterson, 2004; Tandon et al., 2015) robotic functions and computer vision (Rohrbach, Amin, Andriluka & Schiele, 2012; Tenorth, Klank, Pangercic & Beetz, 2011). Recent advancement in voice assistants like Alexa of Amazon, Cortana of Microsoft, and Siri of Apple indicate the potential of having such assistants at home for common human activities, home remedies in the future; and procedural knowledge base will be a necessity to empower those devices. Moreover, we also envision the application of such knowledge bases in personal digital assistant systems.
1.2. Approaches and contributionWe devised a custom pipeline to extract and develop health-related task frames from wiki-how and howtocure communities. Howtocure is a web platform where natural remedies for common health-care issues are shared. We filtered only expert reviewed tasks from wiki-how. Wiki-how labels1 medical articles with a green expert check mark if the article is authored or reviewed by an actual medical doctor. We managed to extract more than 71 K task frames by crawling these on-line community platforms. The task frames are then fed forward to the next levels of the pipe for semantic canonicalization and taxonomic organization. Details of the techniques used in the pipeline are discussed in Section 4. Finally, we constructed a high quality health-care procedural knowledge base (HealthAidKB) consisting of 71,200 task frames. The major contributions of this work are:•To our knowledge, this is the first system that automatically acquires domain-specific human activity knowledge for the health domain from on-line communities.•Devised a unique pipeline to build the procedural knowledge base.•The publicly accessible semantically organized knowledge base of 71,200 health-related task frames.HealthAidKB can be accessed freely from https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/scp7bv5sv4/3.
