Artificial intelligence (AI) and blockchain (BC) based technologies have earned a good reputation among the research community over the past few years. AI is now capable of processing huge anount of data, whereas blockchain provides a decentralized and secure data access (Tanwar et al., 2019, Tanwar et al., 2020; Bodkhe et al., 2020a, b; ALzubi et al., 2019, Gupta et al., 2020a,b,c; Hathaliya and Tanwar, 2020, Mehta et al., 2020, Ali et al., 2019, Afzal et al., 2020). AI has already achieved great success in various fields such as speech recognition (Zhang et al., 2018, Fahad and Yahya, 2018, Bhattarai et al., 2016, Schroff et al., 2015), face recognition (Ranjan et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2018, Bianco et al., 2018), fine-grained image recognition (Zhang et al., 2018, Seo and Shin, 2019), and visual search (Cha et al., 2018, Han et al., 2015). Other than these areas of studies, AI, especially deep learning, has proven its worth by achieving outstanding performance. Deep learning-based and medical imaging applications include histology tissue segmentation (Wang et al., 2017a,b,c), brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis (Yoo et al., 2018), blood cell analysis, and many more (Zhou et al., 2018). Deep learning-based frameworks allow researchers to design better detection models capable of detecting all kinds of diseases especially perilous diseases at early stages. Blockchain technology can assist in collecting data over the decentralized network to train a large number of high-quality images (i.e., radiology scans, MRIs, CT scans). Besides, a trained model based on clinical records of diseases, obtained from global organizations, can help to achieve better performance for early treatment of many diseases. Cancer detection is also one of the most important use-case of this approach.
Lung cancer is the most common type of cancer found in human beings. According to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), an estimated 160,000 new cases of lung cancer were reported in the USA in the year 2018 alone. Currently, more than 3 million women are suffering from lung cancer in the USA. This year alone, lung cancer was held responsible for 41,400 deaths (40,920 women and 480 men). Therefore, early cancer detection and treatment are vital for the prevention of high mortality. To diagnose lung cancer, the most common type of medical technologies include ultrasound, X-rays, and computerized tomography (CT) scans that produce a multi-dimensional image that helps in better understanding of damaged tissues’ properties. A CT scan based screening is one of the most effective and commonly adopted technique specifically for lung cancer detection (Akin et al., 2012, Stavros et al., 1995). However, diagnosing lung cancer at the early stage is a non-trivial task even for the specialists as well. Therefore, an image processing approach can play a vital role in diagnosing cancer at the early stage by providing the detailed characteristics of healthy and damaged tissue properties.
Recently, several researchers have proposed deep learning-based models for cancer detection (American Lung Association, 2020, Ardila et al., 2019, Singh et al., 2011, De Koning et al., 2018, Ozdemir et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2019). However, most of them are not sufficient to analyze important features related to lung cancer (Zhao et al., 2019, Ardila et al., 2019). Additionally, deep learning approaches need high computational resources and time to achieve high performance due to the complex nature of image textures and feature extraction process (Miao et al., 2015, Ahn et al., 2017, Shelhamer et al., 2017, Shan et al., 2012, Du and Yeo, 2001, Chen et al., 2003, Yap et al., 2008). Due to the lack of availability of medical data (mainly due to privacy concerns), it is difficult to squeeze the true potential of deep learning techniques. A large amount of training data is required to exploit the true potential of deep learning-based techniques, realize a robust and accurate model. Therefore, addressing these issues in a single model capable of efficient lung cancer detection is a challenging task. It is a known fact that diseases can evolve by changing their physical properties, shape, appearance, symptoms, etc. In other words, to find the updated evolving properties regarding lung cancer requires storing and sharing data over a commonly accessible network for multiple organization. In this way, multiple organizations can share their data to solve a common problem based on the latest available information. One of the solutions is to store and share data over a decentralized network such as blockchain. By sharing data over the distributed ledger leads to the following challenges: i) Violation of organizations data privacy and to share the organizations’ data in such a manner that the ethics of data privacy are observed ii) Collect a large amount of data from different organizations and to construct a collaborative deep learning model.
To tackle the mentioned challenges, we propose a novel multi-model method that combines deep learning and blockchain technology to diagnose early-stage cancer from CT images. The blockchain-based network can exchange data between different organizations while observing legal obligations. Data sharing between organizations enables the model to train on a large amount of data from different sources. To diagnose early-stage cancer from the CT images based on shared data raise some concerns: (i) How to secure medical data exchange i.e., the privacy of the data is observed (ii) How to deal with different sized CT images from different sources to train the deep learning model (iii) How to distribute the weights of the pretrained deep learning model over the decentralized network.
The smart contract ensures a secure data exchange by authorizing the uploading of the medical images automatically. It generates parameters based on conditions and terms associated with data-sharing agreements. The smart contract can track and collect the data from the original destination. Some parameters such as data provider name, address of the hospital, use condition, and the description of the data are required to share the data through the smart contract. We briefly discussed the smart contract in Section 4.1.
Usually, deep learning models require to have the same size of images. Dealing with CT images of different sizes and from various sources is not a trivial task. For this reason, we adopted the Bat algorithm and data augmentation for the transformation of data to feed into the neural network. The Bat algorithm reduces noise and also tackles the overfitting problem for the neural network (Cui et al., 2018). Further details and information can be found in Section 4.2.
To distribute the deep learning model over the decentralized network, we follow some significant steps for constructing the global model of deep learning: (i) Participants locally compute training gradients. (ii) The blockchain secure aggregate local weights without leakage the private information. iii) The local weights are passed through the IPFS and hashes are stored over the blockchain decentralized network, and after processing the input, the output is shared over the decentralized network. (iv) Updated weights of neural networks are again stored in IPFS via blockchain to reduce the computational power. Therefore, the distribution of the training task reduces time and utilize decentralized resources over the network. We briefly explained all the steps in Section 4.1.
In summary, we propose a novel method that combines various deep learning models (specifically the RCNN) over the blockchain to improve lung cancer detection and learn itself through the decentralized network. By employing blockchain, one can synchronize distributed information to improve classification performance by making use of the evolving data. Each health-care system contributes a part of significant learning data for high performance. It can help to predict cancer at early stages, thus saving millions of cancer patients’ lives. The overall contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
1.We propose a novel framework that combines deep learning with blockchain to provide learning over decentralized data sources.2.We design a customized smart contract to establish a secure large-scale real-time data sharing among different data providers.3.We modify the RCNN by integrating the Region of Interest (ROI) pooling layer to detect the region of interest and train in a decentralized manner.4.Finally, an intensive empirical study is conducted to validate our proposed method through the blockchain and deep neural network.
In this paper, we utilize blockchain and artificial intelligence to distribute data over a decentralized network. This enables organizations to make the best use of novel symptoms and cases for lung cancer patients without compromising the organizations’ privacy concerns. The proposed approach distributes a locally trained model to collaboratively train a global model for big data analytics i.e. lung cancer CT scans. Further, this new technology can extract new patterns for the new cases of lung cancer over the decentralized network. The proposed framework collects a huge amount of data (pre-trained weights) from different sources and to train a collaborative deep learning model over a decentralized network to make use of the most novel information about lung cancer. The main goal of this paper is to improve the deep learning model and learn itself from the data for better prediction. In this way, medical practitioners can understand and diagnose new cases and symptoms in a better way.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we discuss recent relevant studies. The proposed framework is described in Section 4, where we discuss each component in detail. Section 4.1 discusses the data sharing techniques between different health-care systems. Whereas, a comprehensive analysis of the proposed model including competitiveness and complexity can be found in Section 5. Finally, we conclude our research contribution in Section 6 including some future directions.
