Physical educators may use technology to add more value to their teaching, and to improve athletes' capabilities. Computers play growing roles in simulating the dynamics of sports in gaming environments. Wearable sensors have also received interest over the past years due to their promise for monitoring the users' health, fitness, and their surroundings. Additionally, virtual environments provide opportunities for practicing sports in remote places (Sánchez Pato & Davis Remilllard, 2018), and might allow transferring behaviors to real situations. Augmented reality (AR) comprises a view of the real-world merged with computer-generated elements such as audio, video, graphics, or location data (Milgram, Takemura, Utsumi, & Kishino, 1995; Sourin, 2017). While virtual reality (VR) replaces the real-world with computer-generated elements, AR works in tandem with the physical world for enhancing users’ perception of the surrounding environment (Wiederhold, 2019).
The ideology behind AR is to expand the organizational space for enhancing the environment and situations, and to offer perceptually rich experiences (Sánchez Pato & Davis Remilllard, 2018). With the help of AR, the surrounding world becomes interactive and digitally manipulatable. Additionally, by improving users’ capabilities to detect, recognize, and process objects and situations, AR allows adding, removing, or changing aspects of the real-world more efficiently. AR technologies are also used in media, office productivity, phobia treatments, pedagogy, and human-robot interaction (Brito & Stoyanova, 2018). Overall, AR is more than just visuals and is about augmenting our world with digital assets.
Before 2010, most AR applications were complex and expensive systems that restricted their accessibility and adoption. In recent years, the integration of AR systems into mobile devices increased the number of AR applications. For example, while mobile games might contribute to increased sedentary times, location-based AR games might encourage players to be active and to interact with other players (Finco, Rocha, Fão, & Santos, 2017). Few sports coaches have experience with AR technologies to recognize their benefits and applications in their practice. Therefore, the goal of this study was to provide an overview of AR applications in sports education and training. Specifically, we wanted to answer the following questions: (1) What are the characteristics of available AR systems? and (2) what are the benefits of using AR compared to other applications?
