Object detection is extremely important in computer vision and pattern recognition communities, which has wide applications such as object tracking [1], traffic data collection [2], interested people discovery [3], multi-label classification [4] and so on. Currently, the popular and effective way is to train a Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) based models like Faster R-CNN [5], [6], YOLO [7] to detect the interested objects. However, these CNN based deep learning models require extensive labeled annotations for training, which are not available for many custom data in some real-world applications. For example, to detect a special kind of lesion or tumor from the cluttered backgrounds in medical image sequences, there are no available manual annotations to train or fine-tune the CNN based models. Another example is large-scale fiber detection in material images [8], [9], each single image contains approximately 600 objects/fibers. Manually annotating so many fibers for multiple images is tedious and with very high working load.
In many real-world applications, an initialized weak object detector can be easily obtained using some weak supervisions like the prior knowledge of object shape, size or motion. For example, ellipse shape information can be used to detect the fibers in material images [8], [9], and the motion information can be used to detect the moving vehicles on traffic images [10]. Meanwhile, in many cases, objects have little inter-occlusions and split/merge difficulties, so multi-target object tracking is reliable and accurate in these cases [11] and the spatio-temporal consistency in object tracking are well preserved. Our objective is to discover a new method to learn a more robust CNN based detection model from the initialized weak object detector with the assistance of spatio-temporal consistency.
This paper proposes a new weakly supervised learning method for object detection in image sequences using an easy-to-hard learning manner. This easy-to-hard learning strategy is inspired by Curriculum Learning [12]. The idea is to firstly train a CNN based detector on simple examples and then incrementally involve more complex examples to train the CNN based detector. In this paper, we define the objects/background regions that are easily distinguished by the current object detector as the simple samples, while the objects/background regions that are hardly distinguished by the current object detector are the complex samples. As we discussed, in many cases, the spatio-temporal consistency in object tracking is very effective, so we develop an unsupervised spatio-temporal analysis to remove false positive detections and make up for false negative detections, which actually refines the training examples that are hard for current object detector. Removing false positive detections means to prune the current examples with poor spatio-temporal consistency and simultaneously add more complex background examples, while making up for false negative detections indicates involving more complex object examples. Alternately running CNN training and the unsupervised spatio-temporal analysis by several iterations is to add more complex examples to the simple examples so that we could train a more robust CNN based object detector. The proposed method is similar to the Baby-Steps Curriculum Learning [13], which believes that simple examples in the training set should not be discarded, instead, the complexity of the training data should be increased in a multiple-iteration training manner. Similarly, the proposed method uses the above mentioned unsupervised spatio-temporal analysis for adding more complex examples in the current iteration for the next-iteration CNN training.
In this paper, we use the task of fiber detection from microscopy image sequences of continuous fiber reinforced composite materials to explain the proposed method. Recent studies [8], [9] showed that the 3D fiber structures could be reconstructed by tracking the detected fibers through the 2D image sequence, which is modeled as a tracking-by-detection problem in computer vision. The tracking performance of tracking-by-detection algorithms is largely dependent on the detection accuracy, especially the Recall performance [14]. More accurate object detections could greatly improve tracking-by-detection algorithms. State-of-the-art fiber detection is currently achieved by [9], which detects ellipses by Hough transformation with the prior knowledge of fiber shape, followed by a bounding box fitting. This algorithm performs well in the material image regions whose quality is good, but it performs poorly in the material image regions whose quality is bad. In the present case, the images were degraded in local regions because of contaminants during the data collection, such as the blurred and stained regions in Fig. 1. In the degraded situations, the state-of-the-art fiber detection algorithm [9] fails to accurately detect the fibers, resulting in false positive or false negative errors as shown in Fig. 1. Experimental results on this fiber detection task show that the proposed method using [9] as initialization is able to greatly improve the fiber detection performance. In addition, we also conduct other experiments on vehicle detection and pedestrian detection tasks in image sequences. The initialized vehicle detection results are obtained by background subtraction with the weak supervision of vehicle motion information [10]. Experimental results on the vehicle detection task also show significant improvements from the initialized vehicle detection by the proposed method. We see the similar improvement by the proposed method on the pedestrian detection task. In the tasks of fiber and vehicle detections, object tracking can be well addressed because the objects have little inter-occlusions and split/merge difficulties. For example, the fiber tracking performance MOTA is as high as 99% [8], [9] when the image sequence is high-continuity. The satisfactory spatio-temporal consistency in object tracking helps the proposed easy-to-hard learning method to achieve the successful performance boost. In the task of pedestrian detection, there are some inter-occlusions, feature changes and tracking difficulties, so the proposed method has some variances in algorithm convergence but we still see significant improvement by the proposed method.Download : Download high-res image (750KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Comparison of the state-of-the-art method of [9] and the proposed method: (a) one microscopic material image, (b) fiber detections by [9], and (c) fiber detections by the proposed method. Detected fibers are marked by green bounding boxes. Red and blue boxes highlight the false positive and false negative errors respectively. Note that [9] fails where the image quality is poor, i.e., blurred and stained regions. Ideally, the fibers and backgrounds in clear regions are simple examples, while the fibers and backgrounds in blurred and stained regions are complex examples.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the related work. Section 3 describes the proposed object detection method. Quantitative and qualitative evaluation results and discussions are presented in Section 4, followed by brief conclusions in Section 5.
