While most buildings are designed for human occupants, with the functions of providing comfortable, healthy, usable, and secure spaces to fulfill a variety of uses, human-building interaction remains one of the least mature facets of building science [[1], [2], [3]]. Numerous post-occupancy evaluations indicate that our buildings often do not meet expectations of occupants [e.g., 4]. For example, Huizenga, Abbaszadeh, Zagreus and Arens [5] reported that only 11% of 215 buildings achieved 80% occupant satisfaction for thermal comfort and 26% achieved that for indoor air quality. Since then, several studies [[6], [7], [8]] have yielded mixed, but generally positive benefits from certified buildings (e.g., LEED). More research is needed not only on the fundamentals of occupant health and indoor environmental quality (IEQ) in buildings, but also on the processes and technologies required to transfer this knowledge to the way buildings are designed, constructed, and operated [9,10]. This could be achieved through guidelines, recommendations for codes and standards, data-driven methods, (e.g., adaptive building controls), and new occupant models and simulation tools. Accordingly, these are the areas targeted by IEA-EBC Annex 79: Occupant-centric building design and operation.
While there has been a surge in research related to building occupants in the past decade, buildings remain to be designed and operated based on outdated and/or simplistic assumptions about occupants that are increasingly proving to be misguiding [11], such as the following. (Note that the cited papers for each point debunk or discuss the listed common assumptions.)
•Occupants are passive recipients of the indoor environment and optimal indoor environmental conditions can be described alone by physical parameters (e.g., air temperature, airspeed, relative humidity, contaminant concentration, workplane illuminance, sound pressure level) [12].•Providing so-called ideal indoor environmental conditions can replace the need to provide occupants with control over their environment [13,14].•Controlling buildings based on average occupants is adequate for comfort [15].•The four principal forms of IEQ (thermal, visual, and aural comfort and indoor air quality) can be treated individually, weighted equally, and affect energy-related occupant behavior in a linear way [16].•Given the opportunity to control building systems, occupants will use such systems in energy-suboptimal ways; therefore, taking control away from occupants is an effective means to reduce energy use [17,18].•Buildings have uniform occupant distributions and near full occupancy for all or part of the day [19,20].•Occupancy and occupant behavior are uncertain during design and the most appropriate method to address this uncertainty in simulation-based design processes is to use standardized schedules and conservative assumptions [2,21,22].
In brief, a paradigm shift is required, whereby practitioners transition from seeing occupants as sources of indoor heat gains and contaminants who are content with standardized indoor environmental conditions to understanding that there is a complex and dynamic bi-directional interaction between occupants and buildings. This shift, which is presented in Fig. 1, is supported by new knowledge, increased recognition of the value of healthy and comfortable environments, new enabling technologies and techniques (sensing and communication technology, analytical methods, computational power), and acknowledgement that occupants are an increasingly important factor for low-energy buildings.Download : Download high-res image (316KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Paradigm shift from occupants and passive participants in buildings to active and dynamic elements in a complex two-way relationship.
A surge of research on occupancy (i.e., human presence in buildings) and occupant behavior in the past decade has significantly advanced the state of knowledge in this field. For instance, IEA EBC Annex 79's predecessor, Annex 66, yielded the following advances:
•A quantitative representation and classification scheme (ontology) for measured building data, including occupants [23];•A systematic approach to experimentally study occupancy and occupant behavior (including sensing technologies, data validation and management) [24];•A systematic method for modeling occupants (including consideration of diversity between occupants) and evaluating those models [25,26];•Various practical schema and implementations for incorporating occupant models in building performance simulation (BPS) tools [27,28];•A preliminary fit-for-purpose simulation framework for occupant-centric design [e.g., 29];•A framework and survey for interdisciplinary approaches for studying occupant behavior [30,31].
The full final report of Annex 66 [3], along with several review papers [32,33] and special journal issues during the Annex 66 term provide an overview of the above activities. The outcomes are further summarized in Fig. 2.Download : Download high-res image (790KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Summary of Annex 66 activities, problems addressed, and outcomes.
Yet, more research is needed – particularly around the themes of multi-aspect comfort, human-building interaction through building interfaces; advanced sensing, big data, and advanced modeling; and occupant-centric building design and operations. Key questions posed by this paper and that are being pursued by Annex 79 include:
•How do the different indoor environmental parameters (thermal, visual, olfactory, and aural comfort) affect each other in the context of energy-related occupant behaviors? For example, an occupant may be conflicted about opening a window for fresh air and the associated heat entering the space on a hot summer day.•How do building interfaces, their context (e.g., positioning, ergonomics, number of people affected by controlled system), and their underlying controls logic affect behavior and perceived control? What interface features and characteristics are most effective at delivering a comfortable environment, outstanding perceived control, and reductions in energy consumption? What methods can be developed and used from established fields (e.g., human-computer interaction) to evaluate interfaces in laboratories, in situ, and through questionnaires? How should these results be disseminated to industry (e.g. via guidelines or building codes)?•How can new and existing data sources (e.g., building automation systems, human resource databases, information technology networks, Internet of Things, etc.) and advanced data analytics (e.g., machine learning, artificial intelligence, statistical modeling) be exploited to both 1) develop new fundamental knowledge about occupant behavior, indoor environmental quality, energy, and the relationship between them, and 2) better inform building design and operation?•How can simulation-aided building design processes, best practices, as well as energy codes and standards be advanced to encourage or mandate practitioners to properly account for occupants in order to yield more comfortable, healthy, usable, and energy-efficient buildings?•How can building operations and controls be advanced to exploit new data sources and online learning methods to adapt to occupancy and occupant patterns and preferences to provide more comfortable environments using less energy?
The objective of this paper is to provide an overview of the state-of-the-art and most pressing needs in the field of occupant-centric building design and operation to the broader community – and then to provide a framework for research needs and potential activities to address them. This paper serves to review a set of the leading literature, while serving as a capstone for this special issue. Additional papers provide deeper literature reviews and are cited throughout this paper. The scope of this paper and Annex 79 is on office and residential buildings, as these are building types for which occupants have a relatively high impact on energy performance, as well as the ability to improve their comfort (e.g., by opening windows, adjusting blinds, changing clothing levels) and play a role in purchasing decisions (e.g., office equipment). The immediate intended audience for this work is researchers. However, it is acknowledged that the topic widely impacts many stakeholders, including: occupants, building owners, designers, operators, manufacturers, utilities, and policymakers. Annex 79 plans to provide customized reports for these stakeholders. For the current paper, occupants are the consistent thread, whereas Sections 2 Data-driven occupant modeling strategies and digital tools, 4 Occupant-centric building operation focus additionally on building design practitioners and policy-makers (e.g., building code officials), and Sections 3 Occupant-centric building design, 5 Conclusion focus additionally on technology and building operators.
The structure of this paper approximately follows that of Annex 79 and is shown in Fig. 3. The first two sections are of fundamental nature, considering IEQ, interfaces, behavior, data collection, and modeling tools and approaches. These are prerequisite to the second two sections, which focus on simulation-aided occupant-centric building design and on occupant-centric controls.Download : Download high-res image (297KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Structure of this paper and IEA EBC Annex 79.
1.1. Multi-domain environmental exposure, building interfaces, and human behaviorThis section is focused on three main interrelated topics: fundamental research and research methods to study multi-domain indoor environmental exposure; guidelines for ideal indoor environmental quality; and, the study and recommendation for building interface design to optimize energy performance, comfort, and usability.
1.2. State of the artBuilding occupants are exposed to a variety of distinct environmental conditions, including thermal, visual, aural, and olfactory stimuli. An extensive body of literature (including review papers) deals with single-domain influences, such as thermal [[34], [35], [36], [37]], visual [38,39], or aural [40,41] perception. In comparison, fewer research efforts have been conducted to explore multi-domain exposure situations. In a recent review of corresponding laboratory studies, Torresin, Pernigotto, Cappelletti and Gasparella [42] identified 45 studies published after 1990 dealing with two or more domains of exposures, with more than half dealing either with temperature and light (29%) or temperature and noise (24%). In the same period (1991–2019), over 1000 research articles can be found via Science Direct, which have “thermal comfort” in the title. Consequently, the majority of standards and guidelines for designing indoor environments focus on single-domain influences, resulting in isolated treatment of indoor environments' multiple quality criteria.In situations where the state of perceived environmental stimuli, for instance thermal sensation, does not match occupants' preferences and physiological or psychological adaptation is not sufficient to solve such discrepancy, they may opt for adaptive measures such as adjusting their position, body posture, or clothing level, or they may opt to interact with the building's envelope and systems through available interfaces [[43], [44], [45], [46]]. Specifically, in order to support and improve buildings' energy efficiency through occupant behavior, buildings need to provide appropriate and user-friendly control opportunities via adequately designed and configured building envelope components and technical systems as well as corresponding effective human-building interfaces [[47], [48], [49]].
1.3. Existing challengesThe current state of knowledge and practice reveals a number of gaps and related research questions regarding building occupants' perceptual and behavioral phenomena [[49], Schweiker et al., 2020, [51]]. Broadly speaking, these knowledge gaps may be formulated as follows:i)As already noted in the previous section, the bulk of past research concerning human comfort and behavior in buildings treats the various domains of environmental exposure in isolation. Specifically, suspected environmental influence factors are subsumed and assessed under separate domains (e.g., thermal, visual, aural). It is true that the existing comfort models in each of these domains can and must be improved in future (some of the reductive models in individual domains remain controversial). However, there is an additional, more overarching challenge: In real situations, occupants are exposed to a combination of such factors. In such situations, occupants' perceptual and behavioral responses cannot be reduced to simple linear aggregation of individual single-domain stimuli [52]. Much about the implications of such multi-domain exposure situations on occupants' satisfaction, behavior and the energy use in buildings is still not yet understood.ii)Regarding environmentally relevant design and engineering standards and guidelines for indoor spaces, it is often difficult to trace the entailed recommendations back to fundamental insights and studies in human biology, physiology, psychology, and sociology. This implies the need for more systematic explanatory theories of people's perception and behavior in the built environments that are rooted in sound underlying scientific knowledge [53].iii)Buildings are expected to offer a wide range of indoor environmental conditions depending on external boundary conditions and user requirements. Toward this end, buildings are typically equipped with a number of environmental control devices, including both envelope components (such as windows and blinds) and mechanical and electrical systems [46,54]. However, it can be argued that we have not paid enough attention to a critical feature of these systems, namely their user interfaces, specifically, their availability (to individual building occupants), visibility, intuitiveness, responsiveness, and effectiveness.To summarize the above challenges, a deeper understanding of occupants' perceptual processes and behavioral patterns under multi-domain exposure situations is needed. Moreover, there is a need for a systematic approach to buildings' control interfaces in terms of their usability and potential to facilitate energy-conscious occupant behavior [48,54].These topical challenges are accompanied by methodological challenges. As compared to single domain research, multi-domain approach requires (a) deep knowledge in all relevant domains, (b) sensory equipment for field and laboratory studies, appropriate for capturing relevant influences in each domain, and (c) substantially more complex experimental designs that can capture the interrelations between one domain's influencing variables and those in other domains.
1.4. Research prioritiesIn the context of the existing knowledge gaps and challenges, Fig. 4 outlines the two main topics to be investigated in detail: (1) multi-domain environmental exposure and its effect on human perception and occupant behavior, and (2) the interactions between occupants and building interfaces related to the buildings' environmental control systems.Download : Download high-res image (258KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. Schematic illustration of research foci (multi-domain exposure, human perception and behavior, building systems' interfaces).The state-of-the-art review has identified a number of knowledge gaps concerning the multi-domain nature of indoor environmental exposure, the relevance of respective perception and behavior models, and the typology and utility of interfaces for buildings' control devices. Moreover, a number of necessary foundational state-of-the-art reviews have been conducted to address these gaps [[49], Schweiker et al., 2020, [51]]. Consequently, research specific priorities are emerging, which are briefly described as follows – and then in more detail in the following sections.(1)to develop a unified theoretical framework for perceptual and behavioral theory of building occupants;(2)to establish general empirical research methods guidelines for developing a better understanding of occupants' comfort preferences and behavioral patterns under multi-domain exposure situations in buildings;(3)to provide a systematic categorization scheme for common control-oriented building interfaces and to collect and present best-practices for building interfaces, together with interface design and evaluation criteria of new products considering multi-domain comfort;(4)to document occupancy-related information relevant to the building design, construction, and operation processes; and,(5)to further develop existing occupancy-related data ontologies and to explore the potential of a versatile agent-based modeling platform.1.4.1. A unified theoretical framework for perceptual and behavioral theory of building occupantsOccupants’ perception and behavior is investigated by different disciplines, ranging from engineering to social sciences. Underlying theories are more often explicitly mentioned in social sciences compared to engineering work, where theoretical thoughts may drive decisions such as selecting observed variables, but are not explicitly mentioned in the majority of literature. The majority of literature from engineering is concerned with physical variables [45]. Research in social sciences suggests that different psychological factors may drive human behavior and interactions with the surrounding environment. Examples for these psychological factors are control beliefs [55], social factors [56], or the awareness of consequences [57]. Bringing such perspectives together into buildings, occupant behavior and interactions with building systems can be motivated by different psychological factors, resulting in different operation modalities of control devices (luminaires, radiators, blinds, etc.) and respective energy use. Therefore, the first priority is to review scientific theories (from physiology to psychology and sociology) to explain what factors may explain occupants' behavior in view of interactions with buildings' environmental control systems and to develop a unified framework. Thereby, aside from the physical setting and physiological state of the human subjects, special attention must be paid to psychologically and socially relevant parameters that may encourage or discourage occupants from engaging in control-oriented adaptive actions. Developing this unified research framework will guide future activities, enhance communication between different disciplines, and at the same time, will remain open for additions and adjustments based on new findings through collaborative works or from individual disciplines.1.4.2. Guidelines and additional research related to empirical research methods for multi-domain exposure situations in buildingsThe initial assessment of the state-of-art of existing models (and associated practice-oriented standards and guidelines) regarding human perception, comfort, and behavior suggests the pervasiveness of single-domain thinking. This, however, does not mean that there have not been previous efforts to explore multi-domain exposure situations and their implications for human comfort [42,[58], [59], [60]].Future progress in this area could benefit from general guidelines for empirical research methods, which is the second priority of the research agenda. Specifically, guidelines for future studies that concurrently consider multiple environmental stressors, their impact on human sensation and perception processes, their relevance for the formation of adaptive dispositions, and the potential for realization of such dispositions via interactions with control device interfaces. Such guidelines could set minimum requirements for related research activities, support future researchers to avoid previous mistakes, and enhance the comparability across studies, as these studies would be based on common methodological thoughts. Furthermore, such guidelines could offer insights from research design to minimum requirements for reporting research results, such as the inclusion of discussion of non-significant results and reporting effect sizes as important additions to levels of significance.1.4.3. Categorization and assessment of control-oriented building interfacesA better understanding of interfaces and how occupants use them can inform efforts to encourage desirable user behavior patterns that can bring about preferable indoor environmental conditions from occupants' perspective while meeting the operational efficiency criteria [49]. Therefore, the third priority is to characterize how occupants interact with different types of building interfaces (i.e. structural interfaces, control interfaces/building services, and active digital interfaces) and how, thereby, opportunities for energy savings, increased occupant control, both perceived and real, and comfort can be recognized and exploited. This priority also extends to cover the review and processing of experiences in the area of behavior change, feedback (e.g. feedback via screens, red/green light, etc.), and control (e.g. perceived/actual; automated vs. manual). A related challenge, in the area of building interfaces and associated occupant behaviors, is the problem of effectively measuring a building's quality and usability as related to its embedded user control interfaces. There is arguably a lack of generally agreed-upon evaluation procedures for this aspect of buildings' indoor environment, namely its controllability by building users, or – in the terminology of Human Ecology – its “Ecological Valency” (EV) [62]. The potential for designing and implementing formal procedures toward measurement and certification of indoor environments' EV [46,54,63] will be actively pursued by Annex 79 researchers.1.4.4. Documentation of existing information concerning occupants' requirementsThe literature shows that occupants can significantly influence buildings' energy use [64]. Nonetheless, the building delivery process (including the design, construction, and operation phases) does not appear to be sufficiently informed concerning the building users' needs, requirements, expectations, perceptual characteristics, and behavioral patterns. In the initial discussions preceding the formation of Annex 79, the lack of sufficiently rich procedures and informational repositories concerning such occupancy-related requirements and characteristics was found to be potentially detrimental to evidence-based building design and operation processes. Therefore, another priority is to collect salient information concerning the existing procedures and sources available to building design, engineering, and management professionals concerning occupants' needs and requirements at an international level.1.4.5. Occupancy data ontologies and agent-based modelingOccupancy-related factors can significantly influence buildings' performance. Hence, the representation of building users is a critical aspect in simulation applications that deal with buildings' energy and indoor environmental performance. In recent years, researchers have argued for more sophisticated user-related building simulation input data. Thereby, a key prerequisite pertains to implementation of robust occupant-centric data ontologies that would systematically capture constitutive attributes of occupants, such as age, sex, health conditions, typical activity patterns, indoor-environmental requirements and preferences, and cultural background. Initial developments in this area [23] need to be further expanded and enriched. With regard to the temporal patterns of occupants’ presence and action in buildings, stochastic behavioral models have been considered as alternatives to conventional schedules and simple rule-based assumptions. Compared to the conventional static schedules, stochastic occupancy models can provide a more realistic depiction of the dynamically changing patterns of occupants' presence and actions in buildings [45,65]. Moreover, agent-based formalisms have been promoted to provide a flexible and powerful way to capture the complexity of individual users' presence and behavior in buildings. Aside from the potential to enrich advanced building simulation model development efforts, a platform for a systematic and coherent representation of occupants' presence and actions in building via deployment of agent-based modeling techniques can provide a powerful virtual testbed for examination and evaluation of multi-domain occupant comfort and behavior models. Thereby, the aforementioned theoretical and empirical findings, regarding the perceptual and behavioral repertoire of buildings' inhabitant, may provide an underlying basis for the encapsulation of occupants' attributes and behavior in terms of computationally defined dynamically acting agents [66].
