Data Science (DS) is the science of extracting information and knowledge from data with the aim of better understanding the dataset itself. DS, which was introduced by Naur (1974) in Concise Survey of Computer Method, is defined as a new pattern for the research of data mining. It is similar but different with the term of data mining. DS is an interdisciplinary approach to data mining, which combines statistics, many fields of computer science, and scientific methods and processes in order to mine data in automated ways, without human interaction (Hayashi, 1998). Modern data science is increasingly concerned with big data. Mattmann (2013) and Cleveland (2014) further explained and promoted DS. DS is a complementation of computational science and statistics. It is not just restricted to the field of statistics with the increasingly concerned with big data and artificial intelligence (AI). Both DS and AI techniques have gained great attention when entering the era of big data. AI is a technique of learning human skills to deal with problems and is a broad family containing machine learning (ML) and other techniques. Deep learning (DL), as a subtype of ML algorithm, is a kind of artificial neural network linked to multiple hidden layers. DS is a cross subject of AI, ML and DL. In general, the workflow of DS is different from that of ML. The former involves collecting data, analyzing data, and suggesting hypotheses or actions. The latter involves collecting data, training model, and deploying model (https://www.deeplearning.ai/ai-for-everyone/).
Big data has gathered much attention and has instigated the research on data mining in multiple domains. Similarly, earth scientists are dedicated to unearth potential information from big data to find solutions to problems in nature, such as climate change prediction, air pollution monitoring, predicting risks to infrastructures caused by nature hazards, consumption of water and mineral resources, and identifying factors of earthquakes, landslides, flooding, and volcanic eruptions (Karpatne et al., 2019). Research on the earth system is shifting from collecting traditional patterns, such as empirical data, theoretical derivation, and simulation local, into exploiting and mining earth datasets to discover the interrelationships between different variables (Tansley and Tolle, 2009). The earth system has entered a stage of data-intensive scientific discovery, which benefits from new generations of sensors, instruments and platforms for quick transmission rates in data storage facilities, publicity available datasets that gives earth scientists the conditions for global research and resource sharing and large efforts to standardize geoscience data sets to facilitate better mining of them (e.g., Baumann et al., 2016; Ma, 2018).
Geodata science (GDS) is an interdisciplinary field of science to mine geoscience data to better understand the origin, evolution, and future of our Earth and planet with prediction and assessment of its resources, environments, and natural hazards. With a similar definition to geophysics and geochemistry, GDS is an interdisciplinary subject of geosciences and DS (Fig. 1). The data chain of GDS includes collecting geosciences datasets, mining geoinformation, discovering geoknowledge, and making spatial decisions (Fig. 2). Various methods are available to analyze and mine geoscience data. These methods can be classified as data statistics, data mining, and data insight and prediction (Fig. 3). Data statistics mainly refers to traditional statistical methods with the aim of sorting, filtering, calculating and counting the data to reveal meaningful information. Data mining refers to the discovery of unknown, potentially useful, and hidden rules from geoscience data via association analysis, clustering analysis, factor analysis and traditional AI algorithms. Data insight and prediction aim to provide insight into and prediction of geological events which are the core application of big data for extracting geoscience features and integrating of geoscience variables to support decision-making (Zuo et al., 2019). The main aim of this paper is to introduce the concept of GDS and its applications to deal with geoscience problems through a case study in Gejiu region, Yunnan Province, China. This case study demonstrates how the three groups of GDS methods can be applied to mine geochemical exploration data in support of mineral exploration.Download : Download high-res image (43KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Geodata science as an interdisciplinary subject of geoscience and data science.Download : Download high-res image (42KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The data chain of Geodata science.Download : Download high-res image (46KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Geodata science tools.
