
“Transfer of learning is universally accepted as the ultimate aim of teaching. However, achieving this goal is one of teaching's most formidable problems”
While not everyone might accept the assertion of McKeough, Lupart, and Marini (1995) that the ultimate goal of teaching is the transfer of learning, certainly there is high agreement it is an important and challenging goal to achieve. Since the early 20th century there has been considerable research and theorizing about cognitive and situative facets of transfer, what is transferred (e.g., abstract concepts, procedures), types of transfer (e.g., near within domain, far across domain), teaching approaches (e.g., analogical problem solving, metacognitive strategies), learner dispositions, and so on (for an early review, see McKeough, , Lupart, , and Marini (1995)).
Interest in transfer continues in the learning and cognitive sciences, but with shifts in areas of research focus. In the introduction to a special issue on transfer, Engle (2012) observed that researchers have been investigating expanded views of what learners transfer to include representations, perceptually-grounded principles, learning strategies, embodied episodic feelings, discourse practices, preparing for future learning, and so on. Engle further argued that because “of these expansions of what counts as transfer, unproductive arguments about whether or not transfer occurs have been replaced by careful empirical investigations of transfer that specify what kinds of transfer occurred and under what conditions” (p. 348).
Goldstone and Day (2012), in another special issue on transfer, note that although “schools often measure the efficiency of learning in terms of speed and retention of knowledge, a relatively neglected and subtler component of efficiency is the generality and applicability of the acquired knowledge” (p. 149). They identify three main research themes in their special issue: (a) the learner's perspective, (b) motivation in determining transfer, and (c) validated teaching techniques for facilitating transfer. The research reported in this paper aligns the Engle's theme of investigating the conditions under which certain kinds of transfer occur and with the Goldstone's and Day's theme to study and validate teaching techniques for transfer, in our case, by using computer models and visualization systems intended to foster deep learning of difficult scientific knowledge and the ability to apply this knowledge to new problems.
The paper discusses a study of learning for transfer that employed computer models to help high school students understand the science of climate change. The theories to inform the learning designs we employed in this study were analogical comparison (Gentner, Loewenstein, & Thompson, 2003) and productive failure (Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012), both of which have had significant prior research in which learning for transfer has been demonstrated. This content area and the use of computer models was selected for four main reasons. First, current scientific perspectives about atmospheric systems and climate change are examples of complex systems (Bar-Yam, 2003; Donner, Barbosa, Kurths, & Marwan, 2009; Rind, 2011). Second, these domains are now an important part of the school curriculum. For example, in the United States Next Generation Science Standards, climate change has been identified as a Disciplinary Core Idea and complex systems concepts are included as Crosscutting Concepts (National Research, 2013). Third, Next Generation Science Standards also recommend the use of computer models as part of Scientific and Engineering Practices. Fourth, helping students to learn and transfer these concepts and practices represents a significant instructional challenge that relates to the Goldstone and Day (2012) issue of developing and validating teaching approaches for fostering transfer in the “real world” of regular classroom teaching.
There are five main sections in this paper. We next provide an overview of the relevant literature that have informed this classroom-based research study and the methods we employed, followed by the results and discussion sections. The paper concludes with considerations of the educational and scientific importance of this research in terms of theorizing related to learning and to applying—i.e., transferring—challenging scientific knowledge and skills and of practical teaching practices.
