Nowadays, experts in education have almost similar academic opinions that people around the world should have free, open, and easy access to reach digital resources for the purpose of teaching and learning (Hoosen, 2012). Recently, many countries make maximal efforts in the investment to improve the establishment of digital resources for education, especially for teachers. The technology potentiality should be more developed. Studies have informed that the digital resources for education have been well-implemented in developed countries such as USA (Tyler-Wood et al., 2018), Norway (Instefjord and Munthe, 2017), and China (Wang et al., 2019).
This potential has also been made to be suitable with major cities in developing countries, for example, Jakarta as the capital city of Indonesia and Kualalumpur in Malaysia. However, the questions emerged whether similar conditions arise for teachers working in schools of rural areas. In terms of educational quality, teachers in rural areas seem to be less qualified than that of their urban peers, teachers working in major cities (Liu and Onwuegbuzie, 2012). In addition, the lack of quality resources and their access to digital technology have been recognized as pressing challenges (Habibi et al., 2020).
Regarding to theses premises, one of the countries that still has many challenges in implementing digital resources in rural areas’ education is Indonesia. As a country with more than 260 millions people, technology has reached almost 60 % of the total population and made it essential to maximize the use of technology in education. Even though the gap of social and economic exist between urban and rural areas, the equal opportunity should be handed to all students including in terms of access to technology-based education (Qian and Smyth, 2008). Commonly, the factors that are linked with the differences in the quality of education is digital resources for teaching, considered as one of the key factors. The educational policy that tends to prioritize big cities over rural areas should be the main concern (Shah, 2016) since it could result in a big gap.
Many studies have reported teachers' educational technology integration in major cities (Farjon et al., 2019; Habibi et al., 2020). However, few researchers elaborated technology integration perceived by teachers from rural areas (Tyler-Wood et al., 2018; Qian and Smyth, 2008). Even fewer studies reported the integration in developing countries like Indonesia. Therefore, this study is proposed to elaborate on factors predicting Indonesian teachers' integration of digital resources in rural areas into their teaching activities. Demographic information was also addressed to understand the difference regarding the integration. Specifically, we addressed this study to science teachers for a common in-depth and specific understanding of the phenomenon. The findings of this study might have a useful contribution to teachers’ professional development plan and initiatives regarding the integration of digital resources in education.
