Information gathering and information propagation [1] are two of the major activities that occur in any social network. Information gathering can be conducted through various methods like surveys, observation, and examination to collect relevant data from the participants of a given study. In online social networks, information gathering can also be done via the third-party app downloads and installation. When we install apps on our mobile or install third-party apps on Google, Facebook, and Twitter accounts, we are asked for permission to let the apps access our contact information like phone numbers and email ids. True-Caller [2], [3] was able to create one of the largest public phone-directory by using the crowd-sourced data from a social network of our mobile using the aforementioned strategy.
The collected information can be used for business intelligence to investigate the characteristics, behaviors, and opinions of a group of people. It can also be used to obtain information regarding gender, religion, ethnicity, experience, opinions, income, social status, psychological, geographical, and physical characteristics of the people. The collected information can be used for effectively facilitating decision making in many important and diverse applications such as city management, transportation, governance, education, health care, tourism, and so on. In a social network, information can be gathered fast because, in many situations, information about the neighbors can also be obtained from the queried user.
On the other hand, information can also be propagated and shared in a given social network [4] in case of targeted advertising, promotions, notifications, and recommendation systems. One of the major advantages of a social network is that each individual is connected to many other individuals. Hence, by informing a user in the network, information can also be propagated to the neighbors. Thus, providing information to just a few members, we can potentially propagate it to a much larger audience due to the connectivity in the social network. In this paper, we propose an analytical model for information gathering and propagation in a social network graph using simple random sampling and node discovery.
When a node is selected, the node along with all of its neighbors are considered to be discovered. In the node discovery optimization problem, we determine the minimum number of nodes (in the graph) that needs to be selected such that all the nodes of the graph are discovered. In the context of social networks, this problem is often referred to as the influence maximization problem [5]. We could find the minimum number of nodes that need to be queried in order to discover the whole graph by mapping this problem to the dominating set problem [6].
As the number of sampled nodes increases, our model constructs the dominating set [7] of the graph. A vertex v in a graph G covers a vertex u if v=u or if v is adjacent to u. A subset of vertices of G is a dominating set if it collectively covers all vertices in the graph [6]. A connected dominating set (CDS) [8] is a dominating set in which all the nodes are connected through some path.
They have many applications in the field of computer networks, wireless sensor networks, and mobile ad hoc networks [6], [9]. At the data link layer, clustering using the dominating set can increase the spatial reuse of the spectrum, minimize collision, and provide QoS guarantees. CDS can create a virtual network backbone for packet routing and control. The efficiency of multicast/broadcast routing can also be increased by CDS because it reduces the forwarding of duplicate copies of the same messages in the network. Nodes in a wireless network are energy-constrained. CDS plays an important role in power management by increasing the number of nodes that may be allowed to be in sleep mode while still preserving the capability of the network to forward messages.
Multi-document text summarization is another important area of research where the minimum dominating set can be used [10]. A sentence graph is a graph where the sentences are represented by vertices and similar sentences are attached with edges. Given a sentence graph that is generated from a set of documents, the summary can be extracted by using the concept of the minimum dominating set of the graph.
The minimum dominating set (MDS) approach is rapidly emerging as a promising algorithmic method to analyze complex biological networks integrated with human body functioning and related disorders [11]. By identifying important genes (driver nodes), network controllability-based on the minimum dominating set (MDS) provides a new way to study these networks and discover the driver nodes and important genes.
Our work of finding the dominating set using the randomized sampling would be helpful in the above-mentioned scenarios because the complexity of this algorithm is low. The analytical formula proposed by us provides the expected number of nodes that we need to select in order to cover the whole graph. In distributed algorithms for finding the dominating set, our scheme would be even more helpful because nodes can select themselves to be part of the dominating set randomly with a given probability p. The value of p would be the ratio of the domination number provided by our analytical model and the total number of nodes in the graph. This scheme would requires less communication overhead and still would be able to construct a dominating set with a high probability.
The novelty of our work is that it can predict the number of nodes that are discovered as a function of the number of nodes randomly selected. Besides, it assists in predicting the domination number of a graph and in the construction of its dominating set. This formula gives accurate results for both the ER model and the random graph models for social networks. It could help the distributed algorithms in estimating the expected number of nodes required to construct the dominating set. This number can be taken as an input to devise a distributed algorithm with a lesser number of message exchanges and reduced time complexity.
For large graphs, finding this minimal set is computationally intensive with combinatorial complexity [12]. Moreover, finding this minimal set of nodes requires us to have the information about all the nodes of the graph as well as the structure of the entire graph. In practice, such data is typically not readily available due to the following reasons: (i) Finding this information might be generally prohibitively expensive (ii) Crawling or accessing the graph to extract information is generally restricted by the host company of the social network to prevent loss of competitive advantage (iii) It is generally time-consuming to mine such data.
Hence, in this work, we consider the randomized node discovery problem. In this method, the selection of nodes is performed randomly for discovering the graph. We aim at finding the average number of nodes that need to be selected randomly to discover all the nodes of the graph or a given percentage of it. In our work, we model the social network as the Erdos–Renyi (ER) model of the random graph [13]. In this model of the random graph G(n,p), there are n nodes, and any two given nodes are connected with a probability p. We find the analytical solution for the expected number of nodes that are discovered in the Erdos–Renyi graph after randomly querying m nodes. We use the concepts of inclusion–exclusion principle [14], probability, and graph theory to compute this value.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:

•Randomized Node Discovery Algorithm: We propose a simple but efficient randomized node discovery scheme for uncovering information about all of the nodes in the graph.•Analytical Results for Node Discovery: We model the graph using the Erdos–Renyi model of the random graph and provide an exact analytical solution for the expected number of nodes that are discovered after querying a given number of nodes, which are randomly selected.•No Requirement of Complete Graph: In our work, we do not require the information about the complete graph. As previously discussed, this data is not available due to various reasons such as privacy and competitive advantage. Our model works even if we know the total number of nodes in the graph and the linkage probability among the nodes.•Analytical Results for Common Neighbors : We render several important analytical results regarding the number of neighbors shared by the different number of nodes in a random graph.•High Accuracy of Theoretical Results: We derive tight upper and lower bounds for the analytical solution and perform simulations to find the accuracy of the proposed analytical formula. We find that both our theoretical and simulation results match and the accuracy of our results is around 96% for the Erdos–Renyi random graph and around 87% for the power-law graph models.•Applicable for other graphs: The analytical formula derived for the random graph can be used even for other graphs like the power-law graphs (social network graph, citation graph, Internet graph). We provide an expression to compute the linkage probability for a general graph, using which we can get the expected number of nodes that are discovered by randomly querying m nodes of the graph. The accuracy for the power-law graphs is also around 87%.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss related works. In Section 3, we formulate the problem statement and provide the randomized node discovery algorithm. In Section 4, we find an analytical expression for the expected number of nodes discovered as a function of the number of nodes queried. In Section 5, we provide the performance evaluation of our analytical formulas and provide the accuracy of our results using simulation results. In Section 6, we provide the managerial implications of our model. Finally, in Section 7, we conclude our work with directions for future work.
