1.1. Background informationThe construction sector is unique and dynamic in nature, which creates a lot of changes in the stages of construction. Client dissatisfaction creates the number of changes in project scope. Changes are occurring in any stage of the project from various sources which disrupts the remaining two constraints of the iron triangle. By this change order, the constraints of iron triangle time and cost are badly affected by the scope change in the project. The critical change will make consecutive delays in all the aspects of time, cost and resources of the projects such as like equipment, labor, materials[1], [2]. If changes do not resolve this may lead to the cancelation of contracts, risk contribution to the failure of the project. The construction experts and project managers have to take measurements and lead the project and accept the changes from the client and satisfied the client requirements.
1.2. Traditional methodThe traditional method is the best example of the construction, in which the whole process is to work as a sequential process. The traditional method is also known as waterfall methodologies. The output of one phase will be the input of another phase in this same manner the whole process will be carried out until the completion of all the phases. In these methodologies, the requirements of the project must be clear before starting the project, no changes will consider in the middle of the process of the waterfall method[3], [4]. Change or feedbacks will be considered after the whole project. This type of methodology is considered when the scope is cleared and fixed. If any major revision is required then we have to restart the entire process from the beginning. Project requirements must be clear to everyone who works in that project. All the information related to that project must be documented and distributed among themselves who are working on that project. Documentation should take place throughout every phase for involving the process, ensure that everyone is on the same page despite sequential progress.
1.3. Identification of problem statementsFrom the beginning to the end of the history construction projects are being successful despite their dynamic nature. A huge amount of time and budget is to get invested in this construction project. The design which was planned gives several challenges while it is going to execute, in the form of time, quality issues and many more [1], [5]. Change of work, rework, reorder, add several challenges in the project. Time and cost overruns are major drawbacks for any type of construction.Fig. 1, explains that when changes are arises in the flow of a process of a project creates chaos in the project and delays in project completion, and cost escalation will be done, which is represented in the flow chart.Download : Download high-res image (70KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Effect of change in project.
1.4. Agile methodologiesThe traditional method of construction is more conservative. To increase the efficiency in delivering the product the traditional method has to be changed and a new method has to invent in construction. But those changes which are implementing in the construction management system brings confusion and ambiguity[6], [7]. To overcome the change management the agile methods are the best techniques agile managements to manage the impact of change and rise the maximum values of the project by control the risk and those change. Agile is an iterative process to plan and guide the process of the project in any type of industry.
