For the last half-century, computational modeling has become a principal tool in the water resource manager's toolbox. Groundwater models have become indispensable, industry standard methods for estimating the availability and sustainability of groundwater resources (e.g. Young and Bredehoeft, 1972; Cummings and McFarland, 1974; Willis and Yeh, 1987). However, because of the inherent complexity of numerical models and the significant time, effort, and expertise needed for their development, it is often challenging for stakeholders and water resources managers to access models that are appropriate for their needs (Essawy et al., 2018). Within the traditional model development paradigm, water management agencies usually take one of two approaches for obtaining hydrologic models to suit their needs, 1) dedicate significant resources to building internal modeling capacity or 2) contract with outside ‘experts’ to deliver models that typically cannot be interacted with once completed. Drawbacks to the former approach include the high cost of training, software, and salary required for agencies to retain personnel with sufficient skills to assess the validity, conceptualization, calibration, and usefulness of existing models or to create and maintain effective modeling programs. This level of resource dedication is often only possible for larger utility companies or management agencies, leaving small, remotely located agencies with few to no options for maintaining quality modeling expertise. On the other hand, the latter approach of hiring contractors generally results in production of static models that may lose relevance quickly and are often delivered in a format that do not allow end-users to modify parameters or address new questions. This approach also suffers from the inherent temporariness of typical funding mechanisms, whereas the calibration and validation process lasts only as long as the project account is solvent, after which a final report is delivered and the latest iteration of model files are archived for long-term storage on a server in the back of someone's office. Compounding this issue is the fact that many groundwater models are developed with proprietary software or within specialized computational environments, making it prohibitively challenging for end-users to open and interact with the finished product.
To circumvent these problems, yet retain the benefits from each of the aforementioned approaches, we here propose a new approach to the hydrologic modeling process; where model developers and end-users enter into a long-term collaborative working relationship, facilitated by advances in open-source, cloud-computing capabilities. To demonstrate this approach, we present as a case study, the ongoing development of a collaborative modeling framework conceived as a joint effort between the University of Hawaii Water Resources Research Center (UHWRRC) and the American Samoa Power Authority (ASPA). The intended outcomes for this modeling framework are commensurate with the motivations behind the participatory and collaborative modeling movement that has, in recent decades, become a highly utilized approach in environmental management (e.g. Argent and Grayson, 2003; Liu et al., 2008). These outcomes are centered around addressing the need for enhanced researcher – stakeholder engagement and producing, practical, defendable models that sufficiently address stakeholder needs and promote model use in guiding important water management decisions. This paradigm allows for incorporation of the views, needs, and knowledge of many stakeholders, including scientists, policy makers, and resource managers in the modeling process. Moran (2016) describes the collaborative process as one where, “… model developers, decision-makers, stakeholders and others work together to develop a shared understanding of [the region's] management objectives and the model's role in supporting those objectives. Langsdale et al. (2013) further refines collaborative modeling as a process where, “Both the model and the process remain accessible and transparent to all participants, Collaborative modeling builds trust and respect among parties.”
Participatory and collaborative modeling methods are well tested and have been applied across many disciplines ranging from computer science (e.g. Bidarra et al., 2001), to economics (e.g. Mendoza and Prabhu, 2006), and social sciences (e.g. Flint et al., 2017). The approach is especially pertinent in water resource management, as water's indispensable and ubiquitous nature inherently makes any issue a multi-stakeholder concern. In the water resources field, collaborative or participatory approaches have been applied in numerous case studies across a range of technical foci including watershed modeling (e.g. Liu et al., 2008), groundwater modeling (e.g Barfield, 2009; Beall et al., 2011), and water policy and planning (e.g Tidwell et al., 2004). However, the technological boundaries for the implementation of this collaborative paradigm within the high-level programming revolution of the present day have not yet been fully explored. Here we contend that recent developments in cloud-computing technologies are now providing new opportunities for collaboration and communication between remotely located institutions and agencies. Application of these new technological tools within a collaborative paradigm allows participants to more efficiently share resources, and facilitates direct application of models by the managers who are tasked with solving their region's water resource challenges.
The primary objective of this manuscript is to present an example of a collaborative hydrologic modeling framework that takes advantage of recent advances in cloud-computing and open-source modeling tools. The framework is vertically integrated as it is intended to handle all components in the process that ultimately leads to the development of groundwater models used for drinking water management. These components include: (1) the direct collection and processing of basic hydrologic parameters through an island-wide hydrologic monitoring network, (2) development of automated data processing applications to integrate updated data into subsequent model components, (3) creation of a dynamic water budget model to predict island-wide groundwater recharge and (4) development and application of a set of open-source groundwater modeling tools that can be directly modified by stakeholders to address local water resources management questions.
The framework is intended to be entirely open-source, and all raw data, model code and processed outputs are made publicly available online, so anyone with skills and interest can modify inputs, test scenarios, and continue model development. This philosophy promotes transparency, reproducibility, and accessibility through both the development and implementation process, thereby facilitating interaction with interested stakeholders or other modelers. The framework is designed to adhere to the best practices of reproducibility for digital research objects (Fehr et al., 2016), which include (1) being physically accessible by using open-source codes, (2) being conceptually accessible by facilitating sharing of required core skills for data management, workflow efficiency, and visualization, and (3) being reusable by applying modularity, and by providing opportunities to dynamically change inputs as needed. The framework is also intended to be portable, flexible, use small file sizes, and only include models with short run times, which are attributes that have been shown to enhance model adoption rates amongst managers (Argent and Grayson, 2003). By presenting this framework, we hope to demonstrate the ease of use and the applicability of modern code sharing and cloud-computing tools in a scientific modeling setting involving participants at remotely located institutions. These tools have allowed us to connect researchers and stakeholders through ready-built data science infrastructure and to share advanced modeling capacity across our network of participants. While the case study in its current form demonstrates these ideas, we also view model development as a process, not necessarily an end-goal. Therefore, the framework continues to evolve and change as we and our stakeholders continue to participate in discussion, raise concerns, and contribute new ideas.
