The mining of frequent patterns plays an important role in the discovery of associations and correlations between data [1]. Patterns that are frequent in a dataset can be expressed by association rules (ARs). ARs highlight frequent itemsets in the antecedent leading to those in the consequent [2].
During the mining of frequent patterns, it is common to produce thousands of ARs, making the study of each one arduous. This problem weakens the process of discovery of useful information. There is a scientific effort to develop approaches capable of filtering interesting patterns, balancing the number of ARs produced with the goal of not being trivial and known by specialists. Among the approaches for filtering interesting patterns, some use measures of interest [3], [4], others list them based on properties [5], [6], [7], and others use subjective analysis [8], [9], [10].
The difficulty of filtering interesting patterns increases with the number of generated patterns. It is strongly influenced by the potentially high cardinality of attributes available in the dataset and by choice of the minimum support to be considered during mining [11]. Thus, even though the literature presents a diversity of approaches and the possibility of combining several of them, they are not always able to achieve the previously stated goal [12].
For example, consider the evolution of malaria in the Amazon region. Malaria is an infectious disease caused by protozoan parasites of the genus Plasmodium and transmitted through the bite of the mosquito of the genus Anopheles [13]. Tropical and subtropical countries comprise the endemic area of this disease. They have rainy seasons that provide high availability of clean standing water, where the vector mosquitoes can lay their eggs and proliferate [14]. In this context, Brazil is the second country in the Americas with the highest number of malaria cases [15]. According to the World Health Organization, analyzing associations of variables related to positive outcomes for malaria is essential for its control and support in the decision-making process [15].
The Malaria Epidemiological Surveillance Information System (SivepMalaria) is one of the main systems for monitoring malaria in Brazil. Through this system, all suspected or confirmed cases are notified and recorded. However, the occurrence of the disease is not homogeneous, varying from location to location according to some characteristics such as natural factors, geographic factors, and social conditions [16], [17].
By using classic approaches to discover frequent patterns in datasets (such as SivepMalaria), thousands of ARs can be produced; however, several are redundant or not interesting. Even using traditional approaches to filter interesting ARs, the number of ARs can still be high. This work proposes the Divergent Association Rules Approach (DARA), which is a novel approach to filtering interesting ARs from the divergence between the obtained ARs and the data distribution. DARA focuses on the items present in the ARs at a lower or higher frequency than the frequency expected considering the data distribution. They lead to Divergent Association Rules (DARs). DARs assumes the hypothesis of attributes independence. Thus, such divergence in the frequency is not expected to occur. When it occurs, DARs might be interesting.
This paper has two main contributions. In the computer science field, it presents DARA, a novel approach to obtaining DARs, which are ARs that are considered divergent concerning data distribution. The approach both sheds light on interesting patterns and drives a systematic way of discovering them. Furthermore, it serves as a complement to other approaches to filtering interesting ARs.
The second contribution of this paper is related to the medical field, as DARA was evaluated on data from SivepMalaria. The approach was able to highlight ARs that bring relevant insights from the input data. New patterns regarding Brazilian Legal Amazon are revealed.
In addition to this introduction, this paper is organized into five more sections. Section 2 presents background on frequent pattern mining. Section 3 describes related works. Section 4 presents DARA. Section 5 presents the experimental evaluation. Section 6 presents some concluding considerations.
