In the recent decade, with the development of information and communication technology, the social computing systems for social information processing through large social computing platforms have become more and more popular. Today, content social computing and sharing services have made social networking and platform providers immensely popular and important [1]. The social computing systems existed in our daily lives are more than just systems for only information exchanges. Now with the development of information technology, many previous social concepts and theories are able to develop on the social computing platforms. As shown in Fig. 1, current social computing architecture is made up of mainly three layers and the most commonly used layer is formed of the social applications such as the social entertainments, social data service, and social communication [2].Download : Download high-res image (832KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The complex modern social computing and communication systems [5] are made of different layers with theoretical and technical supports.
Therefore, the social computing platform providers are not only the media for information exchange but also probably the most effective social data generation and storage system. Companies such as Facebook [3] or Twitter [4] could collect a huge amount of social data generated and transmitted every day and also get profits from this huge amount of social data. In such a process, the social data that supposed to be used for a form of social profile or self-expression are given commercial values and the result following is that the end-user’s social data security and privacy are vulnerable.
In the past ten years, many web-based social network providers have attracted a huge number of people to join such as Facebook, Linkedin, and Twitter. Not only their real-time messages are shared from smart personal digital devices [6] through these social networks, some private information such as human profiles is also shared. These big social network companies are becoming big data-oriented service providers [7] since most social-related functions are free and the profits are coming from the data and knowledge mining from the social big data [8]. With this background, the data leakage incidents of the social data platforms are happening more frequently and more seriously. On the one hand, social data service providers deal with a large number of external attacks. In 2018, a total of 1.5 million SingHealth patients non-medical personal data were stolen from the health system in Singapore [9]. On the other hand, these social data service providers cannot be entirely trusted either. For instance, personal social data may be exploited in a malicious way such as in the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica data scandal which affected 87 million end-users in 2018 [10]. Moreover, there are other factors for privacy violation on social data such as the surveillance programs of the governments such as the PRISM program in 2013 [11].
Therefore, it is not totally fair to criticize the social platform providers for violating the end-users’ privacy since social data privacy is not only violated by the one entities [12]. One of the classical and practical solutions is to protect social data before outsourcing it to the social data platform. Nowadays, there are many such new laws to force users to use such a standard. For instance, the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [13] states that the data owner should encrypt the data before outsourcing the data and also the key management should be protected by the data owner. Also, similarly, the USA government recommends all digital data must be protected at rest, in transit, and in use, and the access to the data must be controlled [14]. In fact, these laws are transferring the data protection tasks to not only data service providers but also all the participates in the digital environment. The protection methodology is also transferred from the protection of the data to the protection of the key. However, in the social computing scenario, relying on the end-users to well manage their keys is also not practical because the reuse of the keys or passwords is frequently seen [15]. This will lead to a situation of key exposure situation as pointed in [16].
Therefore, since the existing methods seem not always sufficient for social data protection, we propose a new trend that can combine the protection with the data fragmentation [17]. The purpose of our design is to fragment the social data into different fragments and to use the key for the protection of only the important fragments. The transmission or processing of the social data will also be fragmented through different social computing platforms to achieve a higher level of protection against the situation such as the key exposure. Since the data are fragmented and the protection is performed selectively, the attackers must be able to acquire the key and the corresponding data fragments to decrypt which suppose to be transmitted or shared through different social computing providers. Since different social computing providers will come from different countries or be protected with different methods or laws, our method will increase the protection level for social data.
The main contribution of this paper includes: (1) the design of a secure social data outsourcing and sharing method in the current social big knowledge system; (2) extending the classical SE concept by designing a novel social data protection method by combining with the concept of fragmentation and distributed system while guaranteeing the efficiency of the proposed method.
We organize this paper following the order below. Section 2 gives several related works and the main research background of this paper. Section 3 illustrates the approach and the key algorithm of our proposed method. Section 4 gives a comprehensive security analysis and evaluation for the method with social data as examples. Section 5 discuss the method and future work. Finally, Section 6draws the conclusion of this study.
