According to the International Labour Organization (ILO) estimation, globally about 2.3 million workers succumb to death annually due to occupational accidents and diseases which include approximately 360 thousands fatal accidents (Sánchez et al., 2011). Overall, nearly 337 million occupational accidents are reported per year. From the ILO report, it is revealed that approximately 4% of the annual gross domestic product (GDP), which is equivalent to the US $ 1.25 trillion, is drained off due to occupational accidents (ILO, 2008). Although the Government of different countries put much more efforts to curve down the occurrences of accidents, still they are happening frequently. Since these occurrences critically impact operations of organizations and generate economic burden to society, research on the occupational accident is much needed of late.
To research on occupational accidents, there exist several approaches, for example, conventional statistical analysis, survey-based qualitative analysis, data-driven machine learning (ML)-based analysis. Of them, ML-based analysis is rather a new approach, which attains more popularity over existing ones. With the emergence of a large volume of data, ML approach outperforms its traditional counterpart due to its some potential benefits, for example, (i) it is capable to deal with large dimensional data, (ii) it is flexible in reproducing the data generation structure irrespective of complexity, and (iii) its predictive and interpretative potential through the extraction of relations/rules among the attributes in data (Martin et al., 2009, Matias et al., 2008). Due to these benefits, ML-based approaches have been used in diverse filed of applications, such as engineering, medical science, finance, and so forth (Witten et al., 2016). However, its use in occupational accident analysis has drawn relatively less attention of researchers so far. Therefore, it becomes essential to examine and classify the existing ML research on occupational accident domain and to extract the knowledge of their use in this domain. This ultimately puts forward the thrust of the future research trends of ML approaches in this domain.
1.1. Motivation and objectivesBased on the growing interest of researchers on ML approaches in occupational accident domain, there remains a gap. There exist a few review papers related to occupational accidents, for examples, Swuste et al. (2010) focused safety metaphors and theories in safety literature of the UK, US, and the Netherlands, McKenzie et al. (2010) explored the utility of text analysis in injury surveillance research through a systematic review, Khanzode et al. (2012) presented a comprehensive review of the concepts of occupational injury and accident causation and prevention, Samano-Rios et al. (2019) presented a review on occupational safety and health interventions to protect workers from hazards at work, Duarte et al. (2019) reviewed occupational accidents in the mining industry. Although these studies added values to the existing body of knowledge, the focus of those studies is limited in a particular topic, rather than considering the overall occupational accident research. Moreover, the application of ML approaches in this domain has not been reported as of now. Therefore, there is no such comprehensive review reported so far that can bring a broader picture of ML applications on this domain. To comprehend the shortcomings of the existing body of literature, the present study proposes a four-phase literature review on the application of ML approaches in occupational accident analysis. The four phases of analysis are bibliometric search, descriptive analysis, scientometric analysis, and citation network analysis. Therefore, in particular, the objectives of this review include: (i) applying bibliometric search to filter the relevant articles within a certain period; (ii) applying descriptive analysis to find the research trend in this domain in terms of journals, data collection method, machine learning methods, authors’ contribution, contributions of institutes, countries/regions, sponsoring agencies, and different industry sectors; (iii) applying a scientometric analysis to find the influences of journals, authors, authors’ keywords, articles/documents, and countries/regions in this domain; and (iv) applying the citation network analysis (CNA) to classify the overall research domain according to the research themes and methods used. Finally, the study explores several research issues and provides important directions for future research works in this domain.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, the four-phase methodology is explained briefly. In Section 3, the results of the four-phase analyses are presented and discussed. In addition, research growth is presented in this section. Research issues and the scopes for future research works are provided in Section 4. Finally, in Section 5, a conclusion with the limitations of the study is presented.
