The Internet has become an education portal and a learning resource, which has spawned several research projects and for its practical side learning tools and applications for students, teachers and academics alike (Aduwa-Ogiegbaen & Iyamu, 2005; Heo & Chow, 2005; Dangwal & Mitra, 2006; Bell & Federman, 2013; Mtega, Benard, & Dettu, 2013; Suhartanto, Junus, & Sadita, 2014; Qureshi, Raza, & Whitty, 2014). To initiate the advocacy of using the Internet for educational purposes, the trend now in most cases around the world is to align the skills, competencies and values of learners towards becoming information literate and to become global citizens in the 21st century (Calvani, Bonaiuti, & Fini, 2008). This means that learners should embrace Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and understand its functions, benefits and relevance in our present society (21st century skills, education and competitiveness: A resource & policy guide, 2008) and more so with the disruptions caused by the Fourth Industrial Revolution or Industry 4.0 (Schwab, 2017).
World Internet Stats (2019) reports that the estimated total Internet users in the world is 4,346,561,853 or 56.3 % of the world’s total population. Of this total Internet users, it is estimated that 50.4 % of them are in Asia, followed by Europe with 16.5 % and Africa with 10.9 %. Over a span of 9 years it registered a 1,104 % population growth (World Internet Stats, 2019). With this exponential increase, it is projected that in the coming years, more than half of the world’s population will be connected anytime and anywhere using the Internet. Singling out the Philippines, it has an estimated 67 million Internet users and 62 million Facebook users in 2017 with an Internet penetration of 62 % (World Internet Stats, 2019).
UNESCO has capitalized on the importance of communication and information literacy. In its commitment, UNESCO highlights the Alexandria Proclamation of 2005 which states that “information literacy empowers people in all walks of life to seek, evaluate, use and create information effectively to achieve their personal, social, occupational and educational goals. It is a basic human right in a digital world and promotes social inclusion in all nations" (Horton, 2008, p. ii). ICT for education in this context therefore is inclusive and has a positive role to improve one’s life.
1.1. E-Learning as a concept and practiceE-Learning or electronic learning and later enhanced learning is commonly referred to the intentional use of networked information and communications technology in teaching and learning. (Naidu, 2003, 2006; Tavangarian, Leypold, Nölting, & Röser, 2004). A number of other terms are also used to describe this mode of teaching and learning. They include online learning (Yee & Luan, 2009), virtual learning (Cook, 2008), distributed learning, network and web-based learning (Narciss, Proske, & Koerndle, 2007). Fundamentally, they all refer to educational processes that utilize information and communications technology to mediate asynchronous as well as synchronous learning and teaching activities. Also, abbreviations like CBT (Computer-Based Training), IBT (Internet-Based Training) or WBT (Web-Based Training) have been used as synonyms to e-Learning (Garrison & Anderson, 2003). In this study, greater emphasis is given to computer and Internet-based training.Educational programs must start in Basic Education especially if any constructive and developmental interventions are curricular in nature. This is in effect the reason why Department of Education’s (DepEd) new K to 12 curriculum has to adopt the spiraling approach to learning that is, designing content standards, performance tasks and levels of appropriate skills and competencies from Kindergarten, Grade 1 up to Grade 12, completing one full cycle (Features of K to12, 2015). Previous studies also show that measuring effectiveness of education technology and e-Learning programs start in basic education with children (Bulent, Bahar, & Pınar, 2004; Kong, 2007; Mitra & Rana, 2001; Mitra, 2005; Nokelainen, 2006; Valdez et al., 2000).The decision in doing this project in a public school is a deliberate choice made by the research team. This project is not just research-based but also an advocacy to help basic public education embrace e-Learning for the benefits of underprivileged students in the Philippines. Providing this kind of opportunity in the formative years of children would leave a positive mark in their minds for them to achieve and adapt in a global community that is rapidly changing. This paper therefore seeks to propose a model for collaborative social partnership to establish an e-Learning program in public education.Most studies reveal that Internet use is predominantly beneficial to education (Valdez et al., 2000; Hoffman, Novak, & Venkatesh, 2004; Horton, 2008). In the Philippines, there are few researches work that delve with the use of technology and the Internet in higher education (Authors, 2010). In terms of digital divide in Philippine education sector, public elementary schools have not adopted the full benefits of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Financial constraint and the slow implementation, if not, non-implementation of government agenda for ICT in education are the two considerable reasons why Basic Education is far from having an ICT-enabled curriculum for pupils. Government’s heavy spending on education is primarily directed on building classrooms and teachers’ compensation and training. Unlike its counterpart in the private elementary education, some ICT provisions are provided like building computer laboratories for pupils, providing online materials for teaching, and creating an online library resource. Only in 2005 that DepEd adopted the ICT roadmap for education which was dubbed as the “Five-Year Information and Communication Technology for Education Strategic Plan” (Department of Education Information & Communication Technology for Education (ICT4E) Strategic Plan, 2020). Unfortunately it was not fully implemented when new national leaders were elected in the Philippines. However within this context, public-private partnerships can be achieved to make alternative initiatives, which this project is all about. This study is part of De La Salle University’s Challenge Grant Program that aims to produce socially relevant research projects that “secure positive, meaningful, lasting and inclusive growth in society and contribute to nation-building…” (Research@DLSU, 2011, p. 2).
