Cities are complex entities at the heart of the main human challenges in the present century. Cities have been framed both as engines of innovation, productivity and sustainability (Glaeser, 2011), but also as sources of concentrated pollution and crime (Bettencourt, Lobo, Helbing, Kuhnert, & West, 2007). Given that the majority of humanity now live within cities (DESA, 2018), it has never been more important to develop better understanding of their main strengths and weaknesses, as well as those mechanisms underpinning their functional structure and dynamics.
An important concept when articulating urban structure is the notion of the neighbourhood. Neighbourhoods can be understood as the building blocks of cities, coherent and meaningful entities that, put together, make up a city and can also be leveraged for policy making (PCAST, 2016). There is a long tradition within the social sciences to frame the neighbourhood as a social construct (Sampson, 2019) that evolves over time, both in nature and extent (Knaap, Wolf, Rey, Kang, & Han, 2019). Equally, neighbourhoods also have a very physical dimension. At their core, a neighbourhood is the geographical representation and delimitation of a place that, while being part of a larger more diverse city, shares similar character, composition, and/or activity patterns. The concept thus plays at the intersection and interaction of the built and lived or experienced environment (Sennett, 2018). In this sense, it relates to that of activity space, although it differs in some crucial aspects. While activity spaces thread together a series of locations based on whether an individual has been in contact with them in their everyday life (Patterson & Farber, 2015), neighbourhoods bring together the individuals that are in contact with a particular set of locations, and build a place from this collection. This paper brings both concepts in conversation.
Scarcity of relevant data is a clear barrier to furthering our understanding of social systems (Lazer et al., 2009), such as cities and neighbourhoods (Arribas-Bel, 2014; Shelton & Poorthuis, 2019). Traditional analyses of neighbourhoods have been limited by the availability of data that meaningfully represent their extent and accurately capture their nature. For the most part, researchers have been limited to the use of official area estimates such as censuses, or bespoke surveys, each of them with their own frequency, coverage and bias issues (Spielman, Folch, & Nagle, 2014). The former provides a representative picture at the expense of low frequency (e.g. every ten years) and spatial aggregations to administrative boundaries that ignore the social nature of neighbourhoods; while the latter provides more detail and fine-grain scale at the cost of limited coverage and rare repeated collection over time.
Advances in Information and Communication Technology such as location-aware technology, sensor technology and mobile technology, have enabled our capability of collecting detailed data about human dynamics (Shaw & Sui, 2018). The traditional data landscape in urban and neighbourhood research is currently being redefined by new forms of data. Characterized by some as a revolution (Kitchin, 2014), the rise of new data sources are making possible analyses on cities and social systems that just a few years ago were unthinkable (Lazer & Radford, 2017). New opportunities to explore life in cities have been enabled by the volunteering of spatio-temporally referenced digital traces left by human use of urban environments (Campbell et al., 2008; Crooks et al., 2015). One recent source of particularly interesting data for understanding cities and the places that make them up are location-based services (LBSs). These are online applications that, thanks to the geolocation and connectivity technology embedded in smartphones, allow their users to broadcast their location at a given point in time to their social network. Through these “check-ins”, users contribute to building databases of locations (or “venues”, in the LBS jargon) with detailed information not only of their characteristics but also of the type of people that frequent them. Of all LBS services currently available, the most prominent, standalone one is Foursquare1. Existing research using LBSs, and Foursquare more specifically, has focused on studying user behaviour (e.g. Noulas, Scellato, Mascolo, & Pontil, 2011), the motivations behind checking in (e.g. Lindqvist, Cranshaw, Wiese, Hong, & Zimmerman, 2011), global mobility patterns (e.g. Noulas, Scellato, Lambiotte, Pontil, & Mascolo, 2012), or on exploring the extent, coverage and implicit biases recorded in these datasets (e.g. Arribas-Bel & Bakens, 2019; Hecht & Stephens, 2014). On their own, data such as Foursquare check-ins provide insight into both where and when activities are taking place within cities. But, as we demonstrate in this study, through their linkage, augmentation and analysis they also provide a great opportunity to model the functional form and characteristics of neighbourhoods within cities.
New urban data require new urban analytics (Batty, 2019; Singleton, Spielman, & Folch, 2017). Developing an understanding of contemporary human mobility, behaviour, context and outcome poses great challenges to many existing instruments that urban scholars have traditionally relied upon for the empirical study of cities (Arribas-Bel, 2014). Because new forms of data do not represent more of the same nature as traditional sources, but qualitatively different typologies and characteristics (e.g. more granular, different sampling strategies and geographical representations), it is important that methods used to fully leverage and unlock their potential recognize it and be tailored to their unique nature. In other disciplines, advances in this direction are being made in the nascent field of Data Science (Donoho, 2017) and, within the discipline of Geography, there are also calls for a Geographic and/or Urban Data Science (Arribas-Bel & Reades, 2018; Organizers et al., 2019; Singleton & Arribas-Bel, 2019).
A methodological area with great promise for the analysis of cities and their structure is network science. Networks are an increasingly important conceptual and methodological tool in contemporary urban theory. They are used to both represent and model various types of interaction, flow or relation (e.g. movement, finance, communication, friendships etc), and to elucidate the hidden structure manifest through the agglomeration of human connections (Nelson & Rae, 2016; Ratti, 2004). Many applications of networks focus on human dynamics across a range of temporal scales: from mapping patterns of global migration to daily commuting patterns (Campbell et al., 2008). Network analysis has also been applied to new data sources, such as LBS. Noulas et al. (2012) use Foursquare data to uncover universal pattern in human urban mobility. In Jiang and Miao (2015), spatial traces from a former location social media, have been used to build an Irregular Triangulated Network and analyse the evolution of natural cities. Jiang and Miao (2015)’s work has demonstrated the potential of these new data sources to generate realistic geographic units bottom-up and, as they put it, social media such as “Fourquare can act as a proxy for studying and understanding evolving mechanism of cities” Jiang and Miao (2015). To obtain geographic units from network data, scholars have increasingly combined the use of community detection algorithms, a traditional network science approach, with the spatial element Ratti et al. (2010), Chen, Xu, and Xu (2015), Gao, Liu, Wang, and Ma (2013), Guo, Jin, Gao, and Zhu (2018).
In the present study, we couple information from Foursquare with (Geographic) Data Science methods to provide a framework that explores the functional structure of cities, how their populations' preferences underpin them, and the relationship between activity spaces and their contexts. We propose and operationalize the notion of functional neighbourhoods, which intersects that of neighbourhood and activity space.
Differently from the traditional conceptualization of neighbourhood – which also accounts for the identity of people inhabiting it (Kallus & Law-Yone, 2000) – we only focus on spaces that originate from people movements. Such movements are quantified via Foursquare origin destination flows – the number of trips that took place by any user from an origin venue to a destination venue – providing knowledge about the functional role of neighbourhoods. By functional here we refer to areas that display a significant degree of spatial interdependency between venues (Dunford, 2009). At the same time, we expand the idea of activity space, usually centered on individuals' day to day experience (Horton & Reynolds, 1971), by disclosing geographic forms derived from collective behaviours. Then we characterise the hyper-local built environment of each venue; and explore how built and experienced environments interact across a wide range of global cities by building a global typology of functional neighbourhood.
Through this work we introduce a framework to generate functional neighbourhoods and provide insights into the human dynamics characterizing them. Taking advantage of the global coverage of crowdsourced geographic data, our framework also implements a set of methods to identify functional neighbourhoods sharing similar properties – in terms of diversity, morphology, people preferences and mobility – across different cities.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the unique dataset we rely upon to build functional neighbourhoods; Section 3 presents the methodological approach we assemble, including how we delineate neighbourhoods, how they are characterized, and how a clustering exercise groups them in similar types; in Section 4 we discuss our results; and Section 5 concludes with a discussion and ideas for future work in this area.
