Image corner is an important local feature in image processing, and corner detection is a critical pre-processing step for many image processing tasks such as image matching, pattern classification, motion estimation, and object tracking [1]. Moravec [2] found an obvious property in the grayscale patterns of corners and pioneered the study of corner detection. Based on Moravec’s finding, the well-known Harris corner detector [3] was proposed and a ‘corner score’ was derived for an image pixel from a two-directional structure tensor formed from image gradients. Meanwhile, other methods such as Hessian matrix [4] and Hilbert transform [5] have also been used to derive the corner score. These methods usually determine the corner score by analyzing a two-directional structure tensor constructed from the first or second-order derivatives of the image. They are simple and efficient, but sensitive to noise. Moreover, two directional derivatives cannot accurately depict the difference between edges and corners. For example, Noble [6] analyzed the principle behind the Harris corner detector and pointed out that the Harris detector can only detect ‘L’ shaped corners well.
In order to overcome this deficiency, Zhang and Sun [7] replaced the Gaussian kernel in the Harris detector [3] with a set of anisotropic Gaussian kernels to establish an eight directional structure tensor based on the first-order derivatives of an image. Meanwhile, the template-based methods [8], [9], [10], [11], [12] and contour-based methods [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18] have also been presented. The contour-based methods detected corners by analyzing the shape characteristics of the edges in images. Their results heavily depend on the prior segmentation and boundary tracking. The template-based methods used different types of parameterized corner templates to detect corners. Since the parameterized corner templates cannot cover all the types of corners that have different orientations and subtended angles, the performance is unsatisfactory in practical applications.
Recently, multi-scale analysis techniques have been used for corner detection. Mikolajczyk and Schmid proposed two scale invariant detectors called Harris-Laplace [19] and Hessian-Laplace [20], which used Laplacian of Gaussian to perform multi-scale analysis. Wavelets and lifting wavelets have also been used for corner detection [21], [22]. Since two-dimensional wavelets have a limited capability in capturing directional information, Gabor wavelets and Log-Gabor wavelets were used for obtaining more directional information. Gao et al. [23] proposed a corner detection method, namely LGWTSMM, in which the Log-Gabor wavelet coefficients in all directions were weighted and summed to establish a two directional structure tensor for corner detection. This method outperforms the aforementioned wavelet-based methods, but the Gabor kernel is highly non-orthogonal and can cause redundancy in the coefficients [24]. The redundancy will decrease the distinction between corners and other pixels. Moreover, the process of weighted summation of structural information from all directions will lead to loss of some useful structural information and increase the corner localization error.
Natural images contain intrinsic geometrical structures that are important for corner detection. The aforementioned wavelets are good at isolating the discontinuities at edge points, but they cannot handle equally well distributed singularities such as those along curves [25]. As a result, contourlets [26] and shearlets [27] have been introduced to capture the intrinsic geometrical structures. Duan et al. [28] employed a 3D version of the traditional shearlet transform with a dual tree structure to capture the structure information from 3D magnetic resonance images, and then, the structure tensor in the Harris corner detector was utilized to analysis the structure information for image fusion. Malafronte et al. [29] constructed a spatio-temporal interest point detector based on shearlet transform, in which the shearlet coefficients in all directions at each scale were summed. The products of the resultant values at the two finest scales were compared with a threshold for interest point detection. Duval-Poo et al. [30] proposed another interest point detection method based on shearlets. They developed a measure function by summing the shearlet coefficients in all directions at all scales for interest point detection, which has been proven to be relatively accurate in detection and highly robust to noise and scale variations. However, the traditional shearlet transform suffers from some inadequacies in corner detection including the following: (1) shearlet transform suffers from a strong side lobe effect. The local structural information at the locations where the grayscale values drastically change, such as along edges or at corners, has multiple peaks; (2) since a corner is not simply formed by straight lines, and there might be some intensity changes in several directions in its background, the structural information in two adjacent directions is not completely independent. However, in shearlet transform, there is no overlap between the shearlets of adjacent directions in the Fourier domain, making the structural information of adjacent directions independent; (3) because the mother function of shearlets has a limited support in the Fourier domain, the corresponding spatial filter has a larger envelope. This results in the problem of edge extension, which causes erroneous detections in the case of the extensions of two edges intersecting with each other; (4) a spatial filter with a larger envelope depresses the high frequency components in the image, making the detailed information less clear; and (5) in shearlets, the orientation variable is associated with the scale index. For different scales, the number of directions is different and is determined by the scale index. This leads to a great difficulty for subsequent corner detection by using the multi-scale directional information.
Duval-Poo et al. [31], [32] addressed the first inadequacy, i.e., the problem of multiple peaks, and they proposed an edge and corner detection method with a modified shearlet transform. In order to eliminate the effect of multiple peaks, they selected an anti-symmetric wavelet proposed by Mallat and Zhong [33] to replace the Meyer wavelet which is one of two generating functions of the mother shearlet, and the other details of the traditional shearlet transform remain unchanged. Based on the structural information obtained by the modified shearlets, they firstly calculated the mean of all scale shearlet coefficients in the same direction, and then the sum of all directional means weighted by a sinusoidal function was considered for corner detection. Benefited from the modified shearlets, this method yields a better performance in terms of detection accuracy and robustness to noise compared with the traditional shearlet based methods, but merging the multi-scale directional information by calculating their means especially merging information from coarse scales will greatly increase the corner localization errors.
In this work, we focus on all the inadequacies of the traditional shearlet transform and develop an improved shearlet transform with a flexible number of directions and a reasonable support, which can accurately obtain multi-scale and multi-directional structural information from images. In order to make full use of the multi-scale and multi-directional information, based on the shearlet coefficients, a multi-directional structure tensor is constructed for corner detection, and a multi-scale corner measurement function is proposed to reduce the influence of noise and suppress edges. The proposed corner detection method is compared with representative corner detectors. The obtained results show that the proposed corner detection method yields some improvements over the current state-of-the-arts in corner detection in terms of the detection accuracy, corner localization accuracy, and robustness to affine transformations, illumination changes, noise, image blurring, viewpoint changes, etc.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The traditional shearlet transform is briefly reviewed in Section 2. In Section 3, the inadequacies of the traditional shearlet transform for corner detection are discussed and addressed. An improved shearlet transform is developed, and a novel corner detection and measurement algorithm is proposed. Extensive experimental results are given in Section 4. Finally, in Section 5, concluding remarks are provided.
