Coal plays a very important role in the energy supply in China. However, with the reduction of coal reserves and increase of coal consumption, China has to exploit coal resources deeper buried in the ground, during which many safe and environmental issues emerge, such as coal and gas outburst, mine earthquake and water inrush etc. Coal and gas outbursts are dynamic phenomenon that involve the ejection of considerable coal and gas into the working face in an extremely short time as a result of mining activities. The high-concentration gas and vast ejected coal and rock mass may cause people to suffocate or to be buried. In addition, gas can explode when it contacts fire, which is extremely dangerous in underground environment. Furthermore, the greenhouse effect of methane is 28 times that of carbon dioxide and the large amount of gas (methane) emitted will cause serve pollution to the air. (Jackson, 1984; Guan and Wang, 2009; Zhao and Cheng, 2015; Tu and Cheng, 2016; Zhou and Wang, 2017; Tang and Yang, 2018; Zhou and Wang, 2018; Wang and Lou, 2019). Among all the outburst accidents in the world, nearly one-third occurred in China, the country with the most serious coal and gas disasters (Hargraves, 1980; Zhao and Cheng, 2019). Therefore, it is both technically and environmentally important to study accurate methods for coal and gas outburst prediction.
In recent years, with the increasing interests in computer science, methods such as machine learning algorithms, neural networks, support vector machines and data mining algorithms have been gradually adopted in the field of coal and gas outburst prediction. Scholars (Fu and Xue, 2012; Shi and Han, 2009; Wen and Zhang, 2014; Tian and Zhou, 2005; Miao and Zhang, 2008; Min and Wang, 2009; Sheng-qiang and Yan, 2009; Ruilin and Lowndes, 2010) have applied methods such as neural networks, SVM and random forests to outburst prediction and have yielded fruitful results. However, current multi-factor and high-coupling prediction models are still not ideal. They are of poor prediction accuracy and consume long calculation time because of too many parameters used and repeatedly input information into the calculation process. Considering the abovementioned problems, the back propagation (BP) neural network algorithm with high nonlinear fitting ability, strong fault tolerance and rigorous derivation process has been proposed to predict coal and gas outburst. However, this algorithm still has the defects of easily falling into the local minimum and slow convergence. To solve these problems, in this study, the genetic algorithm (GA) with strong global search ability and the simulated annealing algorithm (SA) with strong local search ability were integrated into a new GASA algorithm. Besides, the initial weight and threshold of BP neural network were optimized, and a GASA-BP prediction model was established by introducing an appropriate learning rate into the model. Furthermore, outburst prediction performance of the model was verified based on the actual data from Weicun Coal Mine in Jiaozuo, Henan Province, China. The research results can provide valuable theoretical reference to the prediction of coal and gas outburst.
