Due to its valuable ecological functions and important ecosystem services provided, Posidonia oceanica (L.) Delile meadows constitute valuable ecosystems along the coast which are characterized by high productivity and associated with wide biodiversity. Posidonia oceanica produces oxygen, sequesters organic carbon, provides nutrients for the herbivorous food webs, stabilizes sediments, reduces coastal and beach erosion, enhances biodiversity and trophic transfers to adjacent habitats. These meadows are also good biological indicators of the health status of marine ecosystem, and of the anthropogenic and environmental influences that are causing alarming disappearance of this marine flowering plant (Boudouresque et al., 2006; Casazza et al., 2006; Orth et al. 2006; Montefalcone, 2009).
Nowadays, the endemic Mediterranean seagrass P. oceanica is exposed to several human activities, which are causing a dramatic decline (Marbà et al., 1996; Telesca et al., 2015). P. oceanica is stressed by multiple factors such as sediment and nutrient runoff, physical disturbance including pier or harbor extension, invasive species, diseases, commercial fishing practices, aquaculture, overgrazing, algal blooms, global warming, ocean acidification (Barange et al., 2013). Yet, the current public awareness of the importance of protecting, monitoring, managing and restoring P. oceanica meadows is still very low. Moreover, the direct or indirect impact on people’s lives and the benefits provided by the ecosystem located in the intertidal zones are poorly understood (Nordlund et al., 2014, 2016, 2018). In addition, although the European Union’s Habitat directive (92/43/CEE) considers P. oceanica beds among priority habitats and it has become one of the main targets of the protection and management of the Mediterranean Sea (Telesca et al., 2015), seagrass meadows are frequently not taken into account during coastal management (Orth et al., 2006; Duarte et al., 2008; Grech et al., 2012).
Very limited data is publicly available on the wide San Vito-Barletta meadow located at the Italian southern Adriatic Sea along the coast of Apulia region. In 1991, a first mapping assessed this meadow as “not very lush” (Ministero Marina Mercantile, 1991). An update conducted in 2004 pointed out a drastic reduction in the spatial distribution of P. oceanica meadow, in particular northwards of Bari (Regione Puglia et al., 2006; Costantino et al., 2010). A local survey conducted in April 2010 and October 2011 revealed that in Molfetta P. oceanica had survived only within the natural cove named Cala San Giacomo, where the meadow was described as highly fragmented, characterized by the abundant presence of dead matte with a mean density value falling into the range of “lower sub-normal density” (LSD), and classified as “very disturbed” (Andreassi, 2016). So far, no further studies have been performed on the San Vito-Barletta meadow, and no genetic study undertaken. Thus, our understanding of the health status of this meadow is still incomplete.
The Osservatorio del Mare a Molfetta (OMM, Observatory of the Sea in Molfetta) is a non-profit organization operating in the city of Molfetta (Apulia region, Southern Italy). It was founded by a group of volunteers promoting the census of coastal and marine biodiversity. OMM has four essential missions: a) increase citizen’s scientific literacy on the health status of the coastal marine ecosystem; b) support the public’s right to access environmental data to empower citizens to make effective and efficient decisions relating to environmental issues; c) raise the attention of local policy makers on the actions requested to preserve the health status of urban coast; d) involve citizens with their own devices in monitoring programs according to the methodology of citizen science. In addition, OMM encourages scientists to engage with citizens to establish the absence or presence of a cause and effect association between sea biodiversity loss and pollution/consumption habits.
In this study, we have explored the health status of the San Vito-Barletta meadow with the goal of improving the knowledge on this Site of Community Importance (SCI). To this purpose, we have chosen an original approach, citizen science, to perform underwater visual census (UVC) and a population genetic study. Therefore, using their own devices, volunteers of OMM carried out UVC of the leaf-epiphytes biomass, which can serve as biological quality element (BQE) and as an efficient indicator of the health status of P. oceanica (Frankovich and Fourqurean, 1997; Ruiz and Romero, 2001; Fernàndez-Torquemada et al., 2008; Giovannetti et al., 2010; Castejón-Silvo and Terrados, 2012; McMahon et al., 2013, Costa et al., 2015). Then, we explored the genetic diversity and structure of this meadow. To reach this particular goal, OMM partnered with a public scientific research centre to evaluate the level and spatial pattern of genetic variability of the San Vito-Barletta meadow using highly variable microsatellite molecular markers to assess the relationship between genetic/genotypic variability and the longevity of this seagrass population.
