Managing the heat transfer is an important issue in materials science, as it has critical impact on many practical applications such as heat storage systems, thermoelectric and photovoltaic devices [1], [2], [3]. For instance, paraffin-based phase-change materials have an outstanding ability to store/release the thermal energy upon melting and crystallization [2]. However, practical applications of these materials are rather limited due to their low thermal conductivity [2,3]. One of the possible approaches to overcome such drawback is to fill the paraffin matrix with nanofillers that have much higher thermal conductivity coefficients [1,4]. To this end, it is highly desirable to understand the mechanisms by which the introduced nanoobjects affect the thermal conductivity of the original matrix. Such understanding is a key to design new materials with pre-defined thermal properties.
Advances in computer modeling have made it possible to perform a thorough analysis of a wide variety of the properties of materials in silico, including the thermal conductivity [5]. Computer modeling can be particularly useful in reducing the burden of the experimental work by screening and pre-selecting promising materials with desired properties. Depending on the resolution of a theoretical model, computer simulations can bring an insight into the structure and properties of materials on various scales, including the atomistic one. The models of high (atomic-scale) resolution offer the opportunity to understand the heat transport on a molecular level, as well as to reveal an underlying origin of the changes in the thermal conductivity upon filling the matrix with a nanofiller. Such an insight is unique for computer modeling and is not accessible from experimental measurements [5].
As far as the thermal conductivity is concerned, in molecular dynamics simulations two different approaches are commonly used. The first method is the equilibrium molecular dynamics (EMD); it is based on the Green-Kubo relation and takes into account the fluctuation-dissipation theorem to determine the heat flux [6], [7], [8], [9]. The second approach is the non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD), in which the heat flux and the temperature gradient in a given direction are linked through the Fourier's law [10], [11], [12]. It was demonstrated that both EMD [6], [7], [8] and NEMD [10,13] methods can successfully be employed to compute the thermal conductivity coefficient in simulations. While it is generally accepted that both equilibrium and non-equilibrium methods are largely equivalent [9,14], a number of studies have reported discrepancies in the thermal conductivity evaluated by the two methods [6,15]. According to earlier studies, such discrepancies can partly be explained by the differences in simulation protocols [6,9,15,16]. Considerably less is known as to how the choice of a theoretical model (or, in other words, the interatomic interaction potentials and their parameters) affect the calculated thermal conductivity. In particular, the thermal conductivity is normally linked with the number of degrees of freedom, so that it is often believed that switching from the all-atom models to the united-atom ones leads to a drop in the thermal conductivity coefficient [17]. However, even if two models have the same resolution, they often can give different values of the thermal conductivity coefficients [15,16]. In general, among other factors, a force field is believed to have the greatest impact on the predicted thermal conductivity [18]. Thus, there is an obvious uncertainty regarding a proper choice of the theoretical model for calculating the thermal conductivity of a material at hand. In this paper we aim to resolve this uncertainty for a typical representative of organic phase-change materials.
The main goal of our study is to evaluate systematically how the choice of the theoretical model impacts the material's thermal conductivity calculated via both equilibrium and non-equilibrium methods. As a test system, here we chose to consider paraffin bulk samples. Paraffins, being relatively short n-alkanes, have a simple chemical structure and have been studied by computer simulations for decades. Paraffin is a typical representative of organic phase-change materials, so that the accurate evaluation of its thermal conductivity is highly desirable. Last but not least, paraffin is a crystallizable material, and this makes it possible to evaluate the thermal conductivity in both liquid and crystalline states. In our study we consider n-eicosane (C20H42), one of the most promising paraffins for the use in domestic heat storage devices [2]. The values of the thermal conductivity of n-eicosane samples were systematically evaluated for different models and critically compared with experimental data. To this end, we employed 10 different force fields of common use (both all-atom and united-atom ones). The thermal conductivity was evaluated for both liquid and solid states of n-eicosane samples with the use of EMD and NEMD methods. As we proceed to show, a proper choice of a theoretical model for evaluating the thermal conductivity of organic phase-change materials (such as paraffins) can be a non-trivial task, as different force fields perform differently for liquid and solid states and when equilibrium and non-equilibrium methods are employed.
