While the link between critical thinking development and computer-assisted instruction using simulations is logical, little has been published focusing on using this approach to develop student self-confidence and critical thinking in nursing students academic writing (Reece et al., 2010; Nelson and Crow, 2014). Academic writing has been identified as one of the most important skills that the critical and questioning nurse can adopt and “is an integral skill that defines who we are and what we think” (Whitehead, 2002). There is an expectation that first year nursing students will quickly acquire scientific writing skills when most have had little to no prior experience of this genre of writing (Whitehead, 2002; O'Flaherty, 2019). However, there is much anecdotal evidence that suggests that nursing students struggle with the demands placed upon them when writing academic assignments and developing skills in critical thinking (CT) and appraisal (Salamonson et al., 2010; Borglin and Fagerström, 2012). CT, use of language structuring and argument are all core criteria in good academic writing however few studies in the literature explore the close relationship between CT and academic writing (Borglin and Fagerström, 2012).
Strategies that teach CT in nursing students are essential in clinical decision making and should be introduced early in higher education programs, as these skills build lifelong learning and help move the profession into the 21st century. CT allows future graduates to be more knowledgeable about complex patient situations and competent in their skills and clinical practice (Zori et al., 2010; Chang et al., 2011; Pitt et al., 2015). CT is a “cognitive engine, which drives problem-solving and decision making as well as an explanation of the evidential, conceptual, methodological, criteriological, or contextual considerations upon which that judgment is based” (Facione, 1990, p.3). Scheffer and Rubenfeld (2000) consider the various components of CT to include (i) actively gathering and seeking information, (ii) questioning and investigating, (iii) analysis, evaluation, and inference and (iv) problem solving and application of theory and knowledge. CT in the context of nursing education is the process of intentional higher-level thinking to define a client's problem, examining the evidence-based practice in caring for the client, and making appropriate choices in the delivery of care. Simply put, CT is the development and evaluation of arguments using skills of interpretation, analysis, evaluation, inference and explanation that lead to problem-solving and decision making; it is this definition of the CT cognitive process that has been used to inform the current study.
Traditional teaching styles rely heavily on a didactic lecture format which has been shown by many educators to do little to assist the learner in developing active learning strategies, especially critical thinking skills such as gathering, analysing, synthesising and evaluating information (Knowles and Gray, 2011; Nelson and Crow, 2014). Many studies have reported that students were more active learners when simulations were used compared to conventional class teaching strategies (Reece et al., 2010; Nelson and Crow, 2014; Xu, 2016). In simulations, learners can be asked to solve clinical problems and critically analyse the situation on the information provided, in a safe online environment which poses no risk to actual patients.
A review of the literature show simulations (e.g. high-fidelity simulations or Human Patient Simulations) are most often used as a teaching strategy in undergraduate nursing programs to improve critical thinking with the goal of reducing human error and improving patient safety (Howard et al., 2010; Burns et al., 2010; Guhde, 2011). Simulations that specifically incorporate case studies also have a number of reported teaching and learning benefits. For example, literature reviews by Chan (2013) and Carvalho et al. (2017) have reported student learning being most effective when it is problem or case-based, active and related to real-life. Students often report more self-confidence and knowledge acquisition after engaging with case-based simulations set in a clinical setting (Liaw et al., 2012; Zulkosky, 2012). Simulations that incorporate scenarios and case studies, therefore, have the potential to bridge the gaps between the classroom and real life (Gredler, 2004).
Consequently, a case-based simulation is a novel tool that nurse educationalists and curriculum planners could use to potentially reform their teaching approach and deliver the demands of an academic style of critical writing with their students. The incorporation of a case-based desktop simulation approach in the current study was adopted to teach the immunological basis of hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN, Erythroblastalis fetalis) as part of the teaching of blood biology in an online Human Health course. HDN is a potentially fatal condition initiated when Rhesus (Rh) antigens (Ags) on fetal red blood cells (RBCs) are seen as foreign by the mother's Rh-negative immune system (de Haas et al., 2015). In the first pregnancy, exposure of the maternal immune system to fetal Rh-positive RBCs leads to immune activation, and immunoglobulin M (IgM) production, and memory cell formation. Any subsequent pregnancy with another Rh-positive fetus activates the memory cells, and immunoglobulin G (IgG) production, which is placentally transferred to the fetus. Through multiple effector functions, IgG leads to hemolysis, causing anaemia and in severe cases, even death of the fetus (Moise, 2013). This case-study was chosen as it is traditionally found challenging by students, yet it is a common condition found in the clinic. This approach incorporates premises of adult learning being “problem centred, active, and related to real-life” and has the potential to facilitate critical thinking (Saucier et al., 2000; Knowles and Gray, 2011).
The present study describes the impact of an HDN simulation on first-year undergraduate nursing students' active learning, knowledge acquisition, self-confidence and development and application of critical thinking, specifically in their academic writing.
