The human brain is a complex system. Research towards thought patterns and expanding the way people exchange information with the outside world has never stopped for cognitive neuroscience and neurorehabilitation. With the rapid development of cognitive science, neuroscience, computer science, and signal processing technology in recent years, the brain-computer interface (BCI) provides human beings with other ways to communicate with the world, and also allows us to get a better understanding of the physical mechanisms of human thought [1], [2].
As an essential part of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), electroencephalograph (EEG) signals, also known as brainwaves, have found a variety of exciting and useful applications for users and have become increasingly important in various areas. Gathered from the scalp, the EEG is a signal containing information about the electrical activity of the brain. Electrodes placed on the scalp are used to detect electrical information from the brain under the scalp, bone and other tissues. Since it is an overall measurement of human brain electrical activity, it contains a wealth of information. This is the reason why EEG can be applied to diverse areas like personal recognition [3], disease identification [4], sleep stage classification [5], visual image generation using brainwaves [6], and brain typing [7].
From the viewpoint of data analysis, automatic EEG analysis is challenging due to the inherent feature of bio-signals. One source of ambiguity is the fused nature of features, which is common for most bio-signal feature learning tasks. The fusion here means that any one experimental trial of signals contains both wanted features and unwanted features for the given tasks. Also, due to the lack of macroscopic knowledge of the mechanism of EEG activity, this fused feature problem in EEG is more serious than for many other physiological signals. Besides that, brain wave analysis is challenging in the following aspects:
•Low signal to noise ratio: For EEG signals, being full of information also means full of noise and interference, making it very hard to extract reliable features [8], [9], [10], [11].•Data format varies: Depending on the collection device, EEG signals have a different format [12]. Hence it becomes difficult to construct standard algorithms to extract features from EEG.•Limited training data: Constructing a hand-labeled training corpus for fine-grained EEG analysis is labor-intensive. Since EEG data collections are often domain dependent, it is not practical to always collect new training data for new domains. Furthermore, due to the feature fusion problem, the privacy issue is also one important reason why current datasets do not involve large numbers of subjects, thereby making it practically impossible to build a huge dataset like ImageNet [13].•Large individual difference: EEG signals have large individual differences, making it hard to learn robust features across subjects [14], [15], [16].
In this work, we first designed an end-to-end framework for short-term EEG signals classification. To address the above difficulties, deep learning approaches are utilized in this paper to achieve both learning and visualization. Autoencoder-based techniques are used for feature learning and dimensionality reduction for short-term EEG signals. In this paper this method is referred to as Image-wise autoencoders. The Image-wise autoencoders are designed based on Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and convolutional neural networks. Using FFT, we can obtain the three EEG frequency bands, then we use these frequency bands to achieve an RGB-color visualization (an image) [10]. Then, a CNN based autoencoder is designed to extract features from these color images with both classification loss and reconstruction loss. Under this design, our models successfully overcomes the difficulties of consistent handling of EEG data.
Furthermore, in a real-world situation, customers not only require accuracy for the brain-computer interface but also require a competent level of privacy and information safety [17]. For example, if we would like to use EEG for a personal recognition task for a bank, the only information we would like to upload is personal identity-related information. But unfortunately, EEG is a fused feature data with a messy, vibrant symphony of personal information, including one’s individuality, learning capacity and emotion information. That is, all brain activity related feature will be uploaded and available for legal or illegal uses. For the bank example, since there currently does not exist a suitable information filtering algorithm, both the bank and potential future hackers will also be able to get our other information like disease information, emotion information and so on. Current research has tried to specify several standards for operating on EEG data to protect users’ privacy but that has not solved the problem fundamentally [18], [19], [20].
To address the above issue, for the first time, we propose a feature filter for short-term EEG signals. In practice, we do not use the idea of subtracting features to filter out properties as such properties are not well-defined. Instead, we choose to generate a new EEG trial without the unwanted features but maintaining the desired features of the original EEG trial signal. Thus, a generative adversarial network (GAN) based technique is utilized to create such an EEG signal. In this paper, we also introduce a feature filter, which is as an extension of our short-EEG discriminative model. As mentioned earlier, the feature filter of EEG is more like a style transformation. So we are inspired by the idea of Image-to-Image translation [21] introduced in the computer vision area. This approach is designed to map one image distribution to another image distribution in order to achieve a style transformation. In this section, such a translation mechanism is used for feature filtering.
Contributions are summarized as listed:
•We propose the EEG feature filter and feature extractor to support it based on our conference papers [22], [23], [24]. For the first time, we consider the situations that competent privacy information protection is generally required for customers. We transfer time series EEG signals to EEG images, thereby reducing the feature filter problem to an image translation problem.•We conduct detailed experiments to validate the performance of the proposed network and contribution of each component. Experiment on UCI EEG datasets shows our competent level of information preservation and privacy protection.
