There are three main types of symmetry present in the natural and man-made objects - reflection symmetry, rotational symmetry, and translational symmetry. Reflection symmetry is the most frequently occurring symmetry in natural and man-made objects. Objects can be represented as digital images or 3D point clouds. The primary motivation for detecting reflection symmetry in 3D point clouds is the following. There are various applications such as 3D surface reconstruction [1], model completion [1], [2], [3], symmetrization [4], model reduction [5], 3D model reconstruction from a single image [6], symmetric object segmentation and recognition [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], and viewpoint selection [12]. These applications require robust, fast, and accurate detection of 3D reflection symmetry for further processing.
The problem of detecting reflection symmetry is an example of the pattern recognition problem where our goal is to find the repetitive patterns present in the images or 3D point class. For example, in an image containing reflective symmetric objects, object pixels appear two times with respect to the symmetry axis, while in an image containing translational symmetric objects, object pixels appear multiple times at the grid corners. The primary challenge is to estimate the reflection symmetry or detecting the reflection symmetry pattern in the presence of outlier points, missing parts of the symmetric objects, and deviations from the perfect reflection symmetry. The problem of detecting the reflection symmetry of an object amounts to solving the following two sub-problems - (a) determining the plane of reflection symmetry and (b) finding correspondences between the reflective symmetric points. There exist several approaches for detecting symmetry in 3D point clouds [13]. However, these methods do not scale well with the size of the input point cloud and can not handle a large number of outliers, missing parts, and deviations from the perfect symmetry. For example, a recent method proposed in [14] solves an integer linear program that prohibits it from being used to find symmetry in large point clouds. The method proposed in [15] is not robust to the outliers.
We pose the problem of reflection symmetry detection as an optimization problem by using the reflection symmetry transformation proposed in [14]. We parametrize the plane of reflection symmetry using a rotation matrix and a translation vector and represent the correspondences between the reflective symmetric points using a permutation matrix. We solve the proposed optimization problem for the reflection matrix, the translation vector, and the permutation matrix. The main challenge lies in the fact that the proposed optimization problem is non-linear and non-convex in the reflection matrix and NP-hard in the estimation of correspondences between the reflective symmetric points. There are impurities present in the input point cloud, such as outliers, missing parts, and deviation from symmetry, which further make this problem hard to solve. We propose a fast randomized algorithm to initialize the reflection matrix such that the estimated reflection matrix is in the proximity of the global minimum. We also initialize the translation vector as the mean of the input point cloud using the fact that the reflection symmetry plane of an object passes through the center of mass of the object. We use the reflection matrix and the translation vector to estimate the symmetric correspondences. Then, we update the reflection matrix and the translation vector using these correspondences. We iteratively repeat this procedure until convergence.
The proposed approach depends only on the geometry of the input point cloud and does not use any feature descriptor. Therefore, our approach can be applied to data of any form such as point cloud sampled from the surface of the symmetric object and the volumetric point cloud. This is advantageous since all the descriptors might not be invariant to the outliers and the type of descriptor used also depends on the form of the input point cloud.
Our main contributions are the following.
•We formulate the problem of detecting reflection symmetry as an optimization problem to find the global reflection symmetry in both the volumetric point cloud and the point cloud sampled from the surface of an object in the presence of outliers, perturbation from the perfect symmetry, and missing parts.•We empirically show that the proposed optimization problem is a non-linear and non-convex problem and provides a fast descriptor-free randomized algorithm to initialize the reflection symmetry plane. We also give a theoretical understanding for 2-dimensional point clouds.•We provide a closed-form solution to the problem of estimating the global 3D reflection symmetry plane.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature corresponding to the 3D reflection symmetry. In Section 3, we formulate the problem of detecting global reflection symmetry in point clouds as an optimization problem. In Sections 4 and 5, we discuss the proposed solution for this optimization problem. In Section 6, we present results and comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods on the benchmark dataset. In Section 7, we conclude our approach and discuss future directions.
