There is a longstanding policy interest in unraveling how knowledge generated from public research is used in the private-sector. Studies towards this goal have heavily focused on patent data and considered citations between patents as evidence of knowledge flow. Despite some criticism (Meyer, 2000), such notion has been widely accepted in the literature. Consequently, substantial attention has been paid to patents assigned to universities and other public organizations, examining how those patents are cited by other patents, especially by patents from companies (Rosell & Agrawal, 2009; Trajtenberg, Henderson, & Jaffe, 1997).
University patents, however, only account for a small portion of granted patents, and the main products of public research are scholarly papers rather than patents. Just as patents, papers can also be cited by patents, and indeed both the cited patents and cited papers are served as the “prior art” of a patent application, playing a significant role for patent examiner to determine the patentability of the application. There has been a large literature on both the patent-to-patent and the patent-to-paper citation linkage. Yet, systematic studies, as we shall present in this paper, have been relatively scarce.
Our primary interest in this work is in the life science sector. The last several decades have seen an unprecedented rapid progress of life science, both in basic scientific discoveries and clinical medicine. Recent studies have suggested that biotechnology and pharmaceutical patents have been the main driver for the overall growth of patents and exhibit a particularly prominent citation linkage to science (Mowery, Nelson, Sampat, & Ziedonis, 2004). This has prompted us to ask: How has the patent-to-paper citation linkage of life science patents changed over time? In particular, we aim to answer the following lines of research questions:
1.How has the amount of citations to science changed over time? Does the change vary across different technology classes?2.On the cited side of the linkage, which countries and types of institutions produce the cited papers? Whether basic or applied research are more likely to be cited?3.On the citing side, to what extent company patents cite public science?
