An organisation interested in accumulating analytics related knowledge and resources often finds itself entangled in the complexities of obtaining, deploying and managing the underlying IT infrastructure. In using analytics technology, an organisation also requires expensive software licences, a vast computer infrastructure and expert human resources. Nonetheless, incorporating high quality analytics techniques can directly or indirectly impact revenue of an organisation by leading to a better understanding of customer requirements, behaviours, future product appeals and marketing plans to name a few. Despite numerous benefits that an organisation can achieve through leveraging data analytics solutions, there are multiple challenges organisations face when performing analytics functions.
For instance, an organisation wishing to routinely use a number of analytics models must address the following questions: (1) Data provision: what type of data does such a model require and from which source(s)? (2) Data transformation: what transformations need to be made to data before a model can use them? (3) Model usage: what assumptions underpin a model, bearing in mind that such assumptions help make effective use of the model and interpret the results? (4) Model maintenance: what needs to be done to the model to maintain its effectiveness in the light of change(s)?
Often, organisations rely on the skillsets of their expert analysts to carry out these tasks. Based on feedback related to the performance and prediction accuracy of the models, analysts will adjust the mathematical formulas and change some of the underlying variables or the way data is mapped into variables. This is a highly ad hoc process which involves a mixture of both computational and statistical skills. It is made worse when analysts leave an organisation because their models will often decay and, in most cases, almost certainly die.
Against such backdrop, what organisations need is a way to allow complex knowledge related to these models’ operations, underlying assumptions and connections to the IT infrastructure to be made explicit so that they can be deployed and maintained without necessarily involving the analysts who created them in the first place. To address this need, this paper presents the design of an innovative IT platform that has the following characteristics. (1) It captures and stores the experience and knowledge accumulated by analysts during the elaboration of these models in a knowledge base using semantic modelling principles [1], where ontologies are the basic building blocks. (2) This knowledge base maintains relationships amongst prediction models, data elements and variables, together with their corresponding data sources. It enables analysts to record analytics models and make them readily available and modifiable for future use and problem-solving by analysts and other stakeholders. (3) This knowledge base sits on top of an organisation’s IT infrastructure and therefore does not disrupt existing work practices or introduce dependencies with specific IT vendors.
An organisation can also maintain and update this knowledge base over time with new analytics models. In addition to managing the models, the knowledge base can keep track of data sources available to conduct predictions. This will allow users to reuse the same prediction model with different datasets or update a model when new data sources are available. Furthermore, it will allow users to get better understanding of the key determinants affecting analytics results.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 introduces related work. Section 3 discusses our solution and Section 4 provides a prototype and a use case which demonstrate how to use our platform and knowledge base to maintain multiple property price prediction models and datasets for the New South Wales (NSW) Government’s land and property development organisation. In Section 5, we present experiments and results for evaluating the performance of our platform. The paper concludes with a summary and future work in Section 6.
