Adder is the most basic unit of a computer for numerical calculation. Adder’s speed determines the time consumption of computer during numerical calculation. However, in general addition operation, there is a carry propagation process from the least significant digital position to the highest significant digital position. This process causes the carry delay in addition, which seriously restricts the speed of computer for numerical calculation. In order to overcome the problem, a binary adder with carry look-ahead part is adopted in electronic computer from its early days, but it brought a complex and huge structure of the adder.
In 1960s, A. Avizienis proposed an addition technique that can eliminate carry delay by using modified-signed digit (MSD) number expression. The core of this technique is to represent a number by using signed redundant digits [1]. By reasonably selecting the expression symbol of each bit in the calculation results, the carry propagation is limited to the upper two bits, and a parallel addition is realized. In 1986, Drake et al., changed the MSD number addition rule into symbolic substitution rules [2,3], called as T, W, T' and W' respectively. With T, W, T' and W', they completed the MSD number addition in three steps [[4], [5], [6]]. This adder is called by TW-MSD adder in the following.
The parallel characteristic of MSD adders attracts scholar’s attention for a long time. Up to now more than ten kinds of MSD adder architectures have been proposed. In March 2017, the ternary optical computer (TOC) with a TW-MSD optical adder, called SD16 (the acronym of Shanghai Daxue 16, i.e. Shanghai University 16), was designed and ran at Shanghai University. It was a TOC’s prototype and is shown in Fig. 1. One SD16 can be installed at least 64 modules. So it can have 12288 (192*64 = 12288) data-bits [[7], [8], [9], [10]].Download : Download high-res image (173KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. No.1 machine of SD16.
During the past several years, Y. F. SHEN studied MSD addition thoroughly. He proposed a group of sufficient conditions which can determine whether a set of ternary transformations are able to build a MSD adder and proved its correctness mathematically. Then he gave several more than ten set of ternary transformations each of which can build a new MSD adder. In August 2017, a new type of MSD adder designed by Y. F. SHEN and Dr. JIANG, which is called SJ-MSD adder, ran successfully at Shanghai University Optical Computer Laboratory. The SJ-MSD adder can reduce 25 % hardware resource in comparison with the TW-MSD adder. Now the SJ-MSD adder can be applied to a numerous applications such as FFT and deep learning as well as image processing.
In processing and transmitting digital images, it is possible to be disturbed by different noises. Image noise can cause image quality degradation and blur, which results in the image features being submerged. The presence of noise interferes with the image to a great extent, and if it is not properly processed, it will affect a series of image processing and analysis processes in the later stage. Reducing image noise has been a hot spot in computer image processing. The method of improving image quality by removing noise is called smoothing processing for image, which should not only remove the noise in the image, but also keep the edge contour of the image. Smoothing processing is a very important image processing technique in digital image processing. There are many typical smoothing processing methods, among which the mean filtering is the most commonly used method. Mean filtering method is often used in many application fields, such as seismic abnormal wave processing and digital image processing. This paper mainly introduces how to realize mean filtering processing by constructing multiple SJ-MSD adders in ternary optical processor (TOP), and as an example of the application we apply the computing method to the mean filtering processing of digital image.
In Section 2, some related work on MSD SJ-adder is introduced, which includes the MSD number and Y. F. Shen's sufficient theorem and the principle of SJ-MSD adder. In Section 3, the mean filtering method for image processing is introduced briefly. In Section 4, the methods of configuring multiple SJ-MSD adders on TOC and using them to realize image mean filter processing are presented. In Section 5, the test and experiment of image mean filter processing using multiple SJ-MSD adders in parallel are introduced in detail. The last section summarizes the work of the paper.
