The first description of a tree as having Feet and Head was made by the Poet “Eileen Mathias” in old English poetry. She described a “Tall Tree” as (Source: www.old.nios.ac.in):
“With their feet in the earthAnd their heads in the skyThe Tall tree watchedThe clouds go by”
Such description has inspired Gabr and Dorrah [1] to adopt the notion of “Tree Feet” and “Tree Head” in modeling the flow aggregation and disaggregation natural or man-made networks. Such networks could be composed of a separate or a joint tree-shaped feet/head aggregation system or head’/feet’ disaggregation systems.
The study also has indicated that both the aggregation and disaggregation networks are analogous and could be represented with similar nodes and branches systems of successive orders. These networks follow the basic 2D or 3D continuity equations (preservation of materials and energy laws) [2].
Using the symbolic-based representation and the modular mathematical approach [3], [4], [5], [6] to these tree-shaped networks, it was easy to demonstrate the analogy of such networks between various sciences and the ability to transfer one tree-shaped network from the Science of Botany to an equivalent operational network in Engineering/Technology (and vice versa) [7], [8]. Such approach has enabled sharing knowledge and tools between various sciences. In fact, the tree-shaped networks transfer from one science to another provides an open gate or passage for crossing boundaries between these sciences.
The previous study in Ref. [1] has also revealed the strong morphological similarities between flow tree-shaped networks in various sciences and disciplines. This could suggest benefiting from the particular sciences where tree-shaped network data are available or easy to gather and transfer results to areas where tree-shaped network data are scarce or difficult to gather.
For instance, in dealing with tree-shaped data from natural plants, we could find for the 2D or 3D tree roots or stems parts the capturing of the needed morphological data are costly and highly complex without damaging the tree. This is beside that processing delineated branches for determining branch numbers, branch length, sub-areas, … etc. will also be very complicated as the roots could be of the snake type. Moreover, the 3D computations of any area or volume of branches will be very cumbersome. Therefore, depending only on natural morphological data of natural plants will hinder the fast fostering of the new notion. Other practical and economical sources of natural tree-shaped data rather than of the natural plants are now urgently needed.
Water science experts were pioneering since the mid-seventies in handling their natural tree-shaped watersheds using hydro-morphological network analysis [9], [10]. They defined various network shapes’ metrics based on tree number of branching/orders, average branch length/order, and average branches sub-basins/order, …etc. using Horton’s Laws [11]. Nevertheless, such work was only directed towards analyzing the features that affect watersheds with emphasis on calculating their response when subjected to stormy events and cannot be regarded as a generic theory that could be extended for tree-shaped networks of other non-water sciences.
Since the tree concept is the essence of Life Paradigm, it will be also a symbol of growth and reproduction. Therefore, natural tree-shaped networks will naturally possess many inherited properties within their morphological shapes that will indirectly store in some form or another their “Heredity Features”.
It must be pointed out that “heredity” is different than “genetics”. Genetics is defined as anything pertaining to DNA or gene sequence that exists within every living cell. It is one of the components of heredity in the humans and other living organisms [12]. On the other hand, heredity (also called inheritance) is considered in this paper in the widest sense, to mean the passing of physical (also non-physical) characteristics and features from one generation to another generation.
