“One–way waves” are similar to solutions of wave equations but they move in only one direction, and exhibit no propagation in the opposite direction. They are important in the subject of absorbing boundary conditions [1]. Trefethen & Halpern study the well-posedness of one–way wave equations, and they give a nice overview of the history [2]. The literature on reflectionless boundary conditions, and on applications of Bessel function expansions to waves, is extensive. We do not attempt a survey here. An incomplete list of authors includes: Grote, Keller, Givoli, Bayliss & Turkel, Higdon, Ting & Miksis, Lubich & Schadle, Alpert, Greengard & Hagstrom. Particular attention is paid to the issue of whether or not the proposed reflectionless boundary conditions are exact or approximate, and whether or not the conditions are local or global. There are also important connections to the Kirchoff formula and to the Dirichlet–to–Neumann map, and to Born series, that we do not consider here.
We distinguish three settings:
•Fully continuous: both time and space are continuous. The reflectionless boundary condition is the Sommerfeld condition, which in our setting might be applied by imposing(1)dudx=±dudton the solution u(x, t) at the left and right boundaries. The choice of the plus or minus sign depends on whether the wave is traveling left or right. Notice this condition (1) is local in time and local in space.•Fully discrete: Both time and space have been discretized. Engquist & Majda [3, Equation (5.3)] address the issue of the nature of the condition in this setting. Their reflectionless boundary condition is not a simple expression. It is not local in time and it is not local in space.•Semi-discrete: time remains continuous and space is discretized. Intuitively, we expect the conditions to be local in time, and non-local in space. This situation has been studied by Halpern [4, Section 3].
A well-known model in these settings is a set of masses connected by linear springs, which can be generalised to higher dimensions through an array of springs. The resulting framework is then a linear system of ordinary differential equations.
The focus of our article is on the semi-discrete setting, where time remains continuous. However, from Eq. (28) onwards we find it more convenient to evaluate our expressions at certain discrete time points. (Note that our evaluations here are exact for the semi-discrete setting, as opposed to what is commonly done in the literature in the ‘fully-discrete’ setting where some further approximation is introduced.) In our semi-discrete setting, the solution to the wave equation can be thought of as a matrix function [5]. Nadukandi & Higham have shown how to efficiently compute these wave–kernel matrix functions [6]. Our special matrix function can be written as a sum of two parts, and there are connections to splitting methods for differential equations [7], [8].
It is important to note that our purpose in this article is not to study the reflectionless boundary condition per se, nor to study the big field of inverse problems to which it relates; these topics already have an extensive literature. The boundary condition in particular, is an old problem that has been studied by many authors; among the early literature, perhaps the work of Halpern [4] is closest to our own framework. Instead, our purpose is to reveal the properties of the Toeplitz waves and the Hankel waves that we will introduce later. During the course of our analysis, it transpires that these Toeplitz and Hankel waves possess some attractive reflectionless properties.
We revisit the problem with a new perspective, by carefully revealing the algebraic structure of those matrix functions. We find particularly explicit and exact formulas. An attractive outcome of our perspective is to show that the travelling wave can be considered as the sum of two waves that we call the Toeplitz wave and the Hankel wave. We show that these waves can be written as certain linear combinations of even index Bessel functions of the first kind. These expansions, as we will explain, make it clear that the Toeplitz wave and Hankel wave are reflectionless on even, respectively odd, traversals of the domain.
In Section 2, we give some background on Toeplitz and Hankel matrix functions. In Section 3, we show how to write a travelling wave as the sum of two waves that we call a Toeplitz wave and a Hankel wave. In Section 4, we give analytic expressions for the Toeplitz and Hankel waves in terms of certain sums of even index Bessel functions of the first kind. In Section 5, we show simulations of these waves using the methods of Nadukandi & Higham [6], and also using methods inspired by our analytic expressions. With our analysis, we are now able to algebraically explain interesting behaviours that have previously been observed in numerical simulations in the literature [8]. We also showcase another benefit of our analysis, namely that it suggests a method of simulation that allows us to choose, in advance, the number of reflections. The paper concludes in Section 6 with some observations and discussion for future work.
