Dam management is a challenging planning problem (Graham et al., 2017; Hurford et al., 2014), which typically involves complex environmental, economic, and social tradeoffs that are closely linked to specific dam characteristics (e.g., type, spatial location, and functions) (Almeida et al., 2019; Ziv et al., 2012). Dam management also requires building consensus among a diverse range of stakeholders with different interests (Baish et al., 2002; McCartney, 2007). Improving the use of science in dam decisions, and natural resource management decisions in general, is important for more sustainable decision-making (Dilling, 2007; Löschner et al., 2016). However, the best available knowledge is not always used to inform dam decisions. For instance, dam management typically follows a piecemeal approach, focusing on determining a management strategy for a single dam at a time (Baish et al., 2002; The Heinz Center, 2002). In contrast, research suggests that multi-dam or even multi-basin scale management approaches can produce solutions with greater benefits to meet a broader range of interests (Almeida et al., 2019; Opperman et al., 2011; Roy et al., 2018; Song et al., 2019). On the other hand, the effectiveness of consensus-based, stakeholder-engaged approaches in improving sustainability outcomes is not fully understood. In fact, a common criticism of such approaches is that consensus-based decisions do not always lead to strong environmental outcomes, especially at the larger landscape scale (Layzer, 2008; Poloni-Staudinger, 2008). It has been argued that consensus-based decisions can produce “lowest-common-denominator” outcomes, which largely maintain the status quo (Layzer, 2008; Susskind and Ali, 2014).
This research aims to foster the use of science in dam decision-making and to examine the effectiveness of consensus-based approaches in improving system outcomes. A novel approach that integrates system dynamics modeling (SDM) and role-play simulation (RPS) was developed to achieve this goal. SDM is a computer-aided methodology developed to understand dynamic interactions within and among complex systems under external disturbances (Ford, 2000; Forrester, 1997). This modeling tool has been previously used to evaluate system performance related to dam management, including hydropower production (Bosona and Gebresenbet, 2010; Sharifi et al., 2013), diadromous fish population potential (Barber et al., 2018; Ford, 2000), and tradeoffs among hydropower, fish population, and economic cost (Song and Mo, 2019; Song et al., 2019, 2020).
RPS provides a forum to engage participants in a hypothetical, yet realistic policy decision-making scenario in which they reconsider the usual way of making decisions and explore innovative solutions (Rumore et al., 2016; Stokes and Selin, 2016). RPS can integrate socio-economic and biophysical data, and is therefore well suited to facilitate deliberation for policy innovation, education, and research purposes (Mayer, 2009). The hypothetical decision-making scenario is designed to be contextually similar to illustrate challenges participants experience in practice, but also abstracted enough to immerse participants in a safe space free from their usual pressures to explore change, without being distracted by arguments over how individuals perceive the specifics of the case (Crampton and Manwaring, 2014; Gordon et al., 2011). RPS participants typically assume a role different from their own, which is intended to interrupt behavior patterns, relieve anxieties related to embarrassment or concerns about revealing one's strategy, and provide insights into other stakeholders' perspectives, interests, and constraints (Crampton and Manwaring, 2014; Rumore et al., 2016). RPS has been used in diverse environmental public policy and natural resource management contexts, including climate change, mercury pollution, payment for hydrological services, and sustainable development of rivers (Rumore et al., 2016; Shafiqul et al., 2012; Stokes and Selin, 2016).
Combining SDM and RPS provides an opportunity to link science and decision-making. SDM can be used to simulate the complete range of possible outcomes across quantifiable performance variables under stakeholder-defined dam management alternatives. SDM is also an ideal approach to facilitate communication and negotiation, as well as to assist stakeholders and decision-makers in considering basin-scale tradeoffs and building consensus (Stave, 2010; Van den Belt, 2004). The RPS provides a forum to convene diverse stakeholders to discuss the results of the SDM, along with a range of non-quantified social values defined within the RPS scenario.
Several notable efforts have previously combined RPS and SDM to enhance linkage of science and decision-making of various environmental issues, such as climate change (Sterman et al., 2015) and coastal protection planning (Deegan et al., 2014). However, this approach is rarely used specifically in dam decision-making even though the sustainable development of dams is a topic of global importance (O'Connor et al., 2015a, 2015b; Pittock et al., 2017). In addition, previous studies mainly applied combined SDM-RPS approaches to assist learning about the science of a specific environmental issue or the specific economic, social, and political barriers to consensus-based agreements (Sterman et al., 2015). To our knowledge, the effectiveness of the SDM-RPS approach in promoting system outcomes has not been examined. Therefore, this research investigates two research questions: (1) How do stakeholder negotiated outcomes compare to Pareto-optimal solutions produced by a scientific model?; and (2) How do negotiated outcomes compare to the most likely outcome in the absence of successful negotiations (i.e., the status quo)?
