The growth of information and communication technologies has significantly influenced the teaching and learning processes in higher education in general and in agricultural education in particular. Nooghabi, Iravani, and Fami (2011) stated facilities and equipment are crucial in agricultural education since they provide students with opportunities for experiential learning and diverse learning styles, which is more important in agricultural education systems than in classical education venues. More specifically, the vocational agriculture teacher has a challenging role in teaching agricultural sciences because they must provide opportunities for students to learn and apply concepts over a broad and diverse set of skills where “learning by doing” is essential. The agricultural educator must possess proficiency in Information Technology (IT). However, scholars in agricultural education believe that vocational agriculture teachers at a secondary level either lack this expertise or are reluctant to fully utilize IT (Ganpat, Ramdwar, Stripling, & Roberts, 2013; Maghabl, Movahedi, Naderi Mahdii, & Ghazanfari, 2014; Middleton, 2017; Ndwandwe & Dlamini, 2014; Solaymani & Zarafshani, 2011).
Investment in IT is predominant in industrialized countries, despite the potential for cost-effective applications of IT in developing countries. Iran is essentially an agricultural country with a large proportion of the inhabitants dependent, either directly or indirectly, on agriculture for their survival. Thus, effective teaching and learning of vocational agriculture is an important priory for secondary educators and Iranian society as a whole.
In Iran, formal agricultural education is offered at the secondary level (12–17 years) and post-secondary level (18 years and older). Movahedi, Saadi, and Farani (2013) reported that secondary level agri-science education is being pursued by the next generation of skilled agriculturists. However, for this education to successfully occur, vocational agriculture educators must possess appropriate IT expertise to develop students who are both able and adept in IT use (Ebrahimi, 2018; Moghbeli, Kouhestani, & Orooji, 2018).
1.1. Models of technology acceptance and the TAM modelSome of the interesting models that have been developed and tested to evaluate and predict technology acceptance among diverse types of users include the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA), the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB), Diffusion of Innovation Theory (DOI), Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT), and Social Learning Theory (SLT). Other technology acceptance models include the MPT or Matching Person and Technology model (Scherer 2019, 2018) and the HMSAM or the Hedonic Motivation System Adoption Model to explain e-learning (Fathema, Ross, & Witte, 2014; Fathema, Shannon, & Ross, 2015; Fathema & Sutton, 2013).The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) has limitations because it often ignores one’s needs to participate in an action and due to its basis within cognitive processing. The theory is a psychological construct and is addresses a broader spectrum of motivational factors that are usual when considering technology adoption alone. It focuses on intentions leading to actions and common areas of research are within nutrition and health behavior studies as well as environmental psychology (Ajzen (1985, 1991). Similarly, the Diffusion of Innovation (DOI) has its roots in marketing research from the early 1960’s and is based on how rapidly innovations spread and are communicated over time to those participants in a system (Rogers, 1962, 1983 but expanded to many disciplines although it is challenging to apply to new issues and situations (see Meyers, Sivakumar, & Nakata, 1999 and Katz, Levin, & Hamilton, 1963). The Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) aims to explain user intentions using four constructs of performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence, and facilitation conditions and is a compilation of eight prior models (Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003). However, the UTAUT has been critiqued for as less parsimonious than TAM and TAM2 (van Raaij & Schepers, 2008) along with others who cite the model for being too cumbersome to predict behavior and could be best explained with simpler models (Bagozzi, 2007; Li, 2020).The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) proposed by Davis, Bagozzi, and Warshaw (1989), and shown in Fig. 1, has come to be one of the most widely used models in various contexts and has been applied to a variety of technology adoption questions (Al-Emran, Mezhoyev, & Kamalodin, 2018; Bai, Zhang & Boswell, 2016; Edgar, Johnson, & Cox, 2012.; Teo, 2009.). Since the TAM model is designed to explain the adoption of technology based on its usefulness and perceived ease of use, it is a natural choice for those participants in the field of agricultural science education. Because agricultural education values the practical application of technology, both from the standpoint of ease of use and perceived usefulness, this makes the TAM model the most appropriate choice as it measures these characteristics as drivers for behavioral intention, leading to the actual use of the technology in agricultural classroom and the field of agriculture in general.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis et al., 1989).The model in Fig. 1 includes attitude towards using technology as a factor which is not appropriate for this research because of the wide-spread acceptance of the utility of information technology by Iranian agriculture educators.The TAM model (Davis et al., 1989) or the technology acceptance model is a theory of information systems that describes how individuals come to use and accept technology. The intention or behavioral intention (BI) to use a technology proceeds the technology’s actual use and is influenced by an individual’s attitude toward using the technology. Thus, if the technology is challenging to use and is complicated, few will have a positive attitude toward its adoption.
1.2. Research extensions of the TAM model with additional variablesThe TAM model is ubiquitous and has been studied and augmented with new models including the TAM 2 model of Venkatesh and Davis (2000) which added social influences (subjective norms, voluntariness, image) and cognitive instrumental processes (job relevance, output quality, demonstrability of results and perceived ease of use). Other adaptations include a Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) by Venkatesh et al. (2003). In the field of e-commerce, a TAM 3 model adds additional variables of the effects of trust and perceived risk on IT or technology system usage (Venkatesh & Bala, 2008).It has been suggested that there are significant factors that have not been included in the TAM model (Legris, Ingham, & Collerette, 2003). The TAM paradigm postulates that external variables intervene indirectly by influencing perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness constructs. External variables considered in other studies on the individual acceptance of IT include situational involvement and intrinsic involvement (Jackson, Chow, & Leitch, 1997), computer training and management support (Igbaria, Zinatelli, Cragg, & Cavaye, 1997), level of education and prior experience (Agarwal & Prasad, 1999), and the fit and characteristics of the technology task (Dishaw & Strong, 1999).Still other research has extended the TAM model to include a number of external variables of attitude and behavioral intention (Davis, 1989). While the TAM model has been criticized for its limitations and questionable value as a theory (Okafor, Nico, & Azman, 2016), it remains the preferred model to study the adoption of technology and has been extended to a number of other disciplines and modified for the particular contexts including marketing (Whiting & Williams, 2013) and social media (Wirtz & Gottel, 2016) and has been extended further with additional variables including sociability (Junglas, Goel, Abraham, & Ives, 2013). Other researchers examined perceived self-efficacy, facilitating conditions, and systems quality (Fathema et al., 2014; Fathema et al., 2015) in augmented TAM models.In our research, the primary criterion for inclusion of external variables was to investigate factors that the policy makers could control to promote the adoption of IT and to measure characteristics of adopters that might inhibit or promote the adoption of IT. The following two sections describes the external variables use in this study group as extrinsic and intrinsic.
1.3. Extrinsic variables: facilitating conditions, job relevance, and available resourcesFacilitating conditions (FC) are various technical and organizational infrastructures that support IT systems. This construct is used in research and measures the perceptions of the user regarding support for IT implementation. Teo (2010) found both had significant effects on behavioral intention to use technology. By extending the TAM model, Teo (2010) found the effects were mediated by attitude toward use, perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use in pre-service teachers.Similarly, Waheed and Jam (2010) applied TAM to their study of teachers at the Open University in Islamabad and found support for facilitating conditions as a means of improving productivity in implementing e-learning technology. Ghalandari (2012) found facilitating conditions had positive and significant effects on e-banking services in Iran. Support for subjective norms in extended TAM models has also been noted by (Kim, Kim, & Shin, 2009; Binyamin, Rutter, & Smith, 2018; Mutahar, Daud, Ramayah, Putit, & Isaac, 2017).Researchers have considered job relevance as a factor affecting intention to use big data tools and other technology through extensions of the TAM model (Okcu, Koksalmis, Basak, & Calisir, 2019; Wingo, Ivankova, & Moss, 2017; Sargolzaei, 2017; Lazuras & Dokou, 2016; Bröhl, Nelles, Brandl, Mertens, & Schlick, 2016). Job relevance has been linked with the original TAM construct, perceived usefulness, to offer additional insights (Okcu et al., 2019). Alambaigi and Ahangari (2016) in their study of agricultural extension agents in West Azerbaijan found three variables for describing development of technology acceptance. Job relevance and experience showed significant effects in adoption.Like facilitating conditions and job relevance, available resources (AR) are among the policy tools available to support IT implementation. While studies of these variables in combination with the TAM model is lacking in the literature, there is research showing that providing resources to students promotes adoption of IT (Zheng, Li, & Zheng, 2017; Shana, Abulibdeh, 2017; Akinde, 2016; Merschbrock & Rolfsen, 2016; Botes & Zeeman, 2019). The next section addresses intrinsic variables that describe factors affecting adopters’ receptiveness to IT usage.
1.4. Intrinsic motivators: subjective norms, computer self-efficacy, computer anxiety, and ageIn addition to external motivators available to policy-makers, consideration must be given to the internal motivators of the educators. This section describes the internal variables that were considered in this study to provide insights into the behavioral intentions of educators that could affect technology adoption. Along the same lines, subjective norms are usually perceived social pressures used to engage or support a new behavior or practice such as IT implementation.Computer self-efficacy is the perception of a person’s ability or skills to use computers and other forms of IT. While computer anxiety represents a fear or discomfort or apprehension with having to use IT, the two concepts are similar in that a person high in self-efficacy is often low in anxiety toward IT implementation. Providing alternative descriptions of inversely related constructs is often employed in survey research as a technique of reverse coding of scales to eliminate response bias (Sauro & Lewis, 2011).Abdullah and Ward (2016) found computer anxiety among variables predicting students perceived ease of use of e-learning systems while Zainab, Awais Bhatti, and Alshagawi (2017) included computer self-efficacy in their e-training adoption study of the Nigerian civil servants. More recent studies continue to include the self-efficacy variable in the TAM extensions (Faustino & Simoes, 2020; Hayashi, Chen Ryan & Wu, 2020; Islam, 2020) while other researchers have use “computer anxiety” as an anchoring or adjustment variable to modify TAM (Ho, Chang, & Kurniasari, 2020; Al Kurdi, Alshurideh, Salloum, Obeidat, & Al-weeri, 2020; Elshafey, Saar, Aminudin, & Gheisari, 2020).Lastly, the age variable has been added to TAM model extensions because older individuals, sometimes termed “digital immigrants” because they were born or raised before the pervasive use of digital technology, are often seen to have more computer anxiety. A number of researchers have added age and even gender variables to their research on IT acceptance (see Assaker, 2020; Vahdat, Alizadeh, Quach, & Hamelin, 2020). Talantis, Shin, and Severt (2020) in their study with participant acceptance of conference mobile applications, or apps, noted that the perceived usefulness of the app was the greatest predictor of the users’ attitude toward the ap but that ease of use was the only significant variable to vary between age groups. They agree that attendees’ age group affects technology preference.
1.5. TAM across culturesWhile TAM has come to be one of the most widely used models in technology acceptance (Berhanu, Mehretu, & Ephraim, 2017; Ibrahim, 2018; Scherer, Siddiq, & Tondeur, 2019; Weng, Ho, and Su, 2018), there are inconsistencies in the TAM results across cultures. For example, Straub, Keil, and Brenner (1997) used the TAM in a cross-cultural study with participants from Japan, Switzerland, and the United States. They reported that the TAM exhibited reliability for the United States and Switzerland samples, but not in Japan, which suggested the model may not predict technology use accurately across all cultures.In another intercultural study, Pelgrum (2001) found that there was significant variation regarding the most important barriers to IT implementation among educators of different cultures. Moreover, Ritter (2017) performed a meta-analytic structural equation modeling study of online learning management systems in higher education and was unable to replicate the finding among subsequent studies. Ritter (2017) further concluded that educational technology researchers should be cautious when using TAM as a modeling tool to describe the adoption of technology in online undergraduate education. Yet TAM has not been operationalized in studies addressing vocational agricultural educators.Therefore, to increase the generalizability of the TAM methodology across cultures and to better understand what influences perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, this study was successfully implemented in Iran, providing additional supporting for the applicability of the TAM paradigm across varying cultures. This study augmented the TAM model to evaluate technology acceptance by considering two types of external variables, extrinsic variables which are to policy makers and intrinsic variables that explain the perceptions of technology adopters.
1.6. IT and vocational agricultural educationStephen (2020) agrees industrial development of any country depends to a great extent on the level of skills its workforce possesses, and the skills and effectiveness of the workforce. These capabilities depend largely on the quality of nation’s education and training, which is being transformed by information technology. The value and application of recent developments in IT in agriculture are well documented (Patil & Kale, 2016; Qingbo, Wenbin, & Qian, 2018). To exploit opportunities provided by IT in agriculture requires high levels of expertise in teachers of vocational agriculture.Kleinjan (2020) as well as Kotrlik and Redman (2009) reported that while most vocational agriculture teachers have computers available in their offices or classrooms, most do not incorporate the latest skills and proficiency in utilizing IT. Their research stressed that vocational agriculture teachers do value IT, but are hesitant or reluctant to adopt technology in their pedagogy. These discussions prompt the question, “Is the low acceptance of IT due to instructors’ unfamiliarity with technology and its capabilities, or are instructors unwilling to incorporate IT, or are they simply uncomfortable with the integration of IT methods in the classroom?”Research has shown that teachers’ perceptions and attitudes towards technologies can influenced their acceptance of these technologies in teaching and learning (Gamira, 2019; Njiku, Maniraho, & Mutarutinya, 2019; Schere, Tondeur, Siddiq & Baran, 2018). Adding technology and innovative agrarian practices to agricultural education is growing in usage and popularity (Gaag et al., 2019; Unay-Gailhard, Bavorová, Bednaříková, & Ponkina, 2019; Wells &, 2019). Stephen (2020) agrees information technology is relevant in transforming education and training for the 21st century. Pandey, De, Geetarani, and Singh (2019) notes that information technologies in agricultural education come with challenges including security, privacy, social problems, lack of innovation and creativity, and challenges with integration and usage. Pandey et al. (2019) further concluded that agricultural educators in India found the high costs of technology often made it unaffordable.IT usage in Iran over time has been examined by a number of researchers (Taleba, 2012; Chavoshi & Hamidi, 2019; Faham & Asghari, 2019; Kian, 2019: Mousavi, Farhadian & Chizari, 2019). Asadi and Karimi (2007) observed agriculture faculty agreed that course-related IT use was very important to students’ future competitiveness in the job market. Several recent studies measured variables that interact with each other to either facilitate or discourage the acceptance of IT among post-secondary education. These include personal factors, such as computer self-efficacy (Abedi, 2005; Shahbaz, Nasresfahani, & Zamani, 2007a), technical factors such as technological complexity (Hajforoush & Orangi, 2004; Shahbaz, Nasresfahani, & Zamani, 2007b), teacher’s professional use of IT and the quality of the instruments (Khoshnoodi, Khoshneshin, & Safara 2020); and environmental factors such as facilitating conditions (Moosapour & Keramati, 2006; Yousefi, 1996).The dearth of literature on IT usage by teachers in Iran indicates the line of research proposed in this paper is both timely and attentive to the importance of incorporating IT in the agricultural curriculum by secondary educators. Moreover, given the critical role of vocational agricultural education to the economy as a whole and the stability of the Iranian food supply in particular, study of teachers’ contributions in supporting or inhibiting IT use in the classroom is paramount. The need to develop and test models that could help in predicting IT use in Iran is central. Thus, the theoretical grounding for this research draws from the original TAM model proposed by Davis et al. (1989) with additional external variables that address these questions for vocational agriculture teachers in Iran.
