The Government of Japan has launched the vision of what it calls “super-smart society”, or “Society 5.0” on April 2016 (CSTI, 2016). It is defined as a new society in the fifth stage which follows four earlier stages: the hunting society, the agrarian society, the industrial society and the information society. It aims to create a human-centered society in which products and services will be readily provided to satisfy various potential needs as well as to reduce economic and social gaps so that all the people live a comfortable and vigorous life.
The vision is based on the recognition of the current global trends. The pace of technological, economic and social change has been accelerating, and business and communities struggle to keep up with the speed. Fast progress of information and communications technology (ICT) in recent years has brought about an unprecedented explosion of digital data and the emergence and growth of cyberspace. Rapid globalization has expanded various economic and social activities beyond national borders, and also has been changing the process of creating new ideas for innovation. It is now recognized that the new ideas are generated through different sources and significantly contribute to competitive advantage.
In such the chaotic era of drastic change, Japan looks beyond Industry 4.0 toward Society 5.0, while paying particular attention to other countries' policies, including Germany's Industry 4.0 and the United States' Advanced Manufacturing Partnership. It strives to take the transformation beyond industry and to build a super-smart society in which new knowledge and values are continuously created to contribute to economic growth and social welfare.
This paper explores a prospective model of science, technology and innovation (STI) ecosystem in Society 5.0. The concept of an ecological approach chosen in this paper was introduced by Moore (1993) to describe business environments, and is widely adopted to describe STI environments (Council on Competitiveness, 2005, Adner, 2006, Fukuda and Watanabe, 2008, Carayannis and Campbell, 2009, Traitler et al., 2011, Zygiaris, 2013, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2015). Better analysis of both the economic and social impacts of STI requires a deeper understanding of STI ecosystem which includes the interaction between the actors, their technologies and their business models, and the dynamics that structure this ecosystem (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 1997, Jackson, 2011). Historical changes in Japan's STI ecosystem is examined with a focus on productivity and growth in comparison with two leading countries, Germany and the United States, which take the lead in the new industrial revolution to discuss a transformation path for the future.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the brief history of the national STI policies in three countries; Japan, Germany and the United States. Section 3 assesses changes in Japan's STI ecosystem over the past two decades compared to the above two countries. Sections 4 describes the historical transformation of Japan's STI ecosystem in the post-World War II era. Section 5 then discusses an expected STI ecosystem for the future. Finally, Section 6 presents a conclusion.
