Constraints are a typical part of many real-world and theoretical problems, and thus optimization systems designed to tackle these problems need effective procedures to cope with the constraints (Deb, Datta, 2013, Pioro, Medhi, 2004, Przewozniczek, 2016). In this work, we focus on optimization systems based on an evolutionary paradigm. Usually, to handle the constraints, evolutionary methods employ the penalty factor that decreases the fitness of constraint-violating solutions. However, such practice suffers significant drawbacks. The influence of the penalty factor on the fitness function must be defined. If the penalty is too significant, evolutionary methods may be stuck and become unable to jump out from the local optima region. If the penalty is too low, solutions that break the constraints but high-rated in the objective function terms may dominate the population. Both situations may lead to low-quality of the final results. Even if the penalty factor is appropriate, it may divide the solution space into separate regions containing feasible solutions. Finding and exploring such regions is the key to the success of constrained problem optimization. To make it easier, Deb and Datta (2013) propose to transform the constrained problem into a multi-objective one. The first objective function is an unconstrained function that is optimized, and the second objective function is the penalty. The motivation behind such a transformation is to remove the low-quality zones created by penalty factor incorporation from the fitness landscape.
In this paper, we consider NP-complete, real-life problem with constraints. In particular, we analyze a flow allocation problem in computer networks, which consists of a selection of a routing path for each demand in order to minimize a selected objective function and accounting for the fact that each network has limited capacity. In the considered test cases, the constraints are oppressive, i.e., it is hard to find any solution that does not violate them. Such a situation is typical for real-life cases of the considered problem. Inspired by the proposition of splitting the optimized problem into two objectives (optimized function and the penalty), we propose a technique called Ranking-based Fitness and Penalty Weighting (RFPW). RFPW is introduced into the problem-dedicated multi-population evolutionary method. The performed experiments show that employing RFPW may lead to a significant increase in results quality. Note that the proposed approach of handling the constraints is generic. It can be applied to other optimization systems (eg., Simulated Annealing (Przewozniczek, Walkowiak, & Aibin, 2017b), or Tabu Search (Przewozniczek, Goscień, Walkowiak, & Klinkowski, 2015)) and is not limited to evolutionary-based methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents research related to the issues of multi-population techniques and penalty handling. Section 3 presents the details of the considered real-life problem. The fourth section describes the details of RFPW and the final problem-dedicated method proposed in this paper. Experiment setup, research protocol, the detailed results, and their discussion are presented in Section 5. Finally, the last section concludes this work and presents future research steps.
