In the present age of globalization, it is concerning that an increasing number of citizens may become exposed to dangerous crimes outside their countries. Despite this concern, domestic investigators only have limited means to contribute to their crime investigation work for foreign cases. One of the few remote means is to analyze visual resources, such as photographs and videos sent by criminals. In particular, identifying the location where the resources were taken is expected to be effective support for investigations. An accessible approach to identify the shooting location is to use Exif information attached to a digital image file. However, the information is not sufficiently reliable to determine investigative policies because most of the information is usually deleted and, even if it remains, is suspected of being falsified (Hassan and Hijazi, 2017; Kakar and Sudha, 2012). Another approach is to use the content filmed in visual resources as clues for location estimation. This is called visual-based (geographic) localization (VBL) (Piasco et al., 2018; Zamir et al., 2016). VBL techniques have been mainly developed in the field of robotics including autonomous driving (Arth et al., 2015; Wan et al., 2014). For example, Arth et al. proposed an instant geolocalization technique in urban outdoor environments to initialize pose estimation for augmented reality applications or a simultaneous localization and mapping system (Arth et al., 2015). In the context of computer vision and robotics, the term ‘pose’ is defined as the combination of the position and orientation of the camera. Although the position can be estimated by Global Positioning System (GPS) information, orientation estimation requires a visual correspondence between a set of reference images and a query image. For a similar requirement to that above in robotics, multiple researchers on robot navigation systems, including a lunar rover, have proposed different VBL systems (Piasco et al., 2018; Wan et al. Zhou; Rubio et al., 2015; Sattler et al., 2017). Along with improvement in performance of VBL system, studies aimed at using VBL for industrial purposes have been expanding in other fields such as fashion (Wang et al., 2018). Wang et al. tested the hypothesis that fashion trends are influenced by cultural and climatic factors, and tried to estimate the shooting locations of human-centered images, such as those found in fashion magazines (Wang et al., 2018). To the best of our knowledge, despite the fact that VBL techniques are expanding and advancing in a wide range of fields, the previous studies about VBL have not focused on the forensic use of their systems. Hence, they have never discussed what aspects of VBL system are important for forensic purposes.
In this paper, we discuss a VBL framework specifically for practical use for forensic investigation support tools. We claim that the key points of a VBL framework are the maintainability of the system and interpretability of the estimation results. Since it appears that recent deep learning-based frameworks for VBL are missing these key points, we revisit the traditional VBL framework and revise it by separating it into three functional elements and replacing them with state-of-the-art machine learning techniques. This functional separation becomes the fundamental basis of the key points because the separation offers the ease of both replacing the implemented algorithms and identifying bottlenecks in the current application.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, first, we describe the test data adopted in our proposed framework. Second, we describe the stepwise analysis procedures, including feature extraction, similar image retrieval, and shooting location estimation. Third, we describe the application development using a graphical user interface (GUI), which is expected to promote practical use. In Section 3, we verify that our framework can estimate the shooting location of a query image using a test dataset, and present an example of an application using a demo video. In Section 4, we mainly discuss the key points of forensic investigation support tools for shooting location estimation from the viewpoint of practical use. In Section 5, we draw the conclusions of this paper.
