Thanks to the flourishing development of deep learning in computer vision and image processing, significant progress has been made in the fields of super-resolution (SR) [1], [2], [3], [4] and image deblurring [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. However, both these two tasks remain challenging because they are ill-posed: the former one aims to build a mapping function from a low-resolution (LR) image to a high-resolution (HR) image, while the latter aims at recovering latent clear image from a blurry observation, which could be degraded by many different sorts of blur kernels. Despite the challenge, however, and especially with regard to some specific vision tasks, such as object detection [10] and object segmentation [11], the demand for clear HR images remains significant. This pushes the research further towards effective SR and deblurring methods that can be deployed as preprocessing steps in these tasks.
Recently, the methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become prevalent in the general domain of image restoration [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. With the aid of CNNs, many models have been reported to achieve remarkable performance in various image restoration tasks [17], [18]. An analysis of these methods reveals, however, that the state-of-the-art non-uniform deblurring methods can generate clear output, but fail to enlarge the spatial resolution. On the other hand, the existing advanced SR methods are hardly capable of processing blurry LR images well, as shown in Fig. 1. This is problematic as real-world images often suffer from the reduction of spatial information (resolution) and the effect of non-uniform motion blur simultaneously. This is because most natural images are inevitably deteriorated by environmental factors during image acquisition and processing, which not only cause the reduction of spatial resolution, but also impair the source images by camera shake, long-time exposure and many kinds of non-uniform blur kernels.Download : Download high-res image (280KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. An illustration of blurred input and ×4 super-resolution results generated by our method and other state-of-the-art SR methods. DBPN [1] refers to deep back-projection networks and EDSR [2] refers to enhanced deep residual networks for super-resolution. The input LR image is degraded by a non-uniform motion blur kernel.
In view of the discussion above, in this paper we focus on the possibilities to solve both tasks in a joint framework. Not only would exploiting of such possibilities help us focus on super-resolving high quality image from LR one with serious degradation, but it could also help us solve both tasks more effectively. To achieve the goal of joint deblurring and SR, a common practice is to deploy a cascading scheme, where a deblurring module is followed by an SR module or vice versa. One critical deficiency of such a scheme is that by a simple combination, the reconstruction errors from the first step will be accumulated and magnified in the next step, hindering the restored image quality. Another deficiency of the cascade is that deblur and SR operations are intra-related, and the two-stage scheme splitting them into two individual procedures cannot fully exploit the relationship between low-resolution and high-resolution images and the feature maps, resulting in insufficient learning. Besides, current deblur or SR networks require a large deblurring or reconstruction module for high-quality images restoration, which makes the two-stage scheme have large model sizes and thus be time consuming.
To rectify these deficiencies, we propose a novel attention dual supervised network (ADSN) for joint image deblurring and SR. Referring to Fig. 2, the proposed model, consisting of a deblurring module, an SR module and a dual module, generates clear HR images in one feed-forward pass. By introducing the attention mechanism in the deblurring module, we consider another issue encountered in the previous work [19], [20], [17], namely that not all channels in the feature maps have the same importance for deblurring or SR. If no attention model is deployed, a typical CNN-based method would treat the channel-wise features equally, which would hinder the model to learn more distinguishing content, such as low and high frequency information. The dual module fully exploits the duality in LR and SR images and provides additional supervision to boost the learning performance and prevent that the combination of the two modules is just a “simple” concatenation. Besides, by taking the advantage of U-net and back-projection [1], we propose a novel BP-U block to minimize the reconstruction error in SR module. Also for reducing the number of parameters, the feature maps from the deblurring module are fed to the SR module for reuse.Download : Download high-res image (456KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. An overview of the proposed attention dual supervised network (ADSN) framework. The top portion shows the proposed architecture consisting of three main parts: deblurring module, SR module and dual module. The deblurring module deploys channel attention, rendering the residual-in-residual (RIR) structure, which is used for feature extraction and fuzzyness removal. The SR module is composed of densely connected BP-U blocks and an upsampling layer. The dual module contains stacked convolution layers, which reduce the resolution of images. The bottom portion illustrates the attention mechanism and BP-U block in more detail. The red lines denote the backward connection for the dual module.
As a further contribution, different from the existing work [21], [22], which focused on uniform blur kernels (e.g., Gaussian blur), we extend our consideration to a more general and challenging case involving the non-uniform motion blur. Moreover, instead of the conventional L1 or L2 loss, to further enhance the image quality, we propose a novel MSE-SSIM loss to supervise the whole network. We also provide a comprehensive comparison with recent methods on the challenging GOPRO [6] and DIV2K [23] datasets, in which our method builds new state-of-the-art results for joint image deblurring and SR.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. After reviewing the related work in Section 2, we explain our proposed framework in detail in Section 3. Extensive experimental validation in Section 4 is followed by the main conclusions drawn in Section 5.
