Program evaluation is an integral part of program planning and implementation by nursing faculties and administrators (Lewallen, 2015, Lannan, 2017). A program evaluation plan allows nursing educational programs to benchmark with global and national standards. Program evaluation in higher education has been emphasized as a way of improving learning and demonstrating accountability (Lewallen, 2015, Suhayda and Miller, 2006). An assessment of program fidelity is an important aspect of program evaluation. Fidelity is defined as the extent to which the delivery of a program adheres to its protocol, program model, and/or curriculum (Mowbray, Holter, Teacgue, & Bybee, 2003). Student’s perceptions of the quality of the educational experience is also an essential part in a comprehensive evaluation of an educational program (Chen & Lo, 2012). We conducted a program evaluation of the Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BScN) programs in Sierra Leone with a focus on program fidelity and student satisfaction. Sierra Leone has two BScN programs that are offered at two state universities. Nine other in-country nurse training institutions exist and offer nursing certificates and diplomas. We chose the BScN programs for evaluation in order to focus on higher level nursing education. Sierra Leone has a number of pressing health challenges, including high rates of maternal and child mortality, a severe communicable disease burden, and an increasing incidence of non-communicable diseases (WHO, 2017).
The healthcare system in Sierra Leone is affected by human resource constraints, limited training and mentorship, and inadequate crucial supplies, drugs, and safe blood for transfusions (WHO, 2017). An estimated 5300 nurses and nurse allied-professionals serve the nation and nursing staff account for over 42% of the Sierra Leone healthcare workforce (MOHS, 2016). Of this number only 349 are classified as higher cadre nurses with undergraduate degrees and specialized knowledge (MOHS, 2018). Overall, the skilled health professional density is extremely low at 1.9 per 10 000 population – one of the lowest in the world – with 4 doctors, 70 nurses and 5 midwives per 100 000 population (WHO, 2017). In the last five years a twenty percent growth of the healthcare workforce has been noted (MOHS, 2018). This translates to an increasing number of students in nursing programs in Sierra Leone. Improving and strengthening the standards of nursing education is a key priority of the countries Ministry of Health (MOHS, 2018). There is a growing recognition of the need for a (re)focus on nursing education to ensure and enshrine quality and competency in the growth of the nursing workforce (MOHS, 2018).
Although accreditation and curriculum reviews have been conducted for the BScN program, a literature review found no published program analysis or evaluations examining program fidelity and/or student satisfaction.
