With the continuous development of science and technology, communication technology is constantly updated, and the competition of communication network market is more and more fierce. The traditional network operation and maintenance management mode is that the monitoring team composed of various specialties is responsible for the network management of the specialty, but in today’s fiercely competitive communication network market, the mode has been unable to meet the market demand. The traditional network operation and maintenance management mode requires multi-disciplinary, multi-vendor and multi-platform decentralized management, which wastes human resources, increases the cost of network operation and maintenance, and lacks the ability of centralized processing of alarm data, which easily leads to the existence of missed alarm and false alarm. Therefore, it is imperative to unify the traditional decentralized network operation and maintenance management mode and realize the integrated application of the existing heterogeneous software and hardware systems, which is conducive to improving the operation and maintenance efficiency of the communication network and reducing the operation and maintenance cost. However, the centralized operation and maintenance mode of the communication network will lead to a large number of derivative alarm information generated simultaneously by multiple devices and links in the network when a component fails due to the centralized processing of all information, which brings a new challenge to the network monitoring center to quickly and accurately find and locate the fault. Therefore, in the face of new challenges, it is very necessary to use computer technology to study the correlation analysis mechanism of automatic positioning alarm fault, generate alarm tree through alarm correlation analysis, quickly and accurately analyze root alarm and derivative alarm, so as to locate the fault for maintenance personnel to repair the fault and ensure the stable operation of communication network system.
The correlation analysis of alarm data, in fact, is to shield the derivative alarm information irrelevant to root fault through correlation preprocessing, reduce the interference of these derivative alarm information, so as to quickly and accurately find the fault of communication network. In other words, the essence of alarm data correlation analysis is to select and filter the alarm information and then carry out pattern matching to realize fault identification and location. Data mining technology [1], [2], [3] is a scientific data analysis method, which is very suitable for the correlation analysis of alarm information in communication network. It can analyze the historical records of alarm and automatically find new alarm correlation rules, which is conducive to the rapid location of network alarm fault, saves the process of troubleshooting for network management staff, and improves the efficiency of network management staff in dealing with faults. After in-depth research by researchers, now most of them use data mining technology to process alarm information and mining association rules of alarm information [4], [5], which effectively improves the efficiency of traditional troubleshooting methods. Apriori algorithm [6], [7] was first proposed in association rule mining algorithm. Its disadvantages are that it will produce a large number of candidates sets and need to scan the database repeatedly. Therefore, the improvement of association rule mining algorithm is mainly from three aspects: reducing candidate set, compressing the general office of affairs and reducing the number of database scans. Some improved association rule mining methods such as Frequent Pattern tree (FP Tree) can reduce candidate set, total number of transactions and the number of database scans at the same time. Up to now, the research of association rules can be divided into two kinds: generating frequent set candidates and not generating frequent set candidates.
Although the research and application of association rule mining algorithm has developed rapidly, there are still some problems that need to be solved urgently, and the efficiency of association rule mining and the accuracy of troubleshooting are still lacking. This is mainly reflected in the fact that the traditional association rule mining algorithm only deals with the fault alarm information, but not the network fault directly. Although alarm information has a direct relationship with network fault, their essence is not the same, and the processing of alarm information will inevitably have a certain impact on network fault diagnosis. Specifically speaking, the alarm information is caused by the failure of a part of the communication network, which causes the equipment or link associated with it to send abnormal working signals, that is to say, a large number of alarm information may be caused by a failure, so the alarm information and failure are not a one object relationship, but a one to many fuzzy relationships. In many alarm information, what we need is not derivative alarm information, but to find the root information of the alarm or how much the alarm information solves the root alarm. So, we need a theory that can describe the alarm information intuitively. In the traditional alarm correlation analysis, Boolean logic is used to process quantitative alarm information, which is directly located in a certain language range, which makes the description of alarm information direct and hard. However, the fuzzy relationship between alarm information and fault performance is not definite, which leads to the deviation of network fault diagnosis caused by this kind of rough description, thus the accuracy of network fault location is affected. For this reason, fuzzy theory, which is used to solve the problem that traditional mathematics cannot accurately describe in scientific research, is used to solve this problem in this paper.
Fuzzy mathematics is an important branch of mathematical theory. Based on the fuzzy set theory [8], [9], many theories, such as fuzzy association rules, fuzzy evaluation [10], [11], are put forward. Combining data mining with fuzzy theory, the fuzzy association rule mining is different from the traditional association rule mining in that every alarm data absolutely belongs to a set of hard partition. Instead, the attribute is divided into fuzzy sets according to expert knowledge, and each alarm information is divided into several fuzzy sets. In this way, the alarm information does not belong to a fuzzy set, but may belong to each fuzzy set. The possibility of each alarm data belonging to each fuzzy set is calculated according to the set membership function. In this way, fuzzy association rules mining can avoid the deviation of hard partition of traditional Boolean logic association rules mining, and improve the accuracy of network fault diagnosis. Based on this, this paper introduces fuzzy theory on the basis of data mining technology, combines data mining technology and fuzzy theory, and applies the algorithm of mining fuzzy association rules to alarm correlation analysis, which improves the accuracy of network fault diagnosis. And on this basis, this paper further proposes a dynamic time window fuzzy association rules mining algorithm, which can directly mine the fuzzy association rules in the fuzzy alarm database, and improve the reliability of the association rules, thus further improving the accuracy of network fault diagnosis.
