There has been a tremendous increase in the number of mobile users worldwide. According to Holst [1], the global figures for mobile uptake are rising at a rate that could grow to around 7.26 billion users. In response, organizations that provide mobile products and services have been aiming to enhance their services to include lifestyle sectors such as mobile internet, mobile social media, mobile payment, mobile commerce, mobile shopping, mobile government, and mobile learning [2]. Mobile learning is considered to be a self-directed approach, in which small and portable smart and wireless devices are used. It is defined as “an extension of elearning [e-learning] that allows users to accomplish learning using small and portable wireless devices” [3]. Educational institutions have duly begun exploiting the availability of mobile devices among students to provide education in innovative ways.
Today's students are often referred to as ‘millennials’ or ‘digital natives’ and tend to use new technologies in many different aspects of their lives [3]. According to Thakre and Thakre [4], students commonly use cellphones for communication, entertainment, and learning. The key aim in accelerating the provision of mobile learning services is to facilitate students' learning and improve the quality of its outcomes. Despite this, mobile learning is still in the early stages of its development and is yet to mature, as many issues have not been addressed in previous research [3]. These include, but are not limited to, cultural, technical, and social factors that hinder mobile learning acceptance. Accordingly, researchers have examined mobile learning adoption in different cultures, taking into account learners' perceptions and attitudes [[5], [6], [7]]. Nevertheless, studies on the continued adoption of mobile learning are still scarce [8]. This should invite further effort to identify the variables that may influence students' hedonic motivation to use this technology, as well as their willingness to accept it. Hedonic motivation refers to both the pleasure and/or fun enjoyed during technology use, while technology acceptance consists of an evident willingness to use technology for the activities that it was developed for.
This present research investigates the key variables that can facilitate or inhibit the acceptance of mobile learning in two Middle Eastern nations, namely Saudi Arabia and Iraq. It contributes to the existing literature by predicting the factors that could determine hedonic motivation, where these were not included in the original UTAUT2. It also integrates ‘trust’ with UTAUT2 as another predictor of both behavioral intention and hedonic motivation. Thus, it endeavors to provide insights into mobile learning use in order to help universities promote its acceptance and achieve further improvement in education quality. Finally, this work compares the proposed Model findings from two Middle Eastern countries which differ in some respects but share certain cultural similarities.
This study is organized as follows. The next section discusses the use of cellphones in Saudi Arabia and Iraq, along with previous research on mobile learning adoption in both countries. Meanwhile, the rationale for proposing the associations between the research constructs and hypotheses are introduced in section three. The research Methods section subsequently describes the research participants, survey, procedure, and data analysis. Section five presents the research findings, whereas the Discussion section explains the current research findings alongside previous research results. Finally, the research conclusions, contribution, and limitations are outlined in the Conclusion section, ending with a brief summary of the study.
