When studying large social networks, that represent a complex system, the number of groups that should be found is unknown. This leads us to another more complex problem which is community structure detection.
Community structure detection is an important topic. Since, it can be found in many application domains and real-world situations. The identification of communities also allows us to understand the role of each actor within communities and in the network as a whole. A lot of work about community detection has been done in recent years. Many methods of community structure detection have been developed. Each method has some advantages and disadvantages. In addition, some of them do not cover overlapping communities, other were designed to find overlapping communities. We find also some methods that need parameters like the number of communities. Among these methods of community detection in networks, we find Girvan and Newman method [1] and Lauvin de Blondel [2] method, which are based on modularity measure. They search for the community structure that maximizes the modularity value. Others use random walks such as Walktrap of Pons and Latapy [3] and Infomap of Rosvall and Bergstrom [4]. The idea behind using random walk concept is that a walk from a node is more likely to be trapped during a certain time in its community. Some methods were developed based on labels propagation like Raghavan method [5] and Copra of Gregory [6]. These methods require visiting all the nodes of the graph. CFinder of Palla [7] and Eagle of Shen [8] are based on cliques. Clique is a subset of nodes all adjacent to each other. The community in these methods is defined as a chain of adjacent cliques. Some methods can find the community structure for large-scale networks. For instance the method that was proposed in [9] based on node membership grade and sub-communities integration, can find community structure in large-scale networks. Another method was proposed in [10] based on improved modularity function can find communities in very large-scale networks. The method that was defined in [11] can find community structure in large-scale networks. It is based on labeling algorithm combining with K-nearest neighbor and label propagation algorithm.
Most of community detection methods suffer from high computational complexity. In addition, the community structure found was not very accurate with the real ones. In order to solve these problems, we have proposed a new approach. Our proposed approach is more stable and efficient especially in high density networks. It has a low complexity. Our proposed approach is composed of two phases. The first phase is to find all cycles in a network. Each cycle is an elementary group of nodes. These groups are the subdivision of a network. The second phase consists in merging these elementary groups based on clique method to obtain the final community structure.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our approach to find communities in networks. The evaluating results of our approach are illustrated in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper.
