Since technological change is recognized as one of the main factors of economic growth, national governments strive to stimulate innovation. Firms, on their part, pursue innovation as a way of gaining sustainable competitive advantages and effective value creation (Dosi, 1997, Porter, 1990), whilst being aware that an indispensable element of the success of innovation efforts are their abilities to absorb and adopt external knowledge. (Dahlander and Gann, 2010, Powell and Grodal, 2005). These open practices with multiple players distributed up and down the supply chain can maximize the firms’ capacity to innovate and bring out the best of the whole innovation system.
Considering the fast-growing number of channels through which firms acquire the necessary knowledge and technologies (Laursen & Salter, 2006), interactions with institutional research and development (R&D) performers remain a potentially central vehicle for the development of cutting-edge innovations (Kaufmann & Tödtling, 2001). In this paper the term ‘R&D performing organisations’ means universities and public research organisations.
The close interaction of industry and academia plays an important role in maintaining sustainable innovation systems and is crucial for ‘catching-up’ emerging economies operating away from the global technological frontier (Caraça, Lundvall, & Mendonça, 2009). Therefore, support measures intended to enlarge technological capabilities of enterprises, especially those involved in cooperation with R&D performing organisations, are embedded in public innovation policies (Georghiou, Edler, Uyarra, & Yeow, 2014). Previous research results revealed that state support for innovation has a stimulating effect on the firm performance (Almus and Czarnitzki, 2003, Bérubé and Mohnen, 2009, Hottenrott et al., 2017) and the ‘openness’ of their innovation activities (Cano-Kollmann et al., 2017, Marzucchi et al., 2015). In addition, a sustainable pattern pertinent to a ‘picking-the-winner’ strategy is emerging, when the state is inclined towards supporting more experienced and capable firms (Antonelli & Crespi, 2013). However, whether firms cooperating with universities or R&D organisations are more likely to be supported by the state and tend to demonstrate higher innovation performance remains unexplored.
This study supplements the existing research and aims to examine how enterprises interacting with R&D performing organisations utilize state support measures and how it relates to their performance. This issue is especially critical for developing economies as their networking within the national innovation system is often underdeveloped and regulatory environment for innovation — not as favourable (Fischer, Schaeffer, & Vonortas, 2019). In light of strong budgetary constraints, governments must subsidise R&D more effectively, particularly through supporting enterprises engaged in industry-science cooperation, which tend to be more innovative (Aristei et al., 2016, Dachs et al., 2008). The analysis is based on the data concerning 422 Russian high-tech and high medium-tech innovation-active enterprises operating within the emerging market environment and immature innovation system (Gokhberg & Roud, 2016). By applying a two-stage model, the author pinpoints, firstly, the determinants of the firms' propensity to receive state support, and secondly, the possible influence of state support on firms’ activities.
In order to address the issues of potential endogeneity and selection bias associated with evaluating the effects of state support (e.g., Almus and Czarnitzki, 2003, Bronzini and Piselli, 2016, Busom, 2000), the propensity score matching methodology is used. This approach enables to assess the additional effects of regulatory interventions that would not occur in the absence of state support (Buisseret et al., 1995, Gök and Edler, 2012).
Section 2 of the paper features the relevant theoretical and empirical findings on state support of innovation in professional literature and declares the research hypotheses. Description of the data and methodology are provided in Section 3. Section 4 presents empirical findings. The final section concludes with potential implications for the national policy-making.
