Vision is an important way of human perception and understanding of the objective world. When a person receives information from an external source, visual information from the information exceeds the number of sensory information from other sources, and to occupy the amount of information psychology. The study is "a thing that it should look better." Picture characterization and comment methods give a viable answer for the above issues. Picture grouping alludes to an innovation that consequently relegates content pictures to at least one classifications of mark PCs. The technique for arrangement is additionally prepared by the picture substance of understanding the importance and translation with the PC. Through excellent picture characterization results, you can arrange huge picture datasets on the Internet, improve more compelling administration, execution, and fundamentally quicker Internet picture search. Through excellent picture comment, picture content-based ventures can be changed into more complex watchword based hunts that are semantic and text-put together and can be based with respect to huge arrangements of pictures progressively.
Today, the picture is based on the mid-level representation, primarily as a basis for visual features. Visual image may have very different semantics on, because the influence of the underlying visual characteristics, does not contain semantic information. This formula is far from the way human perception of the image. In the center of the visual features include semantic meaning and image objects in a scene. Based on the function of the intermediate layer, the image represents an effective solution to the problem is the "semantic gap".
By limiting the image quality of the segmentation, image is represented by the visual feature extraction region intermediate layer image, and the semantic scenes and effective semantic object in the image. Could not be retrieved. In order to improve the image representation of semantic information, wherein extraction needed to bring represented above, it can hold a high-dimensional vector in the form of more visual feature information of the image.
The inevitably represented to distinguish and to increase the size of the image. The introduction of the redundant information will decrease the performance of the algorithm. In addition, the efficiency of the algorithm in, in the real-world application, exacerbated by the difficult problem "dimension disaster" and overhead algorithm of time and space. Thus, the fusion feature extraction method for extracting semantic information, one of the most urgent study, effectively the image to design an effective method for the rich semantic information and image representations.
With the advent of the Internet era of big data, image classification and labeling of the research focus has shifted from the traditional limited size of the data sets to the Internet using large data sets and is difficult to use in large-scale data environment "curse of dimensionality". Therefore, in the design classification and labeling algorithm, the complexity of the algorithm, considering the cost, and efficiency, simpler model design, it is necessary to use the introduction of parallel computing mechanism.
Appearance is not, at this point a potential element of conventional displaying techniques dependent on similitude coordinating. The element by and large presents incredible adaptability for planning viable calculations for different employments of picture order and show. Picture arrangement and human view of huge datasets are the primary examination bearings in understanding the importance of pictures, and in presenting from the earlier information on client input on measure models to imitate. At last, the quantity of enormous datasets, continuous substance updates, and this change requires another calculation update system. Existing calculations frequently do not have a powerful component for refreshing preparing sets. The displaying procedure relies upon the preparation set. When the preparation is finished, the relating significance is fixed and no new substance can be included.
This is intolerable, especially for large data sets, and can consume a long time, especially if you need to process modeling and retraining in order to update the calculation of the cost. As a result, a new generation of algorithms are updating their training set affordable, timely and effective manner and to continue to keep up with the Internet and style to keep up with large amounts of data. Personalized Search is an intelligent Big Data era of development, the inevitable result of the Internet search engine.
Personalized search method is used to search the primary user support multimedia data types. The user can use the image, text, natural language, or mixed media type's expansion keyword matching existing text search method. Requesting a search model to represent the abstract semantic multi-output mode, and allows the media data input by the user. In this context, we support the design ideas, theories, work and purpose of the validation process for the introduction of high-speed large measure of self-sufficiency required image data.
From deep semantic image content hash learning framework has been proposed, it can be used in really large data storage environments. Design has always been a basic image features in computer vision and important issue. In previous studies, some typical features are contrived so well, such as the, HOG (Histogram of Oriented Gradients), and so on. It has been shown to achieve the effect of the functional expression. However, these man-made designs also suffer from a lack of good generalization performance. Convolution neural network has a layered depth learning play model.
Functional representation is the basis of computer vision research. How to learn by using convolution neural network universal characteristics and excellent generalization, extraction of a broader overall computer vision has a strong discrimination, analysis of information expression Suppose you have a wider influence.
