Humans are distinctly skilled at sophisticated social interactions. To successfully engage in social exchanges, they rely on “Theory of Mind” (ToM). ToM is a concept defined by Premack and Woodruff (1978) in the highly influential article “Does the Chimpanzee have a theory of mind?” as “an individual imputing mental states [like beliefs, desires and intentions] to himself and others […] to make predictions, specifically about the behavior of other organisms”. In their paper, Premack and Woodruff stressed that ToM need not be accurate for it to be present (i.e., false inferences often do result from its presence and not exclusively due to its absence). Further, they differentiated between ToM for motivation (i.e., another organism’s valuation, intention, purpose, goal) and ToM for knowledge (i.e., another organism’s belief states or learned schemas/scripts). Along with this comprehensive definition, Premack and Woodruff proposed an initial task to probe ToM capacities in nonhuman primates: they presented short videos to a chimpanzee named Sarah of a human struggling with simple tasks. Subsequently, Sarah saw photographs of various items, including the one solving the actor’s problem. Sarah’s ability to select the correct photograph served as evidence of her being capable of recognizing the problem (i.e., representing the state of affairs, as well as the actor’s purpose in the scene, so his intentions and goals). This highlighted that having a Theory of Mind requires a representation of the state of affairs and a representation of an individual’s purposeful and motivational relationship to that state, i.e., the individual’s beliefs and values/goals, respectively, in the situation (Wimmer and Perner, 1983). ToM is thus not a unitary process. ToM is instead a category that includes at least two differentiable social cognitive processes capable of representing the first order beliefs and first order values attributed to others, along with processes for sharing and integrating these representations.
Since this initial empirical investigation into ToM in nonhuman primates, experimental approaches probing and characterizing ToM capacities have been introduced by psychological and behavioral economics research (Houser and McCabe, 2014; Kovacs et al., 2010; Schurz et al., 2014; Wimmer and Perner, 1983). Neural networks implicated in ToM were successfully identified using standard neuroimaging methods (Gallagher and Frith, 2003; Schurz et al., 2014; Siegal and Varley, 2002). Further, analyses of neural signals increasingly drew on quantitative descriptions of covert cognitive processes constituting ToM via computational models of behavior (Charpentier & O’Doherty, 2018; Hampton, Bossaerts, & O’Doherty, 2008; Hill et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2019; Yoshida et al., 2010b). Despite the vast success of these approaches, a coherent picture of what ToM is, how humans and other species engage in it, and which neural mechanisms constitute it, is missing (Emery and Clayton, 2009; Schaafsma et al., 2015). We argue that in part this is due to graded differences in the cognitive processes elicited by various ToM tasks. More specifically, we propose that the extent to which they require an intentional representation of other individuals and the degree of integration between such representations of others and one’s own reference frame is highly variable.
Premack and Woodruff’s conceptual differentiation of ToM’s knowledge and motivational processes has been followed by other investigators, distinguishing between so-called cognitive and affective ToM (Baron-Cohen, 1988; Kalbe et al., 2010; Mitchell and Phillips, 2015). In these accounts, “cognitive ToM” is primarily focused on explicit perspective-taking and strategic reasoning about another person’s beliefs, generating causal inferences and predictions about the other’s behavior. The term “affective ToM” in most investigations is restricted to cognitive processes of inference about the emotions of others, such as empathy, emotion recognition and emotion simulation, and typically does not emphasize goal states or valuations of possible actions. Both cognitive and affective ToM processes have been investigated in great detail. Examining both lines of research at once would go beyond the scope of a single article. Therefore, in this current review, we exclusively focus on perspective taking and valuational and motivational ToM processes during decision problems. Such processes can be considered affective just as they are cognitive. However, in this paper, we do not explicitly consider the processes more typically denoted as affective, such as empathy for emotional states. Instead, we examine how decision tasks aimed at ToM likely differ with respect to the cognitive functions they elicit. We present a typology of experimental approaches and cognitive computational models along two primary dimensions: interactivity and uncertainty. We propose that this typology can help to interpret existing findings on the behavioral and neural levels and can aid task design in future studies. Specifically, we suggest that tasks which combine higher levels of both uncertainty and interactivity facilitate investigations of and potentially provide greater insight into high-level ToM.
1.1. The functional relevance of interactivity and uncertainty in ToM tasksIn the presented typology of ToM tasks, uncertainty refers to either the risk or ambiguity characterizing associations between actions, states, state transitions, and outcomes (Hsu et al., 2005). Additionally, although formally not covered by uncertainty, we discuss the availability and accessibility of information in the context of uncertainty. We propose that under uncertainty and unequal distribution of information between agents, others' intentional states likely become highly relevant and distinguishable from one’s own intentional states. However, task risks or ambiguities must not be so great as to be simply random chance or there will be little incentive for any learning and therefore little incentive for tracking others' intentional states. Uncertainty occurs both for environmental (e.g., state, reward) and social (i.e., agent) variables, and both are relevant to the roles that ToM plays in choice and behavior. Environmental uncertainties may arise when joint action-outcome associations or state transitions are probabilistic, and their dynamical changes are unknown. Social uncertainty refers to the uncertainty about the other agents' actions, because their preferences, goals, beliefs, abilities to track the environmental variables, rationality or stochasticity, etc., are unknown.Interactivity (Byom and Mutlu, 2013; Jording et al., 2019) in our proposed typology of social cognition tasks refers to a combination of the social distance or face-to-face context (e.g., still photos, recorded video, live video, interactive live video, interactive in person; Spezio et al., 2007), the personal relevance, the task-dependent consequences of a social cognition task (Bublatzky et al., 2017), and the level of involvement of multiple agents (Norris et al., 2014). Interactivity is a dimension of socially oriented tasks that ranges from purely passive spectatorial observation to full consequential interaction. Thereby, interactivity determines the behavioral relevance of ToM. Behavioral relevance is understood as the relative importance of making predictions of others' behavior from their frames of reference, using those predictions to plan one’s own (re)actions, and so integrating predictions from ToM into one’s own perspective.We begin by summarizing a range of relevant ToM tasks from psychology, economics and decision neuroscience, and characterize the different experimental approaches based on the two proposed dimensions. We suggest that divergent knowledge about the environment due to unshared information and asymmetric environmental uncertainties motivate the representations of others' belief states while social uncertainties elicit representations of others' motivational states. If all information is equally accessible to all agents involved in a task, participants observing or interacting with other agents have no need for ToM beyond positing that another rational, competent agent wants to succeed in the task and has beliefs that correctly conform to the task contingencies. As risk or ambiguity increases and different information about the environment become available to the participants and the agents they observe or interact with, participants must distinguish their own assessment of the environment from the other agents' assessments (i.e., beliefs about the states, about the state transitions, or about the reward outcomes). As the other agents’ motivations, intentions and reasoning processes become unclear an increased demand to represent motivational states is created.Second, tasks are characterized with respect to the type of interactivity they include. We argue that the degree of interactivity and active engagement influences the need to take others' perspectives and influences the level of interaction of such representations with self-referential processes. The distinction between self- and other-referential processes in the realm of social decision making has proven very useful for the functional relevance of different brain networks relevant during social learning (Joiner et al., 2017; Qu et al., 2017). We follow this differentiation and discuss self- and other-referential cognitive processes and their interaction depending on the varying levels of interactivity in experimental paradigms. We propose that a task, where participants passively observe others' actions in a context that entails no requirement for any response or judgement nor any consequences for the observer, requires less ToM and less self-referential processing than a task where participants are personally involved with another agent with gains and losses dependent upon the decisions made by both. The function of ToM in the latter case would be to enhance the accurate predictions of the other’s actions and so to improve successful coordination or competition. Thus, social tasks in which multiple agents interact cooperatively or competitively in real time with real consequences could foster higher levels of ToM than less interactive tasks where little or nothing is at stake. In synchronous, interactive, consequential tasks, participants would be expected to represent another agent’s representation of themselves (second-level ToM) or even go farther in tasks requiring complex synchronous interaction to achieve task-relevant goals (Doshi et al., 2012; Doshi et al., 2014).In the second section of this review, we examine different computational models that have been used to quantify the cognitive processes individuals engage in when solving such tasks and characterize models with respect to the aforementioned dimensions. Lastly, we interpret neural findings in neurotypical (NT) humans.
