The era in which we live, this “information age”, is brazenly producing enormous volumes of data [1, 2]. Helped by the many innovative technologies and technical tools in play - consisting of a wide range of mathematical techniques, data analysis techniques, visualization techniques, cloud computing and fuzzy sets and systems [3] - these data can be elaborated to build exciting datasets that can be accessed by all. These progressively large datasets contain highly detailed information obtained ever more promptly from different sources, combining data of a traditional, transaction-based origin with those collected either automatically, like the signals emanating from mobile phones and web connections, or on a voluntary basis, like the material we publish on social media [4].
Data Science - the umbrella name given to the innovative use of “analytics” to extract information and insights from these many and diverse datasets [5, 6] - was initially developed for business purposes. It can, however, also be used to support decision-making in the public sector [7, 8], helping us to gain a deeper and more transparent understanding of our world [9], while improving the way we identify and assemble the choices made by people when faced with a number of possible options [10]. Availability and use of analytical information can help, in particular to achieve:
•greater efficiency and effectiveness in planning and implementing public policies, as it becomes increasingly easier to understand what each user's expectations are and so “target” any initiative [11, 12, 13].•greater promptness in understanding how phenomena underway in society can require special interventions, for example, by measuring population sentiment - either locally [14] or nationally [15] - or taking field observations of how a given pathology is spreading (through DDD, digital disease detection, Vayena et al. [16]).
Although the potential applications of Data Science (DS) in many fields and sectors have been propounded in a number of studies, in practice these applications are rarely found in government processes or they are, at most, only at the experimentation stage [17]. Examples include the criminal sector [10, 18, 19, 20], taxes and fiscal areas [21, 22] and healthcare services [23, 24].
This paper focuses instead on the role that DS plays in designing public policies seen as “a set of actions that affect the solution to a privacy problem or dissatisfaction concerning a certain demand or opportunity for public intervention” [25]. More specifically, the objective of this article is to investigate how analytics and data scientists can support the process of defining a given public policy, removing the veil of the obscurity from the underpinning process. Three cases are here presented, where DS has been utilized to support the design of public policies. By exploring these cases through action research and endorsing a socio-technical perspective [21], evidence is provided concerning:
•How the process is carried out and what role the various phases of the DS cycle play in the policy definition process, from the initial definition of the problem to the resulting legislative measure;•What contribution is made by the various actors taking part in policy definition processes, including the DS team, project managers and politicians;•Finally, what is the contribution of DS to policy definition processes, and which factors influenced the various outcomes. Here the contribution is measured by examining whether - and how effectively - elaborated data can be used to put in place a public policy (in the form of legislative measures and/or structural investment and/or intervention to public services). The effects of the policy on the quality and quantity of services delivered have not been examined, in part because of the overly lengthy time necessary for any impact to be felt.
To set out our argument, the paper is articulated as follows: Section 2 contains the review of previous studies and an explanation of our conceptual perspective; Section 3 lays out the methodology, the findings are then presented and are followed by the discussion and conclusions.
