Point-based surfaces created by 3D acquisition devices can reduce the space needed by the connectivity of the scanned surface. This process minimizes the time and storage complexities of large-scale objects, for example, archeological artworks (Boubekeur et al., 2005). The sample points of the surface may be associated with normal vectors. However, the connectivity between sample points represents beneficial information in many applications. In fact, surface reconstruction is the process of building consistent connectivity information for point-based surfaces. In fact, reconstructing a surface from a set of points is a intensely studied approach in the field of computer graphics (Kazhdan, 2005, Berger et al., 2017).
In this paper, we present a method for building a water-tight surface from a set of oriented points that is performed in a GPU parallel framework. In contrast to traditional methods, our approach uses tetrahedralization of the input model instead of voxelization. Our approach can be summarized, see Fig. 1, into four basic steps: (1) We construct a kd-tree from the given points with the condition that every node contains a nonfolding surface patch with respect to the local tangent plane. kd-trees have a unique advantage over octrees in that they are guaranteed to have at most logarithmic depth, which is related to the time required for a nearest-neighbor query. (2) Based on the obtained kd-tree, we generate a set of local triangulations for the kd-tree cells. (3) From these local triangulations, we construct a set of tetrahedrons representing the interior of the model, which we approximate by a set of Fourier coefficients. (4) Finally, we obtain an implicit function approximating the whole manifold from which the isosurface can be extracted.Download : Download high-res image (150KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Overview of the proposed approach: the input point samples are spatially partitioned using a kd-tree; finally, a highly detailed surface is extracted as an isosurface of implicit functions representing the kd-tree cells.
1.1. ContributionOur paper is based on the implicit surface framework, which is considered to be the fastest framework for the surface reconstruction problem. The main objective is to reconstruct a closed surface approximating a given set of oriented points. The principle idea is to calculate the characteristic function representing this manifold. The characteristic function has zero value everywhere except inside the manifold, where it is equal to 1. The surface of the manifold can then be extracted as the isosurface of this function.Similar to the approach presented in Kazhdan (2005), we use Fourier analysis to approximate the implicit function from which we extract the surface. However, we apply the calculations directly on the sample points without approximating the mesh into a regular voxel grid. In fact, the voxelization of any object increases the tolerance error of the calculation, and an enormous amount of memory is required to hold the voxel grid. Therefore, there is no need to obtain a voxel grid having the same dimension as the required bandwidth, as in traditional Fourier techniques. Thus, the calculation of higher bandwidths benefits from the calculation of preceding bandwidths.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief review of state-of-the-art surface reconstruction. Section 3 illustrates how to convert a point-based surface into a volumetric representation as a set of tetrahedrons. We present, in Section 4, how this volumetric representation reduces the calculation of the Fourier coefficients, followed by implelementation issues and results in Sections 5 Implementation issues, 6 Results. Finally, we conclude our paper in Section 7.
