The concept of open science is spurring new visions, principles, and practices for how research and innovation are performed at universities. Open science, based on recent synthesis of research on its usage and application, aspires for “transparent and accessible knowledge that is shared and developed through collaborative networks” (Vicente–Saez and Martinez–Fuentes, 2018). Advances in digital and communication technologies and development of various types of digital platforms are nurturing new open science policies and practices in universities, such as open data sharing (Murray-Rust, 2008), open access publishing (Cribb and Sari, 2010), and participatory design. These novel open science practices have developed in tandem with novel organising forms of conducting and sharing research through open repositories, open physical labs, and transdisciplinary research platforms. Together, these novel practices and organising forms are expanding the ethos of science at universities. However, there are currently no comprehensive empirical studies on the underlying principles and practices that university research teams have developed and are using to adopt open science in response to new policies and the new digital technologies available, nor does an analysis of the factors inhibiting and enabling open science exist.
The purpose of this study was to identify emergent principles, practices, and underlying mechanisms of open science and innovation developed and encountered by research teams at universities. We studied novel practices of open science and innovation at Aalto University in Finland. We studied 15 research teams to understand what principles and practices the teams use to engage in open science, what promoting and preventing factors influence adoption of open science practices, and what practices they use to transform open science outcomes into open innovation outcomes.
The results of this study provide clarity on emergent principles and practices of open science at the universities in a digital world. Firstly, we distinguish between open sharing and inviting practices and identify several forms of both that have been adopted by research teams. Secondly, we clarify openness as a multidimensional variable that can be measured and formulated by levels of transparency of science outputs, accessibility to science outputs, authorization in science production, and participation in science production. Thirdly, we expose key promoting and preventing factors that influence research teams to adopt open science practices. Fourthly, we reveal two novel forms of open innovation practices developed by forerunner research teams: inbound open innovation that uses open science outputs to create product or service innovation and outbound open innovation that uses open science outputs to promote product and service innovation. As such, we provide clarity on the governance of open science and innovation at universities in a digital world and exposure to how universities are becoming active shapers and developers of novel practices of open innovation.
We end the paper with a discussion about how these new open science practices and novel open innovation practices adopted by research teams are challenging the established governance of research and innovation at universities. To undertake this endeavour, we propose a novel open exploration policy that promotes a nexus between open science and innovation at universities in a digital world.
The article is organised as follows. We present the theoretical framework on open science and innovation in Section 2. The methodology of the study is described in Section 3. The findings of the research are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, we present a discussion of the findings and their implications.
