The field of cancer therapy has seen enormous changes within the last two decades. While much interest has been directed to the emergence of novel systemic therapies which capitalise on evolving biological knowledge of malignancy, there have also been substantial changes in technologies and techniques relevant to radiation and surgical treatments of cancer.
While the regulatory environment requires that new drugs undergo clinical trial evaluation before marketing, the adoption of new technologies is not as constrained. Indeed, to truly evaluate these novel approaches, there must be some degree of training and adoption by health sciences centres to enable clinical trials to take place. As a result, randomised clinical trials addressing the clinical benefit of novel radiation oncology approaches or delivery technologies have been limited. Often new technology simply replaces old based on empiricism or theoretical advantages, often explained by the duration of prospective clinical research not being competitive with the speed of constantly advancing technologies [1]. That being said, academic cancer cooperative groups are ideally suited to provide the infrastructure and access to larger patient populations to support investigation and the clinical trials necessary to rigorously understand the impact of such innovations on outcomes of importance in cancer (survival, toxicity, quality of life, patient-reported outcomes and, increasingly, value for money).
The European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) is one of the oldest organisations conducting such critical research. The Radiation Oncology Group of the EORTC has conducted trials that have shaped practice in breast, lung, head and neck and Genito-Urinary (GU) cancers to name but a few. In addition, EORTC Disease Oriented Groups have thriving radiation oncology members engaged in trial development and conduct.
The rapidly changing landscape of radiation oncology including the emergence of highly conformal radiation techniques, particle therapies, new approaches to management of localised and oligometastatic disease, new discoveries in biology, the rise of artificial intelligence (AI) imaging–based algorithms and emergence of novel drugs available for combination with radiation treatment led the EORTC to sponsor a ‘State of Science’ meeting to update knowledge and explore research opportunities in radiation oncology. Radiation oncologists from EORTC, the European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology (ESTRO), Canada and the United States, as well as researchers in particle therapy, radiation biology, immunology, patient-reported outcomes and trial methodology were gathered in September 2018 to review current available evidence supporting practice in various areas, discuss and debate where clinical research should be directed to improve cancer outcomes and to create a menu of priority radiation oncology–based clinical trial questions for further development.
A planning committee created an agenda of priority themes for discussion over a 2-day period, and invited attendees were balanced across therapeutics areas, expertise and European countries (Appendix I). This manuscript summarises key points in the discussion and recommended priority questions and areas for research for study by the EORTC and other organisations.
