MiRNA is a noncoding RNA containing 22 nucleotides[1]. In the 1990s, Li et al. discovered the first miRNA, Lin-4 [2]. Subsequently, a large number of miRNAs with different functions were discovered one after another, and these miRNAs were found in animal and plant viruses [3], [4]. They can regulate the expression of their mRNA targets through strict base pair complementation [5]. More and more evidences show that miRNA plays an important role in the host's life activities. MiRNA can also affect biological processes such as cell development, cell proliferation, apoptosis, and immune response [6]. Previous studies have shown that abnormalities in miRNA can cause human diseases, especially cancer [7]. Therefore, identifying disease-related miRNAs can help to explore the pathogenesis of disease and promote the diagnosis and treatment of diseases [8]. Clinical identification methods will consume a lot of manpower and material resources, so it is more and more popular to predict miRNA-disease associations by computational models.
With the development of high-throughput technology, a large number of databases about miRNAs are available for free, which provides convenience for researchers. For example, HMDD and miR2Disease store a lot of useful information about miRNA [9], [10]. In addition, a growing number of researchers have begun to focus on miRNAs, which greatly expands our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of miRNAs. For example, calculating human miRNA functional similarity [11], prediction of miRNA-target interactions [12], the discovery of miRNA-mRNA regulatory modules [13], [7],
Recently, the application of computation methods in bioinformatics has attracted wide attention, such as the prediction of microbe-disease associations [14], [15], cancer progression identification and identifying mutated driver pathway [16], [17]. Before 2010, there was no computation methods to predict miRNA-disease associations. Jiang proposed the first model to identify the most potential disease-related miRNAs [18]. They studied the functional relevance of miRNAs and found that disease pairs associated with common miRNAs were more phenotypic. The model is a scoring system based on cumulative hypergeometric distribution. Chen et al. presented a computational model named LRSSLMDA, which projected miRNAs/diseases' statistical feature profile and graph theoretical feature profile to a common subspace. It used Laplacian regularization to preserve the local structures of the training data and a L1-norm constraint to select important miRNA/disease features for prediction [19]. Xuan et al. proposed the MIDP model by randomly walking on the heterogeneous network of miRNAs and diseases [20]. They set up the transfer matrix of network nodes. Different types of nodes have different transfer weights. In this way, the prior information of nodes can be fully utilized. Chen et al. developed WBSMDA, which integrates miRNA functional similarity, disease semantic similarity, and Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity to predict disease-related miRNAs [21]. Sun et al. proposed NTSMDA, which is a new method of network topology similarity measurement [22]. It uses a diffusion algorithm to consider the known topological information of the miRNA-disease association network and calculates the relationship score of each pair of miRNA-disease by two-step inference algorithm. Chen et al. recently proposed the heterogeneous graph inference model (HGIMDA), which integrates disease similarity network, miRNA similarity network and miRNA-disease similarity network to calculate similarity scores, and experimentally verified miRNA-disease associations into a heterogeneous graph [23]. Luo et al. proposed a novel semi-supervised prediction method of MiRNA-Disease Association based on Graph Regularization Framework (MDAGRF) in a miRNA-disease network [24]. MDAGRF could obtain a single classifier to integrate homogeneous space and heterogeneous space. Chen et al. developed ABMDA, which balanced the positive and negative samples by performing random sampling based on k-means clustering on negative samples, whose process was quick and easy, and their model had higher efficiency and scalability for large datasets than previous methods [25]. Li et al. developed a matrix completion model (MCMDA) based on HMDD database. MCMDA uses singular value decomposition to obtain approximate complete matrix, minimizing the difference between the approximate matrix and the original matrix [26]. Luo et al. developed Collective Prediction based on Transduction Learning method (CPTL) to systematically prioritize miRNAs related to diseases [27]. CPTL calculates relevance score and updates the network structure iteratively, until a convergence criterion is reached. Mork et al. used text mining to obtain disease-related proteins and protein-related miRNAs, using proteins as a bridge between miRNAs and diseases to predict disease-related miRNAs [28]. Chen et al. proposed a novel computational method named Ensemble of Decision Tree based MiRNA-Disease Association prediction (EDTMDA), which innovatively built a computational framework integrating ensemble learning and dimensionality reduction. For each miRNA-disease pair, the feature vector was extracted by calculating the statistical measures, graph theoretical measures, and matrix factorization results for the miRNA and disease, respectively [29]. Ding et al. developed a novel algorithm, named inference of Disease-related MiRNAs based on Heterogeneous Manifold (DMHM), to accurately and efficiently identify miRNA-disease associations by integrating multi-omics data [30].
These models can be classified into four categories [31]: (1) scoring-based algorithms, such as WBSMDA and Jiang's methods; (2) network structure-based algorithms, such as MIDP and NTSMDA; (3) machine learning-based algorithms, such as MCMDA and MDAGRF; (4) models based on multiple biological information, such as DMHM and Mork's methods.
Matrix factorization is the most popular method in the recommendation system. It maps users and items into a shared latent space, using a vector of latent features to represent a user or an item [32]. In this way, the interaction between users and items is modeled as the inner product of their latent vectors. This is very similar to the task we are trying to solve to predict miRNA-disease associations. Variants of matrix factorization are also widely used to predict miRNA-disease associations, such as NCMCMDA and GRNMF [33], [34]. However, simply combining the product of latent features into linear combinations may not be enough to capture the complex structure of miRNA-disease interaction data.
Since the neural network has been proved to have the ability to fit any function [35], we propose a new method called NCFM (Neural network-based Collaborative Filtering Method) to model the latent features of miRNAs and diseases based on neural network, which can effectively predict miRNA-disease associations. NCFM not only implements matrix factorization but also leverages a multi-layer perceptron to supercharge NCFM modelling with non-linearities. In addition, the prediction task is solved from the perspective of ranking, we use pairwise loss function to optimize the model. In 5-fold cross validation framework, NCFM obtains the maximum AUC value of 0.912, and is superior to other methods of 0.891 (CGMDA), 0.880 (Meta-path), 0.889 (BNPMDA). Furthermore, NCFM also outperforms other methods in Leave-one-out cross validation framework, whose AUC value is 0.921, and is again superior to other methods of 0.915 (CGMDA), 0.908 (Meta-path), 0.893 (BNPMDA). Case studies show that NCFM is an effective method to predict unknown miRNA-disease associations.
