The human face is a sophisticated multidimensional structure that can convey a lot of information about the individual, including expression, feeling, facial features. Effectively and efficiently analyzing the features related to facial information is a challenging task that requires lot of time and efforts. Recently, many facial recognition-based algorithms for automatic attendance management has been proposed, successfully implemented and used as in Refs. [[1], [2], [3], [4]] and also new algorithms developed or some existing algorithms improved or combined with other methods, techniques, or algorithms to build facial recognition systems or applications as in Refs. [[5], [6], [7], [8]].
Although lot of achievements have been made in devising facial recognition algorithms and systems, but to reach human level accuracy of facial recognition, some major issues associated with these algorithms/systems should be greatly mitigated or addressed as argued in Ref. [9] so as to realize a reliable and accurate facial recognition-based automatic attendance management system, which can be very useful in the area of substantiation.
The main challenges for successful face detection and recognition systems are; illumination conditions, scale, occlusion, pose, background, expression etc., as highlighted in Refs. [10,11]. Various algorithms and methods have been proposed to address these challenges; N.Pattabhi Ramaiah Ref. [12] uses illumination Invariant Face Recognition using Convolutional Neural Networks to address illumination conditions, Abass et al Ref. [13] addresses the issues of shift and rotation using complex wavelet transform (CWT) and Fisherface. To address issues related to pose, Kishor et al Ref. [14] proposes robust pose invariant face recognition using Dual Cross Pattern (DCP), LBP and Support Vector Machine (SVM).
In our research work, which is divided into two main sections: The first section focused mainly on improving the face recognition algorithm while the second section focused on the attendance management system based on the recognized human faces. In the first section, a digital live camera will be used at the entrance to capture images of staffs entering an office or a building, which some advanced image processing techniques, such as contrast adjustment, noise reduction using bilateral filter, image histogram equalization, are applied to the captured images to improve their quality, then the Haar Algorithm will be applied to the captured images to detect individual faces, which will be used as an input to the Face Recognition System.
And also the same advanced image processing techniques above, plus Image Blending technique will be applied, a prior, to the training/template face images, then the improved input images will be compared with the improved training images using the LBP algorithm, to yield an improved LBP codes to recognize faces, thus the facial recognition accuracy will be improved compared to the traditional LBP codes without our method. In the second section, the metadata of the recognized facial images such as date and time are automatically extracted to automatically mark attendance of each individual.
