Cloud Computing (CC) is a new form to compute resources. It provide various service such as storage services, hardware equipment, operating systems, software applications and entire network infrastructure and delivers the internet-based services to the users with low cost [1]. CC refers to both the services and the applications delivered to the hardware, internet, and software system in the data center that provides the cloud services [2]. The internet-based technology and the cloud metaphor referenced the accessibility and the availability of the resources to be computed [1]. CC provides the organizational users and the computing resources to be deployed as private, public, and community on the hybrid cloud [3]. CC provides various services like platform as a service (PaaS), expert as a service (EaaS), infrastructure as a service (IaaS) and software as a service (SaaS). The on-demand services and the computing resources allocated to the users are operated in the cloud [1].
CC is a paradigm where the resources of computing are shared as a cloud service on the internet [4]. CC is used in many organizations in the worldwide level as it supports computation and data storage with high performance. The cloud service relies on creating various dependencies using the number of holes with incompatibilities and vulnerabilities [5]. CC is a continuous development technology with abundant challenges in the service of security. The major concern in a cloud environment is the management of the cloud services [6]. The resources that are to be computed as the on-demand services are allocated to the user through the cloud storage [1].
The CC is used at most of the places to solve the cyber attacks as various vulnerabilities are existing in a cloud environment. The distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack is a kind of cyber attack which disrupt normal traffic of targeted cloud server. Hence, the DDoS attack is the critical [7]. Main characteristics of the DDoS attacks are defined: (a) It is very rigid to detect as it contains the equivalent flow in the regular user. DDoS attacks can be completed using a solitary node with limited flow of data and it results in low cost; (b) DDoS is a target insensitive attack because the attacked node identifies the attacker node. Thus, it affects the cloud computing services massively. The DDoS attacker compromises and collects various susceptible hosts referred to as zombies to attack against the targeted node; (c) DDoS attack increases sophistication, size and identifying the extortion is a major motive of this attack [3], [8]; (d) DDoS defense approach generally classifies the data packets as either malicious or legitimate packets [3]; (e) The DDoS attack exhausts the services and resources of the organization and individual by forwarding the useless traffic. Hence, legitimate users cannot access the services [9]; and (f) The DDoS detectors are situated in each host and their respective packet filters are disseminated through the virtual machines (VM) [9]. For the non-intrusive traffic, the network profile is generated by the detectors based on the network attributes of the selected statistics [9].
For most of the web applications (e.g. online auctions and online retail sales), security of the network is a major factor in the internet services [10]. Intrusion detection system (IDS) was noted as an effective method to detect DDoS attack and ensures the functional cloud services [1]. IDS detects the computer attacks by investigating the records, which are collected from the internet [10]. IDS was categorized into two types: (a) anomaly-based detection; and (b) signature or misuse based intrusion detection. Signature-based detection method uses the attacker signatures that are present in the knowledge database for identifying the attacks [3]. It is an effective technique to detect the known attacks [3]. On the other hand, anomaly-based method uses the behavioral pattern of the normal traffic with a period to compute whether the relevant patterns are deviated from the accepted behavior [3]. The anomaly detection potentially detects a few or zero-day attacks [3]. Anomaly detection specifies the deviations that are obtained from the regular patterns whereas the signature detection utilized the patterns, which are related to the attacks to detect the intrusions [10].
Intrusion detection (ID) in CC is considered as an NP-hard problem. Metaheuristic algorithms give the best solution to the NP-hard problems [10]. The IDS is classified based on the source data as follows: (a) Host based IDS (HIDS); (b) Network-based IDS (NIDS); and (c) Distributed IDS (DIDS). The host-based detection system detects the intrusion using the sensors in the single host, whereas the network-based detection system focuses on the network arrangement. DIDS integrates the sensors and classifies the IDS into mobile agent-based IDS and grid-based IDS [11], [12].
The primary focuse of this research is to develop an algorithm for detecting the DDoS attack in the cloud. We propose an effective fuzzy and taylor-elephant herd optimization (FT-EHO) inspired by deep belief network (DBN) classifier for detecting the DDoS attack. The working of the FT-EHO involves three modules: (a) feature extraction; (b) feature selection; and (c) classification. The working starts when the user request is sent to the packet feature extraction module to extract the packet features. The packet informations such as dest-bytes, duration, src-bytes, and so on are extracted and the selective features are obtained by applying the holoentrophy into the feature selector engine. Finally, selected features are further processed by the classification module. The classification module detects the DDoS attacks using a fuzzy and taylor-elephant herd optimization (FT-EHO) inspired by deep belief network (DBN) classifier. The proposed FT-EHO based DBN classifier is the integration of the DBN and fuzzy classifier. The rule learning approach based on the fuzzy classifier where the genetic algorithm (GA) in the adaptive genetic fuzzy system (AGFS) is the standard form. Moreover, the genetic algorithm has no guarantee for optimal solution and its one of state-of-the-art algorithms. Therefore, the genetic algorithm is replaced with the T-EHO algorithm, which is the integration of Taylor series and EHO algorithm. EHO is one of the ideal algorithms for finding a global optimization solution. EHO has been applied various optimization benchmark problems and real-life applications showing promising. Based on the extracted packet features, the proposed classifier based on a fuzzy and DBN classifier detects the DDoS attack by determining the node as an intruder or not.
The key contributions are elaborated as follows.

•We present a FT-EHO based DBN classifier for DDoS attack detection. Our approach utilized the merits of both fuzzy and DBN classified. In FT-EHO, we integrated Taylor series and elephant heard optimization (EHO) algorithm along with fuzzy classifier for rules learning. In the proposed system, the tradional genetic algorithm (GA) is replaced by EHO algorithm.•We systematically show how the packet features and packet information are extracted by the packet extraction module. The selective features are obtained by applying the holoentrophy into the feature selector engine.•A comprehensive discussion is presented on the rule learning approach based on the fuzzy classifier, where GA is replaced by Taylor series and EHO (T-EHO) algorithm.•Extensive computer simulations are conducted to evaluated the performance of the proposed FT-EHO based DBN classifier. Three standard benchmark databases, namely, KDD cup database [13], database 1 and database 2 are used during simulations. Four quality measures such as accuracy, detection accuracy, precision and recall are selected as a performance metrics.•Finally, the comparative results and analysis is presented. FT-EHO based DBN classifier is compared against the state-of-the-art methods. The result indicates that FT-EHO based DBN classifier outperforms other methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 elaborates related work; Section 3 discusses the proposed algorithm; Simulation model is presented in Section 4; Section 5 shows the conclusion of this research work.
