Coronaviruses, a family of viruses, cause infection and consequently illness ranging from the common cold to severe diseases like Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS). A novel coronavirus, COVID-19, is the infection caused by SARS-CoV-2. A study by World Health Organization (WHO) proves that COVID-19 virus like SARS cause open holes in lungs and appear like a honeycomb [1]. The first outbreak of Covid-19 was identified in Wuhan, Hubei, China, in December [2]. Within three months (On March 11, 2020) of the first outbreak, WHO declared the COVID-19 a pandemic [3]. By 09 April 2020, this virus affects more than 15.5 lakhs people and more than 90 thousand people lost their lives [4]. The report from Imperial College, London suggests that more than 90% percent of the world’s population could have been affected and could have killed 40.6 million people if no mitigation measures have been taken to combat the virus [5].
People suffering from COVID-19 have moderate respiratory illness that can be cured without any special treatment of antibiotics. However, people facing from medical complications like diabetes, chronic respiratory diseases, and cardiovascular diseases are more likely to suffer from this virus. According to the reports of WHO, common symptoms of COVID-19 are same as that of common flu, which include fever, tiredness, dry cough, and shortness of breath, aches, pains and sore throat [6]. These common symptoms make difficult to detect the virus at an early stage. As this is a virus, so there is no chance that it can be limited by anti-biotics, which works on bacterial or fungal infections.
The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and Rocky Mountain Laboratories (RML) have released some images of COVID-19 virus using scanning and transmission electron microscopy [7,8]. Fig. 1 shows the sample images of COVID-19 virus captured by NIAID and RML using different microscopes. Image in Fig. 1(a) shows the COVID-19 virus captured by scanning electron microscope from a US patient where virus particles are shown in yellow color and emerge from the cells that are shown in blue and pink color. Image shown in Fig. 1(b) is captured by the transmission electron microscope. This figure is clearly able to illustrate that COVID-19 virus looks similar form outside as most of the corona viruses including SARS and MERS, sharing the bump covered spherical surface.Download : Download high-res image (534KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. COVID-19 virus image captured by: (a) scanning electron microscope in false color; (b) transmission electron microscope.
1.1. ChallengesPrimarily, bacterial and viral pathogens are two leading causes of pneumonia. It was found in some patients that COVID-19 virus, like any other bacteria or virus, causes pneumonia. However, the treatment is different in all these cases. The initial screening/testing allows knowing whether an individual has pneumonia or not. Further diagnosis of pneumonia, that is whether the patient is carrying COVID-19 virus induced pneumonia/bacterial pneumonia or/a viral pneumonia different from COVID-19, is crucial to prevent the spread of virus. If an individual is found infected then according to the diagnosis some precautionary measures can be taken. Bacterial Pneumonia requires intensive antibiotic treatment while viral pneumonia is treated with intensive care. Precautionary measures in case of COVID-19 virus also include keeping the patient in quarantine for some days to reduce the possibility to infect others. It is also crucial to determine the spread of COVID-19 virus in various parts of the world and take appropriate measure to slow down the spread. Therefore, accurate and timely diagnosis of COVID-19 virus induced pneumonia poses the biggest challenge.The WHO approved method of testing corona virus are the reverse transmission polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method where the short sequences of DNA or RNA are analyzed and reproduced or amplified [9]. However, some people require more than one test to rule out the possibility of corona virus. The WHO guidelines of laboratory testing suggest that negative results do not rule out the possibility that the person is containing virus [10]. Limited availability of screening workstations and testing kits to detect COVID-19 creates tremendous burden to medical professionals and staffs to handle the situation. In this scenario, rapid and accurate detection of COVID-19 suspected cases is a great challenge for medical experts. Exponential increase of cases also arises the need of multiple testing to get the idea about true situation and in making appropriate decision accordingly.Early detection of COVID-19 suspected cases is also a challenge when it comes to public health security and control of pandemic. Any failure in detection of COVID-19 virus induced disease results in increase in mortality rate. The incubation period which means the time between catching the virus and beginning to have symptoms of the disease is 1–14 days. This makes it much more difficult to detect COVID-19 disease at a very early stage based on the symptoms shown by the individual.Despite the presence of many imaging modalities, chest radiography is considered to have high suboptimal sensitivity for important clinical findings [11,12]. X-ray imaging is frequently used modality by medical practitioners to diagnose pneumonia with the obvious fact that X-ray imaging system is an essential part of medical care worldwide. Easy availability of X-ray machines make it need of the time to use for detection COVID-19 cases in the absence of screening workbenches and kits. Also there may be certain cases when patients imaged for other reasons and their scans reveal finding potentially suggestive for COVID-19. The X-ray images, as shown in Fig. 2, are chest images taken in the interval of one year from a patient before and after COVID-19 infection [13]. The findings from X-ray images strongly suggests that even in the initial stages of COVID-19, the affect can be seen in lungs particularly in lower lobes and posterior segments, with peripheral and subpleural distribution. The lesions diffuse more and more as the time progresses. However, the biggest challenge encounter here is that the examination of each X-ray image and extraction of important findings take a lot of valuable time and presence of medical experts in the domain. Therefore, computer assistance is needed for medical practitioners to aid in detection of COVID-19 cases with X-ray images. In the current scenario when in each day lakhs of people are required to be check whether they contain deadly COVID-19 virus or not, an automatic, reliable and accurate computer-aided method is imperative to detect the presence of disease. Deep learning techniques in computer-aided methods contribute significantly in analyzing medical images in state-of-the-art manner and show excellent performances. Therefore, the present work proposes a deep learning based two-stage method to detect and classify pneumonia cases using X-ray images.Download : Download high-res image (665KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. X-ray images of lungs taken in year: (a) 2019; (b) 2020 from a 72-year-old woman suffering from COVID-19. Images show cough and respiratory distress. The yellow circle and ovoid indicate the typical subpleural peripheral opacities [13].
