Compressive sensing (CS) (Donoho, 2006, Cands, 2006, Meenu et al., 2018, Lv et al., 2016, Khedr, 2015) method has been proposed as a novel data reduction method for reducing the size of data transmitted through the IoT networks. According to CS method, the Base Station (BS) needs only M measurements, M⩾Klog(N/K), where M is the size of compressed samples, K is the sparsity level and N is the signal dimension, to recover the original signal x∈RN from only y∈RM measurements such that y=Φx and Φ is the CS matrix. On the other hand, the CS reconstruction process aims to recover N samples from only M measurements, where M≪N, which makes it an NP-hard problem (Xinpeng et al., 2014). The CS reconstruction problem can be expressed as follows:(1)minx‖x‖0s.t.y=Φx.
In Eq. (1), the CS reconstruction process aims to recover the sparsity level of the original signal x given the CS matrix Φ and the measurements vector y. A lot of algorithms have been proposed to address this problem such as convex relaxation and greedy algorithm. In convex relaxation algorithms, the problem in 1 is relaxed by replacing L0 to L1 (Davenport et al., 2010) as follows:(2)minx‖x‖1s.t.y=Φx,and then use convex problem solvers such as L1-magic toolbox (Venkataramani and Bresler, 1998) to solve the problem in Eq. (2). Although the convex optimization based reconstruction algorithms have the stability and the ability to reconstruct the full signal correctly, they suffer from highly complex computations that make them unsuitable for IoT network. On the other hand, Greedy algorithms present themselves as sufficient reconstruction algorithms. During the greedy algorithm reconstruction process, one or more CS matrix Φ’s columns are iteratively selected based on their correlation with the current residual. There are different greedy algorithms that can be used, such as OMP (Tropp and Gilbert, 2007) algorithm, in which one column is selected from Φ and then its orthogonality is removed from the current residual. This process is repeated until we obtain the estimated signal x′. Based on OMP algorithm, a lot of algorithms have been proposed such as ROMP (Donoho et al., 2012) and StOMP (Needell and Vershynin, 2009). In addition to this, algorithms such as CoSaMP (Needell and Tropp, 2009), SP (Wei and Olgica, 2009), IHT (Cevher and Jafarpour, 2010) and FBP (Burak and Erdogan, 2013), which use backward steps to prune the wrong elements that have been added during the forward step, also received significant attention. All of these algorithms are sufficient but cannot provide the optimal solution.
A lot of efforts have been done to enhance the reconstruction process at the BS side. Due to the high correlation between IoT’s nodes, these nodes’ data have high sparsity property. CS method utilizes this property to reduce the signal dimension from N to M such that M≪N. On the other hand, during the CS reconstruction process, it is required to reconstruct N from M which makes it NP-hard problem. In this paper, to improve the signal reconstruction process, we propose a new iterative greedy algorithm called Adaptive Iterative Forward-Backward Greedy Algorithm (AFB). AFB is considered as a reversible greedy algorithm that follows a reversible construction so that the support-set can be pruned (backward step) in order to remove the unreliable elements selected in the past (forward step).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the related works. In Section 3, we introduce our approach to carry out the proposed problem. In Section 4, we give an example scenario. The simulation of our approach is presented in Section 5. In Section 6, we conclude our work. Table 1 summarizes the notations used in this paper.Table 1. AFB Algorithm Notations.NotationDescriptionrKThe residue after the k’th iterationDApproximation setAEstimated setUCandidate setZLeast-squares approximation setLNumber of iterationsKSparsity LevelMCompressed samples sizeNSignal dimensionϕCS matrixηForward step size (ξ=M/2)υBackward step size (ρ=ξ-M/3)
