Biological research shows an unprecedented effort in sequencing and categorizing genomes produced by new-generation high-throughput DNA sequencing [1]. Bioinformatics has led to an explosive growth of the complexity, heterogeneity, volume, and geographic dispersion of the biological big data [2]. Considering the annual growth of the generated data, it would reach the 44 zettabytes in 2020 [3]. The integration of the latest breakthroughs in bioinformatics technology from one side and high-performance computing (HPC), high-throughput computing (HTC), data-driven science, scientific workflow management system (SWfMS) [4], and database management system (DBMS) [5], from another side, enables remarkable advances in the fields of healthcare, drug discovery, genome research, system biology, health informatics, and so on.
A science gateway (SG) [6] is defined as “a community- developed set of tools, applications, and data that are integrated through a Web-based portal or a suite of applications” [7]. SGs have gained increasing interest from the research community as they allow the access to wide-ranging supportive technologies that may include databases and data management tools, computational resources, security protocols, high-throughput instrumentation, diverse software applications, algorithms, data transfer protocols, share data and knowledge, and Web resources and services. SGs usually have five functional properties: usability, scalability, integration, automation and sharing, and reuse. SGs try to hide from the researchers the complexity of the underlying resources that are offered to conduct their experiments [8]. There are several global programs and initiatives focusing on the development and sustainability of SGs, including the US Science Gateways Community Institute1  (SGCI) to facilitate the development of ecosystem science gateways, European Commission2  (EC) funding programs for research and innovation for European user communities to create SGs, and Australian National eResearch Collaboration Tools and Resources3  (Nectar) to facilitate software infrastructure programs for the development of virtual laboratories. Moreover, several middleware have proliferated to support SG including Apache Airavata [9], CitSci.org [10], CyVerse (formerly iPlant Collaborative) [11], Galaxy Project [12], Globus Project,4  gUSE (Grid and Cloud User Support Environment) [13], HUBzero [14], Zooniverse,5  and MyExperiment [15]. Successful middleware implementations have been adapted for several SGs e.g. technologies behind the CIPRES6  gateway.
Latin American research institutions have a highly diverse and active bioinformatics community interested in applying technology for scientific collaboration and discovery. The Brazilian Bioinformatics Network (RNBio) aims at strengthening bioinformatics research projects in a multi-institutional format with the training of specialized human resources. RNBio has scientific collaborations with the Brazilian National System for High-Performance Computing7  (SINAPAD). SINAPAD offers specialized resources and technologies with HPC/HTC capabilities and customized security models and hosts several SGs in areas as physics, meteorology, chemistry, complex networks, mathematics, bioinformatics, and medicine [16].
SINAPAD’s grid computing environment [17] is based on the CSGrid8  technology. The CSGrid middleware offers two key entry points for user’s interaction with SGs; via desktop using Java clients or OpenBus services as jobs (OpenDreams) and files (HDataService). CSGrid supports the prototyping of gateways through the mc2toolset.9  mc2toolset is a RESTful Web service (APIs to develop gateways) responsible for building dynamic user interfaces based on settings defined by configuration files. mc2toolset provides additional features of file sharing and restricted anonymous access. Although the advantages of using CSGrid, developers/users require advanced computational knowledge of tools, frameworks, software, and filesystems to integrate their bioinformatics applications to specialized resources and services and HPC infrastructure.
Santos Dumont10  (SDumont) is the largest supercomputer in Latin America. It is managed by SINAPAD, as commissioned by the Brazilian Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovation, and Communication11  (MCTIC). SDumont is a hybrid architecture machine with regular CPU’s accelerators such as GPU’s and INTEL XEON PHI, and a large shared memory component. SDumont capabilities cover several computational requirements of high-demand applications and should further boost the research and Brazilian economy sectors, such as oil and gas, nanotechnology, aerospace, cybersecurity, bioinformatics biodiversity, data science, nanotechnology, and strategic sectors of societal relevance where HPC technologies play a key role.
The questions for planning and designing gateways are funded for specific scientific domains. Requirements for a bioinformatics SG by the Brazilian community was driven by requirements in research knowledge about implementing an extensible, scalable, easy-to-use, and sustainable SG. The design task and the layout for the proposed BioinfoPortal SG is a continuous and iterative process, we plan for continuous improvement processes. In a previous work [18], we introduced the BioinfoPortal12  SG which integrates bioinformatics applications (programs, data, pipelines) to the CSGrid/SINAPAD HPC infrastructure. Machine learning analyses were performed based on result executions and provenance data provided by BioinfoPortal that lead to optimizing the use of computational resources.
In the present article, we aim to address the features of designing, coupling and using the SG for bioinformatics, BioinfoPortal, as a multiuser platform in the Brazilian HPC infrastructure. BioinfoPortal uses the CSGrid middleware as a framework for the integration to the SINAPAD grid-based architecture and its parallel/distributed computational resources, transparently. We present the proposed processing system architecture of the current BioinfoPortal gateway, show example applications enabled by it, and explore research challenges in its implementation. Finally, we discuss the findings of performance and data analytics, the strengths, and limitations to increase efficient resource allocation for parallel applications.
The RAxML software [19] for phylogenomics is the HPC application used as a case study. Multithread and MPI versions of RAxML were used in performance and functional evaluations of BioinfoPortal. Machine learning techniques demonstrated the capability of optimizing the allocation/usage of computational resources of BioinfoPortal based on provenance data, parameters of RAxML, and efficiency of the RAxML executions. Regression models and decision trees provided the basis for planning of a promising learning module, which configures executions for optimizing computational resources. The BioinfoPortal gateway is supported by the team of RNBio, National Laboratory of Scientific Computing13  (LNCC), and SINAPAD. More relevant howto technical details, the multidisciplinary team that contributed to the implementation of BioinfoPortal, and the deployment of this gateway can be found freely available for academic use at https://bioinfo.lncc.br/.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes some of the most popular solutions for the development of SGs found in the literature. Section 3 presents the overall architecture of the proposed BioinfoPortal gateway, provides some background on the CSGrid middleware technology, which is needed for understanding the modus operandi and integration with the bioinformatics applications. It also describes some extensions that we have implemented in the BioinfoPortal gateway and how they were linked to the CSGrid middleware. Section 4 illustrates and discusses the functionality and use of BioinfoPortal currently on operation in the SINAPAD network. It also describes the experimental evaluation of the proposed BioinfoPortal gateway. Section 5 provides some concluding remarks as well as our perspectives for future works.
