Without much effort, humans are capable of recognizing objects irrespective of its scale and orientation. But to devise automated systems to emulate this capability is a Herculean task. The proposed systems attempt to devise a copy-move forgery detection system which is robust to various attacks such as rotation, scaling etc., by choosing a set of invariant features.
Unlike key-point based methods which is sparse, where the forgery detection operations are carried out only on a set of selected key-points, in the proposed method the operations are carried out for each pixel of the image to generate a dense offset field. Compared to key-point methods that only work with a few key-points dense field methods works on all pixels and hence it terms of processing time it is much slower than key-point methods. However, when compared to dense-field methods, the accuracy of key-point methods is somewhat poorer especially when the copy-move involves smooth regions and in case of occlusive forgeries. So, though, dense field methods are slower compared to key-point based methods, as it performs well in cases of occlusive forgeries dense field method is proposed in this work. Further to eliminate false matches, a post-processing scheme is employed in this work which fully exploits the smoothness of the patch- match offset field.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 gives an overview of the previous work on CHT based features and Patch matching. The proposed methodology is discussed in Section2 and experimental results are given in Section 3 Finally, Section 4 draws conclusions.
1.1. Previous workThis section gives a brief overview on the work done using CHT based features and patch matching to detect and localize copy-move forgeries.Using the Radon-Pseudo-Fourier Mellin Transforms (RPFMT), moments invariant to rotation and scaling was proposed for copy move forgery in [1]. The authors in [2] suggested an efficient technique for improving block matching by using polar representation of Fourier transform to obtain the representative features for each block.Fourier–Mellin transform with log-polar mapping and a color-based segmentation technique using K-means clustering, was employed in [3], to devise a CMFD system invariant to various attacks. Similar approach using FMT could be seen in [4] where the block wise FMT magnitude resampled into log polar coordinates projected along the radius direction into a one-dimensional vector is taken as features. As a slight variation to the approach in [4] instead of projecting along the radius direction, the authors in [5] experimented by projecting along angular direction. Both [4], [5] reported that their method was robust and invariant to various attacks.The authors in [6] used wavelet decomposition and Zernike moments to detect and that localize duplicated regions. Both Pseudo-Zernike Moment (PZM) and Zernike Moments (ZM) was employed in [7] and the results indicate that the PZM-based method outperforms ZM-based method both in terms of speed and accuracy. Quaternion polar complex exponential transformation was experimented for detecting CMF in [8].The research in [9], [10] introduces a randomized algorithm for identifying approximate nearest neighbour matches between patches of images quickly. In [11] the authors proposed a system based on patch-match enhanced by a dense field technique to automatically detect copy-move forgeries. In [12] a patch-match-based randomized search and efficient edge-aware image filtering is proposed for detecting copy-move forgery.
