Magnetorheological Fluids (or Magnetorheological Suspensions, MRSs) are suspensions of micron-sized magnetizable non-Brownian particles in a carrier fluid. Magnetorheological suspensions are actively used in damper engineering, instrument making, orthopedics, in safety devices to reduce traumatic impacts and in many other technologies. Overviews of works on physics of these fluids and their practical application can be found in Refs. [1], [2], [3], [4]. The strong dependence of the rheological properties of MRSs vs. magnetic field can be explained by the aggregation of the particles into linear chains, dense bulk and other anisotropic structures oriented along applied magnetic field. When these structures overlap the gap filled with a magnetorheological suspension and form “bridges” between the walls of the gap, the rheological state of the suspension changes from the liquid to a quasi-elastic one. This effect is used in many modern technologies, for example, in shock absorbers, clutches, magnetic field sensors, etc [5].
Theoretical models of MRSs quasi-elastic behavior are based on the concepts that the particles form either the linear chains or separate dense ellipsoidal columns (see Refs. [2], [4]). It should be noted that separate discrete aggregates were observed in computer simulations with low concentration of magnetic particles [6], [7]. However, experiments [8], [9], [10] demonstrate that more topologically complicated structures (labyrinths, tubes, etc.) can appear is these systems when the particles concentration is high enough. With high concentration of particles, these complicated structures were also observed in computer experiments [11].
There is no a way to describe theoretically aggregation in MRSs with non-small concentration of the particles without some a’ priori suggested simplifications. On the other hand, the systems with volume concentration of particles in the range 20–40% are the most interesting from the viewpoint of their practical applications. In this work we suggest a computer model of structural transformations in magnetorheological fluids with 30% of the particles volume concentration.
The computer simulations are based on numerical solution of a system of differential equations of the particles motion. Magnetic interaction of each particle with the all other ones is taken into account. Based on the results of the suspension structuring, the shear stress as a function of the sample shear deformation is calculated. The novelty of this work lies in the fact that when performing computer simulations, mutual magnetization of particles in MRSs is taken into account.
We consider a system of 1600 identical non-Brownian magnetizable spheres with diameter dp each. The particles are situated in a cylinder with boundaries impenetrable for the particles. The diameter of a cylinder D is much more than its length L. At the onset of the simulations, we suppose chaotic, the “hard spheres gas” spatial distribution of the particles.
To eliminate the particles overlapping, we “warm up” the system [12]. This means introduction of a repulsive force acting on the particles if the distance between them is less than their dp. Dimensionless repulsive force F∼Ri,j of interaction between the i-th and j-th particles is radial isotropic force:(1)F∼Ri,j=ri,jri,j,ifri,j≤dp0,ifri,j>dp,ri,j=rj-ri.
Here ri is the position of the i-th particle; ri,j is radius-vector between the centers of i-th and j-th particles.
Note that this dimensionless force does not have physical meaning; it is used for the simplest “warming up” of the system (eliminate the particles intersection). At the time step Δt = 0.01, the algorithm “warm up” the system runs in about 100 steps.
At the calculations we take into account the Stokes hydrodynamic forces acting on the particles in carrier fluid and ignore hydrodynamic interaction between the particles. The last simplification cannot lead to any physical mistakes, since only mechanically equilibrium structures are in focus of our attention here. Magnetic interaction between all particles in the system is taken into account. Since the periodic conditions are not used in our approach, there is no truncation of magnetic potential. Neglecting inertia, the equation of motion of the i-th particle is:(2)Fhi+∑j≠iFmi,j+Fsti,j=0,i,j=1,...,N.
Here N is total number particles in the system; Fhi is hydrodynamic force acting on the i-th particle; Fmi,j and Fsti,j are respectively forces of magnetic and sterical interaction between the i-th and j-th particles.
Ignoring the hydrodynamic interaction between the particles, the viscous force acting on the i-th particle can be calculated by using the Stokes formula:(3)Fhi=-3πdpηdridt.
Here η is viscosity of the carrier liquid; t is time. Approximation (3) means that the hydrodynamical mobility of the particle in the suspension is the same as the one of the single particle.
Substituting relation (3) into Eq. (2), we get the system of ordinary differential equations of the first order:(4)dridt=13πdpη∑j≠iFmi,j+Fsti,j,i,j=1,...,N.
We estimate the magnetic force Fmi,j based on the following considerations.
First, we take into account the mutual magnetization of the particles. Indeed, analysis [13] shows that the mutual magnetization of the particles significantly increases the force of magnetic interaction between them. Due to this effect, the particle magnetization M deviates from the applied field H.
Secondly, for mathematical simplicity, we propose the uniform magnetization M inside the particle. Note that this approach has been used successfully in [14] to estimate interaction between magnetizable particles.
Third, we suppose the linear law of the particle magnetization:(5)M=χHins.
Here χ is initial magnetic susceptibility of the particle material; H(ins) is magnetic field inside the particle.
By using the well-known relation [15] between magnetic field Hiins inside the magnetizable particle, its magnetization Mi and external magnetic field H, taking into account that the demagnetizing factor of a spherical particle is 1/3, after simple transformations one gets:(6)Hiins+Mi3=H+∑j≠iHi,jd,
where Hi,jd is the magnetic field generated by the j-th particle at the point where the i-th particle is located. In the simplest dipole approximation [16]:(7)Hi,jd=3ri,j∙Mjri,j-ri,j2Mj4πri,j5.
Here Vp=πdp3/6 is the particle volume, mi = MiVp is magnetic moment of the i-th particle, to be determined.
Substituting the dipole magnetic field Hi,jd into Eq. (6) and taking into account (5), we come to the system of linear algebraic equations for the magnetic moments mi:(8)83+χχdp3Mi+∑j≠iMjri,j3-3ri,j∙Mjri,jri,j5=4πH,i,j=1,...,N.
For a large number N of the particles, the most effective method of this system solution is the Gauss-Seidel method.
Having the system (8) solved, we can calculate the magnetic forces Fmi,j of interaction between the particles. In the framework of the model of the dipole–dipole interaction, the radial Fm,ri,j and tangential Fm,θi,j components of the magnetic force can be calculated as:(9)Fm,ri,j=3μ04πri,j5Mi∙Mj-3Mi∙ri,jMj∙ri,jri,j2ri,j,Fm,θi,j=3μ04πri,j5MiMj∙ri,j+MjMi∙ri,j-2ri,jMi∙ri,jMj∙ri,jri,j2.
The total magnetic force Fmi,j is the vector sum of the radial and tangential components:(10)Fmi,j=3μ04πri,j5ri,jMi∙Mj+MiMj∙ri,j+MjMi∙ri,j-5ri,jMi∙ri,jMj∙ri,jri,j2.
To estimate the sterical force Fsti,j we use the Weeks-Chandler-Andersen potential UWCA [17]:(11)UWCA=0,ifri,j>216dpεdpri,j12-dpri,j6+14,ifri,j≤216dp,Fsti,j=-∂UWCA∂ri,j=0,ifri,j>216dp6εdp6ri,jri,j82dpri,j6-1,ifri,j≤216dp
In the framework of the model of mutual magnetization of particles, ε = πμ0dp3H2/8 satisfies the condition of non-overlapping of the particles.
This system (4) can be solved numerically, for example, by using the Euler method. At the calculations below the time step has been chosen so that the particle displacement for a given step would not exceed dp/20.
The principal difference between structures in ferrofluids and magnetorheological fluids is that in the ferrofluids the particles, due to the Brownian motion, can achieve thermodynamically equilibrium disposition. In magnetorheological fluids the non-Brownian particles can be ‘‘frozen’’ in some local energetic minimums. One of these typical “frozen” states is illustrated in Fig. 1. In our computer simulations we observe not chains or individual bulk drops, but branched labyrinth-shaped structures. Qualitatively similar structures were also observed in laboratory experiments [8]. It is worth noting that the layers of particles at the cylinder walls are visible in the experiments.Download : Download high-res image (119KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Typical screenshots made using VMD (Visual molecular dynamics) of “frozen” particles under magnetic field after integration of equations of the particles motion. The magnetic field is directed along the axis of cylinder. Parameters of the system: volume concentration of the particles φ = 0.3; number of the particles in computer simulations N = 1600; dimensionless diameter of the cylinder D/dp = 26.1; dimensionless height of the cylinder L/dp = 5.22; magnetic susceptibility of the particles χ = 1000.
As can be seen in the Fig. 1, the magnetized particles are concentrated in the cylinder periphery. The reason of that is the repulsive magnetic force acting between the particles at their lateral disposition. Because of the impenetrable walls and repulsive force of cylinder, particles accumulate at the periphery.
After integration of equations of the particles motion, we get the “frozen” system in which anisotropic structures, consisting of the magnetized particles, percolate the cylindrical cell. We suppose that magnetic field is applied along the axis of the cylinder. We will study the elastic properties of this system at shear deformations, in the direction perpendicular to the applied magnetic field. To this end, we fix the particles that touch the upper and lower bases of the cylinder. All other particles remain free, and hydrodynamic, magnetic, steric forces still act on them.
We twist the upper base of a cylinder and keep the down base fixed. Note that the local shear depends on the coordinates of a point inside the cylinder. For definiteness, we will consider the shear γ on the cylindrical surface. This corresponds to the experimental imposing of the deformation.
Let us introduce the Cartesian coordinate system with the axis y aligned along the sample axis and axes x, z perpendicular to that. After this shear, the x and z coordinates of the particles fixed on the upper base of the cylinder will change:(12)Δxi=-ziγLD,Δzi=xiγLD.
The Eq. (12) is valid provided that the diameter of a cylinder D is much longer than its length L.
We integrate Eq. (4) of the particles motion so that all particles that don’t touch the upper base of the cylinder come to a new “frozen” state, corresponding to the macroscopical deformation of the “sample”.
In experiments, usually, the stress σ on the rim of the sample is detected. In order to calculate this stress, we select a ring on the upper base of the cylinder with the thickness δ, much less than sample radius D/2. By definition, stress σ is the ratio of tangential force acting on the ring to the ring area πDδ/2. Therefore, the stress σ on the disk rim can be written as:(13)σ=2πDδ∑i=1kziFx(up),i-xiFz(up),ixi2+zi2.
Here Fup,i is the sum of magnetic and steric forces acting on the i-th particle fixed to the selected ring from all particles that don’t touch the upper base of the cylinder; summation is over particle, which belong to the ring; k is is total number of the particles fixed to the selected ring.
For computer simulations, the software has been written for Linux operating system. The source code of the program was written in Fortran and compiled using gfortran. After executing the program, the required physical data has been calculated and the obtained results were written in the text file. Visualization of the obtained results has been carried out by reading data from this text file with their subsequent graphic processing. We used software VMD (Visual molecular dynamics) [18] to get the graphic visualizations.
The computer simulations were performed on a quad-core CPU (Central Processing Unit). On every thread of CPU, the dependence of the stress on the disk rim σ vs. shear on the disk rim γ was averaged over different random initial coordinates of the particles. Thread control was carried out by using the library Open MPI (Message Passing Interface) [19] for Fortran. The arithmetic mean stress obtained from the calculations of all threads is shown in Fig. 2.Download : Download high-res image (67KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The stress on the disk rim σ in the MR fluid vs. shear on the disk rim γ. Vector of the magnetic field H is perpendicular to shear. Parameters of the system the same as in Fig. 1. 1 – magnetic field H = 65 kA/m; 2 – H = 95 kA/m.
The computer results demonstrate the non-monotonic dependence of the stress vs. shear with a maximum at shear deformation of about 25%. The reason of this non-monotonous behavior is destruction of the internal structures at large enough γ, which causes decrease of the stress σ. The maximal value of the stress can be associated with the yield stress, corresponding to transition of the system from the elastic to flow regime of the suspension behavior. We have not calculated the stress at high shear values, since the decreasing dependence of the stress on shear corresponds to the mechanical instability which requires a special study.
Note that the nonmonotonic dependence of the stress vs. stationary shear in the MRSs was theoretically described in the work [20] on the basis of the model of dense discrete ellipsoidal aggregates in the MRS. Our results demonstrate that in the concentrated suspensions the labyrinth structures are expected rather than the ellipsoidal ones; for these structures the non-monotonic dependence of σ on γ is also expected.
It is well known (see for instance [21]) that the simplest approximation of the uniform magnetization inside the particle and its linear dependence on the applied field corresponds to the relatively weak fields. In order to investigate the effects of saturation of the magnetization of particles, discussed in [21], we have considered the opposite limiting case of very strong magnetic field, when magnetization of the particles is fully saturated. The dependence of the saturated stress σs vs. the shear strain γ is shown in Fig. 3.Download : Download high-res image (68KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Limiting case of very strong magnetic field. The saturated stress on the disk rim σs in the MR fluid vs. shear on the disk rim γ. Parameters of the system the same as in Fig. 1.
In conclusion, a computer model of structural transformations in concentrated magnetorheological suspensions is proposed. Based on this model, the computer calculations of shear elastic properties of concentrated magnetorheological fluid are performed. The dependence of the shear stress vs. shear deformation displays a non-monotonic dependence with a maximum at shear deformation of about 25%. This maximum is explained by the destruction of the internal structure at large deformations of the sample.
This computer model can be considered as a starting point for the further study of more complicated magnetic soft matter systems (for example ferrogels and elastomers), as well as the practically important range of the intermediate magnetic fields.
