Digital natives' straightforward access and intense use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) in the present day led to unfounded beliefs regarding their multitasking ability (Thompson, 2013). Such beliefs are sometimes accompanied with contemporary arguments where multitasking is considered as a social norm or a required ability of the current workforce (Courage, Bakhtiar, Fitzpatrick, Kenny, & Brandeau, 2015; Logie, Trawley, & Lay, 2011; Sanderson, Bruk-Lee, Viswesvaran, Gutierrez, & Kantrowitz, 2013). Such arguments lead to a series of scholarly work, which involved multitasking performances of digital natives through addressing several social and psychological constructs. On the other hand, recent empirical work led researchers to reject the hypotheses embracing digital natives’ multitasking advantages (Kirschner & De Bruyckere, 2017). That is, the human cognitive architecture may not be suited for effective multitasking (Hembrooke & Gay, 2003; Pashler, 1994) and multitasking may result in poorer performance or productivity (Courage et al., 2015; Gardner, 2008).
The recent proliferation and penetration of digital technologies into educational settings brought about new issues in terms of instructional implications as well. Students are using emerging technologies for non-educational purposes during school and study hours, which brings multitasking into the current educational research agenda (Calderwood, Ackerman, & Conklin, 2014; Ettinger & Cohen, 2020; Hall, Lineweaver, Hogan, & O'Brien, 2020; Hembrooke & Gay, 2003; Sana, Weston, & Cepeda, 2013). Listening to music, visiting social media profiles, texting, or switching back and forth between videos and textbooks while studying are examples of multitasking within educational settings. The prevalence of these phenomena among contemporary learners urges educational researchers to investigate the instructional implications of the so-called multitasking myth, which is considered an urban legend in education (Kirschner & van Merriënboer, 2013).
Despite the empirical work documenting that multitasking could be associated with negative learning outcomes (Hall et al., 2020; Jamet, Gonthier, Cojean, Colliot, & Erhel, 2020; Wammes et al., 2019) media multitasking is still a frequent habit among young adults. College students underestimate their smartphone dependency and use their phones for about a quarter (Kim et al., 2019), or nearly two-thirds of an effective class duration (Ragan, Jennings, Massey, & Doolittle, 2014). Accordingly, even students themselves accept that interruptions or mind wandering during lectures is detrimental to their performance (Was, Hollis, & Dunlosky, 2019). However, social expectancies (Lee, Lin, & Robertson, 2012) and personal beliefs about the perceived multitasking ability (Downs, Tran, McMenemy, & Abegaze, 2015) remain active. In this regard, we focused on frequent media multitasking behaviors observed among the young people today and investigated the impact of task characteristics on learning outcomes.
