Since the early days of the Internet, different services have been provided to serve a variety of users. Service providers aim to allocate these services and resources for the benefit of target users (Vikram et al., 2011). They soon encountered the problem of automated scripts (BOTs) and malicious programs that were accessing these services and distributing malicious information, wasting resources, and degrading system performance (Ponec, 2006). One user authentication approach to prevent automated scripts is the completely automated public Turing test to tell computers and humans apart (CAPTCHA) (Fidas et al., 2011). CAPTCHAs have been introduced to prevent automated scripts from launching attacks by introducing a simple test that is easy to solve by a human user but poses a challenge to automated scripts (Yan and El Ahmad, 2011). Therefore, the security of CAPTCHAs has to be guaranteed to ensure the protection of systems and services.
Two early CAPTCHA methods are text-based and audio CAPTCHA. They present a user with distorted text and audio, respectively, and the user must be able to recognize the actual words. Optical character recognition (OCR) and automatic speech recognition (ASR) have since managed to breach the security of these CAPTCHAs (Snyder et al., 2010). In text-based CAPTCHAs, the image containing the letters or digits is captured and OCR software is used to recognize them. ASR breaks audio CAPTCHAs by extracting voice features and recognizing letters or digits accordingly (Shirali-Shahreza, Shirali-Shahreza, 2008, Yan, Yu, 2009).
Image-based CAPTCHAs are among the most effective solution to the limitations faced by aforementioned security methods (Yamamoto et al., 2010). It presents image-based cognitive challenges to determine whether a user is human or a malicious program. These challenges rely on the fact that recognizing objects and describing images are natural cognitive processes in humans but too complex for computers (Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2015). Because of the importance of image-based CAPTCHAs in securing websites and services, challenges to their security posed by advances in machine learning algorithms need to be further investigated.
This paper investigates the strength of image-based CAPTCHA by proposing an automated breaking system. The breaking system recognizes images displayed by CAPTCHA challenges and makes an automatic, knowledgeable attempt via machine learning algorithms to choose the appropriate answers.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents some general background information about CAPTCHAs and semantic similarity. Section 3 reviews the literature on different types of CAPTCHAs as well as machine learning attacks on image-based CAPTCHAs. Section 4 explains the methodology used to attack the selected image-based CAPTCHA, and Section 5 details an experiment on a dataset, the results obtained, and the metrics used to assess the results. Section 6 contains the conclusions of this study and directions for future research.
