A data model set of logical definitions and rules for representing geographic data has been adopted to represent the spatial information and its attributes. The data model represents the real-world domain of geographic data. These features are the connection between the representatives of computer and GIS. As a result, the data model not only helps you organize the geographic features of the real world as a systematic storage/retrieval mechanism, it will help you get the perception of users of these functions.
The term data model can be two different references that are made to the concept of closely related. Sometimes it refers to the abstract formulation of the relationship with the objects found in a particular application domain. For example, customers, products, and manufacturing organizations to find orders. At other times, it refers to the set of concepts used in this formalism. For example, such entities, attributes, concepts such as relationship or table. Therefore, it can be defined using the “data model” entity-relationship “data model” of banking applications. Two terms are used in this article.
Fig. 1 data model, apparently to determine the structure of the data. The data model, usually, experts of data, have been specified in the digital liberal champion in the data administrator, or data modeling notation. These symbols, usually, have been expressed in the form of graphics. From time to time, the data model, especially in the programming language context, can be referred to as a data structure. The data model, usually, in particular, the case of the enterprise model, will be complemented by a functional model. The problem-based learning method is to create an environment in which the learner can search for information independently. To avoid this problem, it is possible to provide an exciting solution for creating a strategy to resolve training you. Current work, which named the project entity, is that students (usually digital natives) are in peace and build a simulator to resolve the actual engineering scenarios to face to build a virtual learning environment platform in the city aims. Aiming to urban platform high school education, they can solve the various problems that have been raised in a close relationship, at the same time students and students of higher education in.Download : Download high-res image (225KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Block diagram of data modeling.
1.2. Data modeling for GISSuppose there is a geographic data, input to the user's computer, most of the geographic information system. In that case, he is a phenomenological data structure that has been accustomed to using, be the peace of mind can you because to accept can. However, a computer, and not configured like a human heart, must be programmed to represent the appropriate phenomenon's structure. Also, the geographic data the method visualized by the user is not frequently, is the most effective way to build a database on the computer. Finally, the data is written, must need to be addressed in a particular manner and stored in the magnetic device. The geographic information system provides a way to represent spatial data that allows the user to employ the three kinds of the same conceptual model described above. There are two broad categories of a spatial data model. These are the vector data model and the raster data model.
