The fourth Sustainable Development Goal (SDG-4) adopted by the United Nations focuses on ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting life-long learning opportunities. Though recent trends in primary education show near universal enrolment rates across the world, these achievements in enrolment have not been followed by commensurate improvements in learning outcomes.1,2 Many policy initiatives have been undertaken to improve learning outcomes such as improving pupil-teacher ratios, training teachers, and providing additional physical infrastructure to schools (UNESCO, 2015).3 Many of these policies have high reliance on technology. Several multilateral agencies have been aggressively advocating the use of ICT in school education in order to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education for all (Asian Development Bank, 2010, UNESCO, 2016, World Education Forum – UNESCO, 2015, World Bank, 2016). However, available evidence on the impact of such technologies has been inconclusive (Bulman and Fairlie, 2016, Cuban and Kirkpatrick, 1998).
Technology interventions to improve learning outcomes also face issues of implementation and scaling up. Most technology interventions require a student-to-computer ratio much lower than those currently available in many developing countries (Banerjee et al., 2007, Barrow et al., 2009, Campuzano et al., 2009, Carrillo et al., 2011, Morgan and Ritter, 2002, Suhr et al., 2010). Also, most of these interventions require a change in pedagogy and classroom practices which need large-scale retraining of teachers.4 These factors increase the cost of interventions and make them difficult to implement on a large scale in developing countries. Research has so far not addressed the issues of implementation and scalability of technologies used in schools to improve learning outcomes. Our paper is one of the first to analyse a large-scale intervention design to deal with concerns of implementation and scalability; and thereby making access to quality education more equitable and inclusive.
We conducted a large-scale experiment in 1823 schools across 18 districts in the state of Karnataka, India. As part of the intervention, trained teachers conducted lectures using multimedia teaching aids in a studio at a central location in the state. These lectures were transmitted live to schools via satellite as per a pre-decided schedule. The transmitted lectures replaced one-third of in-school instructional time for English grammar, Mathematics, and Science for students from grades 5 to 10 in rural public schools. The lectures covered the standard syllabus prescribed for all schools in the state by the State Department of Education. The randomisation design identified 1000 schools for Treatment and another set of 823 schools for Control with randomisation done at the subdistrict (Taluk) level. The intervention was expected to improve learning outcomes of the students by use of technology to (a) ensure regularity and quality of teaching inputs in the context of large-scale shortage of teachers and teacher absenteeism, and (b) enhance the learning experience for students by use of multimedia and animation and thus improve learning outcomes.
The evaluation of the intervention in this paper is based on a sub-sample of 143 schools randomly selected from the larger sample of 1823 schools (1000 Treatment and 823 Control). The details of the selection process followed for the larger sample of 1823 schools and the sub-sample of 143 schools are provided in Section 3.3.1. The intervention began in November 2014 and continued throughout the academic year of 2015–16.5 We evaluate the impact of the intervention on students of grades 8 to 10 using scores from Pre-test and Post-test conducted at the beginning and end of the academic year 2015–16, respectively.6 Separate tests were conducted for English Grammar, Mathematics, and Science based on the curriculum prescribed by the state authority for all grades. For each grade, the Pre-test was conducted based on the syllabus prescribed for the previous grade, and the Post-test was based on the grade appropriate syllabus covered in the intervention. At the end of the year, test scores showed an improvement of between 0.1σ and 0.18σ across different grade-subject combinations. The impact was highest in Science, followed by English and Mathematics. The results remain robust even after adjusting for attrition.
While the intervention used multimedia tools for teaching, the required student-to-computer ratio, pedagogical adjustments and prior training requirements for the school teachers were kept at a minimum, thus minimising costs. The intervention required one computer per school, which for schools in the state, translates to a student-to-computer ratio of 135:1.7 This is similar to the actual student-to-computer ratio in most developing countries that ranges between 50 and 170 (WSIS, 2014). The Government of Karnataka incurs an estimated cost of USD 240 per student per year on education in government-owned and government-aided schools (Karnataka Jnana Aayoga, 2016). This includes expenses towards physical and academic infrastructure and administrative machinery. Among the three subjects that were covered in the experiment, the increase in test scores in the Treatment group was an average 0.12σ more than the increase in the Control group. This was achieved with an additional cost of USD 16.7 per student per year. The intervention design, therefore, offers a way to get substantially higher returns in terms of learning outcomes by making an additional expenditure of about 7% per student per year. This, along with a high student-to-computer ratio and minimal teacher re-training requirements, makes the programme cost-effective and easy to scale-up. Most studies have found no significant impact of large-scale interventions, especially in the case of in-school programmes implemented by government agencies. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first paper to find significant positive results in a large-scale in-school experiment, with a design that is cost-effective and easy to scale up. The intervention thus offers a possible solution to attain equitable and inclusive quality education.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 reviews literature on the use of technology in school education and tries to differentiate our intervention from those conducted in the field so far. Section 3 provides the context in which the intervention was carried out, the details of the intervention design, and the data used. Section 4 describes the estimation methodology. Results and some possible mechanisms driving the results are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 discusses the cost-effectiveness of the intervention and addresses some other pedagogical concerns arising out of the intervention design. Section 7 concludes the paper.
