The completely automated public turing test to tell computers and humans apart (CAPTCHA) is first proposed by von Ahn, Blum and Langford to distinguish people from computer programs on the Internet [1]. Some example images of CAPTCHAs are shown in Fig. 1. In general, the characters in the images are presented with distortion, rotation and deformation. Moreover, the background of the images is noisy, which makes recognition of the characters fairly difficult for machines.
The research on CAPTCHA recognition is not to attack the security of the websites. It is to test the CAPTCHA recognition capability of state-of-the-art techniques and promote high level design of CAPTCHAs. Hence, it is a crucial web security issue. Although CAPTCHAs have been widely used to protect the websites, rare study has explored the automatic recognition problem of CAPTCHAs.Download : Download high-res image (144KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Four example images of CAPTCHAs.
In literature, CAPTCHA recognition technology was first established based on optical character recognition (OCR) [2]. Nevertheless, there are many challenges for traditional OCR techniques regarding the detection and recognition of text in CAPTCHAs. In recent years, due to the rapid development of machine learning, several machine learning algorithms are adopted for CAPTCHA recognition. Many existing approaches generally include two steps: segmentation and recognization. However, it is difficult for those approaches to segment connected numbers and letters, resulting in low recognition rate. To tackle this issue, Goodfellow et al. proposed a unified approach that integrates segmentation and recognization steps via the use of a deep convolutional neural network [3]. In addition, Lin et al. argued that CNNs could achieve state-of-the-art CAPTCHA recognition performance [4]. Currently, most existing CAPTCHA recognition algorithms are based on CNNs. However, these models have not considered the sequential information of the characters/image features in CAPTCHAs.
To address the above problem, we propose a deep learning model called neural CAPTCHA networks (NCNs) for CAPTCHA recognition. Unlike previous approaches, we consider eachCAPTCHA as a sequence of characters/image features. Especially, NCNs employ the convolutional structure to effectively extract image features, and the bidirectional recurrent modules to learn the sequential information in CAPTCHAs. In our work, we have applied NCNs to recognize text-based CAPTCHAs, including arithmetic operation, character recognition and character matching CAPTCHAs, and puzzle-based CAPTCHAs. We utilize the connectionist temporal classification (CTC) loss to train NCNs for arithmetic operation, character recognition and puzzle-basedCAPTCHAs recognition problems, and the contrastive loss for the character matching CAPTCHAs recognition problem. Experimental results on the above challenging CAPTCHAs demonstrate the superiority of NCNs over related state-of-the-art approaches.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:

•We propose a new CAPTCHA recognition model called neural CAPTCHA networks (NCNs).•NCNs model the characters/image features in CAPTCHAs as spatial sequences, employing bidirectional recurrent modules to learn the sequential information in CAPTCHAs.•With NCNs, text-based CAPTCHAs, including arithmetic operation, character recognition and character matchingCAPTCHAs, and puzzle-based CAPTCHAs, are tackled. Extensive experiments are conducted to show the advantages of NCNs.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review CNNs, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and CAPTCHA recognition technologies. In Section 3, we introduce text-based and puzzle-based CAPTCHAs that are tackled in this work. In Section 4, we present the proposed NCNs in detail. In Section 5, we report the experimental results, with comparisons to related approaches. In Section 6, we conclude this paper with remarks and future work.
