The widespread use of driverless vehicles can yield multiple benefits to society, including drastically reducing the number of accidents on the road (Benleulmi & Blecker, 2017). Road traffic injuries are a leading cause of death globally, and the number of deaths caused by road traffic injuries continue to rise every year (World Health Organisation, 2015). Human errors account for 94% of road traffic accidents (Singh, 2015). Driverless cars eliminate the element of human error, including recognition, decision, and performance errors, thus potentially lowering the number of road traffic accidents significantly (Singh, 2015). Furthermore, driverless cars can reduce road congestion, improve time and fuel efficiency, and make commuting a more enjoyable experience overall (Howard and Dai, 2014, König and Neumayr, 2017, Lipson and Kurman, 2016).
Nonetheless, driverless cars bring about certain risks. While the widespread use of driverless cars can increase road safety, scholars have contended that driverless cars are unable to predict human behavior and may cause an increase in traffic accidents when used alongside human-driven vehicles on the roads (Nyholm and Smids, 2018, Rasouli et al., 2017). There may also be privacy issues as driverless cars can store users’ data even when the cars may not be secure from hackers (König and Neumayr, 2017, Lipson and Kurman, 2016). Besides, driverless cars may bring about social and economic consequences by displacing millions of drivers from their jobs (Lipson and Kurman, 2016, Thierer and Hagemann, 2015).
Many vehicles already incorporate some autonomous elements in the form of computer-operated safety functions that perform independently of drivers (Thierer & Hagemann, 2015). The Society of Automotive Engineers (2018) categorized driverless technologies into five automation levels, with increasing degrees of automation. The first three levels still require drivers to have a degree of control over the car. This study is concerned with vehicles that are level four and above, where little to no driver intervention is required to operate the vehicle.
As with other emerging technologies, public support is critical for the success of driverless cars (Nees, 2016, Panagiotopoulos and Dimitrakopoulos, 2018). Hence, it is timely to examine public opinion of driverless cars and the motivations to use driverless cars. This study employs the cognitive miser model and the science literacy model to investigate the motivations behind public willingness to use driverless cars. These models have been useful in explaining public acceptance of other emerging technologies, such as nanotechnology, agricultural biotechnology, and stem cell research (e.g., Brossard and Nisbet, 2006, Ho et al., 2008, Ho et al., 2010, Liang et al., 2015). This study further examines the mediating roles of risk and benefit perceptions on the relationship between affect and willingness to use driverless cars. The findings of this study can potentially guide policy implementations and communication strategies.
1.1. Driverless cars in SingaporeSingapore is one of the most prepared countries to integrate driverless cars into society. According to a study that examined countries’ readiness for driverless cars by comparing consumer acceptance, policies and legislations, infrastructure, and technology and innovation, Singapore came in second among 25 countries in terms of overall readiness for driverless cars (KPMG, 2019).The Singapore government has been actively incorporating driverless cars into the country’s transport plans. The Smart Nation plan1 features the use of driverless vehicles to resolve Singapore’s transportation problems (Smart Nation Singapore, n.d.). The Singapore Autonomous Vehicle Initiative was set up in 2014 to oversee the development and facilitate the testing of driverless vehicles in Singapore (Land Transport Authority, 2018). In 2017, the Ministry of Transport introduced a set of legislation in preparation for the widespread use of driverless vehicles. Starting from 2022, three areas in Singapore will be ready to incorporate driverless vehicles as a daily commuting option (Lim, 2017). Additionally, autonomous ride-sharing services hold great promise in Singapore as it is the most expensive city to own and use a car (Batarags, 2019).Despite the imminent introduction of driverless cars in Singapore, there is a lack of understanding about the state of public acceptance of driverless cars in the city-state. Studies on public perception of driverless cars have been conducted in Western nations, such as the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands (e.g., Bansal et al., 2016, Blythe and Curtis, 2004, Howard and Dai, 2014, Kyriakidis et al., 2015). However, none of such studies have been based in Asian nations. When forming judgments about driverless cars, different motivations may be activated by individuals from nations with varying values and cultures. This study thus establishes a timely foundation for understanding public support for driverless cars in Singapore.
1.2. Willingness to use driverless carsAcceptance of a technology exists in varying degrees. Adell, Várhelyi, and Nilsson (2014) classified acceptance into five categories. The first degree encompasses a general, heuristic acceptance of a technology. The second degree considers whether individuals’ needs are satisfied through the technology, referring to the perceived usefulness of the technology. The third degree requires affective evaluations of the technology in addition to objective evaluations of the technology’s usefulness. The fourth degree considers users’ willingness to engage with the technology, in addition to holistic evaluations of the technology. The fifth and highest degree of acceptance refers to actual use of the technology.This study examines consumers’ willingness to use driverless cars (i.e., the fourth degree of acceptance). It is difficult to measure the current use of driverless cars in Singapore, as this technology is not yet widely available to the public. Willingness to use serves as an indicator of future actual usage of driverless cars (Ajzen, 1985).
