Lung cancer has become a growing threat to human life at present in the world. The number of deaths caused due to lung cancer is increasing [1]. Early detection and classification of pulmonary nodules is crucial for early-stage lung cancer diagnosis. Here, pulmonary nodules classification is to judge whether a candidate nodule is benign or malignant. However, due to the large size of computed tomography (CT) images, it is time-consuming for doctors to diagnose. Therefore, great efforts have been made to develop automated pulmonary nodules classification algorithms. Such algorithms can be embedded into computer aided Diagnoses (CAD) systems that can aid/enhance radiologist workflow.
Traditionally, researchers explore hand-crafted features and use a classifier to predict the category of a nodule [2], [3], [4]. Nowadays, deep learning techniques, especially Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved great success in various high-level visual understanding tasks [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10].
Researchers are thus inspired to employ CNNs for pulmonary nodule classification. In the begining, a CT image is treated individually, and 2D CNNs are employed. Recent works show that using 3D CNNs leads to slightly improved performance. Most recently, Zhu et al. [11] employ dual path networks (DPNs) for pulmonary nodule classification and achieve previous state-of-the-art performance.
Despite the substantial progress achieved by existing methods, several challenges remain. The first key challenge is lacking fine-grained representation of nodules, which limits the pulmonary classification accuracy. To tackle this challenge, in this work, we propose a contextual attention mechanism. Our motivation is that representations for nodules of the same category might be complementary to each other. Contextual attention models correlations between distinct regions intra a CT image and inter adjacent CT images, and learns the representation at each location by attending to representations across the whole 3D cube [12], [13]. The contextual attention mechanism thus improves the representation ability.
The second challenge is the interpretability of the reasoning procedure. To tackle this challenge, we employ a spatial attention mechanism to automatically locate the regions essential for nodule classification. This is motivated by the fact that nodules do not express uniformly across the whole 3D CT cube. In order to predict nodule category, instead of the entire spatial domain, we should focus on regions which indicate whether a nodule is benign or malignant. To this end, we employ a spatial attention learning mechanism to automatically measure contributions of different regions for nodule classification.
The third challenge is the trade-off between the true-positive rate (TPR) and the false-positive rate (FPR). Here, we employ an ensemble of different model variants to boost the prediction robustness. This is inspired by the success of ensemble learning [14] and multi-view learning [15], [16] in various tasks. Different models might work well for different instances. We thus build several model variants based on 3D Dual Path Networks (DPNs) [11] and the proposed attention mechanisms, and fuse their predictions to get a final classification label.
We conduct experiments on the LIDC-IDRI dataset. Experimental results show that both our contextual attention and spatial attention mechanisms significantly improve the classification accuracy and interpretability. Our ensemble strategy further balance TPR and FPR. In general, our framework significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
•we propose a contextual attention mechanism to model the contextual correlations among adjacent locations, which improves the representation ability;•we use a spatial attention mechanism to automatically locate the regions essential for nodule classification, which improves both the classification accuracy and interpretability;•we propose an ensemble strategy to boost the robustness of the model; and•Our method shows the best trade-off between sensitivity and false-positive rate and outperforms previous state-of-the-art on the benchmark dataset.
The following part of this paper is organized as below. Section 2 introduces previous related works. Section 3 details the proposed framework. Section 4 presents the experimental results. Section 5 concludes this work.
