During the last decade, there has been a revival of interest in the reading of printed versus digital texts, with a focus on potential differences in processing and comprehension. Regarding comprehension, a series of recent reviews has indicated that reading medium affects comprehension, with reading in print leading to better comprehension performance than reading digitally (Clinton, 2019, Delgado et al., 2018, Kong et al., 2018, Singer and Alexander, 2017b). Delgado et al. (2018) included 16 within-participants and 38 between-participants studies in their meta-analysis, with all studies comparing the comprehension of texts that differed only with regard to the reading medium. These authors found an advantage for printed texts that corresponded to a Hedge’s g of 0.21. Two other recent meta-analyses (Clinton, 2019, Kong et al., 2018) obtained similar effect sizes in the favor of printed texts. The meta-analysis conducted by Delgado et al. (2018) also documented that the advantage of reading in print was greater when the reading time was restricted, when people read informational texts, and when the studies were presented or published more recently (i.e., since 2000).
Regarding processing, readers have been found to invest less time in reading digital compared with printed texts, as well as to be less accurate in their judgments of their actual level of comprehension in the former reading context (Singer and Alexander, 2017a, Singer Trakhman et al., 2019; Ackerman and Goldsmith, 2011, Lauterman and Ackerman, 2014). The relationship between reading time and calibration may well be bidirectional. On the one hand, faster, less careful reading of digital texts may increase the tendency to overestimate actual comprehension performance (Singer Trakhman et al., 2019); on the other hand, readers may read digital texts faster than printed texts because they overestimate their comprehension of the former and therefore do not see any need to spend time regulating their text processing (Ackerman and Goldsmith, 2011, Lauterman and Ackerman, 2014).
Both shorter reading times and poorer calibration for digital than for printed texts are consistent with the shallowing hypothesis (Annisette & Lafreniere, 2017) used to explain the comprehension advantages of printed texts. The foundation of this hypothesis was eloquently described by Carr (2011) in this way:
… when we go online, we enter an environment that promotes cursory reading, hurried and distracted thinking, and superficial learning. It’s possible to think deeply while surfing the Net, just as it’s possible to think shallowly while reading a book, but that’s not the type of thinking the technology encourages and rewards (p. 116).
In other words, the shallowing hypothesis is built on the premise that people’s use of digital media, including the Internet, typically involves quick interactions driven by immediate rewards. Over time, such interactions may establish a habit of mind that leads people to process digital texts more shallowly and superficially than printed texts. More generally, this habit of mind may constrain performance of more challenging tasks requiring sustained attention, of which text comprehension is only one example (Annisette & Lafreniere, 2017; see also, Delgado et al., 2018, Latini et al., 2019).
Thus far, however, direct evidence for the shallowing hypothesis is essentially lacking. The aim of the current study was to provide such evidence by using eye tracking to measure students’ processing while reading digital and printed information, respectively, also examining the extent to which the effect of reading medium on comprehension performance was mediated by students’ processing during reading as evidenced by their eye movements. Because students more often than not learn from multimedia involving various external representations, we focused on their integrative processing of textual and graphic information and the relationship between such processing and achieving an integrated understanding of the topic in question: The physiology of human sexuality. Hopefully, the current extension of research on the effects of reading medium to the processing and comprehension of textual and graphic information may enrich research on reading medium as well as on multimedia learning, broadening the research agenda in both areas and providing new insights into the challenges facing “the modern reader” (Magliano, McCrudden, Rouet, & Sabatini, 2018).
Before we further delineate the unique aspects of the current research and the specific hypotheses that guided our work, we briefly discuss relevant theory concerning the processing of and learning from multimedia content and review prior research on integrative processing and comprehension of textual and graphic information using eye tracking technology. Because we also explored whether instructional prompts might moderate the effects of reading medium on the processing and comprehension of textual and graphic information, a brief discussion of this approach is also included in our background analysis.
1.1. Multimedia learning: relevant theory and prior research1.1.1. Cognitive theory of multimedia learningSeveral theoretical frameworks are relevant to understanding learning with and from multimedia, for example, the integrated model of text and picture comprehension by Schnotz, 2014, Schnotz and Bannert, 2003) and the design, functions, and tasks framework for learning with multiple representations by Ainsworth, 2006, Ainsworth, 2014. Still, Mayer, 2005, Mayer, 2014 cognitive theory of multimedia learning is arguably the most influential model for explaining the role of integration in multimedia learning and comprehension. According to this model, words, including spoken and written words, and pictures, including static graphics (e.g., photos and diagrams) and dynamic graphics (e.g., animations and videos), are actively processed in separate information processing channels of limited capacity. This processing involves building a coherent mental representation based on verbal information and a coherent mental representation based on pictorial information in working memory, and then integrating these separate verbally based and pictorially based representations with each other and with relevant prior knowledge activated from long-term memory. According to Mayer (2014), the most crucial step in meaningful learning from multimedia may be the creation of an integrated representation in which corresponding or relevant parts of the verbal and pictorial representations are mapped onto each other. The cognitive processing resulting in an integrated mental representation is termed “generative” because it is aimed at generating new understanding based on the presented multimedia materials.The multimedia principle refers to the assumption that people learn more effectively and deeply with words and pictures than with words or pictures alone (Butcher, 2014). However, the applicability of this basic principle is dependent on several other principles of multimedia learning, including the coherence principle stating that unnecessary information should be removed, the spatial and temporal contiguity principles stating that words (written or spoken) and pictorial information should be presented spatially and temporally near each other, the redundancy principle stating that written text should not be added to spoken text, and the signaling principle stating that essential materials should be highlighted (Mayer, 2019). According to Mayer (2003), there is evidence to suggest that such principles of multimedia learning, including the basic multimedia principle, hold regardless of whether the multimedia content is presented in print (i.e., as written words and static graphics) or digitally (i.e., as spoken words and animations). It is still an important unanswered question, however, whether the medium (i.e., print vs. digital) may affect the generative, integrative processing of multimedia information and, thereby, the construction of a mental representation that integrates verbal and pictorial content.1.1.2. Eye tracking research on integrative processing and learning in a multimedia contextMayer’s cognitive theory of multimedia learning highlights the need for online measurement of processing, with eye tracking representing a promising methodology in this regard (Mayer, 2019). Based on the assumption that information being visually attended to (fixated) is simultaneously being cognitively processed (Just & Carpenter, 1980), eye tracking may provide quantitative and objective information about learners’ efforts to relate or link elements of the learning materials, including textual and pictorial elements, during multimedia learning (Hyönä, 2010, Hyönä et al., 2003). In other words, the switching of attention between elements of different external representations (e.g., text and pictures) can be taken as evidence for integrative processing of these elements (Hyönä, 2010).Mason and her colleagues have been at the forefront of eye tracking research on integrative processing during multimedia learning (e.g., Mason et al., 2013a, Mason et al., 2015a, Mason et al., 2016, Mason et al., 2017, Mason et al., 2013b, Mason et al., 2015b). In this work, which has focused on the reading of illustrated science text, integrative processing has been measured by the duration of the fixations on corresponding pictorial elements while reading the text and the duration of the fixations on corresponding textual elements while inspecting the picture, as well as by the number of times fixations shift between corresponding textual and pictorial elements. Results have generally shown that both the cross-representational fixation times and the number of cross-representational transitions are positively associated with learning outcomes, most notably with the performance on tasks requiring that learners apply the acquired knowledge to new problems (Mason et al., 2017, Mason et al., 2013a, Mason et al., 2015a, Mason et al., 2013b, Mason et al., 2015b). Of note is that results based on cross-representational fixation times and results based on number of cross-representational transitions seem highly consistent in this body of work, with very high correlations between the two types of eye tracking measures indicating that they actually capture the same construct of integrative processing of textual and pictorial information (Mason et al., 2017, Mason et al., 2013a, Mason et al., 2016).As an example of corroborating evidence from another lab, Stalbovs, Scheiter, and Gerjets (2015) found that students’ number of gaze transitions between corresponding elements of text and pictures in an illustrated science text predicted their performance on a broad outcome measure containing items that targeted retention as well as comprehension of textual information, pictorial information, or both. Whereas Mason and colleagues used illustrated texts in which the texts described the same information that was depicted in the illustration, Stalbovs et al. (2015) used an illustrated text in which textual and pictorial information was somewhat different and both needed to gain a complete understanding of the scientific topic in question. Thus, in the terminology of Ainsworth, 2006, Ainsworth, 2014, the multimedia materials presented by Mason and colleagues were complementary in the sense that text and pictures referred to the same information but represented it in different (i.e., complementary) ways, whereas the multimedia materials presented by Stalbovs et al. (2015) were complementary in the sense that text and pictures offered different (i.e., complementary) information about the topic.Finally, in a recent systematic review of eye tracking research on multimedia learning, Alemdag and Cagiltay (2018) found that studies examining integrative processing through learners’ transitions between corresponding elements of textual and pictorial information generally reported statistically significant correlations with learning outcome measures. However, these authors also pointed to a lack of studies investigating relationships between eye tracking measurements and multimedia learning outcomes, with only half of the 58 studies they reviewed providing such information. Moreover, among the studies examining cross-representational transitions, in particular, none of the studies seem to have directly investigated the relationship between such integrative processing and performance on comprehension measures specifically designed to capture the integration of textual and pictorial information (this includes the studies by Mason and colleagues and Stalbovs et al. that were cited above). Because all prior eye tracking research on multimedia learning has presented the materials only in a digital environment, this research, of course, cannot answer the question of whether there are any medium effects on integrative processing and the comprehension products resulting from such processing.
1.2. Instructional prompts in the context of multimedia learningDespite the potential benefits of combining textual and pictorial information, students often tend to skim or skip over pictorial information and invest most of their time and effort in processing the text when reading illustrated science text (Cromley et al., 2010, Hannus and Hyönä, 1999, Schwonke et al., 2009). Reasons for this imbalance may be that students deem the textual information to be more important or relevant, that they are not aware of the role and importance of pictorial information for understanding science texts, or that they find the pictorial information difficult to understand (Cromley et al., 2010, Schwonke et al., 2009). There are several viable paths to promoting students’ attention to and effective use of pictorial information, such as teaching them about the conventions used in diagrams (Bergey et al., 2015, Cromley et al., 2013, Cromley et al., 2016, Miller et al., 2016), simplifying the illustrations (Butcher, 2006, Mason et al., 2013), labeling illustrations in ways that facilitate the mapping of corresponding elements of textual and pictorial information onto each other (Mason et al., 2013a), and modeling a more balanced and integrative processing of illustrated text (Mason et al., 2017, Mason et al., 2015a, Mason et al., 2016). Yet another approach is to try to increase learners’ awareness of the importance of the pictorial information and the need to integrate this information with relevant elements of the text by means of instructional prompts.Instructional prompts are directives that aim at guiding learners’ attention to and processing of the learning materials, for example by explicitly informing them about the importance of particular information and how to respond to it (e.g., Bartholomé and Bromme, 2009, Stalbovs et al., 2015, Van Meter et al., 2017). In the context of multimedia learning, instructional prompts may thus take the form of explicitly telling learners to pay attention to pictorial as well as textual information and to try to integrate pictorial and textual information in the meaning making process. Accordingly, Van Meter et al. (2017), who had college students read a text about human physiology that also included a number of diagrams, provided some of the students with a “diagram awareness prompt” that told them to pay attention to both the text and the diagrams and to think about how they were related. The results indicated that increasing learners’ awareness of the diagrams and text-diagram relations by means of this instructional prompt especially improved their performance on learning tasks assessing knowledge gained from diagrams and from text-diagram relations (Van Meter et al., 2017).Of note is that an instructional prompt such as the diagram awareness prompt used by Van Meter et al. (2017) is consistent with the signaling principle established within multimedia learning research. Thus, this principle highlights the potential benefits of providing cues that guide learners’ attention to important or relevant information and the organization of the multimedia learning materials (van Gog, 2014). In the current study, we explored whether an instructional prompt cueing students to pay attention to diagram-based information and diagram-text relations might moderate the effects of reading medium on students’ integrative processing and comprehension of illustrated text.
1.3. Controlling for individual differencesBecause our study addressed questions concerning the effects of reading medium and instructional prompts rather than individual differences, we wanted to control for the potential influences of intrinsic motivation, reading comprehension, and diagram comprehension. These variables were regarded as relevant covariates because prior research has suggested that they may be associated with integrative processing as well as comprehension of multiple information resources (e.g., Bråten et al., 2014, Mason et al., 2016, Mason et al., 2015b, Van Meter et al., 2017, Wang et al., 2016). Thus, reading comprehension may influence integrative processing by facilitating the building of a coherent mental representation based on verbal information, which is consistent with theoretical assumptions as well as empirical findings within reading research (McNamara & Magliano, 2009b). Consistent with theoretical assumptions and empirical findings within multimedia learning (Mayer, 2014, Van Meter et al., 2017), diagram comprehension may influence integrative processing by facilitating the building of a coherent mental representation based on pictorial information. Presumably, both these individual difference variables may also be directly related to an integrated understanding of the multimedia materials (Mason et al., 2015b, Van Meter et al., 2017). Finally, a willingness to work with the learning material because it is experienced as enjoyable or interesting in its own right (i.e., task-based or situational intrinsic motivation; Deci and Ryan, 2000, Schiefele et al., 2012) is likely to make learners invest more effort in integrative processing and achieve a more integrated understanding of the verbal and pictorial information. Recently, the importance of affective engagement has been highlighted within frameworks addressing learning from multiple information sources (List and Alexander, 2017, List and Alexander, 2019), and empirical work has indicated that learners’ situational interest and engagement in the learning task actually may explain integrated understanding over and above pertinent cognitive variables (Bråten et al., 2018, List et al., 2019).
1.4. The present studyOn the basis of theoretical assumptions and empirical work discussed in previous sections, this study uniquely contributes to research on the effects of reading medium by investigating the extent to which both integrative processing and integrated understanding of multimedia content differs when learners read a printed, as opposed to a digital document. Building on the shallowing hypothesis (Annisette and Lafreniere, 2017, Delgado et al., 2018), as well as relevant prior research consistent with this hypothesis (e.g., Ackerman and Goldsmith, 2011, Lauterman and Ackerman, 2014, Singer Trakhman et al., 2019), we hypothesized that participants who read an expository illustrated text about the physiology of sexuality on paper would display more integrative processing and more integrated understanding of the content than would participants who read the same information in a digital document. In addition, we hypothesized that participants prompted to pay particular attention to both text and illustration as well as their relationship would display more integrative processing and more integrated understanding than would participants who were not given a diagram awareness prompt (Van Meter et al., 2017). Regarding both integrative processing and integrated understanding, we also entertained the possibility that the effects of reading medium might be moderated by the instructional prompt, with a diagram awareness prompt presumably reducing the effects of reading medium on integrative processing and integrated understanding, respectively.Finally, we hypothesized that participants’ integrative processing, as evidenced by their eye movements, would mediate the potential effect of reading a printed versus a digital document on their integrated understanding of document information, as evidenced by their written products. Presumably, when reading a printed document, as compared to a digital document, participants’ eye movements would show more transitions among relevant (i.e., complementary) parts of the verbal and pictorial representations included in the document. Consistent with the cognitive theory of multimedia learning by Mayer, 2005, Mayer, 2014, highlighting the importance of generative processing in multimedia learning, as well as prior eye tracking research showing that number of transitions between corresponding elements of text and pictures are positively related to learning performance (e.g., Mason et al., 2017, Stalbovs et al., 2015; for review, see Alemdag & Cagiltay, 2018), we considered it likely that participants who performed more cross-representational transitions would also display more integrated understanding of document content in their written products. Consequentially, a mediated effect of reading medium on integrated understanding could be expected.By including task-based intrinsic motivation, reading comprehension, and diagram comprehension as covariates, we wanted to ensure that any effects of our experimental manipulations occurred independently of these individual difference variables.
