Forensic science has been evolving towards a separation of more and more specialised tasks, with forensic practitioners increasingly identifying themselves with only one sub-discipline or task of forensic science. Departments and professionals in practice are increasingly labelled and siloed. This is illustrated by the dominant conception of forensic science as a patchwork of disciplines (“forensics”) [1], and by the lack of a universally recognised role for generalist forensic scientists [2].
We have observed that some forensic science departments, professionals and research projects are increasingly placing themselves in a single, isolated category of dichotomies that were never intended to separate scientists or items. For example, we have observed practitioners seeing themselves as being either an “investigator” or an “evaluator”, failing to see that these roles are not descriptions of people, but of two different forms of reasoning that a forensic scientist engages in [3]. We have observed practitioners calling a piece of information as being either “intelligence” or “evidence”, failing to see the commonalities since both are a piece of information that has to be combined and put into perspective with alternative pieces of information in order to understand criminal problems, solve crimes and support decision-making at various levels [4,5]. Along the same lines as the concerns raised by [1,2], attitudes such as “That is intelligence, I won’t forward it to partners or other stakeholders as they may misinterpret it and include it in a formal report”1 or “They are into evidence evaluation, I’m into forensic intelligence” represent an emerging threat to forensic science as a whole by creating barriers or comfortable zones, often framed into standards and letting science, pragmatism and holism out of the perspective. Such attitudes impede information sharing between forensic scientists working on different aspects of the same case or criminal problem, and ultimately cause linkage blindness and the wall effect [7,8]. In the academic world, the number of specialised forensic science journals, conferences and education programs has increased over the years. In parallel, audiences of separate streams within general forensic science conferences tend to become watertight. Training manuals and guidelines contribute to making these separations a norm [[9], [10], [11]]. Although the initial aim of these separations and delineations was to structure the role and positioning of the forensic practitioners, they have progressively become prescriptive and have strengthened the silos. They have blurred the overall picture for forensic scientists or external observers, and have weakened forensic science identity at a time when it faces unprecedented challenges and scrutiny. Depending on how it is implemented, any delineation runs the risk of concealing underlying transversal commonalities, hampering iterative thinking and leading to a disconnection between the multiple and polymorphic activities and roles of forensic science towards security and justice. Such divisions are viewed as a threat to the advancement of science because they tend to polarise researchers and tear apart scientific communities [[12], [13], [14], [15]].
The objective of this article is to highlight that a piece of information is not either intelligence or evidence, and that a forensic scientist is not either an investigator or an evaluator, but that these notions must all be applied in conjunction to successfully understand a criminal problem, solve a case or an inquiry, or support decisions. The “large measure of overlap” between dichotomous categories is occasionally recognised [16] but often neglected, undiscussed or considered as marginal. To fill this gap and to capture the scope, strength and contribution of forensic science, this paper proposes a progressive, non-linear and continuous model that could serve as an overarching guide for forensic reasoning and processes. This model attempts to account for and conciliate the various roles of forensic scientists, and facilitate the emergence of “a generalist scientist and approach” and of a “holistic philosophy” [2] called for by several authors [1,15,[17], [18], [19], [20]]. The model includes the overlapping zones between these roles, making these interfaces much more central than marginal. It also underlines that forensic scientists do not work in isolation [21], providing guidance as to how to engage forensic science in collective and collaborative problem-solving for justice and security purposes. Forensic science and its underlying models are too often defined or perceived through the lens of the existing organisations and their structure. This article attempts to reverse this paradigm and focuses on the science and concepts that transcend operational contexts2. In the proposed approach, hypothetico-deductive reasoning, iterative thinking and the notion of entropy are used to frame the non-linear continuum, and situate forensic scientists’ operating contexts and decision points. Situations and examples drawn from casework experience are used to illustrate the model, underlining the continuity and the iterative character of forensic scientists’ contributions.
