Project-based learning (PBL) is used in all stages of education, from the perspective of elementary school students (García-Varcálcel and Basilotta, 2017) to the level of complexity characteristic of different programs in higher education (Mitchell and Smith, 2008; Peachey et al., 2007; Farrell and Cavanagh, 2014). Learning to think like engineers is the greatest challenge for engineering students (Dym et al., 2005). Thinking like an engineer is a mental approach to problem analysis which considers technical, economic, and environmental aspects that allow engineers to “conceive, design, implement and operate products, services, technologies, systems and solutions that improve the quality of life” (Al-Atabi, 2014). One possible way to promote this type of thinking in undergraduate students is to rely on highly educated professors with proven industrial experience. Professors who have had direct exposure to actual engineering projects can transmit their knowledge from their professional and practical experience.
Montastruc et al. (2019) highlight the need for an integration of knowledge to secure the success of engineering projects in their different stages: (a) plant design, (b) conceptual design, (c) process design, and (d) equipment design. Hence, the importance of complementing the training of chemical engineering students and related areas with studies in different domains such as economic analysis, project formulation and management, environmental fundamentals and knowledge of the country's industrial capabilities, and their integration and application in real projects that cover different levels of complexity. The industrial employment of chemical engineering and related areas has remained largely traditional worldwide (Voronov et al., 2017). This requires that the interaction between the academia and the industrial sector allows for the training of undergraduate students according to the technical competencies required for employability in the industrial sector itself (De Fuentes and Dutrénit, 2012; Feijoo et al., 2019). UNESCO (2013) establishes that a creative collaboration between the public and private sectors must have government support to promote the development of new technologies and the training of professionals according to a sustainable development model.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is an initiative of the United Nations (2015), whose aim is to give continuity to the development agenda after the Millennium Development Goals. The agenda includes 17 goals and 169 targets in areas related to climate change, economic inequality, innovation, sustainable consumption, among other priorities. Goal # 4 (education quality) aspires to “by 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship”. In the 21st century there are three aspects that should change the educational reality: diversity, self-organization, and cooperation (Morin, 2001). The combination of these three values is of extraordinary importance. These are elements that must be taken into account in the training of future engineers. The Paradigm of Complexity (Morin, 1992) and the Constructive Alignment (Biggs and Tang, 2011) are principles widely used in course design/instruction, and curriculum innovation. Furthermore, the Design Thinking concept (Castillo-Vergara et al., 2014) can be used in problem solving, strategic planning and the development of ideas within the educational environment, including the conceptualization of new universities.
Yachay Tech University (Ecuador) is a public university that opened its doors to students in October 2014. It was created with the purpose of generating research at the international level, and with the purpose of providing its undergraduate students with a high quality scientific education. This university is expected to establish Ecuador as a center of excellence in Latin America, both for innovation and technology. Its mission and vision aim at producing high quality scientific results for the international community, by training excellent professionals and participating in scientific and technological projects aligned with the need to improve the productive matrix of the country (Castillo-Chavez et al., 2017). The teaching staff is made up of professors of different nationalities, all with PhD degrees obtained from prestigious universities in Latin America, North America, Europe and Asia. The university has five schools, which are: (1) the School of Biological Sciences and Engineering, (2) the School of Physical Sciences and Nanotechnology, (3) the School of Earth Sciences, Energy and Environment, (4) the School of Mathematical and Computational Sciences, (5) and the School of Chemical Sciences and Engineering. Each school consists of two departments, one that focuses on the basic sciences and the other on technology and engineering. The undergraduate programs last 5 years (10 semesters) divided in two curricular units: a common core (4 semesters) and a specific vocational training cycle (6 semesters).
In the specific case of the School of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, students can major in three fields. The fields are Chemistry, Petrochemical Engineering and Polymer Engineering. In these last two majors, the students receive intensive training in fundamental areas of chemical engineering as applied science. Additionally, they can choose elective courses to complement their training; for example, Computer-Assisted Technical Design (5th semester) and Process Design (9th semester) are two of the available courses. Harris and Briscoe-Andrews (2008) propose to use updated topics in elective courses to complete the training of engineers.
At the end of the common core, the students at Yachay Tech University must select their undergraduate program. To help this selection process, students can take the Introduction to Engineering course (3rd semester), which aims at presenting students with theoretical and practical aspects related to the engineering profession in its different disciplines. Engineering schools all over the world adopt different strategies for the development of this course. Sadikin et al. (2019) highlight the importance of courses similar to Introduction to Engineering as a basis for the training of future engineers, since this allows them to gain experience in solving real-world engineering problems through the best professional practices.
This study presents a project-based learning methodology, whose particularity is the inclusion of training at different levels of undergraduate engineering programs, which allows for the interaction and interrelation of students from different semesters who work together on a common project. It is important that the selected project is based on updated topics relevant to the industrial reality of the country. To show the applicability of the proposed methodology, the professor had 9th and 5th semester students work jointly to develop an industrial production project, within the Process Design and Computer-Assisted Technical Design courses, respectively. Subsequently, the results of the project were presented to 3rd semester students, in order to boost their interest in the study of programs in the engineering area, specifically in chemical engineering and related areas. Additionally, this methodology prizes the previous industrial experience that professors at the undergraduate level may have by allowing them to contribute with an engineering vision to the training of young people in the area of engineering projects. Rodríguez et al. (2018) stated that the use of non-traditional pedagogical tools promotes learning motivation, hence the need to propose a project-based multi-level learning as an innovative strategy in the training of future chemical engineers.
PBL is widely used in higher education in different fields of knowledge which range from areas related to health sciences to areas associated with engineering. Various studies have proposed improvements/modifications to this methodology. Cifrain et al. (2020), Heinis et al. (2016), and Nikiema et al. (2009) developed project-based learning as an engineering student training strategy, and applied it to the same group of students in consecutive semesters. Furthermore, Zupančič et al. (1997) worked on joint training between undergraduate and graduate students. However, there are no specific studies on the application of the multi-level criterion in the training of undergraduate students. For this reason, this study presents a new learning methodology, based on the development of engineering projects with the joint participation of undergraduate students from courses at different levels of their programs.
