1.1. Behavioral assimilation to age stereotypesThe older population across the globe continues to grow at an unprecedented rate. Today, 8.5 percent of people worldwide (617 million) are aged 65 and over (He, Goodkind, & Kowal, 2015). In this epidemiological climate, age-based stereotype threat and internalized negative stereotypes of aging represent serious concerns, as they could impugn the behavioral performance, memory abilities, and general functioning of older adults (e.g., Barber & Mather, 2013; Weiss, 2018; Weiss & Kornadt, 2018). This behavioral impairment is often called behavioral assimilation to age stereotypes (BAAS; O’Brien & Hummert, 2006).In a typical BAAS study paradigm with older adults, a negative stereotype of aging is induced, followed by completion of memory, cognitive performance, or other skill-based tasks. Experimental manipulations used for stereotype induction in these studies are often classified as either blatant (e.g., participants read articles explicitly emphasizing detrimental effects of aging on cognition; Hess, Auman, Colcombe, & Rahhal, 2003) or subtle (e.g., telling participants their memory performance will be compared to young adults; Mazerolle, Régner, Morisset, Rigalleau, & Huguet, 2012). Recent meta-analytic research has suggested differential effects of blatant and subtle stereotype induction techniques, such that subtle manipulations have the most impact on working memory, with blatant manipulations being most impactful on episodic memory (Armstrong, Gallant, Li, Patel, & Wong, 2017). In terms of specific tasks used, meta-analytic research has shown that the effect of stereotype is greater when cognitive tasks are used compared to other types of tasks (Lamount, Swift, & Abrams, 2015). Cognitive tasks used in BAAS studies include block design tasks from WAIS-Ⅲ (Hehman & Bugental, 2013), letter-canceling task (Popham & Hess, 2013), and mental arithmetic (Abrams et al., 2008).
1.2. Intervention studies targeting BAASPrevious studies suggest that explicit and implicit presentation of positive age stereotypes can improve task performance in older individuals (e.g., Hess et al., 2003; Levy, 1996; Levy & Leifheit-Limson, 2009; Levy, Pilver, Chung, & Slade, 2014; Popham & Hess, 2013). These studies also explored the underlying mechanisms of interventions targeting BAAS. For example, Levy et al. (2014) found that improved physical functioning was mediated in part by strengthening positive self-perceptions of aging. These findings were consistent with the stereotype-embodiment theory (Levy, 2009), which postulates that the presentation of positive stereotypes of aging activates positive self-perception processes and enhances performance, while negative stereotypes activate negative self-perception processes and impair performance.
1.3. Contextual behavioral science approach as an alternative account of BAASLevy’s (2009) stereotype-embodiment theory suggests the importance of changing negative aging stereotypes in form and frequency by promoting positive aging beliefs. However, from a contextual behavioral science (CBS; Vilardaga, Hayes, Levin, & Muto, 2009) perspective, the problems of negative stereotypes are not their form (i.e., content) or frequency, but their learned stimulus functions (e.g., activating a certain form of behavior, impairing behavioral performance; Hayes et al., 2001). Furthermore, a CBS account postulates that changes in the stereotype's stimulus function do not require changes in form and frequency, and that their stimulus functioning can be altered contextually through notable context-manipulation exercises, such as mindfulness, cognitive defusion, self-as-context, and acceptance (Hayes, Levin, Plumb-Vilardaga, Villatte, & Pistorello, 2013).Although evidence is still limited, findings from a recent laboratory study with older Japanese adults support this CBS-informed approach for modulating BAAS (Hashimoto & Muto, 2019). Hashimoto and Muto (2019) showed that cognitive fusion with a conceptualized self, measured by the Three Senses of the Selves Questionnaire (TSSQ; Yanagihara, Shima, Saito, Kawai, & Kumano, 2015), moderated the effect of aging-related stereotypes on a cognitive performance as measured by the Block Design task. That is, individuals who were strongly fused with a conceptualized self (e.g., self-narrative, self-concept) were more vulnerable to negative aging-related stereotypes as evidenced by impaired cognitive task performance.
1.4. Present studyBuilding on the findings of this BAAS study with older Japanese adults (Hashimoto & Muto, 2019), the present study examined whether a brief CBS-informed intervention, relative to an attention-control condition, could mitigate the detrimental effect of negative aging-related stereotypes on cognitive task performance in this group. The Block Design task was selected as a measure of BAAS, as Hashimoto and Muto (2019) showed this task to have performed successfully as a measure of BAAS in a group of older Japanese adults. Previous research also indicated the Block Design task to be one of several reliable methods for measuring the effects of negative aging-related stereotypes (Lamount et al., 2015). The present study also explored whether self-reported cognitive fusion with a conceptualized self moderated the intervention effects.
