Saliency and co-saliency that detect salient and co-salient objects have been studied for several years because of their wide applications in computer vision. Such applications include image segmentation and co-segmentation [1], content-based image compression [2], image retargeting and inpainting [3], and object tracking [4], [5].
The existing saliency detectors can be classified into heuristic models and deep learning models. Heuristic saliency detectors are designed based on the contrast of features [6], light classifier (e.g., SVM) [7], graph propagation [8], reconstruction error [9], [10] or other simple learning strategies [11]. The main characteristic of heuristic saliency detectors is using hand-crafted features, such as RGB, LAB, Gabor, Texton and LBP. These saliency detectors can barely achieve promising saliency detection on images with complex scenes because of the inefficient ability of hand-crafted features in distinguishing salient objects and non-salient backgrounds. Deep learning based saliency detectors [12], [13] break away from conventions of using hand-crafted features and directly learn the saliency related features with multi-layer convolutional neural networks (CNN) by adding the loss function at the top of CNNs. With the development of CNNs and learning strategies, deep learning based saliency detectors show superior saliency detection performance on almost all benchmark datasets. However, training CNNs for saliency detection requires numerous of pixel-level images and high performance GPUs.
According to the above classification principle, almost all existing co-saliency detectors [14], [15], [16], [17], [18] are heuristic models. Co-saliency detection primarily identifies the common salient objects in a group of images. Whereas, deep learning models experience difficulty in learning inter relationships in image groups owing to the lacking of training image groups. To the best of our knowledge, the two widely used co-saliency detection datasets, iCoseg and Image pair, possess 37 and 105 groups of images, respectively. The quantity of image groups significantly deviates from learning a CNN with millions of parameters. The latest work of [19] proposes co-salient object detection based on deep learning in which the inter-relationship of two images is measured by a three layers fully connected neural network with superpixel features as inputs. Unlike the deep learning based co-saliency detector, our method does not need lots of training images, and can be easily extend to other computer vision applications, e.g., co-segmentation.
In this paper, we propose saliency and co-saliency detection with two-level exemplars, i.e., image-level and region-level exemplars. Our method requires a small number of images that having similar foreground with query image as image-level exemplars. Then, region-level exemplars are formed with foreground regions of image-level exemplars and background regions of the query image. We use two simple SVM classifiers, i.e., two-class SVM and one-class SVM, for saliency and co-saliency evaluations, respectively. For saliency detection, we use the regions from the retrieved similar images as positive exemplars and the regions of the image boundaries of the query image as negative exemplars for two-class SVM to identify saliency parts. For co-saliency detection, the regions in each image correspond to the positive exemplars for the one-class SVM to identify common parts. Compared with conventional heuristic saliency detectors, our method learns from labeled images to recognize salient regions and robust for the images with complex scenes. Compared with deep learning based saliency detectors, our method uses less number of images and can be easier to extend to novel data, such as mural images. We compare the proposed method with state-of-the-art methods on saliency and co-saliency detection benchmark datasets. Our method shows promising performances in both saliency and co-saliency detection tasks. The main contributions of our method are twofold:
•We propose saliency and co-saliency detection methods with a single rationale, i.e., exemplar. Although we do not use end-to-end deep learning strategy, our method shows promising performances on saliency and co-saliency benchmark datasets.•We propose two levels exemplars, i.e., image-level and region-level exemplars for saliency and co-saliency detection. Image-level exemplars are response for finding similar images. Region-level exemplars are response for propagating saliency values between superpixels.
