Video endoscopy is a normal procedure for screening the gastrointestinal (GI) tract of a patient for potential abnormalities e.g., cancer, ulcer, and bleeding. An endoscope is not more than a wire with a light source and camera mounted on its distal tip [1]. However, the investigation of the gastrointestinal (GI tract via an endoscope) is a time spending and tedious task for the medical experts. In fact, video endoscopy generates a large number of frames which are then carefully examined by a gastroenterologist [2]. An automated vision-based system can play an important role by searching out malignant frames from all video frames which saves time for the medical experts, especially when medical experts have to screen too many patients [3].
Numerous improvements have been made in the simple white light endoscopy to provide easiness to the gastroenterologist. These advancements highlight the abnormal regions on the mucosal surface and to make them more prominent to the medical experts [4]. The chromoendoscopy (CH) is also an advance form of normal video endoscopy. It is an image-enhanced endoscopy method, in which dyes (methylene blue) is used to stain the mucosal surface and it highlights the mucosal patterns [5]. On the other hand, digital filters and image enhancement techniques are used to manifest the effect of traditional colorant-based chromoendoscopy in the digital (virtual) chromoendoscopy [6].
The extraction of important characteristics from medical images is an important step for detection of abnormalities in a computer-aided diagnosis system. Colors are one of the vital and basic visual descriptors for the detection of gastric abnormalities [7]. Many studies confirm their role in the detection of abnormal frames in an endoscopic sequence [8], [9], [10]. The visual description of abnormalities (e.g., bleeding and ulcer) can be efficiently manifested by color features. Color images are represented in a combination of color channels in specific color spaces and CH frames also consist of three color channels: red, green and blue (RGB). Some well-known color spaces are hue, saturation, & value (HSV), cyan, magenta, yellow, & black (CMYK), XYZ and Lab defined by which is the International Commission on Illumination (CIE). There are many more color spaces and every color space has its own application-specific advantages.
In this paper, we also find answers to the following questions:
–How the color features can be used for detection of the cancerous lesion in CH frames?–Which color space best represents color features of the chromoendoscopy frames?–Which color space gives an efficient color-texture representation?–What are the criteria to select a color space to represent features?
For intuition about the selection of a better color space for representing color features in CH images, histogram values of CH images are plotted. The occupancy of colors in different color spaces by normal and abnormal CH frames is shown in Fig. 1. It is clear from the plots, pixel values of CH frames in HSV and YCbCr have a uniform distribution over entire color-space. Whereas the histogram values of other color spaces lead to uneven distribution plots. Colors distribution directly affects the discrimination of gastric lesions. The results confirm the better performance of HSV and YCbCr color spaces for abnormality detection CH frames.Download : Download high-res image (851KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The scatter plots show the color distribution and color space utilization of normal and abnormal CH frames, (a) a benign CH frame, (b) a malignant CH frame, (c) intensity values in RGB color space for normal CH image, (d) intensity values in RGB color space for abnormal CH image, (e) intensity values in HSV color space for normal CH image, (f) intensity values in HSV color space for abnormal CH image (g) intensity values in XYZ color space for normal CH image, (h) intensity values in XYZ color space for abnormal CH image, (i) intensity values in YCbCr color space for normal CH image, (j) intensity values in YCbCr color space for abnormal CH image (k) intensity values in Lab color space for normal CH image, (l) intensity values in Lab color space for abnormal CH image.
In our former work, we proposed a feature extraction method based on geometric homogeneous texture (GHT) descriptors for the classification of endoscopy frames, as these features provide texture description of the CH images presented in [11]. Further, we analysed the performance of different classification models by training on Local Binary Patterns (LBP) texture features for categorization of CH images. In the case of CH frames, colors become very essential for discrimination of abnormal regions. Therefore, in this paper, we compare the performance of color features extracted by transforming these in RGB, HSV, XYZ, YCbCr, and Lab color spaces. Then these features are used for categorization of CH frames.
Color histograms are basic features which can be used directly for discrimination of frames in endoscopic videos without further processing. Color features are normally represented by the probability distribution of intensity values of every channel of an image. These histogram-based features are normally extracted from a specific channel of images (or whole triplets containing three channels R, G, and B). In some existing methods, statistical moments are calculated from these histograms [12]. Gastric images usually suffer from scale, rotation, and illumination variations due to an uncontrolled movement of the camera. Also the presence of air bubble, food contents and lens distortion are the main reasons for a low detection rate. The detection of abnormalities in gastric frames is a difficult task and the dynamics of the GI environment makes the detection task more challenging [13].
1.1. ContributionA little contrast between the mucosal surface and lesion color in the normal makes it hard to detect gastric lesions in the white light endoscopy images. In chromoendoscopy, colors provide aid in visualization the abnormal areas. But, color features suffer from illumination variations. Therefore, our main focus in this paper is finding the color space that best represents the color characteristics of lesions in the CH frames and efficiently copes with the illumination changes. Moreover, the main contributions of this paper are summed as:–The ΔE method requires human involvement for template patch selection for abnormal and normal regions. Hence, we have automated the template selection procedure of ΔE segmentation method by predicting class label of frames prior to segmentation.–For finding the best color space for CH frames, we empirically compare the classification performance of the color histogram features, extracted from CH images by further transforming RGB frames in HSV, XYZ, YCbCr, and Lab spaces (also from the segmented area by using ΔE presented in [14]).–We discover also the suitable color space for representing a combined color-texture description of CH gastric frames for detection of abnormalities.–We compare the segmentation results with the current state-of-the-art methods.
1.2. Related workNumerous systems are proposed by various researchers for automatic diagnosis of gastric abnormalities from gastric frames. We have described some methods which use only color information in one group and other group contains techniques which include both color and texture information.1.2.1. Color histogram features used for detection of abnormal framesBasic information which can be extracted from color channels of an image is manifested by its histograms because a histogram is the measure of pixels distribution. In [15], RGB and YCbCr color spaces were used for representation of zoom endoscopy images, histogram of every channel was extracted from every frames form detection of abnormalities. As the same in [2], where RGB histogram features were used for detection of wireless capsule endoscopy (WCE) bleeding frames. In fact, bleeding stains can be effectively represented by colors. Therefore, HSV color histogram features are preferred over RGB histogram features and for better uniformity in color space, HSV color histograms were adopted for classification of bleeding frames instead of RGB [16]. In [17], Local RGB color image histogram was used for computing threshold for segmentation colonoscopy images. Further, the CIE-Lab color differences are used to minimize the error of segmentation. Similarly, in [18] HSI and RGB channel histograms are extracted from images. Authors then trained an artificial neural network on extracted features to classify colonoscopy frames.1.2.2. Color texture histogram features used for detection of abnormal framesThe textures are also a basic visual clue along with colors for describing of any surface. The abnormal regions in CH frames have a coarse texture. Colors histogram features can be mixed with texture features for better representation of gastric lesions. Therefore, a method presented in [3] uses the color histogram and combined it with texture features. In this method, I component of the histogram from HSI color space, HV component histogram from HSV color space, the Norm of RGB histogram, RG histogram, opponent histogram, and hue histogram are used to represent the color features of endoscopy images. Moreover, these color histograms are combined with local binary patterns (LBP) texture features. Color moments from the histogram of RGB and HSV from color WCE image were extracted and combined with LBP features for representation of color-texture [19].A Gaussian filtered LBP (GF-LBP) features are extracted from endoscopic images by employing colors details using a pyramidal histogram of images [20]. Similarly, the color histogram features, pyramidal histogram oriented gradients (PHOG), and LBP texture from super-pixel were extracted in [21]. Endoscopic images were processed by dividing into patches. Further, the patches of LBP are extracted from HSV and RGB channels for patch-based classification [22]. Color histograms are combined with LBP and HSV color components histogram are added in different combinations with LBP features with a neighborhood of 8 and 16 in [23]. In the same way, uniform LBP features are computed by accounting each channel of endoscopy frame for combining texture and color information [24].All described above computer-aided diagnosis systems are based on histogram features. However, every method uses or prefer a different color space for extraction of color features. None of the above described work confirms that a particular color space has a better color description than others for CH frames. In this comparison, five elementary color spaces are employed for the extraction of color descriptors. Moreover, we also extracted the LBP features from these color spaces to see the impact of a combination of color-texture on the classification of CH images. We also provided an automatic segmented method which requires less involvement of the gastroenterologist or user.In our opinion, a histogram is a concise way to represent digital images and most of the color features extraction methods are based on histograms [25]. Moreover, the LBP texture extraction method is also a histogram of locally computed patterns with a limited dimension. Still, the color and texture based histograms features are used for recognition related applications [26], [27], [28]. On the other hand, contemporary, deep learning methods are very computation extensive and require a large amount of training data and in the case of chromoendoscopy data, is very limited which is dealt by data argumentation but not very effective and produce similar classification results.Colors help in visualization and can be used for color-based segmentation of gastric lesions from gastric frames. The ΔE method requires human involvement for template patch selection for abnormal and normal regions. A patch from the abnormal region is first explicitly selected by the expert then the threshold is calculated based on intensity values compared with input images pixels. Segmentation is performed based on that threshold. Hence, we have automated the template selection procedure of ΔE segmentation method by predicting the class-label based input frame prior to segmentation. The features are given to a trained classifier. Then the template is selected based on input features further the threshold value is calculated by sliding this template over the entire chromoendoscopy image to perform binary segmentation.In the proposed framework, the template image is automatically selected by extracting color features from images. By using prior classification for template selection, the issue regarding human engagement reduces and moved a step towards fully automated segmentation. Hence provides a second opinion and ease to the gastroenterologist in diagnosing cancerous regions and further will help in automation of surgical procedures by marking diseased area.The paper is organized is as follows: An overview of color spaces for the detection of gastric abnormalities based on color as well as texture histogram features is given in Section 2. The proposed method for segmentation and classification are also described in Section 2. The results of segmentation and classification are presented in Section 3. Also this section provides a discussion on results. This paper is concluded with future work in Section 4.
