Directed energy deposition (DED) refers to a category of additive manufacturing (AM) processes that utilizes a high energy source to melt the feedstock material, which comes in either wire or powder form, and patterns this energy source with motions provided by a computer numeric control (CNC) machine or robot to infill enclosed regions for creating a single layer of a three-dimensional (3D) part. The DED process is suitable for fabricating low-to-medium complexity and medium-to-large size metal parts, in which other metal-AM processes such as powder bed fusion (PBF) may not be suitable [1], [2]. Due to its high deposition rate and low setup cost, DED offers an efficient and effective solution for applications that require large near-net-shape parts at a short lead time. Hence, it has been utilized in the maritime, aerospace, and automotive industries with applications including marine propellers [3], winglets [4], and excavator arms [5]. In addition to creating new parts, DED can also be used for on-site remanufacturing applications due to its portability and large work volume when robots are used as motion devices.
Wire arc additive manufacturing (WAAM) is a subcategory of the DED technique that utilizes metal wire as feedstock and an electric arc as the heat source. Favorable characteristics of WAAM include low material costs, high material conversion rates, and the ability to process highly reflective metal materials [4]. In WAAM, process settings are well-recognized as fundamental factors that determine the performance of the fabricated parts such as geometry accuracy and microstructure. However, process planning for WAAM is still considered as a challenging task due to the following reasons. Firstly, the physical and chemical processes within manufacturing, e.g., nonequilibrium phase transformations, are complex and remain unclear. The lack of understanding of these underlying processes has greatly hindered the development of optimal process planning strategies for fabricating consistent and high-quality parts. Moreover, previous studies on process planning for WAAM are often focused on specific materials or geometry features rather than general methods. Hence, findings from these studies cannot be directly transferred to the fabrication of new materials and complex structures. Lastly, current process planning tools for WAAM are mainly based on frameworks that were developed for less complicated AM processes such as material extrusion or subtractive manufacturing such as milling. These tools, such as CuraEngine and Autodesk® PowerMill™ are geometry manipulating and processing software. Their inputs are manually configured by domain experts without a standard procedure. To the best of our knowledge, there is no process planning software that supports automated decision-making for WAAM. The above limitations in existing tools and workflows necessitate a process planning system that allows capturing, storing, and reusing existing knowledge about the manufacturing process.
Methods from knowledge-based engineering (KBE) can be utilized to realize the process planning system discussed above. According to [6], [7], [8], knowledge-based engineering aims to capture and reuse engineering knowledge, which is also called domain knowledge, for reducing time and costs of product development. The domain knowledge is knowledge of a specific discipline and is accumulated through research activities and engineering practices. For engineering design purposes, knowledge bases are often integrated with computer-aided design tools to extend their capabilities for geometry manipulation and data processing. Such integrated systems are called knowledge-based engineering systems and provide a promising solution for WAAM process planning. However, the construction of this KBE system, especially in the context of design for additive manufacturing (DfAM) remains unclear and should be investigated first.
Hence, the focus in this work is a framework for the knowledge-based engineering system that supports process planning and related design activities for WAAM. The main contribution of this research is threefold. First, we proposed a data-knowledge-service architecture for constructing the process knowledge base. This architecture allows capturing, representing, and reusing domain knowledge on manufacturing. Secondly, various data and knowledge types within the WAAM process are summarized and discussed. Moreover, the process planning system is developed as a service provider to support different activities within the DfAM workflow. Specifically, the process planning system not only supports operations engineers to generate process plans but also assists product designers to explore the design freedom and constraints on process variables. Manufacturing bureaus can also utilize the service to formalize their know-how and maintain their competitive edges.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related works on WAAM process planning and AM knowledge management. Section 3 presents the proposed framework for building the knowledge-based computer-aided process planning (KB-CAPP) system. Moreover, a data-knowledge-service structure for constructing the knowledge base and details of each layer are introduced. Section 4 presents a demo KBE system that implements the proposed framework for overhang fabrications. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
