Image set classification is a paramount but challenging task in computer vision and pattern recognition. It has widely potential applications, such as object categorization [1], [2], [3], [4], face recognition [5], [6], [7] and action recognition [8], [9]. This benefits from the development of multimedia network technology and video surveillance that numerous videos and images of a person or an object can be easily obtained. Unlike traditional classification techniques based on single images, the many sample images in an image set convey more intra-class variations of the subject and show superior performance [10]. Meanwhile, a wide range of appearance variations also makes task challenging, caused by arbitrary poses, partial occlusions, illumination conditions and object deformations through multiple representatives.
Current image set classification methods focus on two crucial aspects, i.e., how to model an image set and how to measure the similarity between two image sets. In the past decades, a number of image set representation models have been developed, such as subspace [11], [12], [13], affine or convex hull [7], [14], [15], manifold [5], [6] and covariance matrix [16], [17]. Among them, the success of manifold-based methods is mainly due to the geometry of the manifolds, which encode Riemannian geometry of the underlying manifolds in the learning stage. The complexity of the image set structure makes it difficult for a single subspace to cover changes within the set. Hence, Manifold-Manifold Distance (MMD) [5] expresses a manifold by a collection of local linear models and then measures the distances between pair of subspaces. The method in [6], called Manifold Discriminant Analysis (MDA) is proposed to learn an embedding space to enhance discriminative ability. Learning Euclidean-to-Riemannian Metric (LERM) [18] and Projection Metric Learning (PML) [19] are metric learning methods on Sparse Positive Definite (SPD) manifolds and Grassmann manifolds respectively.
Sparse coding is becoming increasingly attractive in signal processing and related areas [20], [21]. Sparse Representation-based Classification (SRC) [20] treats the entire training samples as a dictionary for face recognition. To preserve the consistency in sparse representation of similar local features, LScSPM [21] incorporates a Laplacian matrix into objective function where the Laplacian matrix is constructed by histogram intersection. Recently, several methods considered sparse coding on manifolds due to its non-Euclidean geometry. Riemannian Sparse Representation (RSR) [22] performs the sparse coding of SPD matrices with the aid of Stein kernel. Later, Grassmann Sparse Coding (GSC) [8] proposes to embed Grassmann manifolds into the space of symmetric matrices and then explore sparse coding. However, these methods discard the locality among image sets, resulting in misleading sparse coefficients. Moreover, it is difficult for a single subspace to cover changes within an image set and the hidden structure among samples is relaxed. One fact in face recognition is that the face images from different people still share common similarity. Hence, similar to Collaborative Representation Classification (CRC) [23], it is useful to model the local structure among images within the same set and the relationships between different sets.
To solve the aforementioned problems of sparse coding on manifolds, this paper proposes a novel image set classification algorithm namely locality-aware group sparse coding model on Grassmann manifolds (GLGSC), to simultaneously exploit the representation exclusivity and locality consistency in a unified manner. Specifically, to alleviate the impact of outliers, we consider a representation adaption term to enforce the representations of different dictionaries to be adaptive. Meanwhile, we explore the hidden structure within the image set and extract multiple subspaces. In this situation, inspired by the idea of linear discriminant analysis, a locality consistent regularization term is employed to constrain representation coefficients of neighbor points on Grassmann manifolds to be as similar as possible, which promotes intra-set compact. Finally, a kernelised version of GLGSC is proposed to handle non-linearity in data. Fig. 1 shows the sketches of Grassmann sparse representation and the proposed model for image set classification.Download : Download high-res image (433KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The sketches of Grassmann sparse coding (top) and the proposed model for image set classification (bottom). A probe set can be described by a linear subspace and represented as a point on a Grassmann manifold. Then, this probe subspace is represented by linear combination of gallery subspaces and classified by computing reconstructive residuals. Since multiple subspaces are extracted, the proposed model covers more variations within an image set and preserves locality information.
The main contributions of this paper include: (1) We deal with image set classification via a novel locality-aware group sparse coding on Grassmann manifolds, which improves the matching consistency. Thus, this model can be understood as both a multi-model representation and a sparse representation model. To our best knowledge, it is the first method that exploits locality property for image set classification. (2) We develop the kernelised version of this method, which can address the non-linearity in data. (3) The proposed method is applied to several computer vision tasks, including face recognition, object recognition and gesture recognition. Experimental results show the superiority of our algorithm over state-of-the-art methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 first presents the related work of our proposed method. In Section 3, the proposed method is exhibited. We present the kernelised version of proposed method in Section 4. The experimental results are depicted in Section 5. The conclusions are provided in Section 6.
