Internet-based technologies are continuously improving, and modern human lives are becoming increasingly dependent on Internet services. However, the open architecture of the Internet makes it vulnerable to various types of network attacks. Denial-of-service (DoS) attack is a classic method of bringing down a victim network by preventing legitimate users (clients) of a service from accessing that service. Distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks are a sophisticated, many-to-one version of DoS attacks, where the attacker overwhelms the victim's resources by sending streams of packets to the victim. DDoS attackers not only aim to render a service inaccessible but also may pursue to gain unlimited access to the victim machine and thus cause more damage. According to Shameli-Sendi et al. (2015), the taxonomy of DDoS attacks involves six categories: the degree of automation (manual, semi-automatic, and automatic); the degree of attack rate (continuous, fluctuating, and increasing); the network scanning strategy (random, hit-list, topological, permutation, and local subset); the adopted strategy (protocol and brute-force attacks); the propagation mechanism (central, back-chaining, and autonomous); and finally the degree of impact (disruptive and degrading). Currently, bot networks are usually utilized to increase the impact of the attacks. These bot networks consist of handler (master) and agent (bot/slave/zombie) machines. The attackers scan the network and compromise vulnerable machines by using them as bots. These bots are then commanded to bombard the victims with packets by specifying the attack type and the victim's address (Mirkovic and Reiher, 2004). Akamai Technologies (Akamia, 2019) recorded 7822 DDoS attacks between November 1, 2017 and April 30, 2018, indicating the prevalence of such attacks despite the presence of multilevel Internet security measures. During the last six months of this period, companies were confronted with DDOS attacks 41 times on average. The United States was identified as the source of 30% of the recorded DDoS attacks, that is, 46,137 source IP addresses.
A DDoS attack can adversely influence an organization at various levels, ranging from financial, prestige, and customer loss to data exfiltration. Therefore, an effective DDoS protection system is critical for preserving revenue, productivity, reputation, and user loyalty. Shameli-Sendi et al. (2015) defined four DDoS defense phases: prevention, monitoring, detection and mitigation. Prevention includes the ideal protection mechanisms against all security concerns including DDoS attacks. However, DDoS prevention has become even more challenging as DDoS attacks are becoming increasingly scaled and sophisticated. They are designed so that they can bypass traditional prevention tools such as anti-viruses, firewalls, and intrusion prevention systems. Consequently, it is impossible to prevent every potential DDoS attack. DDoS detection is another protection mechanism for distinguishing attack traffic from normal network traffic. Shameli-Sendi et al. (2015) categorized DDoS attack detection algorithms into two main groups: signature-based and behavior-based. In the former, the characteristics of the captured traffic are compared with well-defined characteristics of previous and precisely modeled DDoS attacks. In the latter, the primary concern is defining normal traffic behavior based on the traffic pattern. Then, any deviation from this behavior is considered abnormal (Mirkovic and Reiher, 2004). However, defining normal traffic behavior is a challenging task. According to Mirkovic and Reiher (2004), normal traffic behavior can be defined by comparing the traffic in both forward and reverse directions, traffic connections statistics, behavioral monitoring of the aggregated traffic, and behavioral monitoring of the flow traffic. Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are very suitable for automatically learning the normal behavioral of traffic flows. Generally, thresholds are used to measure the deviation from normal traffic behavior to detect anomalies. Behavior-based detection techniques that do not require manual threshold setting are highly desirable, as DDoS attack techniques are continuously developing. Ahmed et al. (2016a) classified behavior-based network anomaly detection techniques into four groups: classification, statistical, clustering, and information theory methods. Subsequently, they regarded a DoS attack as a collective network anomaly when a collection of data points behave abnormally. Therefore, these techniques could be used to detect DoS/DDoS attack types. A large number of studies on DDoS detection have appeared since the 2000s. These studies usually concentrate on the intrusion characteristics, the analysis of the traffic, and the analysis of network-level behaviors. Various analytic techniques have been employed, such as Hidden Markov Modeling (HMM), artificial neural networks, entropy analysis, game theory, decision trees, and Support Vector Machines (SVMs) (Monge et al., 2019). Moreover, several survey studies have reviewed and summarized the main ideas of existing DDoS detection approaches (Shameli-Sendi et al., 2015; Kamboj et al., 2017; Cao et al., 2018; Behal et al., 2017; Mirkovic and Reiher, 2004).
1.1. Contributions of this workDespite the abundance of DDoS attack detection approaches available in the literature, several critical issues remain unresolved. Behal and Kumar (2017a) stated the lack of new benchmark datasets for the validation of detection schemes and the lack of real-time DDoS attack detection systems as major gaps in DDoS attack detection. Therefore, almost all authors used either old datasets or simulation data in a strictly controlled environment. The fixed threshold setting for statistical and entropy-based approaches is another shortcoming of recent methods. To the best of our knowledge, the present study presents one of the few unsupervised DDoS attack detection schemes that satisfy all the requirements of a real-world online DDoS detection algorithm (Ahmed et al., 2016a).According to Behal and Kumar (2017b), only a few approaches available in literature are suitable for real-time operation. The strength of the proposed method is the online, real-time, and on-the-fly detection of DDoS traffic. The terms “online” and “real-time” tend to be used interchangeably in literature, but there is a significant difference between them. An ideal online machine learning algorithm should be able to update itself and adapt to a frequently changing environment, in addition to operating immediately while ingesting one observation at a time.The main contributions of this work are as follows:1.We developed a new DDoS detection algorithm named Enhanced-KOAD (E-KAOD) based on the well-known Kernel-based Online Anomaly Detection (KOAD) algorithm (Ahmed et al., 2007a,b; Ahmed, 2009), which is cited in more than 150 studies. The E-KOAD algorithm boosts KOAD in three aspects including automated setting of the threshold values, automated setting of the RBF kernel standard deviation parameter, and replaces the KOAD “Usefulness Test” with an enhanced “Utility Test” to determine the continued relevance of a dictionary element.2.We also extended the earlier algorithm by Daneshgadeh et al. (2018) when it comes to calculating Mahalanobis distance. We used a dictionary dataset instead of the normal dataset for computing the Mahalanobis distance. This improves the detection performance and reduces the memory requirements of the this algorithm.3.We extracted a small subset of traffic features based on the recommendations for both statistical and entropy-based features in DDoS detection literature.4.We used a recent benchmark dataset from the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CICIDS2017) (Sharafaldin et al., 2018b) to validate the proposed algorithm, instead of performing simulation or using old-fashioned benchmarks such as DARPA98.
1.2. Organization of this paperThe remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related literature by highlighting the strengths and weaknesses of past investigations in the field of DDoS Detection. Section 3 briefly describes the mathematical background of the proposed DDoS detection system. Section 4 presents the detailed platform architecture and feature vector construction. Section 5 describes the experiments with results and analysis. Section 6 empirically compares the proposed scheme with existing methods. Section 7 concludes with suggestion for future work.Table 1 lists the acronyms used in this paper.Table 1. List of acronyms.AcronymExplanationGIDGeneralized Information DistanceDDoSDistributed Denial of serviceDNSDomain Name SystemDoSDenial of ServiceDTDecision TreeEACEvidence Accumulation ClusteringFEFlash EventATCUSUMAdaptive Threshold and Cumulative SumCWTContinuous Wavelet TransformFPRFalse Positive RateGEGeneralize entropyHR-DDoSHigh Rate-DDoSIDSIntrusion Detection SystemIPInternet ProtocolIPSIntrusion Prevention SystemISPInternet Service ProviderKOADKernel Online Anomaly DetectionLANLocal Area NetworkLR-DDoSLow Rate-DDoSPCAPrincipal component analysisRFRandom ForestROCReceiver Operating CharacteristicsSDNSoftware Defined NetworkSSCSub-Space ClusteringSVMSupport Vector MachineTCPTransmission Control ProtocolTPRTrue Positive RateUDPUser Datagram ProtocolWANWide Area Network
