Human hands are widely used every day as exploratory and manipulative tools to obtain sensory information (e.g. shape, size, texture, roughness) and to interact with the surrounding environment. Mastering dexterous use of our hands in some motor tasks requires years of training. Significant hands-on practice is essential in particular disciplines such as medical education to master core skills (e.g. clinical palpation) and to retain them throughout a career. The highly articulated structure of the human hands provides a range of movements designed to allow functions such as pinching, pincer grip, holding, throwing, catching, etc. Thus, it is very hard to generalise a captured model of movements of the hand for a particular targeted skills. Moreover, various sensory receptors and their higher concentrations under the hands’ tissue adds to the difficulty of studying skilful hands-on interactions. In medical education, physical examination(s) plays a key role in diagnosing diseases from their signs/symptoms in the early stages of the patient care process. Almost all of the preliminary physical examinations involve the use of clinicians’ hands and sense of touch to assist in diagnosing various conditions. Therefore it is essential that clinicians master these core skills early on in their medical education (Dinsmore, Langrana, Burdea, Ladeji, 1997, Patel, Morrissey, 2011).
A high quality clinical examination using palpation can help exclude significant pathology and reduce the need for unnecessary (expensive) imaging such as CT and MRI scanning. There is at least anecdotal evidence that poorer clinical examination can result in more expensive and intrusive investigations. This paper will focus on using a novel palpation training system (PTS) to teach and improve clinical examination skills in relation to the abdomen. A patient with an acute emergency abdominal complaint, for example perforated bowel. The latter can often be a life-threatening event. It is also important that the clinician competently picks up any enlargement of the liver, spleen and kidneys. The use of PTS would allow a certain degree of ability to be achieved prior to seeing many real patients in an acute or chronic management setting. PTS also allows individualised feedback and re-testing to check for improvement in practice. The need for superficial, deep and specific organ palpation is thus essential in abdominal examination.
It is equally important that the patient is not subjected to unnecessary “forces” when the abdomen is palpated. For example, it is unnecessary to use the heel of the hand (thenar and hypothenar eminences) as this would not contribute to any diagnostic information but may cause patient discomfort. In addition, a common error amongst novices in clinical examination is to use the tips of the finger to poke the patient rather than use the side of the hand as the diagnostic instrument.
While there is no single unique way to correctly palpate a series of guidelines with suggested steps to be performed exist for correct palpation. Various resources are given to medical students by professional authorities every year (e.g. textbooks, hours of online videos, virtual reality, apps, etc.) with the major focus on how best to transfer the core skills from experts to novices, as well as revising the assessment processes to ensure that a proficient level of core skills has been attained. However, delivering these resources to a large number of students is challenging for programme directors. For instance, Warwick Medical School (WMS) has over 200 new starters per annum who are taught by over 400 senior clinicians with qualifications from 25 different countries.
Recent advances in multimodal virtual and augmented reality simulation techniques have had an impact on learning complex motor skills particularly in medical education (Coles et al., 2011). Physical involvement in virtual simulations can deliver more immersion, minimising the risk of putting patients’ health at risk. The availability of such virtual simulations is particularly valuable in early stages of medical education.
The motivation of this research is to gain a deep understanding and form a reference model for the dexterous use of hands in specific physical interactions. The goal is that training with such a derived model may help enhance the conventional motor training processes of others and allow them to be subsequently assessed via an innovative multimodal training system and not to limit them to a particular method. This is validated by a detailed study to assess the impact of our novel training approach on trainees’ motor performance and learning. A mixed-mode research methodology is used to predict the usability and usefulness of the proposed technique.
In addition, User-Centred Design (UCD) research methods such as participatory design, focus groups, evolutionary prototyping, and usability studies were employed to ensure the new technique complies with user and domain needs. This study benefits from active collaboration with medical experts and students throughout the design and evaluation process.
This paper presents a novel technology-aided method for learning core abdominal palpation skills. A new computer-based educational interface is designed and developed to enhance learning and assessment processes in the current curriculum. A team of senior medical tutors were actively involved throughout the research and design processes to evaluate this approach and help to improve it until it satisfies their requirements. First year medical students were invited to use this method and to reflect on the usability and usefulness. Learning performance was significantly improved in the group of medical students who benefitted from employing this method in training and test phases (p < .05).
