One-class classification (OCC) can be defined as the task of recognizing test data that distributes differently from the data that were available during training [1]. This type of classification has received substantial research attention in the biomedical field [2], fault and failure detection in complex industrial systems [3], finance [4], and security such as in video surveillance [5]. All these applications require the data of all classes to be labeled. However, for real-world problems, samples from unusual classes (the outlier class [OC]) may have insufficient size for effective modeling. In contrast, OCC can identify such cases by training only on samples considered to be the inlier class (IC) and then identifying OC samples that differ from the IC distribution [6]. Therefore, OCC is different from traditional classification in that the former learns the distribution of the IC samples while the latter learns the decision boundary between IC and OC. The training of OCC is less affected by imbalanced sample size of IC and OC while traditional classifiers suffers from model bias due to such imbalance.
There are many OCC methods, including probabilistic OCC, distance-based OCC, reconstruction-based OCC, and domain-based OCC [1]. Recently, end-to-end networks have been successfully used in OCCs. Dimokranitou et al. [7] used adversarial autoencoders and achieved comparable performance with benchmarks in video-anomaly detection. Zenati et al. [8] investigated BiGAN in anomaly detection and applied joint training for bidirectional mapping between the image space and the latent space, leading to superior results on the MNIST dataset. Akcay et al. [6] proposed GANomaly, which uses the encoder-decoder-encoder architecture in an adversarial training framework for anomaly detection and adds a loss constraint between two latent variables of the encoder. Sabokrou et al. [9] proposed ALOCC utilizing an encode-decode architecture to achieve OCC by enhancing the IC samples while distorting the OC samples with an adversarial learning method similar to that in GAN. This network was the first end-to-end network used in a reconstruction-based OCC network. Moreover, although attention mechanism was reported to decreases the number of parameters and can improve image classification accuracy [10], its effectiveness in OCC is seldom reported. SAGAN [11], proposed by Zhang, showed that the self-attention mechanism effectively improves GAN performance.
Inspired by SAGAN, we propose a new attention mechanism to improve both the reconstruction and the classification performance of ALOCC. A new adversarial balance loss is also proposed to address imbalance of the generator and discriminator that evidently causes training fluctuation, which further improves the OCC accuracy. The proposed OCC achieves state-of-art performance in UCSD, MNIST, and COIL-100 datasets under the proposed attention mechanism, and the new loss improves the OCC accuracy compared to the original ALOCC network and better reconstructs the IC samples and distorts the OC samples.
