With the rapid development of 3D model technology, e.g., 3D acquisition and 3D reconstruction, a large number of 3D models have been created. Therefore, the efficient and concise 3D shape analysis technologies are becoming more and more important. Among them, non-rigid 3D shape retrieval is one of the most important and hot topic. Although a large number of approaches of non-rigid 3D shape retrieval have been proposed (Bronstein et al., 2011; Litman et al., 2014; Xie et al., 2015; Ghodrati and Hamza, 2017), it remains a challenging problem due to the perturbations of deformation, the noises of geometry and the changes of topology.
Most methods for non-rigid retrieval usually focus on two aspects: 1) the representation of 3D shapes. 2) the metric of these representations. The intrinsic representation is crucial for retrieval. A large number of methods utilize intrinsic descriptors to construct representation. Most of the intrinsic descriptors are extracted by Laplace-Beltrami Operator (LBO), such as ShapeDNA (Reuter et al., 2006), Global Point Signature (GPS) (Rustamov, 2007), Heat Kernel Signature (HKS) (Sun et al., 2009), scale-invariant HKS (siHKS) (Bronstein and Kokkinos, 2010), Wave Kernel Signature (WKS) (Aubry et al., 2011), etc. Intrinsic descriptors are usually categorized as local and global. The global descriptors contain the structure information of the shapes, and can be used to measure similarities between the shapes in dataset directly. However, they usually underperform due to the lack of the local information. Therefore, most 3D retrieval methods take attention to using the local descriptors. For the local descriptors, various retrieval approaches, such as Bag of Words (BoW) and locality constrained linear coding (LLC) (Wang et al., 2010), encode local descriptors to construct the representations of shapes. However, most traditional methods construct the representation by encoding one type of local descriptor, which leads to a lack of enough geometric information for retrieval task. For the similarity measurement, proper distance metric of the representation should be determined for shape retrieval. Most conventional methods utilize the Euclidean metric or hand-craft metric to measure the similarity between the representations (Bronstein et al., 2011; Kuang et al., 2015). However, the geometric information loss and errors may result in invalid retrieval for the Euclidean metric. To overcome this problem, some shape retrieval methods explore machine learning to improve the retrieval results (Chiotellis et al., 2016; Ohbuchi and Furuya, 2010). Joint Bayesian (Chen et al., 2012) is one of the methods that has been used successfully to face verification, and it can be utilized to learn robust distance metric for 3D retrieval.
In this paper, we propose a novel 2D representation that contains adequate geometric information to discriminate the 3D shapes, and exploit joint Bayesian to learn the distance metric in GI space. Specifically, we first construct a set of the joint distributions of well-known local and global shape signatures, named Graphical Image (GI). A multi-scale GI can be obtained by concatenating GIs with different scale distributions. Then, we exploit the joint Bayesian to learn an appropriate metric in the multi-scale GI space, which is appropriate for 3D shape discrimination. Finally, we apply the proposed GI and the learned metric to non-rigid 3D shape retrieval. Several experiments show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art non-rigid 3D shape retrieval methods. Fig. 1 shows the pipeline of this proposed framework. The main contributions of this present paper can be summarized as follows:•A new 2D representation (Multi-scale GI) is proposed to well describe the non-rigid 3D models with both local and global information. It bridges the gap between 2D images and 3D graphical models, and has several advantageous properties, including high discrimination, isometric invariance, robust to noise and topological changes.•Joint Bayesian is exploited to learn the new metric in the GI space. We apply the metric to non-rigid 3D shape retrieval, and it outperforms the state-of-art non-rigid 3D shape retrieval methods.Download : Download high-res image (79KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Pipeline of our approach.
The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief overview of previous related work of the local descriptor and the shape retrieval. In Section 3, we describe the details of constructing proposed multi-scale GI. In Section 4, we present the learning based 3D shape retrieval. In Section 5, we show the results of our experiment. Section 6 concludes the paper.
