Cancer arises from the unrestrained growth of cells in a specific region of the body. These swiftly splitting cells may result in a mass, microcalcifications, or architectural abnormalities which are commonly known as tumors [1]. It is a major concern with significant social and financial implications in the public health issue. In this context, breast cancer holds the second position for causing deaths among females (above the age of 50) across the globe. According to a report of the American Cancer Society (ACS), approximately 40,610 patients died due to breast cancer in the USA during the year 2017 [2]. Although several reports claim that genetics and tobacco are mostly cancer-causing factors, however, the actual reason behind this cell metastasis is yet to be clarified. Thus, early detection and diagnosis are believed to be the keystone of breast cancer treatment. Breast cancer identified at its early stage can be treated at an ease, whereas later stage increases the chances of mortality to a large extent.
Breast cancer detection can be done using different imaging techniques like digital mammography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), X-ray imaging, and ultrasound imaging. Among these techniques, digital mammography is a widely accepted technique. Mammography utilizes X-rays to generate images of the human breast. Two different types of mammography techniques are used, namely, film-based and screen-based mammography. The later technique is mostly preferred because of its efficacy, cost-effectiveness, and ability to provide the minute details of the mammograms. Moreover, since it is capable of identifying the abnormalities at its early stage, the probability of cure of a given patient increases significantly [3].
Various developed countries organize screening mammography programs across the nation for early detection and diagnosis of breast cancer. It is suggested that every woman above the age of 40 must go through a mammography check-up once every two years to reduce the mortality rate occurring [4], [5]. However, the correct reading of mammography images is a challenging and erroneous job. Even the experienced and skilled radiologists sometimes fail to interpret correctly, because of the complex structure of breast abnormalities, and the highly-dense fibro glandular tissue. It results in more false-positive and/or false-negative cases. Additionally, it is also troublesome for the radiologists to double read the large database of mammographic images.
Hence, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems act as a cost-effective alternative to this real-time problem, which assists the radiologists in the decision making process. The CAD system, which utilizes the advanced technologies to detect and diagnose the abnormalities in mammogram can be a cornerstone in early identification of cancer, and aid in minimizing the mortality across the world [6].
The CAD systems in the field of digital mammography can be of two types, namely, computer-aided detection (CADe) and computer-aided diagnosis (CADx) systems. The former is used to identify the abnormal areas in the mammograms for further analysis, while the latter is used to decide whether the suspected regions are healthy, benign or malignant [7]. The potency of a CAD model mainly depends on three major modules: (a) feature extraction, (b) feature selection and/or reduction, and (c) classifier model.
The present work intends to design a potential hybrid CAD model to reinforce an accurate diagnosis of breast cancer. In this context, the prime motivation of the work is outlined below.
•Exploiting the cross-diagonal texture matrix technique (CDTM) to obtain the texture features of the mammogram ROIs.•Exploring the kernel-based principal component analysis (KPCA) technique to address the non-linearity dimensionality reduction.•Investigating a kernel-based extreme learning machine (KELM) algorithm to classify the digital mammograms.
It may be noted that the effectiveness of any classifier primarily depends upon the features provided as input and the values of its internal parameters. Hence to address this, the prime objective of the present work is listed below.
•Segregating the entire mammogram ROI into several non-overlapping blocks and extracting the local features using CDTM approach.•Developing a wrapper-based learning algorithm using the combination of the grasshopper optimization algorithm (GOA) and KELM to obtain the relevant features and optimal values of the kernel parameters of KELM, simultaneously.
The proposed model is experimented on two publicly available standard datasets, namely, MIAS and DDSM. A total of 319 and 1500 images are collected from MIAS and DDSM, respectively. MIAS has 207 normal, 64 benign, and 48 malignant cases. Similarly, in the case of DDSM, the counts are 519, 479, and 502 for normal, benign, and malignant, respectively.
The rest of the sections of the present article are structured as follows: Section 2 elaborately reviews some of the recent CAD schemes. Section 3 provides some preliminary insights about cross diagonal texture matrix, grasshopper optimization algorithm, and KELM methodologies. Section 4 represents the working principles of the proposed approach. The experimental results, its analysis and comparative study with different benchmark schemes are delineated in Section 5. Finally, the concluding remarks along with scope for future improvements are reflected in Section 6.
