Today, Brain Computer Interfaces (BCIs) are bridging the ultimate frontier between humans and computers. For, these facilitate controlling computers intentionally through the monitoring of brain signal activities.
An equipment commonly used in BCI systems for recording brain signals is Electroencephalography (EEG). It is widely preferred owing to its non-invasiveness, mobility potential in the user, high time resolution and comparatively low cost. Though BCI can be set to use signals in different ways for facilitating control, an extensive area of research interest is motor imagery (MI) BCIs. This is owed to the immense potential for their applicability in fields including gaming, neuro-prosthetics and neuro-rehabilitation, where the user’s thoughts of imagined movements need to be decoded [1].
For instance, EEG recordings of left and right motor imagery can be utilized to move a target or a cursor on a computer screen. This can provide a new communication channel to take the place of a disabled motor function in an individual. It can be utilized to develop a simple binary response that would help ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) patients to reply to particular questions [21]. Thus, it can help improve the living quality of such patients.
EEG signals are recognized in two phases, viz., feature extraction and classification. Feature extraction helps in distinguishing the signals of interest from the activities in background. This is needed because EEG signals are mixtures of noises and effective signals. Researchers have used various feature extraction techniques including entropy, phase, auto-regression, wavelet transform, spatial filter, etc. [3].
After feature extraction, classification of the extracted features of interest is done. Various classification methods have been used for recognizing the EEG signals. There are two major classification methods, viz. linear classification and non-linear classification. The commonly used linear classification is linear discrimination analysis; and the non-linear ones used widely are support vector machines, and neural networks [9].
Irrespective of the methods chosen for feature extraction or classification, considerable difference in classification accuracy is observed often.
ELM [7] plays a vital role in research fields like machine learning and artificial intelligence because of its attractive characteristics such as rapid training, better conclusion, worldwide resemblance and classification competence. It has been an efficient way of solving the problem with the help of SLFN (Single Hidden Layer Feed Forward Network) to depict the efficiency/velocity in different functions such as facet classification [15], picture division [18], and brain activity identification [6].
In this paper, we propose a Hybrid-KELM (Kernel Extreme Learning Machine) method based on PCA (Principal Component Analysis) and FLD (Fisher's Linear Discriminant) for MI BCI classification of EEG data.
The rest of the paper is arranged in the following manner. Section 2 presents the related work. Section 3 describes the methodology adopted. Section 4 describes the experimental setup, and Section 5 is the conclusion.
