Online open book assessment (test/examination) is not a new assessment method in higher education. It has been used in many online undergraduate and postgraduate courses for years. Students are allowed to use any reference resources for answering questions during the assessments without supervision.1 It can be conducted in either a tightly time restricted (e.g. 2–3 h for completion) or take home (e.g. 24–48 h) format.2 Due to COVID-19 restrictions on gathering and movement for infection control, it has become one of the common assessment methods to replace traditional invigilated assessments.3, 4, 5 The use of the online open book assessment is to gauge individual students’ development of knowledge against academic and/or professional standards. This is to ensure that they possess adequate capabilities to meet requirements of their own study and/or work in the future. If they obtain assistance from others to complete their assessments, this is determined as cheating because the submitted works do not represent their own knowledge achievement. In any academic setting, the students must demonstrate honesty, which is known as academic integrity. The unsupervised nature of the online open book assessment increases ease of cheating. For example, the students can approach contract cheating websites, and paid or unpaid third parties (e.g. classmates, friends, relatives, etc.) for the assistance in completing the assessment tasks, breaching the academic integrity requirement.4, 5, 6, 7, 8
For meeting the academic integrity requirement, various universities provide online open book assessment design guidelines to assist their staff in developing this online assessment appropriately. One common suggestion is to use long questions that require application of knowledge or reflection on personal experience for the assessment, and avoid setting factual recall questions (e.g. multiple choice and short questions, etc.). For example, a long question that requires students to tailor their answer specific to a scenario (e.g. solving a particular problem, etc.) or to demonstrate their achievement of learning objectives based on their own experience is recommended. Also, limiting the assessment time can reduce the chance for them to seek assistance from other parties.2,8,9 However, a recent large Australian study involving 14,086 students and 1,147 teaching staff has shown that the students are more likely to cheat in the assessments with the knowledge application and the short completion time (e.g. 3–7 days) requirements. This is because of increased difficulty and pressure associated with the time constraint.6 That research evidence seems against the aforementioned universities’ suggestions to certain extent.
For the author's institution, similar to other universities worldwide,3, 4, 5 the traditional invigilated assessments were not allowed during the pandemic (first half of 2020). Every unit (subject) coordinator needed to rush at converting the original invigilated assessments to other suitable alternatives. The most common alternative was the online open book assessment. This is because it would be unnecessary to change the original assessment questions if they were in line with the universities' online open book assessment design guidelines, addressing the tight time constraint.2,4,8,9 The author was a coordinator of a radiologic pathology unit (Medical Radiation Pathology 2) for third year medical imaging and radiation therapy students of an Australian Bachelor of Science (Medical Radiation Science) course. Originally, this unit had three traditional invigilated assessments, including a 50-min mid-semester test, a 50-min end of semester test, and a 2-h final examination. For meeting the unit learning outcomes and registering body's (Medical Radiation Practice Board of Australia [MRPBA]) professional capability requirements,10 each of the two tests had six long essay questions, which required the students to interpret six cases with patients' clinical histories and multimodality medical images (including general radiography, fluoroscopy, mammography, ultrasound, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and nuclear medicine), and construct written, informed opinions about medically significant findings in a timely fashion. The final examination had five long, 19 short, and 12 multiple choice questions.
To mitigate COVID-19 impacts, it was decided to remove the final examination from this unit since the first and the second halves of this unit contents were covered by the mid-semester and the end of semester assessments. It was unnecessary to have one more assessment to evaluate the students' capabilities. Also, due to the authentic nature of the two tests,10,11 no change was made to the original papers for their online delivery except the end of semester assessment duration. This change of the duration was required by the university that any online assessment administered after May 1, 2020 must have a duration of at least 4 h and open for a minimum period of 24 h. This arrangement allowed the students to handle any potential technical problems, such as internet interruption encountered during the assessment. The end of semester assessment duration became 4 h and it was open for 24 h for the students to download the online paper and submit the completed work to a Turnitin dropbox (Turnitin, CA, USA) for cheating detection and marking. Both online assessments had the same numbers of questions (six long essay questions), answer requirements and marks allocated to each, but covering different body systems. These settings were also the same as those of previous year's traditional invigilated 50-min mid-semester and end of semester assessments. Levels of difficulty of 2019's and 2020's assessments were similar, although the questions were different.
Despite the recent research findings showing the assessments with the knowledge application and the short completion time requirements being the facilitators of the assessment cheating,6 these arrangements were recommended by different universities for maintaining the integrity of the online open book assessment.2,8,9 It is worthwhile to investigate any impact of the assessment durations on the integrity of the online open book assessment with the knowledge application requirement. This study's purpose was to evaluate the integrity of the two online open book assessments with different time limits implemented in a radiologic pathology unit of a Bachelor of Science (Medical Radiation Science) course during the pandemic. It is expected that this study's outcomes can provide further insights about the appropriate time limit for avoiding the cheating in the online open book assessment, which has become the common assessment method in response to the pandemic.3,4,8
