Brain-computer interface is a technology that establishes communication or control pathways between the human brain and external devices; in this way, brain activity can be used to control external devices [1], [2], [3]. BCIs have been successfully used in medicine, neurobiology and psychology and possess promising commercial prospects in the fields of virtual reality, educational technology, and smart homes [4], [5]. The motor imagery (MI) electroencephalogram (EEG) is an endogenous, spontaneous EEG. It is simple, flexible, and noninvasive, and its advantages include low environmental requirements, good temporal resolution and low-cost equipment. Thus, MI EEG-based BCIs are one of the most widely applied paradigms [6], [7]. The MI EEG paradigm collects the EEG signal when the subject imagines a specific motion, recognizes the imagined task according to the EEG signal, and then converts the recognition result into a control command to realize the control of a peripheral device. Recently, MI-based EEG classification-related research has mainly focused on three aspects, namely, the equipment and technology for collecting EEG signals, the method of feature extraction and the training of classifiers [8].
During the execution of MI, the frequency band power of the EEG signals changes according to the content of the imagined task, and these phenomena are called event-related desynchronization (ERD) and event-related synchronizationand (ERS) [9]. Features based on ERD/ERS are efficient in the classification of MI. The common spatial pattern (CSP) and its variants take advantage of the ERD/ERS phenomenon by maximizing or minimizing the variance ratio in the EEG signals from the two classes [10], and the features extracted based on the CSP algorithm are discriminative in two-class MI-based EEG classifications [11]. In recent years, CPS-based features have achieved great success in MI-based BCI systems [12]. Because the CSP algorithm is highly dependent on the covariance matrix of the EEG signals, the performance is greatly affected by the sample numbers. The regularized common spatial pattern was proposed to overcome performance degradation in a small-sample setting, and parameters are involved in the trade-off between the variance and the bias of the covariance matrix estimation [13]. Ang introduced the filter band CSP (FBCSP) algorithm that won the BCI Competition IV on datasets 2a and 2b. The CSP-based features are extracted from 9 subbands to efficiently capture the ERD/ERS phenomenon [14]. Kumar proposed a CSP-based algorithm that applied tangent space mapping (TSM) in the manifold of covariance matrixes for MI-based BCI [15]. The discriminative frequency bands vary from subject to subject. Therefore, many researchers try to recognize the most effective frequency bands and utilize the EEG signals in these bands to improve the performance of the CSP algorithm [14], [16], [17], [18]. Thomas proposed the discriminative CSP method (DCSP). Fisher’s ratio was imposed to select the most discriminative frequency bands, and the specific selected frequency bands of each subject are leveraged to extract features [16]. Two mutual information based alogrightms (The mutual information-based best individual feature algorithm and mutual information-based rough set reduction algorithms) were used to find the most discriminative features in the FBCSP [14]. Kumar proposed an improved discriminative FBCSP (IDCSP) method for MI-based EEG classification. The mutual information is calculated based on the extracted feature of different frequency bands, and the best bandpass filters are selected and applied for classification [19]. Zhang proposed a sparse Bayesian learning algorithm to obtain sparse EEG frequency band-based feature matrix. The features with large weight are employed to accomplish the classification with a linear discriminant criterion [18]. Yang proposed a Fisher wavelet packet decomposition (WPD)-CSP algorithm that found the most helpful subbands for a specific subject by the Fisher distance, and the WPD-based features and CSP-based features are combined and fed to the probabilistic neural network classifier [20].
The traditional approaches improve the classification results by selecting the discriminative features or frequency bands and abandoning the rest. In this way, the searching space of the classifier is shrunk, and the difficulty of the machine learning task is reduced. As a result, a better solution is easily obtained. However, feature selection procedures do not improve the separability of the extracted features. Second, the stability of the CSP algorithm decreases in few-channel EEG system. To overcome these weaknesses, the class discrepancy-guided subband filter-based common spatial pattern (CDFCSP) was proposed [21]. CDFCSP could make use of the a priori knowledge from the training set to augment the EEG signals in discriminative frequency bands, and extend the number of the EEG channel before feature extraction.
The event-related potential (ERP) is an event-related brain activity that could cause time-locked fluctuation in the EEG signals, and the possible event includes sensory stimuli, imagery and so on [9], [22]. The EEG signals amplitudes from the sensorimotor area of the brain will appear time-lock incresing or decreasing depending on the imagined task [22]. Recently, ERP-based MI classification studies have been proposed [23], [24]. Some researchers have proved that the movement-related potential and the ERD provide complementary information when volitional finger movements are prepared and executed [25]. In our previous study of the two-class MI-based EEG classification problem, the spatiotemporal discrepancy feature (STDF) was proposed to take advantage of the ERP. Compared with the ERD/ERS-based features, the STDF performed well in different subjects. Therefore, combining the advantages of ERD/ERS-based features and ERP-based features becomes a key problem to further improve the performance of MI.
As the support vector machine (SVM) algorithms are the most popular method for MI classification [26], [27], aiming to improve the performance of two-category MI-based EEG classification in a few-channel situation, an ensemble support vector learning (ESVL)-based approach is proposed to combine the merits of the ERD/ERS-based features and the ERP-based features in MI-based EEG classification. The decision boundary with the largest interclass margins is obtained using the SVM algorithm, and the distances between sample points and the decision boundary are mapped to posterior probabilities [28]. The probabilities obtained from different SVM classifiers are combined to predict the ESVL classifier. Specifically, the proposed method is composed of three steps. First, the a priori knowledge is extracted from the EEG in the training set to design CDF. The EEG signals augmented by the CDF is applied to extract features through the CSP algorithm. Second, the difference between the EEG signal from left and right sensorimotor area of the brain is evaluated to obtain the STDF. Finally, the extracted CDFCSP-based features and the STDF are used to train the ESVL classifier and make predictions. The experiments performance of the proposed ESVL based algorithm is evaluated based on the BCI Competition IV datasets 2a and 2b.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the proposed ESVL-based approach. Section 3 presents BCI Competition IV datasets 2a and 2b as well as the experiments. Section 4 discusses the experiments results. Section 5 draws the conclusion.
