The subject of “game design” is far too broad to admit any form of concise top-down treatment, but often it is possible to glean general concepts and principles from bottom-up consideration of concrete examples. In the case of particular board games, e.g., Monopoly, it is straightforward to identify specific features that people find to be engaging and entertaining [7], [10], and from these it’s possible to identify general principles that explain the appeal not only of similar board games but also a wider variety of other games as well. However, these general principles would not be sufficient to permit an alien scholar to predict, or derive as being inevitable, the actual existence of such games as a genre. That’s because the genre’s existence has less to do with objectively discernible attributes and more to do with historical happenstance: someone developed the first instance of the kind, it became popular, and subsequent similar games were developed to leverage not only the popular attributes of that first game but also the newly existing familiarity of those attributes among general consumers. In other words, once the initial instance became popular the genre could evolve incrementally with improvements that would be appreciated by consumers without the steep learning curve of a completely de novo game.
The availability of relatively low-cost computers in the 1970s created opportunities to not only design a new class of games tailored to leverage the unique capabilities of the new technology but also to adapt existing games for computer implementation. A good example is the popular card game Solitaire1. Variations of this game are found pre-installed on most home computers and smart devices. It is interesting to note which features of the game are simulated and which are not. In theory, it would seem that the game could be implemented using any set of distinct shapes and/or color designs instead of simulating the suits of a traditional 52-card deck of playing cards. But to do so would sacrifice the familiarity of the game to consumers. In other words, while the logic of the game would be identical it wouldn’t be Solitaire from the perspective of most consumers. In fact, current versions of Solitaire differ little from early computer implementations even though advances in computing power could permit a highly realistic simulation of human hands holding and manipulating cards to more closely emulate how the game is played with real cards. This suggests that current implementations include the salient features necessary to capture the experience and serve as an acceptable replacement for the traditional form of the game.
Traditional Solitaire (Klondike) emerged as one of the most popular and widely-played computer games, and it spawned a family of Solitaire-like games that also became popular despite the fact that they were not convenient to play with actual cards. One such example is TriPeaks[15], which requires cards to be arranged in three overlapping triangular configurations that would be cumbersome to maintain in a neat-and-orderly form using real cards on a real table. As such, it represents one of the first examples of a virtual card game designed specifically to be played on a computer. Now there are many other games that are similarly designed to exploit the familiarity of Solitaire in a form that leverages the advantages of computer simulation. In this paper we will examine the process of adapting and redefining an existing game for computer simulation in a way that reveals a sequence of concrete steps in which mathematical and algorithmic considerations can be applied.
