As technology evolves, investors are using a variety of devices to access, read, and trade on online financial information. One of the most significant changes in recent years is investors’ increasing use of mobile devices (e.g., smartphones) rather than computers to make online investment decisions (Fidelity, 2014; Miller & Skinner, 2015), which ultimately can have a significant impact on market outcomes (Brown, Stice, & White, 2015). Theory suggests that this shift in device use has important implications for how investors process information and make decisions (Brasel & Gips, 2014; McDevitt, 2012; Mueller & Oppenheimer, 2014), which implies that using a mobile device may change how investors respond to managers’ presentation choices relative to using a computer. In this study, we examine if, relative to computers, mobile devices induce a distracted frame of mind, causing investors to rely more heavily on a presentation choice that emphasizes a certain part of the news.
Prior research about mobile device use suggests that mobile devices will increase investors’ distracted frame of mind (Jacobsen & Forste, 2011; Strayer & Johnston, 2001; Thompson, Rivara, Ayyagari, & Ebel, 2013), which theory predicts will encourage investors to default to their natural propensity towards reliance on summaries of information (e.g., headlines) rather than the details (Ashton, 1976; Bushee, 2001; Graham, Harvey, & Rajgopal, 2005). We expect mobile devices, relative to computers, to cause a distracted frame of mind because they generate more device-driven interruptions (e.g., push notifications) and because people become used to allocating some portion of their limited attention to their ever-present mobile devices. We focus on how using mobile devices influences investors’ reactions to a presentation choice that has received little attention in the literature to date: the headline associated with the financial information. Headlines are the text displayed on news sites, search engines, and firm webpages next to the link to the full version of the press release and are also the first text in the press release document when it is opened (BusinessWire, 2010). We examine headlines because they are the first and most prominent exposure investors have to financial information. Further, as firms increasingly use social media to disclose financial information, headlines are also often the text tweeted to announce results (Blankespoor, Miller, & White, 2014). This prominence means that headlines have the potential to impact how investors process information in a press release (McCrudden & Schraw, 2007; Otero & Kintsch, 1992). Specifically, headlines focusing on a specific detail like net income could focus investors’ attention on that specific detail within the press release, relative to headlines that are general in nature and provide no such direction. We predict that when investors use mobile devices, the information related to a specific headline will have a larger effect (or information not related to a specific headline will have a smaller effect) on investment judgments, relative to when investors use computers.
We conduct two experiments to test our predictions. Our first experiment uses a 2 × 3 between-subjects design, manipulating the device used to view information and the focus of the headline. We manipulate device by directing half of our participants to complete the study using their personal mobile device, while the other half complete the study using their personal computer. In the experiment, business student participants read and evaluate a press release about a hypothetical company and make an investment judgment. We use a press release in this experiment that includes a positive trend in overall revenues and a negative trend in net income. Therefore, a focus on net income highlights negative information (because of the downward trend), and a focus on revenue highlights positive information (because of the positive trend). We manipulate the headline as general (“Alpha Company Reports 2016 Results”), specific and focusing on a negative part of the news (“Alpha Company Reports 2016 Net Income”), or specific and focusing on a positive part of the news (“Alpha Company Reports 2016 Revenue”). This experimental design allows us to test whether our theory about the interactive effect of device usage and headline is robust to both positive and negative headlines.
The results of this experiment are consistent with our predictions. We find that participants using a mobile device are influenced more by a specific headline than participants using a computer, providing lower valuation judgments when the headline focuses on a negative trend and higher valuation judgments when the headline focuses on a positive trend. Consistent with our theory, this result indicates that participants reviewing information on a mobile device are more heavily influenced by information highlighted by a specific headline, relative to participants reviewing information on a mobile device who view a general headline and to participants reviewing information on a personal computer.
We conduct a second experiment to provide process evidence supporting our theory and additional, complementary evidence for our primary effect. The second experiment uses a 2 × 2 between-subjects design, manipulating the device used to view information and the headline focus. We use a modified press release in this experiment that describes a positive trend in net income, but includes a transitory gain that, if properly evaluated, indicates that net income fell below prior year results. Importantly, the impact of the transitory gain on net income is not explicitly discussed in the press release. We manipulate device by directing half of our participants to complete the study using their personal mobile device, while the other half complete the study on a desktop computer. We manipulate headline focus by varying whether the press release headline is general (“Alpha Company Reports 2015 Results”) or specific (“Alpha Company Reports 2015 Net Income”). Participants make investment judgments, respond to questions measuring distracted frame of mind, and complete the post-experiment questionnaire. We expect participants who use a mobile device (and thus are in a more distracted frame of mind) and receive a specific headline to have more positive judgments, reflecting more reliance on positive net income and/or less understanding of the transitory gain’s impact on the trend in net income.
Results from this experiment are also consistent with our predictions. We find that participants using a mobile device are influenced more by a specific headline than participants using a computer, providing higher investment judgments when the headline focuses on positive net income. Process evidence suggests that participants using a mobile device are in a more distracted frame of mind than participants using a computer, and as a result, are influenced more by a specific headline, ultimately affecting their investment judgments.
Our study makes several contributions. First, we contribute to the literature on how and why investors’ judgments differ when reviewing information on a mobile device, relative to a computer. Grant (2019) demonstrates that smaller screen sizes increase scrolling and thereby increase investors’ processing costs, relative to computers. Our experiments hold scrolling relatively constant across conditions, and our results show that using a mobile device, relative to using a computer, increases investors’ distracted frame of mind, causing investors’ judgments to be influenced more by the subset of information that is prominent. Thus, we complement Grant (2019) by demonstrating an additional reason why using mobile devices differentially affects investors’ judgments, relative to using computers.
We also contribute to the literature on prominence effects. Archival research finds that the market reacts more strongly to an earnings metric (e.g., Bowen, Davis, & Matsumoto, 2005; Huang, Nekrasov, & Teoh, 2018) or restatement (e.g., Files, Swanson, & Tse, 2009) released in a highly prominent location in a press release, like the headline. Experimental research also finds that salient or prominent metrics are weighted more heavily in investors’ judgments (e.g., Elliott, 2006; Elliott, Hobson, & White, 2015; Hirst & Hopkins, 1998; Maines & McDaniel, 2000). We contribute to this literature in two ways. First, we show that prominent information affects judgments more when investors use their mobile devices to process disclosures than when they use computers. Second, we contribute to this literature by introducing a novel proxy for prominence to the literature – qualitative headlines that have the potential to direct attention to specific quantitative components of a disclosure, but that do not actually repeat the quantitative information themselves. We operationalize a specific, qualitative headline with words like “net income” or “revenue” instead of quantitative net income or revenue amounts. Thus, we extend previous research by demonstrating that simply using different words in headlines affects investors’ subsequent processing of the entire disclosure.
Although we only test the joint effect of mobile device-induced distraction and one proxy for prominent information, headlines, we expect our theory to generalize to other types of attention-directing or prominent information. That is, we expect the distracted frame of mind induced by mobile devices to increase investors’ reliance on the information in a disclosure that is relatively more prominent. Other management choices that could affect prominence include placement within a press release, the word count devoted to discussing a topic, differential use of font types or size, images, and the use and placement of pro forma metrics. Future research could examine how these alternative types of prominence interact with mobile device use when investors review financial information. Our study should help both researchers and practitioners consider how these types of prominence effects might influence investors’ reactions to financial information to a greater extent when they process financial information on their mobile devices.
