The fundamental building block of a biological organism is the living cell, to the point that is has been argued that its creation is the crowning step in the development of life (Pollack, 2001, Wolpert, 2008). Wolpert championed the idea that once a cell is fertilized, strategic positioning of certain proteins onto and into it (a process termed gastrulation) is the most determinant time in the life of most animals because it impacts the course of morphogenesis and, eventually, the structure of an adult organism. The potential importance of morphogenesis for information sciences was recognized early on by Alan Turing in Turing (1950), where he focused on possible mechanisms underlying the formation of memory patterns and their resilience in biological organisms. Since then, morphogenesis can be viewed as a set of algorithmic strategies achieved through a complexification process distributed in space and time, and emerging from the bottom-up through local interactions among atomic components of cells. Such a view allows to study phenomena such as internal dynamical homeostasis, self-reproduction, self-healing, and their relationships, from the algorithmic point of view (Doursat et al., 2012). For a collection of studies pointing to the importance of topological and geometric features we refer the reader to, e.g., Bourgine and Lesne (2010). Important physical phenomena in biology inspiring our algorithmic approach further include, for instance, the role of chemical gradients in chemical signaling in the living cell (Robinson and Messerli, 2003), the importance of cell membrane mechanics for the control of cell shape and morphogenesis (Lecuit and Lenne, 2007), or the function of mechano-sensitive protein channels in E. coli (Blount et al., 1996).
Following up on this idea, two major computational approaches have been pursued to address these questions, namely membrane computing (Păun et al., 2010) and virtual cells (Tomita, 2001). While the latter presents elaborate approaches to the construction of whole cell models in silico, relying on a complex hierarchy of functional levels, the core idea of the former is the role of compartmentalization in the living cell, through the lens of computational complexity as conceptualized in computer science. A survey of results in membrane computing specifically related to morphogenesis can be found in the introductory section of Sosík et al. (2018). Evidence of the power, at least computationally, of walls separating compartments is that relatively simple P systems have been shown to be computational universal (Sosík and Langer, 2016). A more general and systematic approach to formalization of spatial and geometrical interaction in complex (biological) systems is the 3π calculus (Cardelli and Gardner, 2010) based on process algebra. A P system model of formation of a Myxobacterial colony (Nash and Kalvala, 2019) can serve as a recent example of their application in biological modeling. Finally, the membrane-based model of Dictyostelium discoideum’s typical shape formation reported in Manca and Pardini (2014) has a special degree of relevance to our research. Authors work with abstract membranes with a given size/volume whose movements are controlled by chemical signals and mutual contacts and positions of cells. The cells can then functionally and positionally differentiate and form a functional colony with a complex behavior.
The aim of our research is to bring together two models that have been well developed in the last two decades, namely P systems and self-assembly, to achieve self-controlled growth and emerging global behavior that is consistent with macro-properties observable in biological organisms, but which can be explained through nondeterministic local interactions of elementary components. The massive parallelism involved requires balancing three desirable properties to the best degree possible: biological realism, physical–chemical realism and computational realism. For biological realism, the observables in the model must reflect, at least to some level of granularity, the corresponding macroscopic observables and known properties of biological organisms, regardless of whether they faithfully describe factual biological processes. Physical–chemical realism implies a focus on appropriate data structures and algorithmic interactions capturing critical components and/or dynamic processes occurring in a living cell. Finally, to achieve computational tractability, the model must keep an appropriate level of granularity, abstracting from many details including the central dogma of molecular biology (the transformation of DNA to RNA to protein), and focusing on spatial interactions as the key mechanisms behind its dynamics.
Towards this aim, we introduced a new formal model, morphogenetic (M) systems, in Sosík et al. (2017). An M system is intended to address the general question of whether morphogenesis and its characteristic properties (such as internal dynamical homeostasis, self-reproduction, and self-healing) can be meaningfully understood from the perspective of information processing, at some level of abstraction. An introduction to M systems can be found at the M systems web page http://sosik.zam.slu.cz/msystem/. Unlike P systems, which assume cell as a given static atomic assembly unit of an abstract nature, M systems construct a developmental structure from 1D or 2D primitives allowing for gradual self-assembly of 3D (multi)cell-like forms. The fundamental object in a P system is a set of membranes that separates a virtual cell from the external world or the various parts within it. M systems enrich this concept with spatial features inspired in the self-organization of biological systems, including the role of geometric shape and form.
To implement space and geometry in M systems, we have employed and generalized another bio-inspired approach — algorithmic self-assembly, originated in DNA computing (Winfree, 1998, Winfree, 2006, Krasnogor et al., 2011). The resulting M systems demonstrated their computational universality (in the Turing sense) in Sosík et al. (2017), and also their computational efficiency in solving NP-hard problems in probabilistic polynomial time (Sosík et al., 2018). In the same paper, their resistance to injuries and its self-healing capability were also theoretically confirmed. On the other hand, computational experiments have proven the ability of M systems to reflect, to some degree, the corresponding macroscopic observables of growth of biological organisms (independently of whether they faithfully describe factual atomic processes in biological organisms), while maintaining their computational feasibility. Modeling of cell formation, growth and division has been demonstrated in Sosík et al., 2017, Sosík et al., 2018, while in Sosík et al. (2019) the authors studied, both theoretically and experimentally, simulations of another model of development, Lindenmayer systems (L systems), within the framework of M systems, exploiting their communication capability through a common environment.
In this work we report results of a series of experiments with M systems inspired by various aspects of cell formation, growth dynamics and self-healing properties. To carry out these experiments, we have developed a software package Cytos for simulation of M systems. The name reflects its initial application to implement models of abstract cells detailed enough to grow a cytoskeleton and self-regulation through cell fission. Cytos consists of a simulation engine and a visualization tool with an intuitive user interface, where a whole M system can be specified and implemented without any actual programming.
The paper begins with a description of the Cytos software package. We then describe the results of a series of experiments run on the software. In Section 2, we summarize the general design and structure of M systems. Section 3 describes the simulation engine, including a brief review of similar software packages for P systems. Our visualization tool, powered by the Unity game engine, is described in Section 3.5. Section 4 contains visualizations of simulations of three M systems representing growth of cell-like colonies of various types. Sections 5 Self-healing in M systems, 6 Effect of nutrient concentration present results of further experiments focusing on the phenomena of cell self-healing and growth under limited nutrient supply, respectively. Finally, in Section 7, we discuss the results and present some outlook concerning further applications of M systems and Cytos.
