We have witnessed that more applications are moving to mobile or web page-based applications instead of desktop applications. Services like shopping, billing, communication, and transportation can all be done with an internet browser or web page application instead of a sizeable application that is installed onto the desktop computers. Web page applications are commonly used to exchange information between users. However, there is a common issue with this approach, the processing of huge amounts of information on the web. Web pages for serving news have issues for providing accurate information in a timely manner since they have to serve thousands of users in short periods of time and have many articles to be processed for accuracy for easy filtering.
Despite having to handle Big-Data, web applications are the most accessible application for users to get updated information. Being able to load an application in seconds without installation attracts many users resulting in the need for huge amounts of computational power to serve users in seconds with the results they were expecting. This network traffic can be mitigated by categorizing data more affectively and classifiers can be used for data mining. The process of data mining is to find features in huge amounts of data records to minimize how much data needs to be evaluated when a user is filtering through it. These features depend on the application, with web news the features could be news content, users’ behavior, visiting frequency, etc. There are different branches of data mining as described in (Smita, 2014), one is the predictive branch which includes classification, regression, time series analysis, and prediction. Another is the descriptive branch which includes clustering, summarization, association rules, and sequence discovery. The applications for data mining are to improve search engines by classifying web documents and identifying usage patterns allowing for the understanding of user behavior on a web application. The understanding of what users want to see will keep them using the application for longer and consistently.
The contribution of this article is to demonstrate how features like article content using classifiers such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree (DT), Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM), and K-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) can reduce computation strain on time and space complexity. In particular, we conducted a comparative study among several machine learning algorithms for filtering web-based news contents.
The rest of this article is structured as following: section II presents related work to the study. Section III presents the proposed method using the four classifiers as mentioned above. Section IV demonstrates the obtained results after a set of experiments. Section V concludes the article with key points.
