While there is an assumed global adoption of the phrase cybercrime (and its variants) in our modern languages, a universally-agreed upon definition, understanding and constituents of cybercrime remain elusive (Goodman, 1996; Brenner and Goodman, 2002; Kerr, 2003; Broadhurst, 2006; Wilson, 2008; Zavrsnik, 2008; Ngo and Paternoster, 2011; Hargreaves and Prince, 2013; Kirwan and Power, 2013; Brown, 2015; Viano, 2017). In this respect, our paper defines cybercrime and develops a taxonomy of cybercrime.
The literature generally agrees that cybercrime fundamentally alters the nature of a traditional (offline) criminal act. Thus, a security issue is a cybersecurity issue, if it involves the use of a computer, its related technology and the networked system in which it functions to inflict harm—tangible or intangible—on the victim. Therefore, we define cybercrime1 as an act that uses computer technology to commit a crime.
The need for a stable, comprehensive taxonomy stems from a lack of clarity, understanding, uniformity and consistency around cybercrime (SEC, 2015; Europol, 2011; UNODC, 2013; INTERPOL, 2017; DOJ, 2015). The resulting incompleteness leads to an inadequate, ineffective and reactionary approach in tracking and reporting cybercrime - even to the point of denying its existence (UNODC, 2013; SEC, 2015). Bridging the gap with our proposed theory-based taxonomy is particularly important for cybercrime, in view of its continually evolving nature, owing to the ubiquity of the Internet and innovative strides in computer technology.
Inspired from a UN report, the theoretical foundation for our taxonomy has its roots in four building blocks: mutual exclusivity, structure, exhaustiveness, and well-defined categories with clear descriptions (UNODC, 2012). Mutual exclusivity ensures that an act once classified in a group, cannot belong to another group, thus, eliminating overlap. Structure creates broad groups but limits hierarchical levels, thereby, reduces complexity. Exhaustiveness considers all variants of an act, to establish its existence. Well-defined categories ensure a clear identification with description of an event to eliminate ambiguity.
The four building blocks allow for identification and categorization of a unique cybercrime, each characteristically distinct, for determination of its appropriate place in the taxonomy, and for proactive identification of its new variations. The hierarchical classification, inherent in taxonomies, facilitates our understanding of cybercrime and meaningfully organizes its diversity. Organization of elements, using the parent-child relationship, provides structure to manage and measure cybercrimes. From a practical perspective, the resulting conceptual clarity should foster uniform information, standardized measurements and consistent reporting. From an academic and theoretical perspective, our taxonomy should foster precision in associating types of cybercrime with key performance measures and firm characteristics to facilitate an evidence-based regulatory response and to develop prescriptive standards.
The effect of cybercrime is injury or harm inflicted upon a victim. Injuries are tangible (e.g., loss of data or profits) or intangible (e.g., system malfunction or loss of reputation). Both tangible and intangible injuries result in financial loss, either directly or indirectly. Victims are organic (e.g., a natural person) or non-organic (e.g., robots or drones). Therefore, we develop our taxonomy with a victim-centric focus. Victim-types manifest in the following forms: computer technology ecosystem (such as computer system, computer related technologies, networked systems), natural persons, business entities, governments, or property other than computer technology ecosystem.
To identify the effect of a cybercrime, our focus is only on direct victims, which we define as the point of first, direct and immediate impact of a cybercrime. Conversely, relative to a direct victim, an indirect or extended victim is further removed, from the immediate impact, in time and space vector. Our motivation, to focus on direct victims, stems from the fact that in each crime, response and management strategies - such as event identification, business impact analysis, incident response planning, disaster recovery measures, control mechanisms—detective, corrective, preventive—measurement, and reporting are taken with respect to the first, direct and immediate impact of the event. It is worth noting that direct victims are not always the ultimate victims which are individuals, entities or assets that suffer financial loss in a cybercrime. Further, individuals or entities may also have ownership or access rights in assets which lose their value in a cybercrime.
Using a hierarchical structure in a parent-child format, our taxonomy categorizes cybercrimes into ‘pure-technology cybercrime’ and ‘cyber-advanced crime. Each category is progressively subdivided into lower levels with greater precision and clarity to unambiguously define specific acts. Each act is linked to the victim layer for identifying and defining the effect of a cybercrime. Rapid technological advancements (such as AI and self-learning Robots) increase the potential for new species of non-organic cybercriminals (Basalla, 1989; Spector, 2006; He, 2009; Floreano and Keller, 2010; Sharkey et al., 2010; Hu, 2018). Therefore, to accommodate future evolutions in technology, our taxonomy also includes computer-on-computer crime as part of pure-technology cybercrime. Finally, as a proof of concept, we use exemplars and heuristics to validate our taxonomy.
From the perspectives of design, governance, risk and control, our taxonomy has implications for (i) accounting, which seeks to manage by measurement; (ii) technology, which provides efficiency through innovations; (iii) regulation, which seeks to provide transparency and accountability; (iv) enforcement, which needs conceptual clarity; and, (v) public policy, which seeks capacity building and skill development in the society. Our theory-based taxonomy provides clear identification and proper classification for systematic measurement of cybercrime, to help various stakeholders in their respective functions.
Our taxonomy has implications for (i) management to design appropriate internal controls for each cybercrime category, and (ii) governing bodies to institute standards and processes to monitor compliance. For regulatory bodies, our taxonomy is useful to develop standards and requirements for reporting, disclosure and enforcement. Finally, the judiciary and penal system may benefit from the conceptual clarity of our taxonomy to adjudicate cybercrimes.
The rest of the paper proceeds along the following lines. Section 2 reviews current literature on taxonomies. Section 3 presents a rationale for a universally accepted cybercrime classification system. Section 4 discusses theoretical foundations for developing a taxonomy. Section 5 develops and provides details of the cybercrime taxonomy. Section 6 provides a proof-of-concept drawn from several cases to validate our taxonomy. Section 7 presents contributions of our research, significance of our taxonomy and concluding remarks.
