Source Camera Identification (SCI) aims to identify camera models from captured images. Among many investigated forensic issues, considerable attention has been devoted to it. Indeed, SCI can be crucial to criminal investigations and trials, such as solving copyright infringement cases and indicating the authors of illicit material. Even for some other forensic issues referring to image tamper detection, SCI provides essential pieces of evidence.
Different from general image classification tasks, such as handwritten digit recognition and face recognition, SCI relies on fingerprint, which is a kind of in-camera noise in the image rather than the image content. This fingerprint is generated during the image acquisition process in cameras. In many cases, different cameras can be used to capture the same scene, in which case the image content is the same but their source camera models are different. Traditional methods for SCI estimate the fingerprint by some statistical methods or noise filter. Tomaós Filler et al. used a minimum variance unbiased estimator to obtain pattern noise for identification (Filler et al., 2008). Irene Amerini et al. introduced an MMSE filter in the un-decimated wavelet to estimate the fingerprint (Amerini et al., 2010). J. Lukas et al. averaged the noise obtained from multiple images using a denoising filter, and determined the reference pattern noise,which serves as a unique identification fingerprint,for each camera under investigation (Lukas et al., 2006). These fingerprint estimation methods are independent of data and have the advantages of low computational complexity and fast execution speed. But their feature extractor relies on some prior knowledge, and there is still room for improvement in recognition accuracy.
To improve the accuracy of camera recognition, researchers use data-dependent methods to obtain more discriminable features [(Tuama et al., 2016),(Bondi et al., 2016),(Tuama et al., 2016),(Cozzolino and Verdoliva, 2019)]. Since Deep Neural Networks (DNN) has powerful feature extraction ability,it is widely applied to various classification tasks. In recent years, more and more researchers adopt DNN to solve SCI problem. Bondi et al. proposed a method that Deep Neural Networks (DNN) is used for feature extraction, and Supported Vector Machine (SVM) is used for classification, which outperformed the state-of-the-art algorithms at that time (Bondi et al., 2016). Tuama et al. proposed a constrained Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) architecture to achieve higher accuracy with an initial high-pass filtering layer aimed to extract features related to the fingerprint from residual images to reduce complexity (Tuama et al., 2016). Cozzolino et al. considered the effect of the image scene and proposed a Siamese network, trained with pairs of image patches coming from the same or different cameras, which provides the state-of-the-art performance recently (Cozzolino and Verdoliva, 2019). DNN-based methods are trained by using a large number of data samples, compared with traditional methods, these methods can automatically extract task-related features from the data, has higher recognition performance and better generalization ability. However, the evidences (Goodfellow, Shlens, Szegedy, 2014, Szegedy, Zaremba, Sutskever, Bruna, Erhan, Goodfellow, Fergus, 2013) show that because of the linearity of DNN, DNN-based models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks with invisible artificial noise such as gradient-based noise. More seriously, the attackers can manipulate the noise to obtain arbitrary identification results, which is called targeted adversarial attacks. This kind of attack makes it easier for them to achieve malicious purposes. Fig. 1 shows an example of adversarial attacks on the DNN-based SCI model. The attackers disrupt the original image X1, captured by camera model c1 through adding visually invisible noise, thereby obtaining an adversarial image X˜1, then the image X˜1 is classified into another camera model, e.g. c2.Download : Download high-res image (484KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Example of Adversarial Attack on DNN-based SCI Model.
As can be seen from the above example, the DNN-based SCI system and its applications become instability and unreliable. Although some researchers were aware of the risk of adversarial attack on SCI (Güera, Wang, Bondi, Bestagini, Tubaro, Delp, 2017, Marra, Gragnaniello, Verdoliva, 2018), few researchers have proposed targeted defense methods. Generally, to defend against adversarial attacks, researchers start with general image classification tasks, and the classification results of those tasks are often related to the image content. As far as we know, there are two types of defense methods against adversarial attacks in general classification tasks, including image denoising and robustness optimization. The denoising-based methods, such as JPEG compression (Guo et al., 2017), denoising encoding (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2018), and input discretization (Buckman et al., 2018), try to remove adversarial noise by lossy encoding, which presumably reduces the effect of classification. Another type of defense method is robustness optimization which defenses against attack by modifying the network structure or training strategy, or by adding a regular constraint to the loss function. Meng et al. proposed MagNet (Meng and Chen, 2017) to reconstruct the input image and adding a constraint with Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) between the original image and the reconstructed image in their logit output layer. They believe that the reconstruction of original images should lie near the original one on the manifold while the reconstruction of the adversarial image would be far away from its original one. Papernot et al. proposed distillation technology (Papernot et al., 2016), which trains the network once and uses logit output as a soft label for the second training so that the new logit output is more uniform and not sensitive to adversarial noise. The advantage of those methods is no requirement of adversarial samples in training data; however, these methods are insufficient to powerful attacks such as Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) attack (Madry et al., 2017) and Carlini & Wagner (C&W) attack (Carlini and Wagner, 2017). Among all the methods of robustness optimization, adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014) is still considered as the state-of-the-art defense method (Goodfellow, 2018, Madry, Makelov, Schmidt, Tsipras, Vladu, 2017, Wang, Ma, Bailey, Yi, Zhou, Gu, 2019), which is powerful to defense most adversarial attacks. However, there are several problems with adversarial training. Adversarial training can improve robustness, but it is possible to reduce accuracy. Adversarial training largely depends on the data fitting of the existing adversarial samples. Thus, it is difficult to migrate to different kinds of adversarial attacks.
For the adversarial attack problem in SCI, the existing methods based on denoising or robust optimization methods cannot be solved well. As we known, SCI is related to fingerprint in the image, and is independent of the scene of the image, which is different from the general classification tasks. Therefore, those denoise-based methods are possible to remove part of the useful fingerprint, thus reduce identification accuracy and common robust optimization methods lack the analysis of noise components in SCI application scenarios also cannot guarantee identification accuracy. Besides, the training costs of common robust optimization methods are expensive but is difficult to reuse in different SCI models. To address these issues, we analyze the image acquisition process and refine the SCI problem and adversarial attacks on SCI, where the image to be identified may involve scene, fingerprint, general additive noise, and adversarial noise. To analyze the adversarial attack, we model the feature extraction of SCI into dimension reduction mapping between image manifold and feature manifold. To eliminate the interference of the scene, we define S-neighborhood for each image on image manifold and further analyze the effect of mapping on general additive noise and adversarial noise in the same S-neighborhood. By analyzing this, we found that the feature extraction mapping shows different effects on different noises, resulting in the oscillation of the mapping on feature manifold. Based on the discovered phenomenon, we propose an optimization objective that the mapping satisfies locally smooth and information monotony. To optimize our objective, we realize a Pre-defense Network (PDN) with a two-phase training strategy. The PDN structure can be migrated to different SCI models without too much retraining. Our contributions are listed as follows:
•We analyze theoretically and empirically why the existing DNN-based SCI model is vulnerable to adversarial attacks. We discover that this vulnerability essentially comes from the oscillation of feature extraction mapping. This kind of mapping can suppress the general additive noise but amplify the antagonistic noise in S-neighborhood. Our results suggest that alleviate the oscillation of mapping that makes the mapping locally smooth in S-neighborhood and satisfy information monotonicity, which provides a new design principle for robust SCI.•We propose a robust SCI solution that ensures both robustness and accuracy. To construct local smooth mapping on manifolds, we establish a local coordinate system. Further, we propose local smooth mapping function by minimizing Kullback Leibler Divergence on the local statistic coordinates between two manifolds, which guarantees information monotonicity and achieves sufficient statistics. The proposed objective removes redundant information and retains useful information so that the mapping can suppress adversarial noise without losing accuracy.•We realize a flexible Pre-defense Network (PDN) structure, which is easy to migrate to another SCI model. The proposed PDN, a combination of compression encoder and decompression decoder, is applied to eliminate redundant information for SCI. The two-phase training strategy, including feature extractor training and joint defense network training, is adopted to simplify training difficulty.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we analyze the image acquisition process, refine the definition of the SCI problem, and analyze the adversarial attacks on it. In Section 3, we analyze the effect of mapping on different noises, then propose our objective and introduce the construction of local smooth mapping. In Section 4, we introduce our defense structure and training strategy. Experiments and analyses are in Section 5. In Section 6, we conclude our works.
