In most cases, an individual’s first sensory contact with food occurs visually (Wadhera & Capaldi-Phillips, 2014). Appearance is an important factor in the selection of food, more than its taste or smell (Stillman, 2002). It has been suggested that colour vision in primates developed to facilitate food selection (e.g., to select ripe fruit; Foroni, Pergola, & Rumiati, 2016); therefore, it is not surprising that the visual appearance of food can and often does influence how its flavour is perceived (Lavin and Lawless, 1998, Levitan et al., 2008).
1.1. Colour and sensory perceptionVisual perception, especially the colour perception of food and drinks, influences how we perceive products in various ways (Spence, 2018). For instance, product colour can play an important role in product liking (Wadhwani & McMahon, 2012) or perceived sweetness (DuBose, Cardello, & Maller, 1980), and people tend to associate specific colours with particular tastes (Spence et al., 2015). Green colours are often associated with sourness, whereas red colours are frequently associated with sweetness (Koch & Koch, 2003). In a study where participants rated wine under white, red, and green lighting, they perceived wine as fresher and less intense while consuming it under green lighting and liked the same wine best under red lighting (Spence, Velasco, & Knoeferle, 2014).Product colour also affects flavour identification (Garber, Hyatt, & Starr, 2000). More specifically, people’s expectations concerning flavour-colour associations can modulate their flavour discrimination responses to flavoured drinks (Stillman, 1993) and familiar foods, such as Smarties (Levitan et al., 2008). Colour also influenced flavour identification when participants were told to ignore the colour of the product when identifying its flavour (Stillman, 1993, Zampini et al., 2007) and when its colour was masked by a fluorescent light (DuBose et al., 1980). Colour-flavour associations can be highly product specific and tend to be fairly stable over time (O'Mahony, 1983, Spence et al., 2015), but they can also be learned (Higgins and Hayes, 2019, Hyman, 1983).This short overview demonstrates that sensory science is an exciting area of research, in which scientists aim to understand the complex interplay of the senses in flavour perception. A better knowledge about this interplay could help promote healthier food choices and come up with product designs that advertise products that are beneficial for our health.
1.2. The use of VR in sensory scienceAn important challenge faced by sensory science studies is that colour is much more difficult to modify in solid food products than in liquids. This might explain why far more studies have worked with beverages than with solid foods (Spence, 2015b). Virtual reality (VR) offers critical benefits in terms of experimental design. For instance, the visual appearance of a food can be modified without changing its composition (Spence, Okajima, Cheok, Petit, & Michel, 2016). Participants can immerse themselves in a VR environment and experience it with one, several, or all of their senses (Guttentag, 2010). Visual properties of the VR environment can be designed according to specific study requirements. VR provides total control of the visual environmental features, which results in more flexibility in study design (Botella, Fernandez-Alvarez, Guillen, Garcia-Palacios, & Banos, 2017). The range of possibilities offered by this technology is also reflected by the fact that VR designs can be placed within the so-called reality-virtuality continuum. This continuum ranges from the real environment (no VR elements) to augmented reality (reality enhanced with certain VR elements) and augmented virtuality (VR environment with real-life [RL] features) to the virtual environment (total VR; Flavian, Ibanez-Sanchez, & Orus, 2019).VR has been used in various areas of research (Spence et al., 2016). Hartmann and Siegrist (2019) identified four main areas of food behaviour research in which VR has been applied: the sensory evaluation of food, food shopping behaviour, the influence of environmental cues on eating behaviour, and the treatment of eating disorders. In the present study, the focus was on the sensory evaluation of foods and beverages. Previous research using VR in the context of the sensory evaluation of food manipulated the environment. In one study, participants tested samples either in a coffee house setting produced by immersive technology or in a traditional RL test environment (a sensory booth) with no contextual information (Bangcuyo et al., 2015). In the traditional booth, coffee was served in an insulated foam cup; in the coffee house setting, participants received the same sample in a ceramic mug. The products received higher liking scores when served in the VR environment simulating a consumption context than when served in a sensory booth. A similar study was conducted by Hathaway and Simons (2017), who invited participants to assess their liking of cookies in an RL sensory booth and in a VR environment in which they saw men baking. Again, product liking was higher when contextual information was provided through VR. Ung and colleagues (2018) compared participants’ food choice behaviour in RL and VR. They used a buffet setting (including carrots, pasta, and chicken) in which participants completed the task of serving themselves a meal, and they found that participants’ food choices in RL strongly correlated with participants’ behaviour in VR.Despite the broad range of possible applications for VR, its use in classical sensory science studies to modify sample properties instead of the test environment remains rare. One of the few studies in this domain was conducted by Huang, Huang, and Wan (2019). They performed three experiments in which participants were shown virtual tea samples before they tasted and evaluated actual tea samples. They concluded that visual cues provided in VR and gustatory cues from RL can work together to create the resulting sensory perception. However, it remains to be seen whether participants behave similarly in VR and RL environments and, more specifically, whether they provide similar sensory assessments for food products in VR and RL (Hartmann & Siegrist, 2019). We aimed to address these issues through this research.
1.3. Aim of the studyThrough a set of two studies, we aimed to assess the methodological question of whether it is possible to transfer a classical sensory science experiment from an RL setting to a VR setting (Study 1). The results of Study 1 were promising, so we conducted a second study to confirm our findings and to compare the RL and VR conditions directly (Study 2).
