At present, more and more wearable devices are being developed such as bracelet, watch, wristband, and glasses and they are increasing the evolution of medical Internet of Things [1], [2]. With the rapid proliferation of medical Internet of Things, smart medicine has made remarkable progress [3], [4]. In particular, smart medicine was explored to offer the pervasive and reliable medical services by combining medical techniques, artificial intelligence, big data, cloud computing, and medical Internet of Things [5], [6], [7]. In the past two years, smart medicine, especially smart Chinese medicine, has been presented and obtained several successful applications. For example, Zhang et al. [8] presented a unified smart Chinese medicine framework for computer-aided syndrome differentiation and prescription recommendation on the edge-cloud computing platform. In addition, they proposed to use two deep learning models for syndrome differentiation in hypertension and spleen–stomach diseases [9], [10].
Currently, smart Chinese medicine is a significant component in the integration of traditional Chinese medicine with western medicine for treating infectious fever. Infectious fever is caused by the invasion of various pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, mycoplasma, chlamydia, rickettsia, spirochetes, and malaria [11]. In particular, the fever may occur in the acute or chronic, localized or systemic infection. From the point of view of pathogenesis, the metabolites of pathogenic microorganisms or their toxins act on white blood cells to produce and release endogenous heat sources. Their molecular weight is so small that they can directly act on the body temperature regulation center through the blood–brain barrier. In this case, the temperature regulation point is raised, thus causing fever. Infectious fever is seriously threatening human health. For example, during the past few years, a large number of enterococci which can resist carbon, hydrogen, enzymes, and alkene have emerged since the abuse of antibiotics such as mepem and imiperem destroys the microecological balance in the intestine [12], [13]. In particular, the infection of the enterococci may cause septicemia when the enterococci enters the blood. Moreover, the enterococci often leads to sepsis when it infects two or more human organs. Antagonism is the main method of Western medicine in treating infectious fever. For example, tigecycline and polymyxin are usually used to treat the infection of the enterococci [14], [15]. However, they are not always effective. In this case, the infection of the enterococci will result in the death. The speed of research and development of new effective antibiotics is far behind that of bacterial mutation. When no effective antibiotics can be developed to treat the infection of mutant bacteria, human life is seriously threatened. In this case, the intervention of traditional Chinese medicine is necessary. In addition, there are more and more cases of fever of unknown origin in the infectious fever at present [16], [17]. A lot of clinical experience shows that the integration of traditional Chinese medicine and western medicine is one of the most important ways for treating the fever of unknown origin. In particular, during the examination of pathogens, the traditional Chinese medicine can be used to alleviate symptoms by bringing down the fever. Therefore, the Chinese medicine is playing an important role in treating the infectious fever, especially the fever of unknown origin, in the integration of traditional Chinese medicine and western medicine.
The theory of traditional Chinese medicine states that the toxin is caused by fever. Based on a large volume of clinic experience, we put forward a new theory of infectious fever, which states that fever is caused by toxin. In detail, the pathogenesis of the fever comes from four respects. Firstly, the invasion of cold causes the occlusion of Xuanfu, and thus leading to fever. Secondly, the external toxin is latent in the body and then produces the fever. Thirdly, toxin fever is caused by implication of evil Qi and plague. Finally, the fever is caused by internal toxin. Furthermore, we put forward a new theory for syndrome differentiation and treatment for infectious fever, the location by three cardinal guides and zang-fu viscera, the qualitative analysis by two-izations and qi and blood, and the tendency determining by four stages with deficiency and excess. In detail, three cardinal guides includes exterior, interior, and semi-exterior–interior, and zang-fu viscera include heart and small intestine, lung and large intestine, spleen and stomach, liver and gallbladder, kidney and bladder, and pericardium by heat and sanjiao. Two-izations include cold and heat, and qi and blood states the qifen and xuefen differentiation of infectious fever. Four stages include latent stage, early stage, obvious stage of symptoms, and termination stage. Moreover, each stage is divided into deficiency syndrome and excess syndrome. By this theory, the Chinese medicine aims to coordinate yin and yang. For example, the Chinese medicine restores ecological balance in intestine by coordination yin and yang for treating the invasion of enterococci. By the comprehensive application of Treatise on Epidemic Febrile Diseases and Treatise on Febrile Diseases, we put forward four therapeutic methods of sweating, dispersing, purging, and preventing for bringing down the fever.
Syndrome differentiation is the premise and core of the Chinese medicine [18] for treating the infectious fever. However, it is hard for the traditional Chinese medicine to accurately differentiate the syndromes of the infectious fever because of the complexity of the infectious fever. On the one hand, the infectious fever has many different syndromes. On the other one hand, some different syndromes have the similar symptoms, which poses a great challenge on syndrome differentiation. Smart Chinese medicine provides a new solution for syndrome differentiation by integrating various machine learning techniques into the traditional Chinese medicine. In this work, we present a promising deep learning model by combining an adaptive dropout function with the stacked auto-encoder for syndrome differentiation of the infectious fever in the future work. The adaptive dropout function is used to set the activation of neurons in each hidden layer of the deep learning model. To validate the presented model, we summarize the main syndromes of the infectious fever. This work is expected to further the development of the smart Chinese medicine.
Overall, the paper has three contributions:

•We put forward a new theory for syndrome differentiation and treatment of infectious fever in the traditional Chinese medicine. The presented theory is three-fold: (1) fever being caused by toxin; (2) the location by three cardinal guides and zang-fu viscera, the qualitative analysis by two-izations and qi and blood, and the tendency determining by four stages with deficiency and excess; (3) four therapeutic methods of sweating, dispersing, purging, and preventing for treating infectious fever.•We present a promising deep learning model that integrates an adaptive function into the stacked auto-encoder for automatical computer-aided syndrome differentiation of infectious fever.•We summarize the main syndromes of infectious fever by two methods of syndrome differentiation that are sanjiao syndrome differentiation and syndrome differentiation by weifen, qifen, yingfen, and xuefen.
The paper is organized into four sections in the following. Section 2 presents the related work on smart Chinese medicine and Section 3 describes the proposed deep learning model. The main syndromes of infectious fever are summarized in Section 4 and the future work is discussed in Section 5.
