Nowadays, increasing use of vehicles by people has negative consequences such as traffic, accidents, injuries, fatalities, and financial losses. The U.S. Department of Transportation’s Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS, 2017) has announced that 34,439 fatal accident with 37,461 deaths occurred in the USA in 2016. The mistakes of drivers, and human factors affected by fatigue, alcohol, reckless or careless are the main factors associated with the most accidents. Information about driver, environment, and vehicle can improve the safety of deriving, especially when an abnormal situation occurred on the road. ITSs and Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs) tries to reduce the accident risk by analyzing such information.
Driver behavior is one of the most important factors, which affects road safety. Hence, recently monitoring and detecting systems of driver behavior have been an active research area. Some systems monitor the driver behavior in isolation (Galarza, Egas, Silva, Velasco, Galarza, 2018, Jo, Lee, Park, Kim, Kim, 2014), whereas others monitor status of the driver by combining of the driver behavior, the vehicle state and the environment(Al-Sultan, Al-Bayatti, Zedan, 2013, Daza, Hernández, Bergasa, Parra, Yebes, Gavilán, Quintero, Llorca, Sotelo, 2011). Almost most driver behaviour monitoring systems just detect one abnormal behavior (Carmona, García, Martín, Escalera, Armingol, 2015, Dai, Teng, Bai, Shen, Xuan, 2010, González, Wilby, Díaz, Ávila, 2014, Lee, Chung, 2012), whereas few of them detect more than one (Al-Sultan et al., 2013). However, there is still no effective monitoring system to accurately detect all abnormal behaviors of a driver.
So far, many studies have been done on driver behaviors, which monitor the drivers’ body and use the deep learning techniques to classify their activities (Danisman, Bilasco, Djeraba, Ihaddadene, 2010, Galarza, Egas, Silva, Velasco, Galarza, 2018, Jo, Lee, Park, Kim, Kim, 2014, Sabet, Zoroofi, Sadeghniiat-Haghighi, Sabbaghian, 2012). Due to the violation of privacy and the possibility of spoofing in camera-based systems some studies desire to use the non-visual driving signals and traditional learning techniques such as Support Vector Machine (SVM) and k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) (Al-Sultan, Al-Bayatti, Zedan, 2013, Carmona, García, Martín, Escalera, Armingol, 2015, Dai, Teng, Bai, Shen, Xuan, 2010, Tango, Botta, 2013, Yu, Chen, Zhu, Chen, Kong, Li, 2017).
Deep learning techniques especially CNNs have been successfully developed for image applications. There are many successful deep networks for image classification such as AlexNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), ResNet (Zeiler & Fergus, 2013), VGGNet (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), whilst deep learning techniques have a slow progress for signal processing. Consequently, to take the advantages of such CNNs (i.e., image based ones) for analysing the driver behaviors, we propose to represent the driving signals as several images. To this end, we use the recurrence plot technique (Spiegel, 2015, Spiegel, Jain, Albayrak, 2014) as an efficient way for converting signals to images. With this novel trend, we also benefit from the spatial dependencies of the images instead of temporal dependencies of the driving signals, which leads us to an approach with high efficiency.
In this paper, we propose a novel and efficient method for driver behavior classification. We divide the driver behaviours into five classes: (1) safe or normal, (2) aggressive, (3) distracted, (4) drowsy, and (5) drunk driving. We gather vehicle data, including acceleration, gravity, RPM, speed, and throttle (the amount of accelerator pedal is pushed). Then, we consider overlapped time windows and use the recurrence plot technique to convert the data to the image. Finally, we use a CNN to classify the driver behavior into the five types and can alert the driver or other vehicles via wireless communication technology in VANETs.
The main contributions of this paper are: (1) we propose a method based on CNN for detecting the driver behaviors from vehicle movement patterns instead of driver’s face monitoring. (2) We classify the driving behavior into the five types: normal, aggressive, distracted, drowsy and drunk driving. (3) We convert the temporal dependencies of driving signals to spatial dependencies. Experimental results show that this converting leads to a low computational power approach with high efficiency.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We briefly introduce the previous works in field of driver behaviors detection and machine learning techniques in Section 2. We explain the proposed approach for detecting and classifying the driver behaviors in Section 3. Experimental results and discussion are presented in Section 4. Finally, we present the conclusion and future work in Section 5.
