Since the first CubeSats were launched in mid 2003, they have ushered in a new epoch in human space history in offering reduced cost access to the space for nontraditional players. A smaller size spacecraft with reduced complexity and standardized specifications offers the chance to understand the operation and interfaces of subsystems, providing a great opportunity for student education. CubeSats allow students to develop a full spacecraft in a period as short as 2 years, with a much lower price compared to larger satellites. After almost two decades, it has become more and more common to see CubeSats in project-based learning class, and the miniaturized components are sold by a large variety of companies. At this stage of development, CubeSats are not only an educational tool, but also a viable platform to perform scientific measurements.
The International Satellite Program in Research and Education (INSPIRE) consortium was formed in 2015, with the objectives of developing small satellites to perform science missions, building a project-based learning curriculum for space science and engineering, and establishing a supporting network of ground stations. The consortium was initially comprised of the University of Colorado at Boulder (CU), National Central University in Taiwan (NCU), and the Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST). The consortium has since expanded to eleven institutions as of 2019, with six small satellite science missions funded from sources secured by the participating institutions (Baker and Chandran, 2018, Chang et al., 2018b). A large number of these missions are focused upon the study of the Earth’s upper atmosphere, including the neutral thermosphere (~90 - above 500 km altitude) and mesosphere (~60–90 km), as well as the ionosphere (~60–1000 km).
The ionosphere is the ionized part of the upper atmosphere, formed by the photoionization of neutral atmosphere in the mesosphere and thermosphere through absorption of solar extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and X-ray radiation. There are strong day-night differences as well as day-to-day, seasonal, and solar cycle variability in the ionosphere. Changes in the ionosphere affect radio propagation and Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) signals. High frequency (HF) radio transmissions propagating obliquely into the ionosphere can be refracted over the horizon for long distance communications or surveillance purposes (Frissell et al., 2014). Ionospheric plasma can also cause electrical charging of spacecraft flying in the space.
Modern society relies heavily upon terrestrial and satellite radio communications that are affected by the ionosphere. Trans-ionospheric radio signals, such as those from Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) are refracted by ionospheric plasma, introducing time and range errors proportional to the integrated electron content along the propagation path (Zhong et al., 2008). Smaller scale irregularities in plasma distribution such as plasma bubbles and Travelling Ionospheric Disturbances (TIDs) can diffract GNSS signals, resulting in scintillation and signal fading at the receiver end, which can render the signal unusable (Afraimovich et al., 2004). Terrestrial high frequency (HF) radio transmissions are also refracted and reflected by ionospheric plasma allowing for over the horizon communications and surveillance (Daniel et al., 2016). Measurement of ionospheric plasma parameters at planetary scales, with sampling frequency high enough to resolve small scales irregularities is therefore crucial for understanding ionospheric variability and its effects on human technology.
This paper focuses on the mission objectives and design of the Ionospheric Dynamics Exploration and Attitude Subsystem Satellite (IDEASSat/ INSPIRESat-2) - a CubeSat that is designed to measure and study planetary-scale wave structures in the ionosphere, the distribution of ionospheric irregularities and Travelling Ionospheric Disturbances (TIDs), as well as the electric fields driving vertical plasma drifts, and their relation to the ionospheric F region wind dynamo.
