Accessibility is closely related to controllability, and in driftless or linear systems become equivalent to it. Accessibility from a point means possibility of accessing an open set in the state space from that point, using all possible inputs. Similarly to controllability rank test for linear systems, there exists accessibility rank test for nonlinear systems [1]. But in nonlinear case different points may have different accessibility properties and as the accessibility distribution consists of infinite number of vector fields (Lie brackets of any length), one does not know how many successive brackets are needed to check accessibility from x0 [2].
Similar problem exists in the context of controllability of non-holonomic systems, where the so-called degree of non-holonomy of the system at a given point is not known a-priori (see [3], [4], [5]). In [6] the author obtained an upper bound on the degree of non-holonomy for planar systems, and this result was extended to the case of polynomial systems with arbitrary dimension in [4]. The obtained upper bounds were improved and extended to the Noetherian analytic rings (i.e. a ring of analytic functions that is generated finitely) in [7] and [3]. See also [8] for recent improvements. Unfortunately, these upper bounds grow drastically with increase in dimension of the system and degree of polynomials, and as a result, they are far from being applicable. Singularity of distributions is also important in non-holonomic robots, see for instance [9], [10].
Knowing the exact location of the set of accessibility singular points, denoted by S∞ in this paper, is equally important, since S∞ is an invariant set, and therefore it should be avoided for initialization of the system, or trapping the state within S∞. Also S∞ may obstruct global controllability, if the set of regular points is disconnected by the set S∞, just as singular points in flatness property can obstruct definition of global flat outputs and global motion planning (()).
This paper suggests, instead of examining accessibility property pointwise in a finite number of steps, to look at the big picture of the entire set of singular points (denoted by S∞), and the invariance relations between them. The idea is that if the system is non-accessible from x0 (i.e. x0 is a singular point), then any trajectory starting from x0 must evolve on the invariant set of non-accessible points. It will be shown that for polynomial systems and analytic systems, immersible into polynomial systems, the set S∞ is an algebraic set. Then the invariance of algebraic sets are characterized in terms of invariance of their corresponding ideals under Lie derivatives defined by the system dynamics. The polynomial structure of the vector fields that describe the system is responsible for stabilization of the constructed sequences of sets that at the limit gives us the invariant set. Note that similar sequences for analytic or meromorphic vector fields do not have to stabilize. Analogous results have been obtained for strong accessibility. Our results give either the exact or upper bound on the depth of Lie brackets in the (strong) accessibility distribution, necessary to apply (strong) accessibility rank test. The set S∞ is obtained as the algebraic set of a limiting ideal of an ascending stabilizing chain of ideals whereas its stabilization can be detected constructively by a differential algebraic test. Note that computer algebra tools are especially well-suited for polynomial systems.
We restrict the main results on polynomial systems, because of Noetherian property of the ring of polynomials, and especially because it is easier to manipulate ideals of the ring of polynomials using computer algebra tools. We then extend the results to the case of analytical systems that can be immersed into polynomial systems, which contains a very wide class of systems.
Finally, note that similar results have been obtained in [12] based on the same idea, for rational discrete-time systems as well as for analytic systems, restricted to compact semianalytic sets. However, the proofs are different because in the continuous-time case, unlike the discrete-time case, the chain of algebraic sets Sk (see Definition 3) may not be strictly descending.
The paper is organized as follows. Preliminaries and definitions are given in Section 2. Generic accessibility criterion, and relation between generic accessibility and pointwise accessibility are obtained in Section 3. The main results of the paper for polynomial systems are given in Section 4. Section 5 contains the extension of the results of the polynomial case to the case of non-polynomial systems. The Appendix presents an introduction on ideals and algebraic sets.
