For many organizations, improving occupational safety and health concerns of workers is an important yet challenging venture. In 2017, there were approximately 2.8 million non-fatal employee injuries and 5,147 worker fatalities in the United States according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2018). Nonfatal and fatal work-related incidents also pose organizational safety and health concerns to the workers who respond to these events. Fire and emergency medical services (EMS) occupations are among those with the greatest risk for injury and death in the line of duty (Reichard & Jackson, 2010). For U.S. paramedics and EMTs, the annual rate of non-fatal work-related injuries is three times higher than the national average (Maguire & Smith, 2013). Approximately 21,200 EMS personnel were treated in emergency departments for their work-related injuries in 2017 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019). Consequently, opportunities to reduce injury costs and improve safety and well-being of employees and the communities served are continuously sought by emergency responder organizations (Allen, Baran, & Scott, 2010).
EMS is a high injury risk, high stress occupation at the crucial intersection of public health, public safety and healthcare systems (American College of Emergency Physicians, 2017, NHTSA Office of EMS, 2019). A significant challenge facing the occupational safety and health of EMS workers is violence from patients and bystanders (Taylor, Davis, Barnes, Lacovara, & Patel, 2015). Career exposure by EMS responders to an act of verbal and/or physical violence is estimated between 57 and 93% (Taylor and Murray, 2017a, Taylor and Murray, 2017b). In fact, workplace violence has become so ingrained into the occupational identity, that many EMS responders have internalized the belief that violence is simply “part of the job” (Taylor et al., 2016, Taylor and Murray, 2017a, Taylor and Murray, 2017b). This negative internalization regarding workplace violence exposures creates many challenges for EMS organizations including: reporting of violent incidents, short and long-term mental health impact, and workforce retention (Taylor and Murray, 2017a, Taylor and Murray, 2017b). In addition to violence, an increase in community demand for services (National EMS Information System, 2016) presents major challenges for the organizational structure, mental health, and safety burden for EMS workers. To date, no evidence-based interventions exist to prepare EMS responders for violence on the job (Taylor and Murray, 2017a, Taylor and Murray, 2017b).
However, EMS industrial trade journals frequently describe best practices to address workplace violence, specifically checklists. An extensive review of EMS industrial literature found examples supporting the development of checklists for each phase of emergency response including: traveling to the event, scene arrival/prior to entry, patient care, transport to the hospital, transfer to emergency department staff, and assessing readiness to return to service (Murray et al., 2019, Taylor et al., 2019, Taylor and Murray, 2017a, Taylor and Murray, 2017b). Checklists work to reduce complexity in systems because they acknowledge errors as inevitable (Perrow, 1984). Checklists have seen successful in reducing errors and unsafe practices in many industries (Ashford, 1998, Berenholtz et al., 2004, Erdek and Pronovost, 2004, Gawande, 2010, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1990, Shappell et al., 2006). In healthcare, for example, the “Doctor’s Checklist” was created at Johns Hopkins Hospital in 2001 to avoid infections when inserting central lines into intensive care unit (ICU) patients. Checklist implementation resulted in an 11% reduction in the 10-day line infection rate and after 15 months, only two central line infections had occurred (Berenholtz et al., 2004). Another checklist focused on nursing observations of pain in the ICU saw the likelihood of patients bearing untreated pain decreased from 41% to 3% (Erdek & Pronovost, 2004). In addition, the World Health Organization’s Surgical Safety Checklist helped reduce physician error, patient safety events, and even helped decrease post-surgical mortality rates by 37% in the decade since implementation (Ramsay et al., 2019).
The “Stress and Violence in fire-based EMS Responders (SAVER)” checklist was developed in 2018 (Taylor et al., 2019). It is an innovative departure from the traditional checklists described above in that it is designed to shift the onus of safety and health from the EMS responder back to the organization for whom they work by identifying actions leadership can institute through policy, training, and environmental modifications. Individual pause points (Gawande, 2010), which are opportunities for individuals to take a brief moment to stop and consider their personal safety before continuing with patient care activities, were incorporated into the SAVER Systems Checklist. Pause points create feedback channels for EMS responders to communicate with leadership regarding their safety and health needs when serving the public (Taylor et al., 2019).
In order for a checklist to be utilized as designed, there must be a willing culture to implement it. One consideration for improving safety and health in organizations is through the development and maintenance of a climate for safety (Dunn et al., 2016, Zohar, 2000). Safety climate, a type of organizational climate, is the degree to which employees hold shared beliefs and perceptions that management supports, rewards, and expects safe behavior and safe work practices (Hoffman and Stetzer, 1996, Hoffman and Stetzer, 1998). Introduced to the organizational science literature in the 1980s, a recent meta-analysis on safety climate has linked the construct to both increased safety behaviors and decreased occupational injuries (Clarke, 2006, Clarke, 2010). Organizations with a strong safety climate often have fewer negative safety outcomes, such as near-misses, injuries, and line of duty deaths (Christian et al., 2009, Zohar, 2000). In healthcare, hospitals with a strong safety climate not only have a positive impact on workers, but also a reduced incidence of patient safety events (Singer, Lin, Falwell, Gaba, & Baker, 2009).
One methodology to increase occupational safety climate is the use of meeting science (Tannenbaum & Cerasoli, 2013). Meeting science is a useful tool for promoting safety culture and safety behaviors by creating environments where collaborative development of intervention processes can occur. One such example to be further discussed here is the use of meeting science to overcome the fraught and rate limiting step that meetings and consensus can often pose for the development of public health interventions. Codified facilitation techniques are routinely used in other fields such as occupational health psychology (De Vreede, 2006). Yet, these methods are new and innovative to the field of public health and even more so to the fire and rescue service, the context of our work. Through the application of this meaningful convergence process, national stakeholders were able to participate and comment on the design of the SAVER Systems Checklist, a workplace violence intervention for EMS, in a highly effective and novel way.
To address the growing concern of workplace violence in EMS, a public health intervention using a combination of theory and methods from occupational health psychology and meeting science was pursued. The purpose of this manuscript is to report out on the collaborative facilitative process that utilized meeting science in the development of the SAVER Systems Checklist. Specifically, the primary goals of this paper are to: (1) Describe the evaluative results from the Systems Checklist Consensus Conference (SC3) where collaboration tools from meeting science were deployed and; (2) Describe the feasibility assessment re-evaluation results subsequently completed by the four SAVER study sites.
