Model-based definition (MBD) refers to a three-dimensional digital (3D) model that contains the product requirements and specifications. Model-based enterprise (MBE) replaces two-dimensional (2D) drawings with 3D model data in all engineering activities throughout the product lifecycle. However, to achieve these goals, interoperability remains an obstacle [1]. STEP AP 242 is a standard protocol for MBD, which states that MBD must contain nominal geometric data and must also contain additional information for manufacturing and inspection, namely, PMI [2]. In principle, even the most advanced manufacturing process has no means of effectively using these data, except for the applications in each phase of the product lifecycle that can correctly interpret the input model data and process it to obtain the data output, which can be used by other applications. Although the AP242 standard defines the consistent grammar, structure and annotation of PMI information in the 3D model, the reality is that the implementation of CAD manufacturers does not always follow this standard. As a result, different engineering and manufacturing applications still have inconsistent interpretations and representations of the same PMI data [3]. STEP File Analyzer and Viewer [4] is a software package designed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) that is used to measure the ability of CAD software to conform to the standard of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) for PMI, especially with respect to geometric dimensions and tolerances. This software primarily tests the correctness of neutral STEP files exported by CAD for syntax, structure and semantics of PMI implementation [5]. However, STEP File Analyzer is designed based on the CAx implementation forum (CAx-IF) [6] recommended practices and represents the recommended practices in the software as an internal data structure via hard-coded form. A problem exists in that the software must also be updated when the recommended practices need to be updated. To make the STEP file analyzer overcome the above problems and facilitate its maturation into a framework software package, an effective method is to describe the recommended practices in computer interpretable languages that can be read and processed by the software. Because the implementation of the AP 242 protocol is based on EXPRESS language, the PMI information of the product data model described by it can only remain in the correct syntax and cannot explicitly represent the semantics [7]. As a formal shared conceptual model, ontology has attracted increasing attention for data exchange between heterogeneous systems. OWL2 DL is a sublanguage of OWL based on SROIQ(D) [8] and offers several features such as the consistency checking, inference, decidability and query needed to enrich semantics [9]. Therefore, the establishment of a unified standard-based PMI ontology for information exchange between CAx and conformance checking of neutral exchange files based on the AP242 standard generated by a CAD system is of great significance in engineering application.
Based on the above analysis, this paper proposes a new method for building an ontology based on CAx-IF recommendation practices for interoperability and conformance checking of PMI. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. An overview of related work is given in Section 2. The details of the proposed approach are explained in Section 3. Section 4 reports a prototype implementation of the approach and presents an example to illustrate how the approach works finalizes the paper with conclusions.
