The High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) 2018, on Sustainable Development, highlights data gaps as a notable challenge, stating ‘more and better data are required for national, regional and global monitoring’ (HLPF, 2018). In terms of water quality, the recent data drive of 2018 on Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) indicator 6.3.2 (on the ‘proportion of bodies of water with good ambient water quality’) (UN, 2017) only resulted in available data from about thirty countries (UN Water, 2018). These data were mainly provided from developed countries, with less developed countries experiencing a lack of human and financial resources for gathering, analysing, and sharing data (UN Water, 2018). However, indicator 6.3.2 sets out to estimate the quality of freshwaters through a core set of easily measurable parameters, namely dissolved oxygen, electrical conductivity, total oxidized nitrogen, nitrate, orthophosphate, and pH; and proper measurement of water quality is often the starting point for addressing complex water quality problems through management and governance (Kirschke et al., 2017). The present gap in water quality data is therefore recognized as a key challenge for governments to care for the freshwater of their territories (UN Water, 2018; UNEP, 2016).
To address this data gap efficiently, researchers and practitioners increasingly call for the integration of non-traditional data sources in water quality monitoring, such as data collected by citizens (Quinlivan et al., 2020; HLPF, 2018; UN Water, 2018; Buytaert et al., 2014; Lowry and Fienen, 2013; Conrad and Hilchey, 2011). The idea is that citizens hold immense potential to increase temporal and spatial data availability and therefore could bridge the data gap that the international community faces (Assumpção et al., 2018; Carlson and Cohen, 2018; Ballard et al., 2017; Hulbert, 2016; Walker et al., 2016; Buytaert et al., 2014; Loperfido et al., 2010). However, citizen-derived data may also be selective and biased, calling on the need for identifying design principles for successful citizen science projects (Brouwer et al., 2018; Crall et al., 2011).
Environmental and sustainability research has come up here with numerous studies discussing the role of citizens in scientific data gathering. Prominent fields are astronomy, biodiversity, and medical research, regularly publishing scientific studies based on citizen-derived data (e.g., Fritz et al., 2019; Hecker et al., 2019; Turbé et al., 2019; Irwin, 2018; Domroese and Johnson, 2017; Schröter et al., 2017; Kosmala et al., 2016). Such studies also discuss relevant design principles for successful citizen projects, such as critical motivational factors for initiating and participating in citizen science projects, new digital tools, and a cross-check of citizen-derived data. But while there exists knowledge on designing citizen science in these fields, one may not easily transfer such knowledge to the area of water quality monitoring. First, water quality is an invisible subject, calling for specific equipment whose handling can be particularly challenging. Second, water is a basic human need with enormous impacts on health and human being, which may also influence the motivation of citizens to monitor its quality. In sum, this calls for a separate analysis of design principles for successful citizen science projects.
Against this background, water research has increasingly dealt with the emergence of citizen science in supporting water quality monitoring. However, comparative analyses of the role of citizen science activities for addressing the water quality data gap are currently unavailable. Similar to the broader citizen science literature, water-related citizen science projects researcher encounter varied factors that improve or hinder the success of citizen science projects. But given the focus on case studies, the researchers report on these factors in a less systematic manner that does not allow for generalization. Primary factors highlighted across such projects involve, but are not limited to, citizens' knowledge, awareness, interest, and capacity (Weeser et al., 2018; Storey et al., 2016; Buytaert et al., 2014; Conrad and Hilchey, 2011). These factors are spoken about separately and scattered across countries, watersheds, temporal monitoring regimes, and individual perceptions of citizens and institutes. As a consequence, different factors (e.g., prior knowledge and experience of citizens) mostly relate to specific regional project settings (e.g., measuring chemical or physical parameters in Europe, Asia, or Africa), but are not generalized for water quality monitoring. Moreover, studies generally focus on individual dimensions of success, such as the amount of reliable data rather than providing a systematic review considering various dimensions of success, such as the amount of data, related scientific outputs, and political problem-solving.
This study therefore aims at a systematic literature review, identifying and synthesizing a comprehensive list of potential influencing factors for successful citizen science projects in water quality monitoring. This is supposed to provide guidance to projects, designing citizen science activities in water quality monitoring. The term ‘citizen science’ is here defined as ‘the collection and analysis of data relating to the natural world by members of the general public, typically as part of collaborative projects with professional scientists’ (Oxford Dictionary 2018). The success of citizen science projects refers to various dimensions, including an increase of highly reliable water quality data along with temporal and spatial scales, the use of such data for research outputs and water quality policies, as well as broader societal effects of data gathering processes such as awareness-raising, capacity development, and societal interaction. This understanding of success is also in line with the multiple benefits both the water quality and the broader citizen science community has emphasized (e.g., Hecker et al., 2019; Peter et al., 2019; Ceccaroni et al., 2017). The point of reference for this research is citizen-monitored freshwater, including surface waters and groundwater, considering a variety of water quality parameters. The goal is here to generate a set of generalized design principles that refer to different contexts. Citizen science projects can then further fine-tune the design when it comes to the actual application in different regions, types of waters, and types of pollutants.
Section 2 describes our methodological approach for the literature review, including relevant search engines, systematic keyword search, and the approach for extracting and synthesizing data. Section 3 describes the identified success factors along three pillars: the attributes of citizens (3.1), the attributes of institutions (3.2), and processes and mechanisms between citizens and institutions (3.3). 4 Discussion, 5 Conclusion discuss the results and conclude on the role of citizen science in addressing the water quality data lack. We hope that the identified success factors help practitioners in designing successful citizen science activities in the future.
