The current utilization of immersive technologies in the education sector has proven to provide an effective utility for promoting the learning of various subjects (Al-Samarraie & Saeed, 2018). Virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) are examples that clearly illustrate the utilization of these new technologies, which provide opportunities to promote lifelong learning (Gün & Atasoy, 2017; Ozdemir et al., 2018). VR is defined as a real or simulated environment in which a perceiver experiences telepresence (Minocha et al., 2017), while AR is defined as a technology that superimposes a computer-generated image on an individual’s view of the surrounding environment (McMillan et al., 2017). The review of the literature shows that VR and AR support constructivist learning principles (Bani-Salameh et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2010; Katz & Halpern, 2015); hence, learners that utilize VR and AR would be equipped with the capability to process and control various learning related activities. They have ultimate control over where and when to explore learning. For instance, students can control the pace of their movement in a VR environment. They can communicate with friends through a network and determine the next action to be performed after the communication (Fowler, 2015; Ha & Fang, 2018). In AR, students can easily visualize virtual objects, which makes learning more interesting and more realistic than any other technology (Vosinakis et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018).
In addition, learners may overlay virtual electromagnetism content on actual book pages using a handheld device (Wu et al., 2018; Al-Samarraie & Ahmad, 2016) or utilize an AR game that uses tangible cubes to enable learners to learn about different animals that are at the risk of extinction (Daineko et al., 2017). Despite these, there is still a notable lack of research into understanding the perceptions of teachers towards VR and AR in school teaching and learning. This, as a result, makes it difficult for decision makers and teachers to judge the suitability of each technology, particularly in the context of science education. In most developing countries, VR and AR are new to primary school teachers, even though this is not the case for developed countries.
It is believed that exposing students to computer-simulated environments may make science learning effective (Chen et al., 2017). This is because combining actual and virtual environments would result in mixed reality, which would provide learners with a wide variety of exploration options (Correia et al., 2016). Several school teachers have been criticized about being less concerned or slower to recognize the potential of using VR and AR (Ab Aziz et al., 2012). In addition, the lack of evidence about the cause of delay in the utilization of VR and AR in science education makes it difficult to assess the prospects of these applications in current teaching practices. Therefore, this study is aimed at providing insights about the current challenges and prospects of VR and AR utilization among school teachers for the purpose of teaching science subjects. It is assumed that identifying the key factors slowing down the utilization of these technologies would aid educational decision makers to identify organizational and individual factors associated with the utilization these technologies, and shape strategies for delivering effective teaching and learning experiences of science subjects.
