1.1. MotivationFor large-scale compute-intensive applications, users want faster computers. In the past, computer manufacturers improved performance by integrating more transistors and enhancing the frequency of cores, but this often led to higher energy consumption or higher operating temperatures. The former means spending more money, the latter may affect hardware functionality, even damage it. Thus, users need to seek highly energy-efficient computers with more cores but cores of relatively low-frequency. This can be seen by reviewing The green 500 list-No. 2018 [1] that primarily evaluates computers based on their energy efficiency. The mainstream computers on the Green 500 list are built on CPU + Nvidia GPU heterogeneous architecture.CPU-GPU heterogeneous platforms are popular not only for supercomputers but also for general computers because of the high cost-to-performance ratio of GPUs. GPUs support general purpose computing and are easy to program using frameworks offered by their manufacturers. Nvidia provides the Computing Unified Device Architecture (CUDA) to facilitate programming for general purpose applications. The most important point is that GPUs show high energy efficiency due to simple control and high throughput. For this reason, we choose this type of platform to research and develop Energy-Efficient Parallel (EEP) AES algorithm as a popular and marketable approach.
1.2. Our contributionsIn this work, we first analyze the opportunities for improving the energy efficiency of AES algorithm on CPU-GPU heterogeneous platforms. The energy consumed by GPUs is measured by the NVML library [2], which is able to acquire the power and adjust the frequencies of Nvidia GPUs. The energy consumed by CPUs can be measured by the Intel Power Gadget Application Program Interfaces (APIs) [3], which can acquire the energy of Intel CPUs by energy Model-Specific Registers (MSRs). Then, we propose the corresponding methods to achieve an energy-efficient parallel AES algorithm. We evaluate the energy efficiency of EEP by comparing it with CPU-only parallel (CP) AES algorithm proposed in [4] and GPU-only parallel (GP) AES algorithm presented in [5]. Note that GP refers to the main encryption performed on GPUs in parallel, which still need the assistance of CPUs for such tasks as transferring data, executing key extensions, etc.In summary, our contributions are listed as follows.•We systematically analyze five opportunities for achieving energy efficiency of parallel AES algorithm.•We propose an energy-efficient parallel AES algorithm called EEP, which synthetically adopts the methods of hybrid parallelizing, workload balancing, frequency adjusting, communication-computation overlapping, and best occupancy.•We evaluate EEP in several aspects, including energy ratio, energy saving, energy efficiency, and so on, and compare EEP with CPU-only parallel AES algorithm, GPU-only parallel AES algorithm, and some previous works.
1.3. OrganizationThe remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews some related works. Section 3, describes two opportunities to save energy. Section 4 provides the corresponding methodologies. Section 5 presents the algorithm for EEP that adopts the aforementioned methods. Section 6 describes the experiments conducted, then provides and evaluates their results. Section 7 provides conclusions and a look to the future.
