Discovery is not a free lunch. Since 2000, total global R&D expenditures have tripled in current euros, from EUR 624 billion to EUR 1.8 trillion (Congressional Research Service, 2019).1 The total capital and operations costs of some very large-scale research infrastructures (RIs, hereafter) such as the International Space Station, the Square Kilometers Array Radiotelescope (SKA), the Human Genome Project, are in the region of billions of euro. For instance, the present value to 2025 of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) total costs has been estimated around EUR 13.5 billion2 (Florio et al., 2016), while the cost of the Human Genome Project is estimated at around EUR 2.5 billion.3 Even minor RIs, only supported by national governments, such as the CNAO research centre for hadron therapy in Pavia (Italy), the ALBA synchrotron supported by the Spanish government4 or other public research institutes in developing countries require investments in the region of hundreds million euro (Battistoni et al., 2016; Biscari, 2012; Caliari et al., 2019; Sanz-Menéndez et al., 2013).
All these scientific projects are funded either by international and national agencies through government funding, hence ultimately by taxpayers. So, the questions to be addressed are: does society perceive (big-) science as a valuable investment? Are citizens outside the scientific community willing to pay for basic research with their own money? And what factors drive this willingness-to-pay (WTP, hereafter)? These questions are interesting for both academic research and science policy (Baneke, 2019; Florio, 2019). From the academic research perspective, the questions are particularly intriguing when basic research is considered, since its definition acknowledges ‘any particular immediate application or use in view’ (OECD, 2002). In his timeless essay, ‘The Usefulness of Useless Knowledge’ Abraham Flexner (Flexner, 1939) argues that the search for answers to deep scientific questions driven solely by curiosity and deflected by considerations of immediacy of applications often leads not only to technological breakthroughs but also contributes to human welfare. In short, the cultivation of scientific curiosity would generate equally important satisfaction as the intellectual and the spiritual life do. Similarly, Flexner and Dijkgraaf (2017) says that society can tackle societal challenges, achieve deeper understanding, and pursue progress only by really valuing and funding the curiosity-driven “pursuit of useless knowledge” in both the sciences and the humanities. So, scientific curiosity would be the source of an increase in the people’s utility, which feeds the willingness to contribute for investment in knowledge production. This paper wants to shed light on this public’s preference for science. Interest in our questions goes even beyond utilitarian considerations. Since 2008, budget austerity has been forcing governments around the world to weigh carefully the economic and social benefits of all their investments, so from the science-policy perspective, there is great concern related to the allocation of resources for the conduct of science towards the goal of best serving the public interest and how the general public perceives this effort (Bauer, 2009; European Commission, 2016; Florio et al., 2020; Muñoz et al., 2012). Indeed, the main benefits generated by research infrastructures such as the creation of knowledge outputs, technological externalities, human capital accumulation, the cultural impact of the outreach, and service provision may only capture the use-value of these assets. To estimate their total economic value, the benefits related to the non-use value should also be considered (Johansson, 2016; Rousseau et al., 2021). As stated by Johansson and Kriström (2015, p. 24): “If the project being evaluated affects non-use values, this should be reflected in the cost-benefit analysis”. For these reasons, it is a timely need to examine the WTP for scientific discovery, even when, as in the case of the Higgs boson or the gravitational waves, there are no particular applications or use in view.
This paper investigates on the WTP for particle physics research at LHC by a pilot experimental setting, drawing from the empirical literature on the valuation of non-use benefits of environmental or cultural goods (Carson, 2011; Snowball, 2008). A sample of 230 undergraduates at University of Milan was involved in a Contingent Valuation referendum-like (CV-SBDC)5 survey, where some questions were designed to elicit the respondents’ WTP and other to control for individual variability of some socioeconomic and psychological characteristics. Given the relatively small sample size and low heterogeneity of participants, our study should be intended as a “laboratory” experiment; namely, an attempt to learn how to estimate the WTP for basic research by examining the preferences of young students (Andrews, 2001; Ricciardelli et al., 2020; Vossler & McKee, 2006) not involved in science.
Lab experiments are widely applied in economic research to respond economic questions, including how various personal traits and context influence the behaviour of economic actors on certain issues (see, for instance, Kessler & Vesterlund, 2015). However, a recently handful of papers by Levitt and List (2007a, 2007b, 2009) has heavily critised the (external) validity of laboratory studies because, according to the authors, there are many reasons to suspect that lab findings fail when generalized to naturally-occurring settings (Levitt and List, 2008). A response to this critique has been moved, among others, by Camerer (2011), who argue that generalizability of lab results is an exaggerated concern among non-experimenters and “a typical experiment has no specific target for external validity; the target is the general theory linking economic factors to behaviour” (Camerer (2011, p. 46). Accordingly, what does really matter is whether the qualitative results are externally valid, and to a lesser extent to which the quantitative results are. There is no disagreement on the debate on the contribution of lab experiments to economics on this point (Kessler & Vesterlund, 2015). In line with this argument, the contribution of this paper to the literature of welfare economics of big-science is two-fold: firstly, to explore variable of interest (awareness, attitude, personal characteristics) that influence the WTP for global research projects; secondly, put forward recommendations for follow-up research wishing to investigate on this field more deeply. The impact of big-science on society is an important issue to be investigated and deserves much more attention than is current the case.
To achieve this stated purpose, we use both parametric and non-parametric estimators to explore the drivers the respondents’ WTP. Our results suggest that a non-zero positive WTP for the LHC discoveries exists and it is influenced by income, the offered bid, previous awareness of CERN and its experiments, and interest in science.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the analytical framework. Section 3 presents our results. Lessons learned for future research are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.
