Open science, or knowledge openness, refers to the practices toward better scientific communication and scientific advancement by giving access to resources for the public (FOSTER, n.d.). Common approaches include open data sharing, research transparency toward reproducible research, and citizen engagement in research (Lyon, 2016). Among these common approaches, the field of research transparency toward reproducible research in natural and biological sciences receives unprecedented attention because of the requirements and policies imposed by representative journals such as Nature and Science (Lee & Moher, 2017).
This study utilizes the research lifecycle as a grounding framework for exploring and modelling how faculty researchers from diverse disciplines practice research transparency through behaviors and activities. The study is positioned within a research environment that is increasingly data-intensive and in which scholars view data curation practices as having growing value and significance for assuring the trust and integrity of scientific evidence and associated scholarship.
1.1. Problem statementWhilst stakeholders advocate transparency and reproducibility in submissions through declarations, mandates, badges and policies such as the OSF and TOP guideline (Lee & Moher, 2017), studies related to researcher compliance on the matter remains undiscovered. In addition, while research transparency is gaining attention as a key approach for many stakeholders engaged in open science endeavors and data infrastructures, it lacks comprehensive and substantial studies in the LIS field (Lyon, Jeng, & Mattern, 2017).This study presents findings on the critical network connections and relationships between transparency components, the development of a conceptual model, and its potential application by a range of open science stakeholders. In this paper, the phrase transparency components refers to “discrete entities which are closely associated with the research lifecycle and together form part of a larger whole.” These include ‘action/verb’ i.e. the language used to describe a specific transparency activity, ‘object’ i.e. the item to which a specific activity is applied and ‘stage’ i.e. the particular point within the research lifecycle at which an activity occurs.More specifically, this study responds to three research questions:1.What are the generic and specific research transparency components through the lifecycle?2.What are the relationships among specific components at each lifecycle stage?3.How does a conceptual model describe these component relationships?
