Since the Internet of Things (IoT) was formally put forward by the International Telecommunication Union in 2005, the development of sensor networks, cloud computing, microchips and other relevant technologies has greatly contributed to the rapid growth of the IoT industry. As a typical representative application of IoT technology, the smart home integrates household facilities based on technology to provide a comfortable, convenient, safe and entertaining living environment to its residents [1], [2], [3].
Since a variety of smart devices are used in the smart home system, a large amount of data is generated, and data exchanges are dispensable during its operation. The storage of video information in the home camera, for example, usually requires a very large storage space. Therefore, traditional information systems face difficulty in maintaining and managing a large amount of collected smart home data [4], [5], [6], [7]. Fortunately, cloud storage has played a revolutionary role in the field of data storage. Under the new storage mode, users do not need to care about the specific structure, management mode and maintenance mode of the storage system and do not need to worry about technical issues such as expansion and fault tolerance. They simply purchase storage services from a cloud storage provider (CSP), who will not only meet the diverse requirements of its users (such as storage capacity, access speed, and security) but also reduce the storage cost and bring greater economic benefits to the data owners. Therefore, cloud storage technology is widely used in the field of smart homes [8], [9].
Despite all these conveniences, smart homes also face serious security problems. The security loopholes of the smart home system may not only bring the risk of privacy leakage to its users but also cause the loss of its users’ property and even threaten their personal security [10], [11]. In general, the following challenges exist for the smart home system.
(1) Unauthorized access: Attackers may invade smart homes without authorization and steal users’ data. In this case, they may hack into the system by learning users’ behavioral patterns and steal their data, thus removing their privacy.
(2) Tampering with data: Attackers may modify data stored in the smart home system without authorization, making authorized data collectors obtain fake user data. For example, attackers may deliberately adjust the temperature settings, which will put the user’s property and life security at risk.
Since the smart home system is based on cloud storage, the data owner may physically lose control of their data, making the data stored on the server easy to modify and delete.
To address the above threats, this paper constructs ablockchain for data storage in a multiple-cloud-storage-provider environment and proposes an aggregate digital signature to address security problems. Here are our contributions:

•Blockchain in multiple CSPs: We build a blockchain for data storage in a multicloud environment for the smart home system. As each CSP has a copy of the blockchain for a smart home user’s data, it prevents data from being tampered with.•The identity-based proxy aggregate signature (IBPAS)scheme: This scheme is an identity-based proxy aggregation signature one that can compress the blockchain storage space and reduce the communication bandwidth.
We have organized the existing papers below. On the basis of a literature review, Section 2 introduces the basics of smart homes and blockchains. Section 3 describes the security requirements of smart homes. Section 4 presents our multiple-cloud-storage model. Section 5 describes the identity-based proxy aggregation signature scheme. Section 6 gives an assessment of the energy consumption of the message calculation and transmission of the IBPAS scheme.
