An important trend in education in recent years is the increasing recognition, by researchers and educators, of the need to move beyond teaching of concepts and facts to incorporate authentic practices and everyday life of students in learning and instruction (Bennett, Lubben, & Hogarth, 2007; Kuhn, 2010; Silseth, 2018). In the case of science literacy, for example, Duschl (2008) suggested using the “cultural imperative”—the integrated fabric of the society and the community that learners live in. Integrating the culture and context of the students with their learning brings to the fore the “social and epistemic dimensions that are embedded in the growth, evaluation, representation, and communication of STEM knowledge and practices” (Duschl, 2008, p. 268).
Among the challenges of science education in secondary schools is fostering students' appreciation of the value of science in their lives and involving them in the approaches and methods that scientists use when making scientific claims or solving problems (e.g., DeBoer, 2000; Hurd, 1998). The omission of students' everyday life from science teaching and learning has often resulted in undue emphasis on isolated facts, lack of relevance and transfer of knowledge, and content overload for the learners (Gilbert, 2006). In order to address this challenge, researchers suggest a context-oriented approach to teaching and learning (Bronkhorst & Akkerman, 2016; Gilje & Erstad, 2017; Hand & Prain, 2006). However, despite continuous efforts to consider context in designing learning and instruction, a) there is no consensus on what context constitutes and how it can be framed in various learning environments, and b) oftentimes in classrooms, teachers frame the learning context with limited agency for learners.
By way of addressing the above-mentioned challenges, Erstad and colleagues (e.g., Gilje & Erstad, 2017; Silseth, 2018; Silseth & Erstad, 2018; Wiig, Silseth, & Erstad, 2018) have considered a sociocultural perspective to the design of learning environments and examined how teachers attend to and incorporate everyday life and out of school practices of students in their teaching. The researchers referred to this effort as “contextualizing instruction”, which is defined as “using students' everyday knowledge as cultural and cognitive resources to guide their learning and support their motivation and conceptual understanding as they encounter academic topics, issues, and concepts” (Silseth, 2018, p. 293). Contextualizing instruction builds on the notion of connecting everyday ideas and experience of learners to scientific and academic practices that traditionally take place in schools. In their study of the resources that teachers orient to when contextualizing instruction, Silseth and Erstad (2018) reported that secondary school teachers use resources such as characteristics of local community, everyday practices and personal issues of students and travel experiences. While it is a step forward, contextualizing instruction is what teachers do in their instructional planning and enactment. To a certain extent, it depends on teachers' knowledge and understanding of learners' everyday life practices, which is not always easy when there are many students in a classroom.
In this paper, we extend the idea of contextualization one step further and examine how students actively and continuously contextualize their learning. This extension is from contextualizing instruction to contextualizing learning and the study focuses on the nature and extent of students' active contextualization during their engagement in a science literacy project. Students often bring unique experience and background to a learning environment that is likely to influence their appropriation of new knowledge. Bronkhorst and Akkerman (2016) identified three reasons for learner agency and active contextualization: the unique and specific background of individual learners, the personal and interest-based appropriation of learning experiences, and the changing and less predictable nature of what is to be learned for students to fit into (professional) communities. We contend that contextualizing learning should entail much more than dealing with the nature and relevance of content in the classroom or a teacher providing good examples to facilitate the potential future transfer of learning for students. It rather should involve learners' active engagement in authentic practices of building on their everyday life, understanding and using scientific reasoning to explain phenomenon around them, and making connections to issues of personal and societal concern that go well beyond the immediate school environment.
Accordingly, we engaged secondary school students in creating and reporting authentic infographic-based science news and, in the process, examined how students contextualize the different phases of their engagement as it relates to both their learning and their everyday life. More specifically, we answer the research question, “In what ways does design of a learning environment centered on learner agency and authentic science news reporting foster active contextualization of learning experience?” In the process of answering the research question, this paper reframes the notion of context as an interactive process and student-oriented learning activity. It also identifies elements of learning environments that facilitate active contextualization. By focusing on active contextualization and student agency, the study provides a new and unique perspective for learning scientists who try to understand the role and influence of learning context.
