1.1. Background and motivationIn 2017, the population of people aged 60 years or over numbered 962 million in the world, double the number in 1980 (United Nations, 2017). Moreover, there will be a globally dramatic increase in those aged 80 years or over, from about 137 million in 2017 to nearly 425 million by 2050 (United Nations, 2017). Aging has led to rapidly rising burdens on health care and disease control expenditures (Westerhout, 2014). Mobile technologies with useful functions and high mobility are more often being used to assist older adult users in the self-management of various diseases and encouragement of healthy behaviors (Free et al., 2013). Mobile health (mHealth) technologies have been developed for rehabilitation to deliver exercise and gait training programs through self-management systems and measurement tools (Nussbaum et al., 2019). The potential benefits of mobile technology include monitoring chronic conditions for older adults (de Barros et al., 2013) and assisting with treatment decisions for health professionals (Lv et al., 2016). In addition, due to aging-related ability declines, older adults suffer from inactivity, which can lead to social isolation, depression, and cognitive deterioration (Murtagh et al., 2015). Digital and information communication technologies (ICT) provide remote communication and support for older adult users (Vroman et al., 2015). These benefits can promote active and healthy aging by enabling social connectedness for the aging population.Although technology can potentially benefit seniors, some remaining barriers and concerns influence the use of technology by older adults (Li et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2016; Nurgalieva et al., 2019). Perceived usefulness and ease of use were found to influence the intention to use wearable (Li et al., 2019) and smartphone (Ma et al., 2016) technologies in older adult users. Li et al. (2019) found that perceived usefulness was the major factor in the intention to use smart wearable systems. In addition, compatibility with other existing products and with the lifestyles of senior users is also important for enhancing the perceived usefulness of smart wearables (Li et al., 2019). Through structured questionnaires and interviews with older adult users, Ma et al. (2016) found that age and education were two critical factors in the acceptance of smartphones. The cost of the products and family support also influenced smartphone acceptance (Ma et al., 2016). Regarding the use of touchscreens, Nurgalieva et al. (2019) noted that the most relevant cognitive declines were in memory, information processing, information communication technology skills, and language processing. Besides the age-related decline in cognition, other age-related changes in perceptual and motor abilities also affect the use of technology, including the vision and dexterity problems of older adult users (Nurgalieva et al., 2019).
1.2. Age-related declines in ability to use interfacesThe types of technology use can be divided into remote interactions with large screens and direct interactions with mobile touchscreen technologies. Since sufficient postural stability and proximal control of the upper extremities are needed for proper interaction with large screens, our research team investigated the postural effects and users’ experiences in interactions with such screens (Lin et al., 2015). Lin et al. (2015) found that different contributions of hand-direct and gaze-direct postures affected accuracy and usability. As small screen interactions with mobile touchscreen interfaces increase in frequency in the daily lives of the elderly, the usability of mobile touchscreens for elderly users has become important.Aging-related ability declines manifest in older adult users and influence their experiences of using mobile technology with touchscreens. Nurgalieva et al. (2019) developed a capability model including perceptual, cognitive, psychomotor, and motor abilities for analysis of the interactions with touchscreens of older adult users. In the model developed by Nurgalieva et al. (2019), the perceptual abilities included vision and hearing. The cognitive abilities included working memory, divided attention, and information processing speed. The psychomotor abilities focused on the slowness of motor control and the deterioration of eye–hand coordination. Muscle weakness and declining dexterity resulted in decreases in motor ability, which also influenced the older adults’ use of touchscreen devices.Several researchers have noted that age-related declines in motor control and coordination influence the use of gestures by older adults interacting with touchscreens (Chang et al., 2014; Gao and Sun, 2015; Harada et al., 2013; Leonardi et al., 2010; Mihajlov et al., 2015; Tsai et al., 2017). Harada et al. (2013) focused on the experiences of the elderly while interacting with smartphones and tablet computers through direct touch, and they found that older adult users experienced some difficulty with successfully tapping on targets due to their reduced motor control and coordination of the fingers. Leonardi et al. (2010) provided several possible reasons to describe the elderly's limitations in using touch-based interactive technologies, including persistent problems in the timing of gestures, the difficulty of controlling the speed of tapping, and failure to complete dragging actions. Chang et al. (2014) studied the most commonly used gestures adopted by older adults, young adults, and children. They found slight differences among the different age groups in terms of the gestures frequently used. However, all groups in that study primarily used the index finger for the dragging task and the index finger and thumb for one-handed enlargement and rotating tasks (Chang et al., 2014). Gao and Sun (2015) also investigated gesture preferences and found that rather than multiple-finger movements, older users favored single-finger movements. Mihajlov et al. (2015) found that dragging was easier to learn than rotating and that it was easier to generalize the skills to other tasks with similar gestures for older adult users without any previous experience using touchscreens.Tsai et al. (2017) investigated the age effects on the use of smartphones with gestures for dragging, zooming, and several modified gestures. They found that adults older than 60 years were outperformed by younger users between the ages of 18 and 34 in both speed and accuracy on all gestures tested (Tsai et al., 2017). Interestingly, although the elderly groups expressed a preference for the improved gestures over the current gestures for dragging and zooming, they actually exhibited better objective use of the current ones (Tsai et al., 2017). Therefore, it should be noted that actual performance might not be consistent with preferences in older adult users. For older users with reduced eye–hand coordination, increased button sizes and spaces between buttons have been suggested (Ghorbel et al., 2017). Hand tremors and arthritis will also influence the users’ dexterity in the use of touchscreens. Therefore, Piper et al. (2010) recommended that touchscreen devices include the option of using whole-hand input for individuals who need it.Wu et al. (2019) also reported significantly lower performance on touchscreen device use in older adult users with declines in processing speed, working memory, and executive function. It has been suggested that important information be located in the center of the screen and that information be categorized with different colors to reduce the cognitive load of searching for older adults with low information processing abilities (Ghorbel et al., 2017). Declines in working memory can cause the inability to remember past experiences of interface use in previous steps and interfere with the use of technology in older adult users (Pak et al., 2017). Therefore, the “Home” button is useful for guiding senior users with reduced working memory when they are navigating a touchscreen (Carmien and Manzanares, 2014).The above findings provide general guidelines for developing mobile interfaces for the elderly population. However, for successfully interacting with such technology, older adult users need to utilize several mobile interface abilities simultaneously. Therefore, there is a need for a testing mechanism for detecting the mobile interface usage behaviors of the elderly in multiple dimensions and from the perspectives of aging-related ability declines. With such a mechanism, individualized interfaces can be designed to meet the different needs of older adult users so as to improve the user experiences of the elderly.
1.3. Current relevant evaluation mechanismMost current assessments of technology use provide only general information on the computer use performance of the elderly from subjective questionnaire forms, including the Computer Expertise questionnaire (CE) (Arning and Ziefle, 2008), the Computer Proficiency Questionnaire (CPU) (Boot et al., 2015), the Computer Literacy Scale (CLS) (Sengpiel and Jochems, 2015), and the Basic Computer Skills (BCS) (Goldhammer et al., 2013). Arning and Ziefle (2008) assessed the elderly's knowledge of computer use from conceptual and procedural perspectives. Since multiple choices were provided on the computer expertise (CE) questionnaire, the exact abilities could not be represented by this tool (Arning and Ziefle, 2008). More recently, Boot et al. (2015) proposed the Computer Proficiency Questionnaire (CPQ) to understand the elderly's use of computers. Six categories—computer basics, printer, communication, internet, calendar, and entertainment—were classified in this questionnaire by different functions (Boot et al., 2015). Although most representative computer tasks were included, self-reported rating of difficulty was used in this questionnaire to describe subjective difficulty of use (Boot et al., 2015). CE and CPQ can represent the elderly's knowledge and perceived difficulty of using computers. However, the actual behaviors of technology use can only be reflected through direct interactive operation.The Computer Literacy Scale (CLS) was designed to test the understanding of computer knowledge among the elderly through multiple choices and interactive scenarios in the advanced versions (Sengpiel and Jochems, 2015). Although several basic tasks are included in the interactive version, these tasks only partially describe the knowledge of computer use. Goldhammer et al. (2013) developed Basic Computer Skills (BCS) to evaluate the skills of computer use among children. A more comprehensive set of skills was covered in this interactive and task-oriented tool through collecting the users’ responses while meeting task needs. However, since this tool was designed with purposeful tasks, it could not represent the individual matching ability for each task. This tool could only describe the general use of computers among children.Indeed, there is a need for a testing mechanism to effectively detect the mobile interface usage behaviors of older adult users. The mechanism should be able to reflect actual performance to avoid subjective judgments in scoring. A continuous grading system should also be considered to detect various levels in the progressive aging process. In addition, the task requirements should be matched with the required abilities for differentiating the presence or lack of ability for each task. Tasks developed based on the model of Fitts' law have been adopted in many studies to describe human movements in interface use behaviors, and this is one technique that reflects actual performance through measurable parameters of continuous performance rather than subjective judgements. However, the testing mechanism based on the model of Fitts' law has some limitations. The following section introduces the current applications of Fitts' law and the issues in those applications requiring further investigation.
1.4. The application of Fitts' law in the elderly's use of mobile interfacesFitts (1954) and Fitts and Peterson (1964) proposed the fundamental relationship of the average movement time (MT) of completion of Fitts' task and the combination of the width and distance between targets. The original relationship proposed by Fitts' law was as follows:(1)MT=a+b log2(2DW)where D is amplitude of movement, W is width of target, and a and b are empirical constants.The index of difficulty reflects the capacity to process information in units of bits in the human motor system (MacKenzie, 1989). The framework of Fitts' law has been applied to investigate the age effects on executing sensorimotor tasks (Bakaev, 2008; Poletti et al., 2016; Poletti et al., 2015; Temprado et al., 2013; Temprado et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2015). Bakaev (2008) modified the model of Fitts' law to predict movement time from age and experience with using computers. Temprado et al. (2013) found that compared with younger adults, the elderly took more time to finish Fitts' task. However, the low capacity of information processing induced by age effects should not reflected only in the index of difficulty, which was shown by the combined effects of the distance and the tolerance of the target (Temprado et al., 2013). The distance of the target would be more critical in influencing the movement time than would the width of the target, and this effect was not influenced by age (Temprado et al., 2013). Temprado et al. (2017) further investigated age differences in behavioral variability, information processing, and slowness of movements in contexts with different force control phases in Fitts' tasks. Age-related slowness, higher variability, and lower efficiency were found to be more profound in the phase of rapid force control for older than for younger adults (Temprado et al., 2017).Age differences in strategy selection and variation in aiming tasks were also investigated with Fitts' law (Poletti et al., 2015). In general, older users use fewer strategies than younger adults do, and strategies with corrective submovements were commonly chosen by the elderly (Poletti et al., 2015). Poletti et al. (2016) further explored the sequential effects of age-related variation in strategy adoption. They found that older adults were more likely than younger adults to continue using under-shoot or progressive deceleration strategies, since the older adults might have more difficulty switching to other strategies after adopting the difficult strategies (Poletti et al., 2016). Since environmental clues are essential in the execution of aiming and pointing tasks, Zhang et al. (2015) investigated the aging effects on Fitts' pointing performance with different types of visual feedback. They found that age affects movement time but not mean accuracy. The accuracy rates of the elderly were even higher than those of the younger group in the task with full visual feedback on target location and the users' hand movements (Zhang et al., 2015).Devices have been compared based on the concept of Fitts' law as well (Carvalho et al., 2015; Suta et al., 2018; X. Zhou and Shen, 2016). Suta et al. (2018) adopted the concept of Fitts' law to compare input methods with the use of touchpads and remote controllers, and they found similar patterns of the model even with different devices. Fitts' law was also applied to compare different gesture-sensing devices, namely, the Microsoft Kinect and Leap Motion, in hand or full body movement recognition for three different age groups (Carvalho et al., 2015). The results showed no differences between devices in movement recognition, but age effects were noted (Carvalho et al., 2015). Carvalho et al. (2015) found that older adults performed more slowly but also more precisely than children. Recent findings indicate that both young and elderly users operate faster with direct touch interaction than with a mouse or stylus, and their accuracy rates are influenced more by the width of the target than by the distance of movement in Fitts' task (X. Zhou and Shen, 2016).From the above research, it is clear that Fitts' law has been used to compare and investigate performance in aiming and tapping tasks for older adult users. Based on the model of Fitts' law, the slowness of older adult users has often been ascribed to age-related declines in information processing capacity (Rey-Robert et al., 2012; Temprado et al., 2013). However, no evidence to date has shown that age-related decline in the execution of Fitts' task has consequences on the common use of technology with multiple task requirements. It is worth investigating whether a decline in performance on Fitts' tasks can reflect performance on other tasks requiring multiple interface usage in mobile technology.
1.5. Research objectivesBased on the above discussions, several points can be summarized. Age-related declines limit the user experiences of older adult users of mobile technology. Current evaluations of technology use cannot provide sufficiently objective or quantitative measurement results. There is also a need to develop a measure of mobile user interface abilities. If the adapted interface designs can be developed with the concerns of age-related declines in ability, older adult users with those difficulties can benefit from using those designs. However, the profound heterogeneity in the aging process causes high variability in performance among older adult users (Stone et al., 2017; van Boekel et al., 2017). One uniform design for general age-related decline in ability may not be suitable for all older adult users. There must be a proper way to detect different mobile interface usage behaviors and ability levels for different users. With such a method of detection, individualized interface designs could be introduced to older adult users with particular needs for the use of mobile technology. The research purposes of this research are described as follows.1.5.1. To develop the domain constructsBased on the above discussion and because of the limitations of current evaluations, this research aimed to develop a testing mechanism for evaluating the elderly's use of mobile interfaces across the age span efficiently and comprehensively. Before that, a domain structure covering major user interface abilities for the use of mobile technology would need to be developed. Then an evaluation mechanism could be developed based on the proposed domain structure to measure mobile user interface abilities in different older adults. Therefore, a comprehensive domain structure of the elderly mobile user interface ability (EMUIA) regarding progressive aging was established first. The structure could also provide future researchers a way to explore the elderly's behaviors in mobile interface usage.1.5.2. To develop the evaluation of the elderly's use of mobile interfacesA structured testing system, the Elderly Mobile User Interface Ability Evaluation System (EMUIAES), for assessing the elderly mobile user interface ability across age spans was established based on the domain structure developed in this research.1.5.3. To investigate the effects of experience and age on mobile interface usageSome recent studies have investigated the effects of previous experience on performance in technology use (Arief et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2019). Arief et al. (2018) found that previous working experience with computers could help older adults to become familiar with new technology. Huang et al. (2019) showed that proper training with well-designed graphic icons could improve the speed of use of automatic teller machines for elderly novice users. Therefore, previous experience with using technology might influence the interface interactions of elderly users. However, it still remains unclear how much of the use of mobile technology can be accounted for by age and past experience with using technology. Therefore, this research further investigated the effects of age and past experience with using technology on changes in the elderly mobile interface usage behaviors. In this research, it was hypothesized that more experience with technology and younger age would be related to better performance on mobile user interfaces.1.5.4. To investigate the relationship between the representative elderly mobile user interface abilities and Fitts' performanceFitts' Law (Fitts, 1954; Fitts and Peterson, 1964) is a broadly used model to describe the efficiency of pointing and tapping tasks. However, only limited evidence demonstrates the application of Fitts' law in older adult users, especially as it relates to the behaviors in mobile interface usage with multiple task needs. As a result, this research examined the relationship of Fitts' performance and other critical elderly mobile user interface abilities (EMUIAs).
