Bangla (Bengali) is the second most spoken language in India. It ranks fifth in Asia and it is also in the top ten spoken languages in the world (Majumder et al., 2007). So, a huge number of people depend on this language for their day to day communication. Therefore, automatic recognition of Bengali handwritten characters and numeral digits are needed to be digitized for making the communication smoother. Many research works and models have been proposed to recognize Bengali handwritten characters and numeral digits so far, but still, a huge scope is there to improve this task in terms of accuracy and applicability. Most of the previously proposed models are based on traditional pattern recognition and machine learning techniques where human expertise is required for feature engineering (Bag and Harit, 2013, Pal et al., 2012). The recent success of deep learning, especially Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for computer vision (Ghosh et al., 2019, Krizhevsky et al., 2012, LeCun et al., 2015, Gu et al., 2018, Sultana et al., 2018) has inspired many researchers to use the CNN to recognize handwritten characters and digits as a computer vision task. The BDNet, we proposing through this paper, is a task-oriented deep CNN based model to classify Bengali numeral digits. This model trained using untraditional preprocessing and data augmentation techniques for trained with generalization. It has achieved new baseline accuracy on benchmark datasets (Bhattacharya and Chaudhuri, 2009). Here we have also proposed a new dataset of 1000 images of Bengali handwritten numerals. This own dataset used to test the trained model, and it giving promising results but this new dataset not used during training. The working pipeline of the BDNet is designed by an inspiration of DenseNet (Huang et al., 2017) which is one of the state-of-the-art deep CNN algorithm for image classification. The conceptual view of the BDNet has shown in Fig. 1 and details of the model have explained in Section 3.Download : Download high-res image (149KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Overview of the BDNet model.
1.1. Contributions of this paper•A deep CNN working model, called BDNet, is designed to recognize Bengali handwritten numerals.•The BDNet is trained end-to-end with unorthodox data preprocessing and augmentation.•The proposed model has achieved the highest test accuracy with 47.62% error reduction on baseline result (99.78% whereas the previous best was 99.58%) on the test data of ISI Bengali handwritten numeral dataset.•A new dataset is created with 1000 samples of handwritten Bengali numerals for testing performance of the trained BDNet where the model gives promising results.
1.2. Organization of the paperThe rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, a literature review has done. Model details of BDNet are explained in Section 3. In Section 4, the dataset and preprocessing of data are explained. Training details are explained in Section 5 and result analysis is in Section 6. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 7.
