During the rice growing process, weeding is of great importance to improve the yield and quality of rice. Although the use of chemical herbicides helps, the damage to the environment is enormous. The demand for environment-friendly, labor-saving and yield-increasing weeding methods is growing. Mechanical weeding suits that demand well, though it has problems regarding labor costs and rice injuries.
In practical paddy fields, different degrees of misalignment of seedling rows exist in either mechanical or manual transplanting. Consequently, the weeding machine without feedback could inflict rice injury, for it is unable to adjust the weeding wheels automatically according to the bending. Thus, it is significant for the weeding machine to avoid seedlings automatically. In 2011, Ma’s group studied and summarized the development of domestic and foreign mechanical weeding machines, especially the development of intelligent weeding robots in the United States and Japan. They proposed that the development of mechanical weeding technology should be the one that includes bionics, multi-technology integration, and intelligence, especially computer vision [1].
Inspired by Ma’s work, Qi’s group proposed a small weeding robot platform for paddy fields in 2013, which adopted the scheme of remote control and mechanical elastic tactile feedback weeding. Despite its failure to achieve complete autonomous navigation [2], Qi’s work was still an inspiring, bold attempt to use tactile feedback rather than computer vision for seedling line perception.
As for the mechanical weeding system with computer vision technology, the implicit bending information inside images can provide direct feedback for automatic rice avoidance. The extraction of bending information and guidance line is based on rice seedling identification. A method of rice seedling identification based on machine vision was proposed by Jiang et al. to weed more efficiently. The rice image in the paddy field was processed using graying, point filter, binarization, and connected domain. However, the accuracy of rice identification and positioning, will be affected to some extent, due to the complex background and illumination degree, as well as the morphological similarity between weeds and rice seedlings. Therefore, Jiang’s group proposed to shoot the stem base of rice seedlings on the side, as well as to add shading in the image collection process, increasing the difference between rice plant and paddy field background under sunlight [3]. To obtain the stem base, they introduced image segmentation and edge detection algorithm, then completed the positioning of the rice plant by fitting the center point of a single rice plant. Slightly different from Jiang’s work, Zeng used the YUV color space based on the color space theory to gray the images. The rice images from the background were then segmented through Fourier transform combined with corrosion-expansion operation [4]. Finally, the position of rice seedlings was extracted after the inverse projection transformation. The above methods mainly adopt traditional image processing methods, such as graying, thresholding, and morphological operation. Their low processing speed, however, with insufficient generalization ability and high requirements for image quality, is one of their significant shortcomings. Besides, it is not easy for the algorithm to tell the difference between seedlings and weeds with traditional image processing methods. However, deep learning methods can extract the features, which are beyond our understanding, for object detection.
Since 2015, deep learning has become a popular area of research and has been widely applied in a variety of fields. After the region-based object detection model [5] was proposed, deep learning became popular in the area of object detection. Methods based on deep learning have achieved good results on face detection [6], pedestrian detection [7] and object detection in the wild [8]. In the field of agriculture, the deep-learning-based computer vision is used for crop pest detection and single crop classification. Yang’s group summarized the application of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [9], which is a popular deep learning model, in the field of agriculture in the aspects of disease pest detection, and crop classification. They also realized the accurate identification and positioning of the maize roots based on the object detection model of Faster R-CNN [10].
In this paper, we apply the Faster R-CNN and SSD [11], [12] object detection model based on CNN to paddy field seedling identification and localization, extract the guidance lines using the least square fitting method, and obtain the target position of the weeding wheel through max–min optimization. The target position will then serve as the reference input in the control system. In the case of mean Average Precision (mAP) and speed, the experimental results show that the Faster R-CNN model is better in mAP. However, the SSD model is several times the speed of Faster R-CNN.
This paper is organized as follows. The automatic weeding scheme is introduced in Section 2 to illustrate the significance of this study. The guidance line extraction algorithm is discussed in Section 3. The experiment and experimental results are given in Section 4. Finally, some concluding remarks are given, and our future work is discussed in Section 5 and Section 6, respectively.
