
“The important thing is not to stop questioning. Curiosity has its own reason for existence. One cannot help but be in awe when he contemplates the mysteries of eternity, of life, of the marvelous structure of reality. It is enough if one tries merely to comprehend a little of this mystery each day.”Albert Einstein (quoted in (Miller, 1955), p.64)

“Try and penetrate with our limited means the secrets of nature and you will find that, behind all the discernible concatenations, there remains something subtle, intangible and inexplicable. Veneration for this force beyond anything that we can comprehend is my religion. To that extent I am, in point of fact, religious.”Albert Einstein, (quoted in (Kessler, 1971))
Recognizing that something is a mystery could highlight a gap in one's knowledge, prompting curiosity, questioning, and a search for information (e.g., Kidd & Hayden, 2015; Loewenstein, 1994). At the same time, declaring something a mystery suggests that the target of inquiry might be ineffable and inexplicable. The first perspective is reflected in Einstein's attitude to mystery as spurring on scientific advance (questioning), the second in his acknowledgement of limits to human understanding (resulting in a veneration that Einstein calls “religious”).
In the current paper we investigate the role of questioning and mystery across the domains of science and religion. In particular, we ask: do questions about scientific matters (e.g., “Why is the center of the Earth so hot?”) prompt a more strongly felt need for explanation than questions about religious matters (e.g., “Why did God create the world?”)? Is declaring something a mystery more acceptable in the domain of religion (e.g., “Why does prayer work? It's a mystery”) than in the domain of science (e.g., “Why does the Moon cause tides? It's a mystery”)? We hypothesize that the answer to both questions is yes, and we argue that these domain differences in “need for explanation” and “mystery acceptability” can shed light on the different functional roles of scientific and religious beliefs in human cognition. In particular, whereas inquiry in science typically plays an epistemic role (helping us achieve a more veridical representation of the world that enables us to make predictions and take effective actions), inquiry (or its absence) in religion may often play non-epistemic roles (such as signaling individual and group identities and supporting narratives of meaning).
In the remainder of the Introduction, we first review prior work on scientific and religious explanation, including (1) the similarities and differences in explanation across domains, and (2) when an unresolved mystery or “no explanation” is judged adequate. We then consider research on scientific and religious belief more generally, including important differences in their responsiveness to evidence, and in the (average) confidence with which they are held. This work motivates our proposal that the domains of science and religion are differently aligned with epistemic versus non-epistemic aims, and that this should be reflected in need for explanation and mystery acceptability, a hypothesis we go on to test in three studies.
1.1. Scientific and religious explanationsWhile prior work has not investigated need for explanation or mystery acceptability across domains, scholars have long emphasized the central role of explanation in both the domain of science and the domain of religion, where we can understand these domains as defined by their content (with “science” concerning natural entities like germs and mountains and “religion” concerning supernatural entities like gods and angels), their corresponding methods of inquiry, and the institutions that support them. Importantly, science and religion both offer explanations for the world and for human experience, and on many accounts, providing such explanations is a central aim of both—offering a sense of understanding for otherwise mysterious events, such as an unexpected power outage or a tragic loss. Harré (1985 p. 168) called scientific explanations “the crown of science”; similarly, some regard “the pursuit of explanation, prediction, and control [as] both necessary and sufficient for the flourishing of religious life” (Horton, 1997 p. 373).These similarities in function are matched by similarities in cognitive processing. Prior research has suggested that shared cognitive processes underlie both religious and non-religious explanations for everyday events (e.g., Barrett, 2000, Barrett, 2004; Hood et al., 2009; Lupfer et al., 1992). In particular, both scientific and religious beliefs are shaped by intuitive theories and by common cognitive biases, including tendencies to essentialize and to interpret behavior as purposeful (e.g., Shtulman, 2015; Willard & Norenzayan, 2013). Religious and scientific explanations can be integrated in individual minds (for a review, see Legare et al., 2012), and religious and scientific beliefs can co-exist just as distinct sets of factual beliefs co-exist (Harris & Giménez, 2005; Legare & Gelman, 2008; Shtulman & Lombrozo, 2016).On the other hand, scientific and religious explanations are often distinct in their targets and forms. Adults are more likely to generate religious explanations for events that are life-altering and positive in valence as opposed to mundane or negative (Lupfer et al., 1996, see also Lupfer et al., 1992; Ransom & Alicke, 2012; Vonk & Pitzen, 2016; Weeks & Lupfer, 2000). Both children and adults are more likely to generate supernatural explanations for events that are positively valenced as opposed to negatively valenced (Woolley et al., 2011), and for things that are unlikely or impossible than for those that are possible (Woolley & Cornelius, 2017; see also Woolley & Dunham, 2017). There is also evidence that scientific explanations are thought to be more appropriate to explain aspects of human experience and behavior that are associated with the body and shared with other animals, such as headaches or discerning temperature through touch, than those that have a rich mental experience that is potentially unique to humans, such as falling in love or feeling transformed by a spiritual event (Gottlieb & Lombrozo, 2018). Beyond differing in their targets, religious and scientific explanations may differ in form. In particular, religious explanations often appeal to intentional agents and are teleological in nature (appealing to the function or purpose of the thing being explained; Kelemen, 2004), while scientific explanations instead emphasize physical causal mechanisms (Keil, 2019).In sum, there is evidence that explanation is central to both science and religion, and that scientific and religious explanations make use of shared cognitive processes. On the other hand, scientific and religious explanations are distinct in their typical targets and forms. However, this prior work has focused largely on what domain of explanation is demanded given different circumstances (i.e., whether a scientific or religious explanation should be offered for a given phenomenon) and on how explanations appealing to different domains are similar or dissimilar (i.e., how an explanation appealing to scientific content is different from an explanation appealing to religious content). This work leaves open the question of what demands an explanation across domains. According to the philosophy literature on “need for explanation” (Grimm, 2008; Wong & Yudell, 2015), the sense that an event or phenomenon demands an explanation motivates explanatory inquiry, whether it takes the form of explanation generation, experimentation, or question-asking. We can therefore ask: when are explanations demanded for religious and scientific phenomena? And are explanations demanded with the same frequency and fervor across domains? Conversely, when is it appropriate to refuse explanatory inquiry, for example by stating that some event or phenomenon is (and perhaps even ought to be left as) a “mystery”?
1.2. Mystery in science and religionWithin science, declaring something a mystery is a sign that current scientific theory is inadequate or incomplete (for relevant discussion see Klein & Colombo, 2018). In contrast, some religious traditions seem to actively embrace (some) mysteries (Boudry & Coyne, 2016; Boudry & De Smedt, 2011; Boyer, 2001; Sperber, 1996). For instance, some Christian theologians maintain that the trinity is a mystery (Tuggy, 2016) and some mystical traditions consider mystical experiences to be “ineffable,” meaning the experience or its object is beyond the possibility of explanation (Gellman, 2017). While empirical research on this topic has been sparse, there is evidence that the absence of a good scientific explanation can increase implicit endorsement of religious ideas, and perhaps lead to greater acceptance of the claim that “there is no way to explain” the premise of a question. We review these findings as evidence that science and religion may be differentially tolerant of weak or absent explanations.In a study investigating the relationship between scientific and religious explanations, Preston and Epley (2009) manipulated whether science was presented as offering a strong explanation for the origins of the universe and of life, or as leaving many questions unanswered (“this was the best scientific theory on the subject to date, but it does not account for the other data and observations very well, and raises more questions than it answers”). They found that this manipulation affected associations between “science”/“God” and positive or negative words on a subsequent evaluation task, such that a weak scientific explanation boosted positive associations with God. In another study (Preston et al., 2013), participants read passages that offered weak or strong neuroscientific explanations for psychological phenomena, such as love. In the weak condition, the passages highlighted gaps in the neuroscientific explanations (e.g., “Neuroscientists note that these results only raise more questions than they answer. For instance it does not explain when or with whom we fall in love, and cannot explain what creates the feeling of love itself”). Participants who received the weak neuroscientific explanation were more likely than those who received the strong explanation to favor a title for the passage reflecting the explanatory gap (e.g., “the mystery of love” versus “the construction of love”), and also went on to show greater implicit belief in a soul (as reflected in the subjective value placed on the soul when given the opportunity to “sell” their soul—represented by a soul ID card—to the experimenter).Woolley and Cornelius (2017) asked 5- to 9-year-olds and adults to evaluate the claim that there is “no way to explain” given mundane events (e.g., a dog waking up after falling asleep), improbable events (e.g., a dog waking up from a coma after two weeks at the vet), and extraordinary events (e.g., a dog waking up after being pronounced deceased by the vet). While endorsement of the “no way to explain” claim was low across all event types, two interesting patterns emerged: first, only children younger than 8 years did not judge the “no way to explain” claim to be significantly worse than the neutral scale midpoint, suggesting a developmental trend in the belief that some things have no explanation or are unexplainable. Second, 8- and 9-year-olds and adults rated “no way to explain” as more acceptable for extraordinary events than for mundane events. While the extraordinary events used in this study were not explicitly religious or supernatural in nature, these findings are at least suggestive that “no way to explain” or mystery explanations may be more acceptable in the religious domain (where extraordinary events are often targets of explanation) than in the science domain (where mundane events tend to prevail).Though the work reviewed in this section offers indirect support for the idea that declaring a mystery is more appropriate in answering questions about religion versus science, no research to our knowledge has directly tested whether mystery acceptability differs across domains. Additionally, the relationship between mystery acceptance and explanation remains an open question. Is declaring that something is a mystery equivalent to declaring that it does not demand an explanation? Or does appealing to mystery carry distinct or additional commitments? We address these questions in the present research.
1.3. Scientific and religious beliefs play different functional rolesInvestigating need for explanation and mystery acceptability across the domains of science and religion is valuable because it sheds light on how inquiry is perceived and satisfied within each domain. However, these judgments also offer a window onto a much bigger and more elusive set of questions: Do scientific and religious beliefs differ only in their subject matter? Or is the nature of belief itself importantly different across domains? Prior theoretical and empirical work has identified distinct kinds of belief that may be differentially prevalent across the domains of science and religion (Buchak, 2012; Buckwalter et al., 2015; Heiphetz et al., 2013, Heiphetz et al., 2014, Heiphetz et al., 2018; Metz et al., 2018; Van Leeuwen, 2014), and a subset of this work further suggests that these kinds play different functional roles in human cognition. While both kinds of belief play a role in sensemaking (Chater & Loewenstein, 2016) and can offer a sense of control (Laurin & Kay, 2017; Rutjens et al., 2010; Rutjens et al., 2013), we suggest that scientific beliefs play a more central epistemic role (helping us form veridical representations of the world). This proposal is supported by past research investigating epistemic similarities and differences between scientific and religious beliefs.Within psychology, research suggests that scientific and religious beliefs differ in how they are justified and in the (average) confidence with which they are held. Shtulman (2013) found that college students in the United States more often justified beliefs in scientific entities (such electrons or genes) vs. supernatural entities (such as souls or heaven) by appeal to evidence. Beliefs in supernatural entities were primarily justified by appeal to authority or with subjective justifications (such as appeal to intuition or volition), while beliefs in scientific entities were primarily justified by appeal to authority or evidence. Shtulman also found a notable difference in the confidence with which participants held these beliefs: while they were generally highly confident in the existence of both scientific and supernatural entities (selecting the highest possible rating for 46% of all selections), the average confidence with which they endorsed the existence of scientific entities was higher than that for supernatural entities. This confidence difference has been replicated cross-culturally (Clegg et al., 2019; Davoodi et al., 2018) and emerges in childhood (Harris et al., 2006): 5- and 6-year-old children are on average less confident in the existence of unobserved religious/supernatural entities (e.g., God, Santa Claus) than unobserved scientific entities (e.g., germs, oxygen), even though both are frequently endorsed by adults.Additional evidence for differences in how scientific and religious beliefs are held and justified comes from Metz et al. (2018), who compared creationists and those who endorse evolutionary explanations for human origins, finding differences across these groups in which justifications for belief were judged generally acceptable. Across several studies, those who endorsed evolutionary explanations for human origins tended to endorse empirical evidence and consensus among scientists as strong justifications for belief, while those who embraced creationist explanations also endorsed religious authority and knowledge of the heart as strong justifications for beliefs, not only for creationism but in general. Additionally, endorsement of affiliative justifications for belief (e.g., the people I love believe it is true) predicted rejection of scientific beliefs like evolution and climate change (Metz et al., 2018).While these findings reveal that there are often differences between scientific and religious beliefs, one possibility is that these beliefs differ only in their accessibility to investigation—we merely have more abundant and clear evidence about scientific phenomena (at least at the level of the scientific community), and this is reflected in both the confidence with which scientific beliefs are held and in the justifications that are given. However, another possibility is that there are multiple kinds of beliefs that play different functional roles in human cognition. Some recent proposals advocate for the latter position, arguing that religious beliefs can involve a faith-like dissociation from evidence that differs from a typical belief. One relevant proposal comes from Buchak (2012), who develops a formal analysis of faith as an epistemic attitude distinct from generic belief (see also Buchak, 2017). On her view, having faith in some claim involves a commitment to acting as if the claim is true without first needing to examine additional evidence that could potentially bear on it. Using formal arguments from decision theory and rational choice theory, Buchak identifies the conditions under which faith (in this sense) can be rational. Thus relative to generic belief, a proposition that is believed “on faith” has a distinct epistemic profile, whether its content is religious or scientific (for instance, non-experts could hold scientific beliefs “on faith”).Another proposal comes from Van Leeuwen (2014), who argues that religious “credences” differ from factual beliefs1 in several ways. In particular, religious credences are less responsive to evidence than factual beliefs (for relevant evidence see Friesen et al., 2015). Moreover, religious credences are context dependent (i.e., only guide action in certain contexts), do not govern factual beliefs, have normative force, and are susceptible to special authority (authority appointed on non-evidential grounds, like many spiritual leaders). Van Leeuwen warns against taking the distinction too rigidly, suggesting that the two types characterize different “attractor positions” in an interdimensional space of epistemic attitudes, which may also include beliefs with mixed or intermediate features. Later, we will examine the possibility of finding these in folk conceptions of domains such as psychology or philosophy.There is also some empirical evidence corroborating a conceptual distinction between factual belief and religious credence: adults are more likely to use the word “think” when referring to factual belief and “believe” when referring to religious credence (Heiphetz et al., 2018). Additionally, religious beliefs and scientific beliefs differ in ways that cannot readily be explained by higher levels of confidence in science relative to religion. For example, McPhetres and Zuckerman (2017) found that religious participants accepted weaker evidence for a religious claim than for a scientific claim—a difference more consistent with greater prior confidence in the domain of religion. In another set of studies (Heiphetz et al., 2013), 5- to 10-year-old children and adults were asked to judge whether two people with differing beliefs on matters of fact, preference, and religion could both be right, or whether only one person could be right. Even for novel beliefs (for which prior confidence is undefined), children as young as 5 years old differentiated between religious beliefs and factual beliefs in their degree of objectivity, with factual beliefs being rated more objective. Religious beliefs and factual beliefs were both seen as more objective than preferences (for related research, see Flavell et al., 1992; Goodwin & Darley, 2008; Heiphetz & Young, 2017; Kuhn et al., 2000).Why do scientific and religious beliefs have these distinct profiles? One possibility is that these profiles are uniquely suited to satisfy different functional roles (Tetlock, 2002). If a belief plays a predominantly epistemic role (such as supporting a maximally veridical representation of the world), one might expect this belief to be open to revision when counterevidence arises. Moreover, as this belief is taken to be accurate, it will be allowed to guide action and govern other beliefs. By contrast, if beliefs play an important role in individual identity or in signaling group membership (see also Kahan et al., 2012; Norenzayan, 2013; Sosis & Alcorta, 2003), one might expect a different profile. Specifically, one might expect this belief to be tied to personal identity or intuition, and to be sensitive to social factors (such as deference to authority or in-group cohesion). One might also expect weaker sensitivity to evidence: “If my credence that our god exists can be banished by something so trifling as mere evidence,” Van Leeuwen writes, “how can you be sure that I am really committed to our group, which defines itself by allegiance to our god?” (Van Leeuwen, 2017, p. S56). Notably, the first (epistemic) role for belief aligns with empirical evidence on scientific belief, while the other (non-epistemic) role for belief aligns with empirical evidence on religious belief.In sum, there are many documented differences between religious and scientific belief, from their perceived objectivity, to their responsiveness to evidence, to the ways they are justified. These differences could reflect something about the confidence with which beliefs in these domains are held—scientific beliefs tend to be endorsed with higher confidence than religious beliefs (Clegg et al., 2019; Davoodi et al., 2018; Harris et al., 2006; Shtulman, 2013). However, a more provocative proposal is that the difference between scientific and religious belief is more profound, with differences in objectivity, sensitivity to evidence, and justifications instead reflecting types of belief that play distinct functional roles in human cognition. While modest empirical evidence supports this latter proposal, few of the differences found in beliefs across domains have been dissociated from differences in confidence. Furthermore, these questions have not been explored through the lens of need for explanation and mystery acceptability, two judgments that may be particularly relevant given their potential ties to epistemic inquiry.
1.4. The present researchWe predict that need for explanation and mystery acceptability will vary across scientific and religious domains. If scientific belief is largely tied to epistemic aims (forming and maintaining a veridical representation of the world), demanding an explanation for phenomena in the domain of science is appropriate because it may lead to explanatory inquiry, new evidence, and information gain. Conversely, declaring something a mystery is inappropriate for epistemically-aimed beliefs, because mystery suggests that the relevant belief cannot or should not be explained and thus terminates inquiry.2 If, on the other hand, epistemic goals are less crucial for religious beliefs (which may instead be aimed towards maintaining personal identity or social cohesion), explanatory practice may differ as well, with lower demands for explanation and greater tolerance for mystery.In the present research, we explore three questions regarding judgments of need for explanation (NFE) and mystery acceptability (MA). First, do judgments of NFE and MA differ across the domains of science and religion? Second, given that we do find such differences, what explains them? And third, what is the relationship between mystery and need for explanation?An important hypothesis to consider (and potentially rule out) is that differences in NFE and MA are just a function of differential levels of confidence: We experience a higher level of NFE, and a lower level of MA, the stronger our belief in the truth or reality of the explanandum, regardless of the domain of the explanandum. After all, if a claim isn't true, it doesn't need explanation. For example, an individual could be more confident that rust is red (a belief in the science domain) than they are that God is good (a belief in the religion domain). This asymmetry in strength of belief could lead them to judge that the question “Why is God good?” is less in need of explanation than the question “Why is rust red?” and that declaring the former a mystery is more acceptable, solely because of the different levels of confidence with which these beliefs are held. We call this the confidence confound hypothesis, and we test it in Study 1 by investigating whether domain differences exist even for the most religious and supernaturally-inclined participants (i.e., those with high confidence concerning religious or supernatural explananda). In Study 2, we go beyond overall religiosity by measuring and statistically controlling for strength of belief in the premises of individual religion and science questions. Finally, in Study 3, we select only participants who hold both scientific and religious beliefs with an equal level of reported confidence, and control for strength of belief at an item-level and within-subjects. Across these increasingly stringent tests, we fail to find support for the confidence confound hypothesis.An alternative hypothesis, the domain-based difference hypothesis, predicts that differences will persist even after equating strength of belief. Instead, differences in NFE and MA across domains reflect domain-based differences in the nature of belief: as suggested above, beliefs in different domains can play different functional roles.3 For example, beliefs may serve a truth-tracking (epistemic) function in the domain of science, but a more affiliative function in the domain of religion (Van Leeuwen, 2014, Van Leeuwen, 2017), or religious faith may have a distinct relationship with epistemic behaviors, such as evidence-gathering (Buchak, 2012, Buchak, 2017). If this is the case, need for explanation—a signal that inquiry should be pursued—may be felt more strongly in the domain of science, where inquiry is a useful tool for gathering evidence, than in the domain of religion, where evidence is less relevant. Likewise, an explanation appealing to mystery—a signal that inquiry has been or will be futile—may be more acceptable in the domain of religion. Under this hypothesis, domain differences in NFE and MA can be mapped onto different functional roles that belief may play in different domains. In particular, whether belief serves an epistemic vs. a non-epistemic role in a given domain may determine judgments of NFE and MA in that domain. In Study 3, we test this account, finding evidence that domain differences can be partially explained by domain-specific properties of belief, which may map onto different functional roles.Finally, we investigate a third question: what is the relationship between NFE and MA? Is mystery simply an abdication from explaining? Or do need for explanation and mystery track distinct features of a domain? In Study 2, we investigate this question by correlating NFE ratings and MA ratings, finding little overlap in NFE and MA. In Study 3, we measure how people interpret explanations that appeal to mystery and whether this differs across domains. Additionally, we find that the properties of belief that explain domain differences in NFE are partially distinct from those that explain domain differences in MA. These results suggest that NFE may persist whether one or multiple explanations are recognized as legitimate, while an appeal to mystery is seen as less appropriate in cases where only one explanation is believed to be legitimate.Though our theoretical interest is in general differences between scientific and religious beliefs, we constrain our investigation of these research questions to the difference between scientific beliefs and Judeo-Christian beliefs, in a predominantly Judeo-Christian population in the United States. This may limit the generalizability of our findings (a point to which we return in Section 5), but allows us to constrain the scope of our investigation and is in keeping with much of the previous research we have reviewed. Additionally, we only explore beliefs that can be uncontroversially classified as “scientific” or “religious.” Individuals can hold beliefs that combine both supernatural and natural elements (e.g., that prayer can cure disease) and can treat the same entities (e.g., disease) as caused by either natural or supernatural forces (e.g., germs or a curse). These instances of cross-domain beliefs (Legare et al., 2012) raise interesting questions for any account of belief, and we return to some of these questions in Section 5, but these cases are beyond the scope of the present research.
