With an imperative search for alternate resources nowadays, the exploitation of plants like Jatropha Curcas L. (JCL) and Pongamia Pinnata L. (PPL) for generating energy (biofuel) is becoming very prevalent. This is because of their eco-friendly nature and economical importance [1], [2]. Moreover, these plants are also well-known for their affluent medicinal values. Several studies also exemplify their importance in controlling soil erosion, developing a degraded land, and acting as carbon sequesters. But because of various biotic and abiotic factors, the normal growth of these plants gets affected. The leaves, flowers, and fruits of these plants get afflicted in most of the cases, but it may also result in a complete plant loss number of times. These agents likewise reduce plants environmental and economical values as well [3], [4]. Therefore, inorder to sustain the supply chain demand and to automate the disease (biotic factor) detection and treatment process an intelligent system is required.
Images play a decisive role in the number of applications. They have been adopted in fields like medical, defense, agriculture for pattern recognition, classification, object detection, and so on. Images also act as a backbone for computer vision methodology where these are used for achieving high-level understanding therefore automating the human visual learning process [5], [6], [7]. And, also because of high computational power, low-cost solutions, ease of availability of devices, and increasing interest, computer vision and image processing methodologies have been used in several fields to achieve artificial intelligence [7], [8], [9], [10]. Another important aspect of these approaches lies with their fast and accurate solutions, thus overpowering the deficiencies present in the manual intervention. In recent times, these methods have also shown a wide development in agricultural engineering for plant phenotyping, fruit disease detection, and classification, estimation of the crop, weed detection, leaves disease detection, plant growth, and yield prediction, grading and sorting of plants, soil condition, water management, and so on [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14].
Therefore, a computer vision and image processing based method for plant leaf disease segmentation and classification is proposed in this work. Two important well-known plants which are the rich source of renewable biodiesel production named as Jatropha Curcas L. and Pongamia Pinnata L. were selected for this purpose. To begin with, the healthy and diseased plant leaf images were self-acquired for both the plants separately. Then these images were the preprocessed for maintaining uniformity and attaining better results. Further, with the help of Simple Linear Iterative Clustering (SLIC) algorithm the pixels with similar attributes were initially clustered, and then using the Adaptive Linear Neuron (ADALINE) network the disease region is segmented from the plant leaves images. Color, shape, and texture features were extracted using different algorithms. Finally, seven different Machine Learning (ML) classifiers had been used for classification. A three-way classification methodology was adopted that first classifies the images among two discrete plant leaf classes, then among healthy and diseased for Jatropha Curcas L. plant and at last healthy and diseased for Pongamia Pinnata L. plant respectively.
The rest of the paper has been structured as follows: Section 2 presents the various materials and methods used in this work, including basic methodology or the algorithm used for segmentation and classification, data and image acquisition filed and setup, Section 3 introduces the proposed hybrid neural network, feature extraction algorithms, and different machine learning algorithms. The experimental evaluation and results for disease segmentation and classification have been discussed in Section 4. The summary and limitations of the proposed work is discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the manuscript and with possible future improvements.
