Due to the recent increase in amount of video data from surveillance cameras, it has become very challenging to process these data for various applications such as video browsing and retrieval [1], object segmentation [2], semantic/action recognition [3], and background subtraction [4]. The manual extraction of informative sections from video data and their processing are laborious tasks, and there is therefore a need for automatic techniques to remove redundancy and extract useful information. To solve these challenges, various techniques such as video skimming [5], video summarization [6], and video condensation [7] have been presented. A video skim is a short segment of the original video that reflects its overall representation. Video summarization is a technique used to extract salient frames or sequences of frames from a video; it offers fast browsing by shortening the input video into a synopsis and retaining only salient information. Video summarization is a hot area of research due to the massive growth in the amounts of video data captured by surveillance cameras or recorded via smartphones on a daily basis. It can be broadly divided into single-view video summarization (SVS) and MVS. SVS [8] is the process of creating a summary of single-view video and the generated summary should preserve three properties including minimum repetition, representativeness, and diversity [9]. Most of the summarization techniques are presented for single-view videos because their target is to produce a summary which is representative of the input video by considering only the intra-view correlations. SVS is less challenging compared to MVS due to lack of synchronization and illumination difference problem among different views. This article focuses on only MVS, thus SVS is outside the scope of this paper.
MVS is a rarely addressed problem in the literature of video summarization. As for SVS, the output generated from MVS is either a set of representative frames (keyframes), a short and comprehensive video (video synopsis) or video skims. Unlike SVS, however, the input for MVS is acquired from various cameras with different views. The basic pipeline for handling such videos include pre-processing, feature extraction, post-processing, and summary generation. The preprocessing of multi-view videos (MVVs) typically comprises redundancy removal steps such as segmentation [10] and shot boundary detection [11]. Pre-processing is followed by features extraction, object detection or tracking, the choice of which varies from one application to another. Feature extraction methods include handcrafted features [10], [11] such as, colour histograms, edge histograms, colour layout descriptors, and learned features through CNNs, as presented in [12]. Post-processing of the extracted features refers to computation of intra- and inter-view correlations, as used in mainstream existing methods, followed by summary generation. The most common approaches for summary generation in MVS literature are based on machine learning techniques or template matching. The final generated output varies, and may consist of keyframes, video skim or video synopsis. The overall flow of MVS methods is shown in Fig. 1. MVS can be used in several applications including surveillance (both indoor and outdoor) for activity and event analysis [13], investigating accident scenarios [14], interesting and salient events extraction from sports, security and law enforcement for theft detection, and robbery events recognition. It also has applications in virtual reality in terms of creating a single 360 view using multi-view cameras.Download : Download high-res image (465KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. General flow of MVS methods (condensation of multi-view videos into a short and comprehensive output summary).
There are several significant challenges that are encountered when summarizing MVVs, such as inter and intra-view correlations among different views, the problem of synchronisation, the presence of different lighting conditions for different views, and the possible overlapping of views. A simple multi-view network contains two cameras with two output videos. For example, consider two cameras acquiring video from two different views at 25 fps, which generates 180,000 frames (90000 for each camera) for one hour of video content. This huge amount of data is the big hurdle to the exploitation of important visual data and extraction of more interesting and specific aspects of videos is essential, rather than watching the whole video. The literature shows that several companies are already working on MVVs for different purposes such as car parking and the provision of supportive, comfortable, and safe driving. For instance, Honda Motor [15] has launched a multi-view camera system that offers different views with multiple wide angles from cameras within the vehicle. Similarly, many other companies are developing multi-view camera systems for different applications , such as the scheme in [16], which can record video from multiple views in excessive temperature , providing assistance for further analysis of the scene. Similarly, based on a multi-view camera network, a software developed in [17] can monitor and control users working inside a company and can analyse the ongoing processes within the company.
In the modern technological era, cameras are installed in offices, campuses, factories, streets, and public places. These cameras capture continuous data on daily basis that can be used for many purposes, such as persons tracking [18], disaster management [19], abnormal event detection [20], and other video analytics applications [21]. To date, the field of MVS has been less exploited and there is an urgent need for MVS techniques to process video data effectively for various applications. Mainstream current research works use traditional hand-engineered features for MVS, while deep learning has recently been applied to numerous computer vision applications such as disaster management [19], security [22], and abnormal activity recognition [23]. It is therefore recommended to develop deep learning-assisted intelligent methods for MVS. Likewise, in literature, there is a deficiency of standard publicly available datasets that are challenging and can be used for better evaluation of MVS techniques. The major contributions of our survey are summarized as follows:
1.We present the very first survey of MVS methods. To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing survey in the MVS literature and it lacks the attention of researchers. With this motivation, we present a comprehensive and compact tutorial of all the existing MVS methods.2.In this survey, we cover trends in the MVS literature, the distribution on the basis of publishers, citations, types of research papers, and application-wise scattering of MVS approaches along with taxonomy of MVS methods. Further, this survey provides results of all the queries for searching MVS papers in various repositories and also offer remarks about the selection process of the retrieved papers in the survey.3.This survey explores the current challenges of MVS methods, explores the evaluation metrics, datasets, and draw conclusions of the overall literature. Finally, our survey provides recommendations and future research directions for further exploration of MVS field.
Rest of the paper is structurally divided into eight different sections. Section II covers the scope of this survey, provides its outline and coverage. Section III investigates the existing methods for summarization of MVV and provides categorical distribution and taxonomy of different MVS methods. The available MVV datasets with their characteristics are discussed in Section IV. Section V explores the evaluation metrics of different methods used in MVS literature. Section VI and VII highlight the major challenges of MVS and provides recommendations for future research. Section VIII concludes this survey with discussion about future research methodologies.
