Increasing the enrollment of students in computer science related fields has been the focus of many research projects in the past. The integration of open source software (OSS) in educational institutions can be useful in enhancing computing studies and motivating students to enter the computer science field. However, this has not been extensively discussed in the literature, nor has a clear roadmap of these potentials been developed. Students, teachers and faculty often have little knowledge of Open Source Software and are unaware of its benefits and potential uses. As a result, instructors typically have no experience dealing with or developing OSS. Moreover, switching from traditional programs into new programs is a real challenge for educators. On the other hand, using open source software in schools and universities should be encouraged. Many educators find them to be very useful for education and learning. In addition to the educational benefits, OSS is available at no cost to educators. “There is no reason why colleges and universities cannot teach production programming in the classroom”. Students who are just beginning to use Linux systems have reported satisfaction and a relatively smooth learning curve. Students also showed remarkable patience and tended to accept the technical difficulties introduced by the open source software. OSS gives students a better appreciation for the usefulness of computing, and allows them to understand how their projects can impact the world (Daloukas et al., 2008; Dias et al., 2012; Dorodchi and Dehbozorgi, 2016; Hislop et al., 2009; Izbicki and Mike, 2016; Morelli and de Lanerolle, 2009; Smith et al., 2014; Terbuc, 2006; van Gumster and Jason, 2007).
The UAE has begun the process of overhauling their educational system, and especially their Computer Science curriculum. Our research takes advantage of this moment of change in the UAE to demonstrate the potential of Open Source Software (OSS) to improve the curriculum.
We will begin by taking a close look at OSS usage in academia. Fig. 1 shows how we conducted the research presented in this paper, including an overview of our procedures for performing systematic reviews (Kitchenham, 2004; Jesson et al., 2011; Booth et al., 2016).Download : Download high-res image (320KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Methodical planning.
