Feature matching is the fundamental prerequisite for a lot of computer vision techniques. Many tasks in computer vision, such as image registration [1], [2], [3], image fusion [4], [5], 3D reconstruction [6], [7], point set registration [8], [9], can be typically considered as feature matching problem. The features to be matched are usually extracted from images of similar or the same scene, which may be obtained at different times, from different viewpoints, or by different sensors. The goal of feature matching is to establish reliable correspondence between the two images. The feature matching problem is usually tackled by a pipeline, i.e., first constructing initial correspondences by some feature extraction and description techniques (e.g., SIFT [10]) and then selecting reliable correspondences from the putative sets with some outlier removal algorithms. Due to ambiguities of the descriptors, the putative sets usually contain a number of outliers. Therefore, a robust outlier removal algorithm is particularly necessary for some feature matching task [11], [12].
In order to match two feature sets accurately, many approaches have been developed in the past few decades. Feature matching methods can be roughly divided into four categories, i.e., resampling methods, non-parametric interpolation methods, graph matching methods, and learning-based methods. The resampling methods [13], [14], [15], [16] adopt a hypothesis and verification procedure, sampling the minimal subset from all inliers to calculate parameters of the model through resampling. Nevertheless, to find the minimal subset from all inliers, the iteration number needs to be exponentially increased in cases of high outlier percentages in the putative set. Moreover, a predefined parametric model is less efficient to deal with image pairs that undergo complex non-rigid transformations. A number of non-parametric interpolation methods [17], [18], [19], [20], [21] have been proposed to deal with the above mentioned problems. These methods usually make some prior assumption such as geometric consistency between inliers to learn a pair of correspondence functions or interpolate a motion field, where the correspondences are slow-and-smooth. Compared with resampling methods, the non-parametric interpolation methods can deal with non-rigid transformations, whereas they commonly have cubic complexities which restrains their applications on real-time tasks. Graph matching methods [22], [23], [24], [25] represent the matching problem as an integer quadratic programming (IQP) problem that forces the geometry between two feature sets to be preserved, which does not rely on a specific transformation. The optimal solution of it determines the final matching results. However, these methods only consider the spatial information and ignore the local descriptor information, which are not robust enough to deal with different image deformations, meanwhile, the non-polynomial-hard nature will also result in large computational complexity, which is not suitable for large-scale matching problems. Learning-based methods [26], [27], [28], [29], [30] are another technique to deal with the feature matching problem. Although it has been verified that the representations obtained by those using deep learning architectures are better than hand-crafted representations, the putative set still contains a large number of mismatches. Therefore, a mismatch removal method remains necessary. Besides, the GANs have been used to the point set registration, which regard the point clouds as the probability distributions. The aim of these methods is to learn a critic network confusing the source point sets and the target point sets. Some of them just need the spatial information of the points and do not construct the initial correspondences between the two point sets. Therefore, they are not suitable for the image feature matching problem.
Most recently, several coherence constraint and local neighborhood consistency based methods are proposed such as grid-based motion statistics (GMS) [31], coherence-based decision boundaries (CODE) [6], and locality preserving matching (LPM) [32], which achieve promising results. In LPM, it is based on the observation that the absolute distance between the corresponding feature points may vary a lot when the image pairs degrade due to complex deformations, but in the local neighborhood of the feature points, the local neighborhood structure and the topological structures are generally well preserved due to physical constraints. The advantage of LPM is that the simple formulation makes it possible to remove mismatches from thousands of putative matches within a few milliseconds. Nevertheless, the main deficiencies of LPM are that the consensus of neighborhood topology cannot distinguish inliers from the putative sets well and it is apt to have an over-penalization on outliers. Therefore, as the outlier ratio of the putative sets increases, its neighborhood construction will become unreliable. In this paper, we propose a new robust feature matching method based on the advanced neighborhood topology consensus (ANTC), which can efficiently distinguish inliers from the whole putative sets. The main contributions of this work are twofold. First, we propose an advanced consensus of neighborhood topology, which can expand the distributions between outliers and inliers and better exploit the consensus of topological structures to identify inliers. Second, to deal with high ratio outliers in the putative set, a guided matching strategy is used to establish a subset with high ratio of inliers, which enables the neighborhood construction based on this subset more reliable leading to an almost perfect matching result. Extensive experiments on three public available datasets referring to different image deformation (e.g. rigid transformation, wide baseline, repetitive structures, non-rigid transformation and so on) compared with the state-of-the-art methods show that our proposed ANTC are better in terms of precision, recall, and F-score.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we first review the original LPMand then introduce our proposed ANTC in detail, involving the advanced consensus of neighborhood topology and the guided matching strategy. The image feature matching experimental results on different types of image datasets are shown in Section 3, and the conclusions are drawn in Section 4.
