Eye gaze trackers (EGTs) are smart devices, which are used to estimate the direction of eye gaze. Eye gaze is defined as the line of sight of an individual and it represents focus of attention. Initially, EGTs were used in neurology, ophthalmology and psychology to study oculomotor patterns with respect to different cognition states of an individual [1, 2]. Recently, EGTs have been used to decide appropriate marketing mix, advertisement design, human computer interaction, virtual reality, disease diagnosis and to study human behavior [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Tracking the gaze of an eye is used to study the influence of visual stimuli on consumer behavior and attentional processes [3, 8, 9]. EGTs have also been extensively used in web page design to predict the salient regions of web pages [10]. EGTs can be broadly classified into two categories namely intrusive and non-intrusive techniques. Intrusive techniques make use of electrodes, contact lenses and head mounted EGTs to record eye gaze, whereas non-intrusive techniques rely upon high precision cameras to capture eye images and gaze direction [11]. Commercially available EGTs are pretty expensive, making it economically unavailable for most of the user and researchers [12, 13]. Manuscripts pertaining to eye gaze tracking and computational models for measuring gaze of an eye has been published by many researchers. Studies providing an insight into contemporary status of eye gaze research and outcomes is available at renowned research databases. Literature considering algorithms, system configuration, user conditions and performance issues for existing gaze tracking systems has too been reviewed by many researchers. Most of the available reviews are done manually and may suffer from opinion bias resulting from experience, expertise and analytical skills of the reviewer [11, 14]. Semi-automated topic modelling algorithms imbued with established methods to conduct a systematic review, could be an alternative to restrict this opinion bias to a great extent. Further, it may also help in identifying research trends within eye gaze tracking research [15, 16, 17]. Furthermore, semi-automated review methods to find the core research trends have been adopted by many researchers in many domains [18, 19, 20, 21]. To the best of our knowledge there is no empirical study suggesting EGT research trends available so far [11, 14]. In this paper a quantitative method called Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) is used for open ended text analysis of literature associated with EGTs and their applications [22]. LSA is a fully automatic mathematical technique for extracting and inferring meaningful relations from the contextual usage of words [22]. This method provides textual meaning to identified topic solutions using an automated approach thereby eliminating human bias [15, 20]. Primary aim of this work is to gain a realistic understanding of prominent research trends and EGT applications as promulgated by EGT researchers [22]. Subsequently, the relationships amongst them were investigated to achieve following objectives:
•To find the leading researchers and prominent publications in Eye Gaze Tracking.•To find out most prominent research topics associated with Eye Gaze Tracking.•To anticipate the future research directions in applications of Eye Gaze Tracking.
Rest of the paper is structured in five sections. Section two elaborates methodology used in finding research trends and prominent researchers. Section three details about the results obtained after implementation. Section four provides a discussion about research objectives and probable future directions. Section five provides limitations of the study and last section includes conclusion drawn from the study.
