There once was a time when leaders, such as Charlemagne, governed empires without knowing how to read and write (Dutton, 2016; Pascal, 1970). Contemporary “thought leaders” are in a very similar situation. Though hardly ever away from keyboard, we scholars in general and social theorists in particular relate to the dominant media of the 21st century as if we are still living in the Gutenberg Galaxy (McLuhan, 1962). This anachronism is exemplified in our prevailing reliance on computers and the Internet mainly to write books and articles to store and search for in online libraries; and the situation is even more remarkable in that we not only continue to treat new media like traditional media, but that we also produce more and more traditional media in the effort to illuminate the new media. Meanwhile, there are analogue texts on the digital transformation of almost everything. Work (Stone, 2004), production (Potstada et al., 2016), or healthcare (Agarwal et al., 2010) are being transformed digitally along with human identity (Nagy and Koles, 2014), time and space (Berthon et al., 2000), and, eventually the entire globe (Heylighen and Lenartowicz, 2017) and, thus, the totality of our everyday life (Wajcman, 2008). In the course of this process, not even the most traditional forms of media and mediation can escape the digital transformation (Coyle, 2006; Dahms, 2014; Roth et al., 2017).
In such a context of inescapable transformation, our professional insistence on oral and written language remains consistent as long as we have reason to believe that these traditional media remain dominant, or at least relevant, in the age of new media (Turkle, 2016). The less justified we are in holding on to this belief, however, the clearer it becomes that books and articles on the digital transformation consistently systematically fail to “walk their own talk”. Digital copies of printed theories do not turn these theories into digital theories, just as literature is much more than a mere transliteration of oral speech.
While smart attempts to tie programming languages back to the traditional text occasionally result in the discovery of new genres such as code poetry (for an example, see Bertran, 2012), to most of us even these literalised forms of computer language remain as inaccessible as the Bible once was to the majority of the medieval populations. Thus, of all people, and figuratively speaking, we scholars also belong to the illiterate farmers of the information age today, as we harvest our research fields at computer-mediated conferences and virtually augment our stocks of books and papers. The heirs of the medieval monks, our profession of bookworms and elaborate natural language processors itself grew dependent on trust in and reliant on spiritual guidance from a community of cybermonks who shape and administer the increasingly omnipresent knowledge architectures of the future.
Early attempts to remedy this situation and to develop at least prototypes of digitally transformed social theory include social systems theory. As is well known, Niklas Luhmann (1995, 2012, 2013) built his social theory – as much as his theory of society – on the formal language of George Spencer-Brown (1979); and a recently discovered 1961 prototype of the Laws of Forms leaves no doubt that Spencer-Brown developed his laws as elegant solutions to problems in electronic engineering (Roth, 2017). Thus, Luhmann's social systems theory does not only theorise the digital transformation of society, but also presents an example of a theory whose architecture at least in parts is coded in a digital language. Yet, while Luhmann's early effort at the digital transformation of theory was somewhat superficial, it still has remained without parallel in the wider social theory community
In this context, the contributions to this virtual special issue of Technological Forecasting and Social Change do not constitute efforts at presenting new social theories of the digital transformation, but rather, efforts at digitally transforming social theory.
