In 1818, The Lady's Magazine included an article on “The Three R's” (reading, writing and arithmetic) (Percy and Timbs, 2019). Schools today still teach these foundational skills but also teach many more (Nias et al., 2005). Towards the end of the 20th century, information and communication technologies (ICTs) started to pervade daily lives, such that ICTs have now become an infrastructural essential on a par with electricity and water (Carr, 2003). In addition to the three R's, schools and higher education increasingly also teach ICT skills to children from a very young age. The United Kingdom (UK), for example, proposes curricula for early education to include Information and Communications Technology as a foundational skill (Education and Training Foundation, 2019). There are also moves to ensure that children are taught about online safety (Sutton, 2011) and how to spot fake news (Cockburn, 2019).
ICT use is now intertwined with Internet use. It then follows that anyone using the Internet, whatever their age, also needs to know how to secure their devices because forewarned is forearmed (Renaud et al., 2016). Safety and security are semantically different concepts (Waldron, 2006) requiring different kinds of knowledge and skill sets. Smartphone users, of all ages, should know that their phones are vulnerable to attack, and also know how to improve device security. Because education is at the heart of security awareness and capability (Siponen, 2001), it is imperative for cyber security education to reach all of society and all ages.
Cyber security education has two elements: first people need to become aware of the need to take precautions, and then teachers need to impart the skills they require to take the required precautions. We plan to assess awareness, as an essential prerequisite to mastering cyber security skills. We focus on assessing levels of cyber security awareness of university students in South Africa, as developing country citizens i.e. the “outcome” of the wider South African cyber security educational approach. Moreover, we explore whether the extant awareness levels exhibit the same gender imbalance as that evidenced in other societal domains in South Africa (Langen, 2005; Choi and Ting, 2008; Chinyamurindi and Louw, 2010).
We chose to focus on smartphone cyber security in South Africa, for three reasons:
•The first is that cyber-attacks increase year on year (Fowler, 2016), and developing countries are not exempt (Olapido, 2015). Cyber criminals, finding that large organisations are getting better at cyber security and are therefore becoming more difficult to compromise, have now turned their attention to easier targets: small businesses and home computer users (Krebs, 2017), both of whom do a great deal of their computing on their smartphones (Asadullah Khaskheli and Bhuiyan, 2017).•The second reason is that smartphone ownership is increasing globally, offering an attractive attack surface that hackers can use to target the unwary or unprotected (Mayer, 2014). Smartphone adoption has increased beyond expectations but, unfortunately, so have security vulnerabilities. A lack of education and awareness is contributing to the growing cyber-security problem (Hanus and Wu, 2016). South African smartphone ownership was 51% in 2018 (Pew Research Centre, 2018), which is higher than global computer ownership (Newzoo, 2017), meaning that South Africans might be even more vulnerable to smartphone-enabled attacks than citizens of other countries.•The third reason is that South African children own and use smartphones at increasing rates. Businesstech reported that 80% of secondary South African school pupils owned a smartphone in 2017 (Businesstech, 2019), and Porter (2016) reported that 51% of primary South African school pupils owned mobile phones. Because South African adolescents and youth are the first adopters of new mobile technologies (Beger and Sinha, 2012) and South African University students are heavy users of smartphones (North et al., 2014), we cannot wait until adulthood to raise awareness of security issues and ensure that people have the requisite security-related skills.
South African schools and universities are starting to incorporate cyber security into many of their educational programmes (Kortjan and von Solms, 2014; von Solms and von Solms, 2014). According to Dlamini & Modise, the South African government is investing in cyber security efforts to help improve cyber resilience (Dlamini and Modise, 2013). However, there does not seem to be a formal across-the-board curriculum for cyber security (De Lange and von Solms, 2012). It cannot be assumed that all South Africans’ awareness of cyber security issues is being improved by these efforts. Any educational endeavour needs routinely to assess its impact, so that interventions can be refined and improved and made as effective as possible. We thus assess the impact of the South African approach to raising cyber security awareness.
The main contribution of this paper is to:
1.emphasize the need to treat cyber security (and not merely ICT) as a foundational skill, alongside other basic skills throughout the educational system—together with the basic “three R's”.2.highlight the impact of the current South African approach to cyber security education i.e. rendering young women more vulnerable to cyber-attacks, and thereby exacerbating the gender imbalance in South African society.
We consider related research in Section 2 before explaining our research methodology in Section 3. Section 4 presents our results, with Section 5 discussing and reflecting on them. Section 6 concludes.
