Myocardial infarction (MI) is serious ischemic heart disease and one of the leading causes of death worldwide, which happens when blood flow stops inside the heart muscle and causes damage. Furthermore, the infarcted area after MI can develop into the deaths of cardiomyocytes and vascular cells in the border area. Worldwide, 32.4 million myocardial infarctions occur every year [1]. Around every 40 s, myocardial infarction will occur in an American [2].
Myocardial contrast echocardiography (MCE) is a novel cardiac imaging tool using microbubbles as the contrast agent to obtain more information in the diagnosis of MI [3]. The microbubbles injected intravenously can improve the assessment of left ventricle function and myocardial conditions [4]. Hence, MCE has an increased effect on the evaluation of myocardial ischemia [5]. However, echocardiography is time-consuming and employs visual estimation [6]. Echocardiogram interpretation can vary significantly between operators. Besides, analyzing large amounts of imaging data is labor-intensive and time-consuming [7]. At present, MCE is capable of making semi-quantitative assessments which remains limited by human error in data acquisition and interpretation. The existing MCE relies on the human visual assessment, a qualitative assessment is poorly reproducible, and the diagnosis procedure is highly dependent on the experience of the clinician. Although there is some commercial software to accomplish some tasks of myocardial infarction detection, all results from such software are wholly contingent to the manual annotation of the anatomy and implicitly deferred to the clinician. The radiologists must manually select the high-quality images, choose appropriate parameters, and specify the metrics to measure. Besides, it is trivial and time-consuming in diagnosing a large data set [8]. Thus, there is an increasing demand for an automatic and efficient assessment of MCE images for diagnosis purposes that will produce accurate, timely and robust scientific evidence for reliable decision-making.
Hence it is significant to effectively and quantitatively assess MCE images for diagnosis purposes [9,10]. Different computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) approaches have been utilized to find the myocardial infarct on MCE. For example, Vidya et al. [11] compared the performance of different myocardial infarction detection approaches using the second-order statistics calculated from gray-level co-occurrence matrix, discrete wavelet transform and texture descriptors. These features are ordered using a t-value and a support vector machine (SVM) classifier handle them to obtain the final diagnosis results. The paper [12] proposed a local configuration pattern via a curvelet transform for detecting MI on echocardiograms. Classifiers categorised these features into normal, moderate and severely infarcted classes. The study [13] used a myocardial infarction index (MII) to identify infarcted and normal myocardium using the features from apical cross-sectional views. These features were ranked using different ranking approaches, and the high-rank features were used to define an integrated MII and different classifiers are used.
These previous methods depend upon the different features to describe the myocardium, and most of the features were designed manually and via trials which limits their performance and the ability for generalization. In this situation, deep learning, one class of neural network, can perform well to automatically rank features via a multi-layer hierarchy [14]. Researchers combined the deep learning model with random forests for ventricular volume estimation, segmentation and classification [15,16].
The main limitation of the existing deep learning approaches is that they used the convolution filter with a rectangle shape. However, the myocardium has a ring shape, especially in the short-axis view of MCE, and the information and features on the radial direction are not described well using the rectangle convolution filters. To overcome this drawback, a new deep learning network, a polar residual network (PResNet) is developed for myocardial infarction detection on the MCE in a short-axis view, which considers the myocardium's shape features and its features on radial orientation. In the PResNet, a new polar convolution layer is designed to describe the MCE's feature on radial direction, and a residual structure is integrated to construct as a feature extractor and classifier to classifying the MCE sections into normal or abnormal categories. The new contributions of the proposed network include proposing the new polar convolution layer for radial feature extraction and integrating the residual structure for feature enhancement.
The remaining sections are structured as follows. Section 2 discussed the fundamentals of the deep learning framework. Section 3 discusses the details of the proposed myocardial infarction detection method. Section 4 provides the results, evaluates the performance and discusses the comparison with the state-of-art methods. At last, Section 5 presents a conclusion of the work.
