Analytical techniques have become very popular over the last few years due to the proficiency of data collected and the capability of computer technology to handle large amounts of data (Hazen et al., 2016, Tiwari et al., 2018). They represent a wide range of methods and techniques that analyse different types of problems with the aim of finding a solution by providing accurate forecasts of the potential results. Supply chain management is an area that has benefited from these techniques due to the efficiency and usefulness that these new approaches provide in order to obtain a better assessment and solution of the problems considered (Addo-Tenkorang and Helo, 2016, Zhong et al., 2016).
Computers and Industrial Engineering (CAIE) is a leading international journal that publishes original contributions regarding the development of new computerized methodologies for solving industrial engineering problems. Additionally, the journal also publishes applications that appeal to the broad industrial engineering and associated communities. Recently, Cancino, Merigó, and Coronado (2017) presented a bibliometric overview of the journal where they identified the leading trends occurring in the journal in terms of papers, keywords, authors, institutions and countries. This study showed the results from a general perspective. The USA has the highest number of publications in CAIE. However, China and Taiwan’s contribution has grown significantly and they have been the most productive countries during the last several years. The journal is strongly connected to other leading journals in operations research and production research including the European Journal Operational Research, International Journal of Production Research, Management Science, International Journal of Production Economics, Operations Research and Computers & Operations Research.
The aim of this study is to continue analysing the publications of CAIE through a bibliometric approach. This work focuses on the articles published in CAIE connected to analytic techniques solving supply chain related problems with the objective of identifying how this specific area which is popular worldwide is growing in the journal. This study presents the most cited papers in this field, the leading authors, institutions, countries and keywords. The work uses the Web of Science Core Collection database and the visualization of similarities (VOS) viewer software (van Eck & Waltman, 2010). The article considers several bibliometric indicators including the number of publications and citations, the h-index, and the citations per paper and citation thresholds. Additionally, the work uses several bibliometric techniques in the VOS viewer including bibliographic coupling (Kessler, 1963), co-citation (Small, 1973) and co-occurrence of author keywords.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the bibliometric methods of the paper. Section 3 presents the results obtained in the Web of Science Core Collection. Section 4 develops a graphical mapping of the bibliographic material by using the VOS viewer. Section 5 summarizes the main findings and conclusions.
