When prospective Dutch home-buyers require a mortgage, they often initiate a mortgage orientation consultation (MOC) at a financial institution, such as a bank, to become familiar with the most important mortgage terms, and more prominently, to learn how much money they can borrow. In order to generate an amount, the mortgage advisor, customer and computer engage in a joint project of entering software-requested customer data into the advisor-operated computer. Subsequently the computer delivers the maximum mortgage loan amount. This amount depends on so many parameters that computer use is indispensable for achieving this particular consultation goal.
During their interaction the customer is a so-called ‘incidental user’ of the software, who is not familiar with it, nor operates it (Inbar and Tractinsky, 2012a, Inbar and Tractinsky, 2012b). In such a ‘Customer-Agent-Computer interaction’ setting (CACI) (Olsson, 2007, Kira et al., 2009), the advisor is the system expert who has to bridge the ‘gulf of execution’ (Norman, 1988) between the customers' expression of their wishes and requirements and the computer's ‘technical language’. In the MOC's human-human-computer interaction, in contrast to CACI, the computer screen is not only visible for the advisor, but also for the customers; still, the advisor is in charge of the computer.
In the MOC the mortgage advisor interacts with customers and operates the computer on behalf of customers; customers talk to the advisor and respond to the computer via the advisor; the computer demands customer input via the advisor and delivers output accessible for customers and advisor. So, during their interaction the advisor, customer and computer are mutually dependent when they want to fulfill the goal of their joint project: calculating the maximum mortgage loan amount.
The aim of this paper is to argue that the advisor, customer and computer constitute a distinct type of participation framework (Goffman, 1981) that has not been studied by CA-scholars previously: the human-human-computer triad (HHC triad). In the HHC triad (see Fig. 1), the advisor, customer and computer are actors in a triadic participation framework in a triangular face formation (Kendon, 1990, Tong et al., 2016) working on a single task: calculating the maximum mortgage loan amount (henceforth ‘the task’).Download : Download high-res image (151KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Triangular face-formation of human-human-computer triad.
By applying conversation analysis (CA) and using the theory of turn-taking systematics (Sacks et al., 1974) we will show that HHC triads in mortgage consultations are a distinct type of participation framework in institutional interactions. Contrary to what previous studies have shown, in HHC triads computer use is not a side sequence that detracts from the main activity (Jefferson, 1972) in a different participation framework. Instead, all the actors in the HHC triad are full participants collaborating in the main interactional activity (Goffman, 1963), despite the restricted repertoire of the computer.
As the use of digital tools in our society keeps expanding, more and more institutional interactions will take place in task-driven triadic human-human-computer frameworks. For instance, in educational settings ‘peers’ are often collaborating on digital tasks, and teachers may help students with tasks in which the computer generates a certain output; and in health care settings, the computer will be increasingly used for diagnostic purposes.
This paper begins with a brief literature review on the use of artifacts in institutional encounters (section 2). Although triads are conceivable in everyday conversation, we will focus on triads in institutional encounters. These encounters are task-driven, goal-oriented and asymmetrical in their predefined participant roles (Drew and Heritage, 1992). After a short description of the data (section 3), the analysis is presented in three sections through which we will argue that computers are collaborative participants in HHC triads. First, we focus on the global sequential organization of HHC triads, on how these triads emerge in the course of institutional interactions and how they are closed (section 4.1). The next section (4.2) concerns turn-taking. We will demonstrate that HHC triads in MOCs display the general properties of ordinary human-human conversations observed by Sacks et al. (1974), despite the restricted automatic and non-spontaneous nature of the computer. Moreover, we will show that the computer cannot actually take turns itself, but that it does show ‘turn-like’ characteristics, because the other participants manage its turns. In the final section (4.3) we will describe the local sequential structure that occurs in HHC triads and the specific actions of the participants, including the computer.
