Computer technology has provided architects with new affordances and has begun to displace traditional design technologies. It is obvious that the efficiency, control, and intelligence became possible by computational tools; these methods are increasingly considered essential to architectural practices. However, it is less obvious how this technology has begun to influence the practice of architecture, the society they serve, and therefore the education of architects. According to Qaqish and Hanna [27], Computer technology includes all computer applications whether they are integrated within the design studio, or are stand-alone courses; both in architectural design as well as in urban planning courses.
In the 21st century, architectural education has witnessed an increase in the digital technologies that have been involved in the design studio curriculum. These various technologies of computer aided drafting, enumerating, modeling, and analysis became not only key pedagogical nodes in the design studio, but also started to shape the overall curricular structure of architectural education. They also needed to be implemented as support courses in order to balance the learning curve and the number of software available to architects. Traditional architectural education tools are mainly based on 2D sketches as well as on physical 3D models. This situation has been changed through the 90’s. According to an experiment in architectural education by Angelil [4], computer technologies have been involved in the education process to replace traditional tools of teaching at least in the three final years of the educational schedule.
Nowadays, integrating complete digital teaching became the main subject of educators and researchers. Their main aims are using computer applications as a tool for design as well as improving students’ skills and abilities. However, until now there exists neither a framework nor a fundamental structure for the use of computer in architectural education, most of architectural schools and departments, especially in developed countries, have developed their criteria in the educational schedules by integrating more computer courses [39].
A proper understanding of architecture schools pedagogies can be a start to discover when, where and how the computer applications should be implemented in architectural education. Hence at first, the current status for the architectural education should be examined and analyzed through a theoretical and analytical investigation of the architectural schools. Then, understanding the architectural profession needs is the second step towards an ideal framework to integrate the computer applications with architectural curriculum.
