Forensic odontology is the field of dentistry that involves the analysis of teeth, tooth impressions or bitemark comparisons in criminal investigations is complex and has not been without controversy in the court of law [1]. Though reports on the role of bitemark evidence in legal cases have been infrequent prior to 1950, chronologically, accounts characterizing bitemark cases reach back to the mid 17th century [2]. During the latter half of the 20th century, there was a significant increase in the number of criminal cases, many involving murder trials where bitemark evidence was a critical component for prosecutors [2].
In the 1970s, the application of “matching” a criminal suspect’s dentition to bitemarks found on physical evidence such as food or on the bodies of victims was initiated and while it remains widely accepted, it has been estimated to fail in approximately 75% of the cases in which this evidence is used [1,2]. Similar to other disciplines within forensic science, such as tool marks, tire/foot prints, hand-writing and including voiceprints, bitemark matching compares some sort of imprint (the mark) to an implement used to produce it, e.g., a cast of a dentition [3]. This comparison implies that the alleged ‘match’ was made by the individual and only one individual’s dentition and excludes all other individuals [4,5].
Since the advent and acceptance of DNA analysis in the court of law towards the end of the 20th century, where such analyses provide a means for those individuals wrongfully convicted to contest their convictions, errors in bitemark evidence interpretation have become more apparent in the first decade of the 21st century [2]. Incorrectly ‘matched’ bitemarks have led to the review of hundreds of cases from several states where bitemark evidence led to wrongful convictions [1,2]. The troubling aspect with bitemark analyses is the lack of validated rules, regulations or processes for certification or accreditation that establish forensic dentists as expert witnesses [6]. Due to the increase in the alarming number of cases where this type of evidence has resulted in appeals and often reversals of verdicts, innocence groups have focused on the use of DNA evidence not utilized in the prior trying of the case. Many cases e.g., State v. Krone in Arizona and State v. Brewer in Mississippi exemplify how the key part of the investigation, prosecution and expert testimony was misdirected and resulted in the wrong conviction based solely on bitemark evidence.
Often times, during such appeals, other experts such as a forensic entomologist may be brought into cases if their field is relevant to the case at hand. In those cases, forensic entomologists generally provide an opinion on the post-mortem submersion interval (PMSI) or the time period from when the body appeared in the water to the moment of discovery. However, as a forensic entomologist, I have been asked to review cases where marks of unknown origin were found on victim’s bodies in aquatic systems regardless of whether the marks in question were caused by insects or other invertebrates. The physical evidence may suggest some other ecological interaction with the remains and because forensic ecology is not an officially recognized branch within forensic science, often – forensic entomologists are asked to review cases that involve other aspects of the biological or ecological world. This case report offers a unique approach to evaluate quantitatively bitemarks on a decedent mistakenly identified as being caused by humans.
