Innovation plays an important role in modern economic development and business success. It is fueled by progress in science, which provides new knowledge bases for advances in technology. It is useful to business to anticipate the areas where science and technology will make rapid progress. Doing so can support strategy and policy planning for a variety of enterprises in the public and private sectors. Structured attempts at such anticipation fall under the broad heading of foresight.
In this study, we asked readers of Science, Nature, and Harvard Business Review about their expectations for advances in science, technology, and business over a 35-year time horizon. We asked further about their needs and dreams for technical products, and their forecasts of converging industries. A fourth survey, fielded later to experts in technology forecasting and science policy, yielded critiques of the earlier survey results as well as the experts' own views on the advances, needs, and convergence questions.
These surveys address our research questions: What science and technology trends, across a broad variety of fields, will dominate in the next 35 years? What are the gaps between desired products and anticipated sci/tech capabilities, and between the anticipations of educated business persons and those of scientists?
A combined analysis of the four surveys, combined with selected additional data sources, leads to this paper's portrait of the scientific and business environments 35 years hence, and a description of the gaps between expected developments in science, technology and business on the one hand, and market needs on the other hand. This extended expert panel supplements mathematical extrapolations and other (scenarios, Delphi, etc.) methods of apprehending the future.
This study was conducted on the occasion of the 350th anniversary of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany, the world's oldest pharmaceutical and chemical company. In honor of the anniversary, the company is conducting a series of open innovation activities including a major conference, a new Research Prize, 350 research grants and 350 research challenges. Like the present paper, the anniversary edition of the company's Innovation Cup series is run as an open science activity, with all results released in the public domain to stimulate discussion, to build a global network of innovators.
The results tell a multi-faceted story. Its central thread is that the combination of medical, biomedical, and biotech advances with developments in artificial intelligence will have the greatest impact on business and society in the next 35 years. Survey participants predict that a golden age for medicine is dawning, along with a multitude of corresponding business opportunities that can lead to formation of entirely new industries and markets. Progress in energy and transportation, both resting on new advanced and sustainable materials, will contribute to human well-being. Companies will consolidate and industries will converge accordingly, even as gaps in attitudes and expectations between businesspeople and scientists and technologists (and between supply of innovations and demand for them) confound matters in the short term. All developments will continue to be subject to funding uncertainties, and to challenges in the food and education sectors.
In following sections, we give a brief background on foresight, explain our study's methodology and its supporting literature, and set forth the results from the four surveys, including respondent characteristics. In a “gap analysis” discussion, we compare the four survey results, highlighting gaps that are of potential importance for corporate planning and public policy. Limitations of the study are noted. A concluding section summarizes key results and management recommendations.
