Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) emerged as a means of learning and instruction that can foster the social nature of learning using a variety of technological and pedagogical strategies (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009; Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2014). As a research field, CSCL is now more than 20 years old and is coming of age as a mature field. Although there is extensive research regarding the use of CSCL in STEM education (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2012), there have been few systematic assessments on the effects of CSCL. The goal of this research is to examine the effects of CSCL in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education using a statistical meta-analysis (Cooper, Hedges, & Valentine, 2009; Glass, 1976, 1977). We focus on STEM in particular, as that has been the focus of much CSCL research (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2012).
1.1. Theoretical backgrounds of CSCLCSCL is built on the premise that collaborative knowledge construction and problem solving can effectively be assisted by technology. This premise was not always obvious to instructors and learning researchers. Early theories emphasized conditioning behaviors and/or strengthening memory traces through repeated associations and practices by individual learners. Researchers soon noted that learners' active engagement with learning materials and strategy use is critical to learning success (Chi, 2009; O'Donnell & King, 1999). Researchers also realized the fundamental role of social interaction in learning and development. It was noted that social interactions, even interactions that involve social conflicts, can lead to cognitive reorganization and development (Diose & Mugny, & Perret-Clement, 1975). Vygotsky (1978) argued higher psychological functions emerge first in social interaction, and skillful scaffolding within the child's zone of proximal development is critical for cognitive development. These theoretical advancements eventually led to the proposition that co-construction of shared understanding and intersubjective meaning-making is the key objectives of collaborative learning (Stahl, 2006; Suthers, 2006).Collaborative learning, an essential element of CSCL, can take a number of forms depending on the pedagogical emphasis and contexts of learning. In many constructivist pedagogical approaches such as problem-based learning and inquiry learning, students solve problems, design artifacts, or engage in inquiry in small groups. Group work and collaboration are encouraged as they help students to engage with the learning materials and develop deep disciplinary understanding (Engle & Conant, 2002; Hmelo-Silver, 2004). Pedagogical approaches and techniques by Johnson and Johnson (2009) and Slavin (1983) focused on how students should be grouped and rewarded, and emphasized conditions to ensure productive modes of collaborative engagements. In responses to the distraction and unruliness that can arise in peer collaboration, O'Donnell and King (1999) proposed structuring group processes to ensure productive interaction. Online collaborative learning presents special challenges in terms of regulating students' behaviors because students are often outside the supervision of teachers and instructors. CSCL scripts focus on the regulation issues that arise in CSCL settings (Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006).A diverse variety of tools ranging from discussion boards to simulations, and wikis to robots have been used to support collaborative learning in CSCL research. Learning has always been assisted by tools and technologies, but the recent proliferation of digital technologies makes the role of those tools even more critical. Vygotsky (1978) was one of the first scholars who noted the importance of tools for their capacity to mediate thinking. Modern researchers noted the fundamental roles of external representations and tools in carrying out cognitive functions (Hutchins, 1995; Zhang & Norman, 1994). These realizations helped CSCL researchers make the distinction between learning “with” and “from” computers, and focused the development of tools that can amplify, extend, and enhance what learner groups and communities understand and do in the process of learning and solving problems (Kirschner & Erkens, 2006). It has also been noted that humans and tools form a system of distributed cognition, which constitutes part of the socio-cultural and historical activity systems along with other components such as actors, artifacts, community, and rules that regulate the activities in the system (Arnseth & Ludvigsen, 2006; Greeno, 2006). Researchers now liken learning to the process of participating in the practice of cultural significance in these systems instead of having knowledge or skills. This means that the very nature and notion of learning is closely tied to the contexts within which it takes place and may vary across cultural and historical contexts (Sfard, 1998).
1.2. Assessing the effectiveness of CSCLThe diverse traditions in CSCL research present overlapping and yet different perspectives on what it means to learn collaboratively with the help of computers. Some approaches focus on developing and assessing the role of specific technology or design features of CSCL applications/environments, whereas others are more intent on understanding and evaluating pedagogical models to foster CSCL. Still others are interested in examining the influences of cultural and historical contexts on CSCL (Arnseth & Ludvigsen, 2006). In searching for the effectiveness of CSCL, some researchers focused on learners’ cognitive outcomes and processes, while others were more interested in demonstrating how CSCL affects student motivations and attitudes toward subject domains or learning partners (Serrano-Cámara, Paredes-Velasco, Alcover, & Velazquez-Iturbide, 2014). This means that there is a diverse array of empirical CSCL research, each examining the workings of different variables and assessing different outcomes. Integrating evidence from these diverse research practices demands that we use common metrics that can transcend differences in individual studies, while paying attention to the complexity of CSCL practices. Statistical meta-analysis is one of the most widely used synthesis methods that make it possible to combine and compare results from different studies on a single uniform scale of effectiveness (Cooper et al., 2009). In addition to assessing the overall effect of CSCL, it is also possible to evaluate the role of potential moderator variables (Glass, 1976, 1977).The positive outcomes of collaborative learning are well established by a number of meta-analyses (Kyndt et al., 2013; Rohrbeck, Ginsburg-Block, Fantuzzo, & Miller, 2003; Springer, Stanne, & Donovan, 1999), but this does not necessarily mean that the outcomes of CSCL would also be positive. Computers and digital technology can provide a number of supports for collaborative learning, but taking advantage of these affordances requires overcoming a number of challenges. In addition to having to deal with technical issues that might arise when using digital tools, technologies may distract learners from learning (Kershner, Mercer, Warwick, & Staarman, 2010; Mateu & Alaman, 2013). Technologies can also demand that learners and teachers change their behaviors and practices. Not everyone is comfortable with posting messages and their work online. Helping them to overcome these difficulties may require a significant amount of demonstration and guidance (Kafai, Fields, & Burke, 2010).A few existing meta-analyses provide important background to our current work and demonstrate that collaborative learning is effective even when computers are used. Lou, Abrami, and D'Apollonia (2001) carried out a meta-analysis comparing the outcomes of small group learning with technology to outcomes of individual learning with technology. Based on 486 outcomes from 122 individual studies, they reported that small group learning with technology, on average, produced more positive effects than individual learning with technology on students' achievements with effect sizes ranging from .15 to .31. Similar positive effects were also reported in a recent meta-analysis by Chen, Wang, Kirschner, and Tsai (2018). They compared individual learning with computers with collaborative learning with computers in one of the subgroup analyses and reported effect sizes ranging from 0.38 to 0.64. These results demonstrated that learning together is effective compared to learning alone even when learners work with computers.When it comes to the supports for collaborative learning, we need to note that it can come in many different forms. It may involve providing tools such as online discussion boards, representational tools, and/or simulations as well as supports for pedagogical activities. The nature of these supports are likely to vary depending on whether learners collaborate face-to-face, synchronously or asynchronously. Vogel, Wecker, Kollar, and Fischer (2017) recently examined the effect of CSCL scripts on learning domain-specific knowledge and collaboration skills. Based on 45 outcomes from 24 studies, they reported that learning with CSCL scripts lead to a small positive effect on domain knowledge (d = 0.20) and a moderate to large positive effect on collaboration skills (d > 0.65) compared to unstructured CSCL. Such effects are promising, but their meta-analysis was restricted to CSCL scripts, one of the pedagogical approaches used CSCL. A more diverse array of pedagogical approaches and technological tools were examined in Chen et al. (2018) in what they defined as “learning environments or tools” and “supporting strategies”. They analyzed a number of outcome measures (e.g., knowledge achievement, skills, or perceptions) and reported positive effect sizes ranging from 0.23 to 0.89 based on results from 208 studies. They also reported that effect sizes varied significantly as a function of research design (e.g., experimental, quasi-experimental), sample size, and duration of study, although the moderator effects were significant mostly in the knowledge achievement measures.These positive reports are promising, but the effectiveness of CSCL needs to be assessed more comprehensively and carefully. Chen et al. (2018) considered only a limited range of technologies and pedagogies, that is, seven learning environments or tools and four supporting strategies. Influential CSCL approaches such knowledge building, argumentation and problem-based learning were not included. Widely used CSCL tools and environments such as simulations, games, and/or mobile devices were not examined, They did not mention whether the collaboration was face-to-face or distributed. In addition, the analysis did not take into account that many of these technologies and pedagogical approaches may co-occur. Given that past research warned us that technology itself cannot guarantee learning and that media effectiveness may be a myth (Dillenbourg et al., 2009; Clark, 1994), it is critical is to understand the conditions under which CSCL can successfully elicit and facilitate the kinds of processes needed for students to achieve deep understanding of the learning domains. This requires a clearer assessment of the contributions made by different aspects of CSCL as well as an understanding of how they may interact and contribute to the overall effectiveness of CSCL.
1.3. Current studyThis paper is built on our earlier work on CSCL research in which we have examined the nature of CSCL research practices with a focus on methodological and theoretical frameworks (e.g., Jeong, Hmelo-Silver, & Yu, 2014) and technological and pedagogical approaches surrounding CSCL (e.g., Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2012). The goal of the current meta-analysis is to understand the overall effectiveness of CSCL in STEM education while attending to some of the complexities that mediate the outcomes of CSCL. In order to achieve this goal, we first focused on the role of collaboration mode, technology, and pedagogy, the three pillars of CSCL. The nature of collaboration may vary a great deal depending on the mode of collaboration. Although face-to-face collaborative learning has been around for a long time, distributed collaboration is relatively new. Both synchronous and asynchronous communication technologies allow learners to collaborate anytime and anyplace, but they are also limited in the kind of information they channel through (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016). Technology supports for collaboration also extend beyond communication supports and include supports for information sharing, visualization of complex ideas and phenomena, and co-construction and community building (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016). Taking advantage of these affordances of technology critically depends on the pedagogy. It helps to make technology supported collaboration meaningful and relevant to learning, encouraging students to share and co-construct with partners and prompting them to examine the problem deeply and find out underlying mechanisms.We additionally examine the role of learner's educational levels and learning domains. Collaborative learning is supported by technology at diverse educational levels ranging from as early as pre-K to graduate level and in a number of different domains (Gijlers, Weinberger, van Dijk, Bollen, & van Joolingen, 2013; Tsuei, 2012). It takes time and experience for students to develop the competencies to regulate their own behaviors and manage conflicts that can arise during group work. Different learning domains also focus on the development of different types of knowledge and skills, which can impose different demands and emphases on the design of instructional and technological interventions. Educational levels and learning domains were reported to be a significant moderator of learning outcomes in a number of meta-analyses on other educational interventions (Cheung & Slavin, 2012; Kyndt et al., 2013; Lou et al., 2001). This study will examine whether learning domains and educational levels can also significantly moderate outcomes in CSCL, although the examination of learning domains will be within STEM domains.We assessed the overall effectiveness of CSCL and the effects of these moderators on three kinds of outcome measures: cognitive outcomes, processes, and affective measures. Earlier studies reported different effect sizes depending on the outcome variables, but did not always test whether the difference is significant. In this study, we additionally tested whether the differences in outcomes types are significant. We also examined how methodological features of the study affect the outcomes. Methodological features of the primary research can influence the outcomes of the meta-analysis in significant ways (Chen et al., 2018; Cheung & Slavin, 2012; Slavin, 2008) and we need to be aware of their influences in CSCL research as well. In this study, we focused on three methodological features of the study; they are research design, settings, and types of comparison condition. CSCL research has employed a diverse range of research designs (Jeong et al., 2014) and we compared the outcomes between randomized and quasi experimentation that were conducted in classrooms, laboratories, or other settings (e.g., online communities). Different conditions have been used to compare and assess the effects of CSCL applications. That is, some studies may determine CSCL effectiveness based on the comparison between CSCL and face-to-face collaboration condition, whereas others may use comparison between CSCL to individual learning conditions, either with or without computers. Such diversity in comparison conditions makes it difficult to gauge the overall effectiveness of CSCL. In this study, we examined whether outcomes differ as a function of comparison conditions (e.g., face-to-face collaboration, individual learning with or without technology supports).A better understanding of how these variables moderate the effects of CSCL can help us to evaluate its impact more accurately and guide our future efforts in further enhancing CSCL environments and interventions. Our research questions can be summarized as:(1)What is the overall effect of CSCL in STEM education on collaborative learning processes and outcomes?(2)To what extent are CSCL outcomes moderated by: (a) Types of outcome measures, (b) methodological features, (c) collaboration modes, (d) technology used, (e) pedagogical approaches, (f) education levels of the learners, and (g) domains of learning.
