During recent years, many innovations in the construction industry have emerged in an attempt to revolutionize this so-called conservative industry. A major area of innovation is the automation of the actual construction process by introducing robotics [1,2]. Contour Crafting (CC) is the first additive fabrication technology developed for automated in-situ construction of custom-designed structures [3]. It could reduce construction costs by cutting down construction time as well as the workforce required for the construction process. Moreover, CC technology offers numerous advantages such as good surface quality, high degree of customization, and a wide selection of materials [4,5]. CC is also considered as one of the most promising approaches for building human settlements on other planets such as the Moon and Mars [3,6,7].
Material and structural related aspects of robotic building construction have been the topic of numerous research projects [[8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]]. Marchon et al. [14] have discussed the hydration and rheological requirements for printable concrete and highlighted the role of admixtures in the mixture development process. Perrot et al. [11] investigated the role of the structural build-up of cementitious materials in construction scale 3D printing. A theoretical framework has been developed by these researchers to optimize the building rate. This framework is based on the comparison of the vertical stress acting on the first extruded layer with the critical stress related to plastic deformation. Sanjayan et al. [15] carried out an experimental study on the interlayer bond strength of 3D printed elements and have identified surface moisture level as an influential parameter. In another recent study [16] a mechanistic model was presented for analysis and optimization of the mechanical performance of printed straight wall structures. The proposed model incorporates many process parameters such as printing velocity and the curing characteristics of the printing material.
Several studies are also available on the software aspects of construction-scale 3D printing, and how building information modelling (BIM) could be customized and adopted for this new construction paradigm [5,17,18]. In a recent study, a software platform was developed as an initial step toward integration of BIM into layer-by-layer robotic construction [5]. This platform was named Planning and Operations Control Software for Automated Construction (POCSAC) and covers various aspects of automated building construction such as BIM model preparation, toolpath optimization, and automated construction document generation [5]. Teizer et al. [19] have discussed some potential advantages of adopting BIM for construction scale 3D printing, with emphasis on scheduling and activity sequence information.
Compared to the material, structural, and software aspects of construction-scale 3D printing, quality monitoring and control of this process has not been investigated extensively. Quality monitoring and control is a critical aspect of any fabrication process. In construction, it is of utmost importance since product failure could endanger human lives. In conventional concrete construction, based on the project size and importance, a number of experiments may be carried out in order to design and validate a mixture prior to the actual construction. Different aspects such as mechanical strength and durability of hardened concrete could be investigated using various standard test methods, some of which take months to be completed [[20], [21], [22]]. On the other hand, after a mixture is designed, quality monitoring of its fresh properties on the construction site is commonly brief and rudimentary. It is often limited to slump measurements, and sometimes is complemented by unit weight and air content measurements. These traditional quality control methods are manual, off-line, need sample preparation, and are time-consuming. Therefore, while deemed sufficient for conventional construction, these methods cannot be directly adopted for quality control of automated construction processes. A major distinction between the two construction processes is that in traditional construction, large volumes of concrete are poured at once, and as long as structural and durability requirements are later satisfied by the hardened concrete, small variations in the mixture are not concerning. In construction-scale 3D printing, however, thin layers of 2.5–5 cm dimensions are continuously extruded for many hours, and the process could be adversely affected by small variations in the printing mixture. In fact, during the printing process, the stability of the incomplete structure depends on two factors: the increasing strength and stiffness caused by thixotropic build-up and setting of the printing mixture versus the gradually increasing load as more layers are deposited on top of each other [3,9]. An imbalance between the loading conditions and the stiffness of layers, or extrusion of layers with unacceptable properties, could lead to extensive deformations and progressive collapse of a freshly printed structure. Therefore, it is imperative that a customized, robust, real-time quality monitoring system is developed for robotic construction systems.
A real-time quality control technique which is widely adopted by several industries such as agriculture, food processing, and manufacturing, is computer vision [[23], [24], [25]]. For instance, the applications of computer vision for inspection, sorting, and grading of grains, fruits and vegetables have been frequently reported [[26], [27], [28], [29]]. With respect to the construction industry, many projects have investigated the use of site images and videos to track construction personnel, equipment, and materials for progress monitoring and safety analysis [30,31]. Seo et al. [31] have provided a comprehensive overview of application of computer vision techniques for construction safety and health monitoring, where three main categories of object detection, object tracking, and action recognition have been discussed. Dimitrov and Golparvar-Fard [32] have proposed a new method, based on computer vision, to classify construction materials from single images taken under unknown viewpoints. A construction materials library was formulated to train and test the proposed method. These researchers have reported encouraging results, such as an average material classification accuracy of 97.1% for 200 × 200 pixels image patches. In a recent study, Kropp et al. [33] have developed a method for indoor project progress monitoring as a step toward automated construction inspection. In this method computer vision is used to recognize the actual state of construction from video data based on as-planned BIM data. The reported experimental results prove the high potential for automatic progress monitoring by adopting BIM and image processing [33].
In this paper, computer vision is proposed for real-time extrusion quality monitoring during robotic building construction. It should be mentioned that several configurations, including extrusion nozzle assemblies, and the related information for adopting computer vision techniques for Contour Crafting process have been described by the fourth author in the patent number US 8944799 B2 [34]. In the following sections, an algorithm for the vision system is presented which detects the extruded layer and measures the layer width in real time to detect conditions of over-extrusion or under-extrusion. The proposed technique is also used to develop a feedback control extrusion system which automatically adjusts the material deposition rate such that layers of acceptable dimensions are continuously printed.
