Computational studies of glass formation and deformation constitute a substantial fraction of the research conducted in relation to these problems. The attention drawn by this line of work has been on the rise recently due to several methodological developments that allow investigators to create computer glasses with a very broad variation in the degree of their mechanical and kinetic stability. These include the ongoing optimization of Graphics-Processing-Units (GPU)-based algorithms [1,2] that now offer the possibility to probe several orders of magnitude in structural relaxation rates in the supercooled liquid regime [3]. A sampling method based on a generalized statistical ensemble has been shown to yield well-annealed states [4]. In groundbreaking work of Ninarello and coworkers [5], inspired by previous advances [6], a glass forming model was optimized such to stupendously increase the efficiency of the Swap Monte Carlo algorithm, allowing the equilibration of supercooled liquids down to unprecedented low temperatures, while remaining robust against crystallization. In [7] a model and algorithm were put forward that allows to create extremely stable computer glasses, albeit with a protocol which is not physical. Mechanical annealing by means of oscillatory shear was also recently shown to be an efficient protocol for creating stable glasses [8]. Finally, numerical realizations of experimental vapor deposition protocols [9] have shown good success in creating well-annealed glasses [10,11].
This recent proliferation of methods for creating stable computer glasses highlights the need for approaches to meaningfully and quantitatively compare between the various glasses created by these methods. In particular, it is important to disentangle the effects of parameter choices — both in the interaction potentials that define computer glass formers, and choices of external control parameters — from the effects of annealing near and below the models' respective computer glass transition temperatures. In addition, in some cases it is useful to quantitatively assess the effective distance a given computer glass is positioned away from the unjamming point — the loss of rigidy seen e.g. upon decompressing essemblies of repulsive soft spheres [[12], [13], [14]].
This work is aimed towards establishing how elastic properties and elasto-plastic responses of simple computer glasses depend on various key external and internal control parameters, how they change between different models, and how they are affected by the preparation protocol of glasses. In order to disentangle annealing effects from model- and external-parameter dependences, we exploit the observation that creating computer glasses by instantaneous quenches of high energy states to zero temperature defines an ensemble of configurations whose elastic properties can be meaningfully and quantitatively compared between models and across different parameter regimes.
The existence of the aformentioned ensemble is demonstrated in Fig. 1, where we plot measurements of the sample-to-sample mean athermal shear modulus (see definition below) of underlying inherent states of parent equilibrium configurations (labelled by their equilibrium temperature Tp) of a simple glass-forming model (see details in Section 2.1.4 below). This high-temperature saturation of elastic properties of very poorly annealed glassy states appears to be a generic feature of computer glasses [[15], [16], [17], [18], [19]]. We therefore carry out in what follows a comparative study of elastic properties of different computer glass models created by instantaneous quenches from high energy states. Our analyses of elastic properties of instantanously-quenched glasses are compared against the behavior of the same key observables measured in a variant of the glass forming model introduced in [Ninarello et al. [5] Ninarello, Berthier,andCoslovich] that can be annealed very deeply below the conventional computer glass transition temperature. This allows us to compare the relative protocol- and parameter-induced variation in these key observables.Download : Download high-res image (114KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) Sample-to-sample mean athermal shear modulus G measured in inherent states that underlie liquid states at equilibrium parent temperatures Tp of the POLY model, see Section 2.1.4 for model details. The vertical line approximates the crossover temperature above which several elastic properties saturate. (b) Sample-to-sample mean inherent state potential energy-per-particle U/N. Interestingly, while G saturates above the crossover temperature, U/N does not. In this work we focus on several observables that feature a saturation as seen for G in panel (a).
In the same spirit, we also investigate the elasto-plastic steady state as seen by deforming our instantaneously-quenched glasses using an athermal, quasistatic shear protocol, that gets rid of any rate effects associated with finite deformation rate and finite temperature protocols. We anticipate our results to constitute a benchmark for quantitative assessment of other glasses in future studies of elasticity, elasto-plasticity and glass formation.
This paper is structured as follows; in Section 2 we spell out the models employed in our study, and list the physical observables that were calculated in those models. Section 3 presents various data sets that characterize the elasticity and elasto-plasticity of the computer glasses we have investigated, and discusses various points of interest and connections to related previous work. Our work is summarized in Section 4.
