Translation of highly specialized medical papers has been growing due to exponential medical progress. Most medical articles accepted by international medical journals are in English. Therefore, Italian professionals and specialists working in the medical fields need to read, write and understand medical papers in English. Most professionals have sufficient knowledge of the particular topics, the English language and specialized medical language so that they are capable of reading medical literature themselves. However, in some cases it may be necessary to use a translator, due to the fact that many professionals are not English language native speakers, and thus, they are unable to understand the language correctly and the language richness. Furthermore, although translations are carried out by native speakers who translate into their mother tongue, the background knowledge of the specific topics may be insufficient and knowledge of the specialist language may be incomplete (Halliday, 1978; Jacobson, 1989; Neubert, 2000). Specific problems are posed by the particular register and lexicon, and by the many linguistic conventions and norms adopted by this particular language community (Halliday, 1988; Bell, 1991). The resulting translations are often less than satisfactory, and sometimes clearly wrong (Halliday, 1973; Jacobson, 1989; Daniele, 2005).
Many theories have been developed on how to translate. Although many researchers and experts more or less agree on the techniques, the processes and the deep mechanisms involved with translating standard language, much controversy arises from technical translations and particularly medical translations (Newmark, 1981; Darian, 1982; Daniele, 1999). A common idea is that translations have to be performed complying with the original style of the authors (Taylor, 1998). On the other hand, others argue that translating consists mainly in expressing the same concepts in a different language (Bassnett, 2013). It seems that no unanimous position can be taken. Instead, it is crucial to remain open and versatile toward the process of translating that might simultaneously involve a number of different techniques.
The type of translation seems to be very important. Many authors have discussed different kinds of translations. Peter Newmark distinguishes between a semantic and a communicative, poetic translation. According to Newmark, a communicative translation is one that addresses the reader in an understandable way, while remaining faithful to the source text. On the other hand, a semantic translation appears to be more rigidly bound to the source text, tending to be more precise and highly literal (Newmark, 1988, 1991, 1993). Poetic translations are closer to re-writing, because the translator has to convey the deep meaning the author is expressing, but this must be done in a way that respects poetic conventions and also the sounds and the feelings the original author intended to elicit in the reader (Jacobson, 1959; Dastjerdi and Hakimshafaaii, 2008). As a result, in these conditions a specific style must be respected (Taylor, 1998). On the other hand, technical translations seem to be more like a simple transfer of the corresponding words into the target language. This would appear to be a more mechanical type of translation, and the outcome is a word-for-word style (Fischback, 1998). The main problems posed by translations of this type do not necessarily derive from the source language, nor from the target language, but from the translator.
In recent years, translation studies have shifted their focus from the translation to the translator. Today it is widely agreed that the best translations are those by translators who translate into their mother tongue (Ulrych, 1999; Hatim and Mason, 2005). In addition, translators need to be fully proficient in the source language, and most researchers highlight the fact that it is crucial for translators to have a good understanding of the subject matter. In other words, the translator has to be sufficiently familiar with the specific terminology, and even more importantly, to have a good knowledge of the specific concepts, processes, situations and phenomena the specialized language is communicating (Robinson, 2012; Hatim and Mason, 2014). Unfortunately to date not many professionals are translators, and so in order to overcome the obvious obstacles encountered when dealing with medical translations, cooperation between the translator and the professional seems an acceptable solution (Daniele, 2013). This represents a good compromise that combines effective language utilization and correct medical concepts (Jacobson, 1989; Gramley and Patzold, 1994; Daniele, 2000). Recent studies have reported on the effectiveness of online translators in translating various types of texts (Ellender, 2012; Somers, 2012; Taleghani and Pazouki, 2018). Mathematicians, computer scientists and engineers have published a number of papers discussing the construction and development of specific machines for medical translations (Shultz et al., 2013; Guzmán et al., 2017). However, no such machine seems to be currently available for widespread use. Therefore, to date only standard translators can be used.
The aim of the present paper is to quantitatively assess the performance of a free online translator in translating medical texts from English into Italian. Effectiveness was evaluated and established by analyzing the number and the percentage of total translation errors with respect to the original medical texts.
