Creativity refers to the process of generating contextually or culturally original and valuable products (Yeh, 2017; Mayer, 1999; Shamay-Tsoory, Adler, Aharon-Peretz, Perry, & Mayseless, 2011); it requires both divergent and convergent thinking (Glăveanu, 2017). Although creativity development involves interactions of personal traits among other variables (e.g., family and school environment, working environment, customs, and social values), personal traits themselves remain among some of the most influential factors for creativity performance (Yeh, 2017; Valgeirsdottir & Onarheim, 2017). This consensus has led researchers of creativity development to include personal traits in empirical studies.
Much of the previously conducted creativity enhancement research involves the training of originality which is assessed by idea generation or divergent thinking tests (e.g., Fink et al., 2010; Scott, Leritz, & Mumford, 2004; Sun et al., 2016; Valgeirsdottir & Onarheim, 2017; Wei et al., 2014). However, the training of convergent thinking which is utilized in the assessment of valuableness, is often neglected. According to Glăveanu (2017), a critical sociocultural perspective advises against adhering to a single perspective, rather than considering perspectivism when evaluating creativity or developing creativity theories. The present study therefore holistically explores a new paradigm for enhancing creativity which focuses on both originality and valuableness, in addition to providing an interdisciplinary approach that evaluates two potential moderators—Desire of aesthetics (DA) and emotional creativity (EC).
The field of education is exploring new methods for appropriating computers, or other technological devices for the delivery of instruction, and the present researchers developed a multidisciplinary computer-based training program called FACE for accomplishing the instruction of creativity. The four components of FACE are as follows: Feedback, Aesthetic experience, Creative design, and Evaluation of designed products. In this approach, Science (computer science), Technology (multimedia and 3-D design), and Art (aesthetics and creativity) are integrated to offer a teaching method for the developing trend emphasizing STEAM (science, technology, engineering, art, and math), 3-D design, and maker-centered learning (Clapp & Jimenez, 2016; Saorín, Melian-Díaz, Bonnet, Carbonell, Meier, & De La Torre-Cantero, 2017). To date, few researchers have conducted such a multifaceted study pertaining to creativity. However, the close connection between aesthetics, design, art disciplines, and creativity has been documented in the relevant literature (Clinton & Hokanson, 2012; Saorín et al., 2017). These related findings suggest that incorporating elements of aesthetics into the present training may bolster creative design.
Moreover, two personality traits were included in this study: desire for aesthetics (DA), which pertains to one's personal attraction or motivation to seek out aesthetically appealing objects (Lundy, Schenkel, Akrie, & Walker, 2010), and emotional creativity (EC), which relates to an individual's ability to have emotional control and produce a variety of emotional responses (Oriol, Amutio, Mendoza, Da Costa, & Miranda, 2016). Based on previous research suggesting that motivation and EC act as moderators during creativity learning (Averill, 2009; Chad-Friedman, Lee, & Watson, 2018; Oriol et al., 2016; St-Louis & Vallerand, 2015), desire for aesthetics (DA) as a type of motivation, and emotional creativity (EC), were investigated as possible moderators for the outcome and effectiveness of the training employed in this study.
Briefly speaking, the investigation of the FACE approach combined aesthetics-integrated computer-based training with the analysis of personal traits. In addition, constructive feedback was evaluated as a potential mechanism for enhancing training effects in the exhaustive and interdisciplinary FACE program.
