In the United States, the master’s degree is the entry-level degree to practice as a speech-language pathologist (SLP). As part of their education, students are expected to complete 375 h of supervised, direct speech-language pathology clinical services in various clinical settings with a variety of clinical populations (Council for Clinical Certification in Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 2014). This places a tremendous demand on the resources of the graduate programs that must provide or facilitate the supervision of these supervised hours. To ease this burden, the Council of Academic Programs in Communication Sciences and Disorders (CAPCSD) investigated the possibility of permitting alternative clinical experiences that are potentially not as demanding on physical resources (space, clients, materials, and supervisors). After their investigation, CAPCSD recommended that the definition of supervised clinical activity be expanded to include simulated learning environments. In 2016, the CFCC began allowing up to 75 of the 375 total hours to be obtained in this manner.
Despite an abundance of evidence demonstrating that simulations can positively affect the knowledge, skills, and abilities of students in various fields, inquiry into utilizing simulations with future SLPs is in its infancy. Studies have demonstrated that specific tasks can be taught via simulations and surveys indicate that students enjoy the educational experiences provided by simulations (Berkowitz, 2017; Hill, Davidson, & Theodoros, 2013; Miles, Friary, Jackson, Sekula, & Braakhuis, 2016; Ward et al., 2014); however, there is little research on computer-based simulated learning environments in speech-language pathology. In addition, the literature has almost exclusively focused upon acquired speech and language disorders to the exclusion of developmental manifestations of language impairments. The current study is designed to assess the effects of a computer-based simulated learning experience on the performance of graduate speech-language pathology students in a pediatric language disorder course.
1.1. SimulationsA simulation is a task that is designed to provide guided experiences that resemble real-world experiences. Simulations typically allow for repeated practice in a safe environment for both the client and the clinician, providing clinicians an opportunity to engage in experiential learning (Jansen, 2015). Dudding and Nottingham (2017) list four common categories of simulated learning environments that are commonly used in speech-language pathology programs: part-task trainers, mannequins, standardized patients, and computer-based simulations. Part-task trainers and mannequins are more commonly used to simulate physical as opposed to cognitive-based disorders, and therefore, will not be considered in the current review. Standardized patients and computer-based simulations are more closely intertwined due to their reliance upon case-based learning philosophies and will be central to the current review.
1.2. Case-based learning and critical thinkingSimulation-based clinical education is a comprehensive, student-centered teaching approach that promotes experiential and reflective learning (Motola, Devine, Chung, Sullivan, & Issenberg, 2013). Simulated learning environments are often rooted in case-based learning principles (CBL). CBL is a long-established pedagogical model in which the learning opportunities are based upon actual patient cases. It engages students in dialogue about clinical scenarios and helps them identify client problems, compare and evaluate optional solutions, and decide how to deal with clinical situations (Kaddoura, 2011). CBL demands active participation from learners, and it supports professional practice goals by encouraging learner-teacher interactions. This constructivist philosophy is based on the belief that students’ learning is supported by the interaction between prior knowledge and current environment (Lee, 2012). It is designed to facilitate the incorporation of knowledge and skills into clinical practice to improve clinical skills (Thistlethwaite et al., 2012).Critical thinking is the application of relevant knowledge and skills toward decision-making. It is increasingly recognized as a desirous skill for speech-language pathologists (Finn, Brundage, & DiLollo, 2016). Skills that can fall under the purview of critical thinking include developing alternative explanations, integrating research implications, and applying new information to social and personal problems (Wade, Tavris, & Garry, 2014). With case studies, the hope is that learners will grow in both proficiency and confidence, becoming well-rounded clinicians who are able to think critically regarding their clinical decisions.
1.3. Standardized patientsOne form of case-based inquiry that has a rich history in health fields is the usage of standardized patients (see Zraick, 2012). According to Zraick (2012), a standardized patient is “a person designed to portray a patient scenario, or an actual patient using their own history and physical exam findings, for the instruction, assessment, or practice of communication and/or examining skills of a health care provider” (p. 113). Standardized patients are trained to exhibit patterns of behaviors and responses during human-to-human interaction and the variation in their responses contributes the dynamic, human element that characterizes interpersonal communication. Overall, standardized patients have been demonstrated to be potent instructional and evaluative constructs in the education of speech-language pathologists (Baylor et al., 2017; Hill et al., 2013; Syder, 1996; Zraick, 2012; Zraick, Allen, & Johnson, 2003).Implementing standardized patients into the curriculum can be associated with many challenges. Baylor et al. (2017) found that overt symptoms (word finding deficits, hand tremors, hemi-paralysis) are often portrayed realistically by standardized patients whereas covert symptoms, such as comprehension difficulties are portrayed far less realistically. This limitation could affect the ability of standardized patients to portray many of the developmental language-based disorders within the SLP’s scope of practice. Furthermore, standardized patients almost exclusively tend to be adults. In the broader medical literature, a single study was found that used pediatric standardized patients as part of a pediatric clinical skills assessment for medical residents (Lane, Ziv, & Boulet, 1999). No current studies within the field of speech-language pathology have used children as standardized patients.
1.4. Paper-based case studiesA common method of instruction in speech-language pathology programs involves using paper-based case studies. Chabon and Cohn (2011) state that the benefit of learning with paper-based case studies depends upon the questions that are asked by the learner in the process of completing the case. The authors state that questions should encourage learners to expand beyond shallow thought into deeper levels of comprehension regarding the most suitable clinical practices for each case. This client-centric focus is thought to encourage critical thinking by engaging the learner in self-directed learning as they assess new knowledge and integrate it with foundational knowledge while acknowledging the human dimension.Although the process described by Chabon and Cohn (2011) is meant to emphasize the human element by placing the human at the center of all clinical inquiry, the human element of this format can be lacking due to the static nature of hard copy material. Paper-based formats do not incorporate the communicative reciprocity that is indicative of human interaction. Thus, the interface that learners have with paper-based case studies can lack the dynamism that human communication frequently entails.
1.5. Computer-based simulationsComputer-based learning environments (CBLE) allow for a high degree of learner control and self-directed learning opportunities (Winters, Greene, & Costich, 2008). The majority of CBLE employ multi-modal representations (text, video, audio) of information, which allows learners to dynamically engage with material from multiple vantage points. This fosters active participation in the construction of knowledge (Moos & Azevedo, 2017). Research has demonstrated that those who activate prior knowledge and monitor their emerging understanding during CBLE tend to develop deeper understandings of challenging topics as opposed to those who simply click and proceed through the learning environment. Feedback is thought to be crucial to the monitoring process in CBLE (Van der Kleij, Feskens, & Eggen, 2015).It is possible that CBLE represent a viable educational option for the field of speech-language pathology. However, there is little evidence supporting their efficacy in this field despite reports of high usage in university settings (Dudding & Nottingham, 2017). The authors reported that 31 of the 69 universities that used simulations, used computer-based methods. Dudding and Nottingham claimed this high rate could potentially be due to the commercially available product SimuCase™, which is a computer-based simulation program designed specifically for speech-language pathology programs (SimuCaseTM, 2017). SimuCase™ had only been commercially available for two years during the period of Dudding and Nottingham’s data collection. It is likely that this number has since increased.Each SimuCase™ case is developed by SLPs and computer programmers. Learners interact with the case by making decisions regarding the appropriate procedures. As more steps are completed, more information becomes available and the learner must adapt their interactions with the virtual client (avatar) accordingly (Johnson, Jansen, Ondo, Williams, & Pantalone, 2017). SimuCase™ can be completed in “Learner Mode” or “Assessment Mode”. “Learner Mode” provides immediate feedback regarding the appropriateness of the decisions that the user makes whereas “Assessment Mode” does not provide immediate feedback.SimuCase™ potentially reconciles the previously mentioned limitations that are associated with standardized patients and paper-based case studies. Whereas standardized patients are unlikely to be able to demonstrate the nuanced behaviors and responses associated with developmental language disorders, SimuCase™ cases are created with the “client’s” patterns of strengths and weaknesses embedded directly and precisely into the case. Furthermore, SimuCase™ enables the learner to interact with pediatric clients, whereas standardized patients tend to be adults. In addition, the interface between an avatar and learner more closely approximates the reciprocity of interpersonal communication than that which is experienced with paper-based case studies. Finally, SimuCase™ can provide immediate feedback as individuals engage with the program, which is difficult for a single professor to do individually with each student.Simulated learning environments have been found to benefit the educational experience of future speech-language pathologists; however, these positive findings have not been extended to computer-based simulated learning environments. In addition, no studies have focused upon pediatric developmental language disorders in a simulated environment. If simulations are to be used as a prominent feature in the education of SLPs, then their efficacy and flexibility must be assessed. The purpose of this study is to examine the effects of a computer-based, pediatric, simulated learning environment on the learning of speech-language pathology graduate students.The current study addressed the following experimental question: What are the effects of a computer-based simulated learning experience on the learning outcomes of speech-language pathology graduate students? It was hypothesized that simulated learning environments would be associated with improved student performance due to the preponderance of positive results associated with other forms of simulated learning environments. Case-based learning principles have a long, productive history in the field of speech-language pathology (Chabon & Cohn, 2011). It is possible that combining case-based learning principles along with feedback-intensive computer-based learning environments will stimulate learning by allowing for a high degree of self-directed learning opportunities (Van der Kleij et al., 2015; Winters et al., 2008).
