Despite the explosion in the use and diversification of research and applications using electroencephalography (EEG), other than one current privately financed project (Alexander et al., 2017; O’Connor et al., 2017), significant recent brain biomarker discovery initiatives have not involved EEG-derived measures (Pedroni et al., 2019). Other neuroimaging techniques, chiefly MRI and fMRI, are the focus of leading initiatives such as the IMAGEN study (Schumann et al., 2010), the U.K. Biobank project (Sudlow et al., 2015), the Human Connectome Project (Van Essen et al., 2012), the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (Di Martino et al., 2014) and the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (Mueller et al., 2005). Three major factors are hindering the large-scale data collection, analysis, and meta-analysis of EEG data.
Physiologic and experimental variability. The first factor is the native high inter-subject signal variability in EEG signals themselves. Brain anatomic and physiological (as well as cognitive and behavioral) differences between individuals, produce differences in their EEG signals that may severely affect the performance of models and preprocessing techniques meant to generalize across many subjects (Pedroni et al., 2019). Circumventing issues arising from this variability requires major efforts both in data standardization and in data analysis (Bigdely-Shamlo et al., 2016a,b; Bigdely-Shamlo et al., 2015; Gabard-Durnam et al., 2018; Pedroni et al., 2019). Differences in number and placement of the recording electrodes across studies, and difficulty in co-registering the electrode positions to the head and underlying functional EEG brain sources add further complexity.
Format variability and lack of specificity. A second factor hindering development of large scale EEG data analysis and meta-analysis is the lack of agreement within researchers and system manufacturer communities regarding EEG data formats. Lack of standardization in this area has negatively impacted the growth of EEG data sharing. Inconsistent and often insufficient documentation of data collection and analysis procedures have made it difficult to reproduce results across laboratories and limited the possibility of bringing together data recorded in different formats using varying experimental paradigms and recording systems and parameters.
The Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) specification initiative is attempting to establish a common set of standards for, first, MRI and fMRI (Gorgolewski et al., 2016) and most recently MEG (Niso et al., 2018), iEEG (Holdgraf et al., 2019), and EEG (Pernet et al., 2019) data. The emerging BIDS standards are sets of interrelated research community-developed specifications for organizing, archiving, sharing, and easily analyzing brain imaging data collected within and across studies and laboratories. The new BIDS standards, now being rapidly adopted by neuroinformatics projects in the US and in Europe, address the issue of heterogeneity in the structure of archived data across studies. Importantly for EEG data, the root BIDS standard supports the Hierarchical Event Descriptor (HED) system for annotating the precise nature of experimental events recorded in the data (Bigdely-Shamlo et al., 2016a,b), thereby promoting greater depth of detail and improved consistency across labs in the descriptions of experimental events recorded in the data.
Need for high-performance computing. A third factor hindering the development of large-scale EEG analysis is that, given the success of applications of machine learning methods to very large data archives in an increasing number of fields, and the relatively large amount of EEG data that could potentially be made available for such analyses, there is an increasing need for using high-performance computing (HPC) resources. However, there are few readily available tools for solving difficult EEG signal processing problems such as EEG source localization using realistic electrical head models (Akalin Acar and Makeig, 2010; Brunet et al., 2011; Wolters et al., 2002); time-frequency (for example Makeig et al., 2002; Onton et al., 2005; Pfurtscheller and Da Silva, 1999) and cross-frequency coupling analysis (Canolty and Knight, 2010; Martínez-Cancino et al., 2019; Tort et al., 2010); stochastic analyses including independent component analysis (ICA) (Artoni et al., 2014; Makeig et al., 1996); and a growing variety of machine learning methods (see examples in Lotte et al., 2018; Makeig et al., 2012). Thus, for many EEG researchers lack of access to sufficient well-documented and formatted data, readily applicable analysis tools, and connected computing resources are major current obstacles to applying new large-scale analysis and meta-analysis methods to EEG and related data.
HPC science gateways. Publicly available high-performance computing (HPC) resources do exist at national academic supercomputer centers, but access by neuroscientists to these resources is limited by both administrative and technical barriers including the steep learning curve required to understand HPC hardware, software, usage policies, user environments and to install and run applications on HPC resources (Delorme et al., 2019). These obstacles are being partially eliminated through the creation of science gateways to publicly-funded HPC resources (Wilkins-Diehr et al., 2008). Each science gateway provides a customized set of compute-intensive applications to researchers in a specific scientific field, making them available for use via a simple to use web portal and/or an application programming interface (API). These gateways allow scientists to access HPC resources without dealing with the complexities associated with the machine environment. A gateway has been developed for the neuroscience community, the Neuroscience Gateway (Sivagnanam et al., 2013; Sivagnanam et al., 2018). Here we present a solution linking the most widely used signal processing environment for EEG research, EEGLAB (Delorme and Makeig, 2004), to the U.S. HPC Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) computer network (xsede.org) via the Neuroscience Gateway (NSG).
The Neuroscience Gateway (NSG) (Sivagnanam et al., 2018) is a National Science Foundation (NSF) funded project focused on providing HPC resources to neuroscience researchers. In doing so, NSG aims to lower or eliminate the administrative and technical barriers that currently make it difficult for investigators to use these resources. The NSG (nsgportal.org) gateway offers free computer time to neuroscientists on the XSEDE computer network, providing a ready means to use HPC resources for popular neuroscience tools, pipelines, data processing, and software including NEURON (Hines and Carnevale, 2008), GENESIS (Bower and Beeman, 2012), MOOSE (Ray et al., 2008), NEST (Gewaltig and Diesmann, 2007), Brian (Goodman and Brette, 2009) and PyNN (Davison et al., 2009), as well as software for analyzing and visualizing structural and functional brain imaging data, such as Freesurfer (Fischl, 2012) and MRtrix (Tournier et al., 2012). NSG leverages access to resources including the supercomputers Comet at the University of California San Diego and Stampede2 at University of Texas Austin, and the Jetstream cloud resource at the University of Indiana.
The EEGLAB signal processing environment. Resources for analyzing EEG data are increasingly freely available as open-source software. Leading examples are the EEGLAB (Delorme and Makeig, 2004), Fieldtrip (Oostenveld et al., 2011), Brainstorm (Tadel et al., 2011), and MNE (Gramfort et al., 2014) tool environments. In 2011, EEGLAB was reported to be the most widely used by the cognitive neuroscience community (Hanke and Halchenko, 2011), a report consistent with counts of more recent research publications reporting the use of these respective environments (see Inline Supplementary Fig. 1). EEGLAB, first introduced in 2002 organizing tools first released by Makeig and colleagues at the Salk Institute in 1997, comprises a large set of tools for performing ICA decomposition, time/frequency analysis, and effective source-level (or scalp channel-level) data visualization. EEGLAB combines a simple but powerful graphical user interface (GUI) for data exploration with an easy transition to command line scripting for custom analysis, exploiting the richness of the MATLAB environment (The Mathworks, Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, United States) on which it runs. EEGLAB is also compatible with the open source, cross-platform Octave application, and is readily extensible through its increasing library of more than 100 plug-in extensions contributed by many laboratories, extensions that appear as easy-to-launch items in the EEGLAB window menu of users who download them. These plug-ins can take advantage of the wide range of easily accessible core MATLAB graphics and other libraries.
Inline Supplementary Figure S1Download : Download high-res image (127KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. S1. Citations of the EEGLAB reference paper vs. other open-source EEG analysis software reference paper citations as per the Web of Science (https://www.webofknowledge.com, mid-December 2019).
Using EEGLAB on high-performance computing resources. In a recent publication (Delorme et al., 2019), we introduced the Open EEGLAB Portal (OEP) software framework enabling interaction between EEGLAB and the Neuroscience Gateway (NSG, nsgportal.org) to offer free use of the HPC resources of the U.S. XSEDE network for analysis of EEG and related data from the EEGLAB environment. The OEP makes use of NSG to provide ready access to HPC resources without the burden of complications typically associated with using HPC services.
Earlier, in (Delorme et al., 2019), we previewed the EEGLAB functions supporting the OEP and discussed future development, e.g., a programmatic user interface from EEGLAB to NSG. Here, we introduce the EEGLAB plug-in nsgportal (github.com/sccn/nsgportal) that fulfills this purpose -- to give cognitive neuroscientists free and easy access to HPC resources from an EEGLAB session running on any lab or personal computer running MATLAB.1 The current manuscript is organized as follows: In Section 2, we expand on the structure and capabilities of the OEP, ways of accessing it and the characteristics and structure of the computational jobs. In Section 3, we introduce the nsgportal plug-in and discuss its architecture, its GUI structure, and its set of MATLAB command line tools. In Section 4, we present three nsgportal applications, the first illustrating the use of the nsgportal GUI, the second its MATLAB command line tools, and the third showing use of these tools to incorporate HPC access into new or existing EEGLAB plug-ins, culminating with building nsgportal capabilities into the compute-intensive RELICA (for ‘RELiable ICA’) plug-in of Artoni et al. (2014). Finally, in Sections 5 Discussion, 6 Conclusions, we outline current and future developments and present conclusions from our work to date.
