Landscape science is an interdisciplinary endeavour drawing upon geography, ecology, architecture and planning. It necessarily merges ideas relating to physical form, aesthetics and purpose to further understanding of the relationships between people and place. These culturally embedded relationships have received recent scrutiny due to their inclusion within the theoretical framework of ecosystem service assessment (MEA, 2005). A beautiful landscape view can be identified as a ‘cultural ecosystem service’ alongside other intangible benefits such as spiritual nourishment or enjoyment of nature (Costanza et al., 1997; Church et al., 2011; Daniel et al., 2012). Assessing the visual quality of a landscape is an exercise in quantifying our qualitative responses to these views (Swetnam, Harrison-Curran, & Smith, 2017). Such assessments are important to answer fundamental questions such as ‘what do we want our landscapes to look like? and ‘who decides?’
The sensory nature of this evaluation means that visual technologies are often employed in data gathering as well as the presentation of results. Traditionally, this started with fieldwork which is place-based, time-stamped and multi-sensory (Riesco-Chueca & Gomez-Zotano, 2013). Visual impressions of landscapes were originally recorded through narratives, sketches and paintings and this is still important in geographical research (Turkington, 2010). Site photographs represented a major step forward with respect to capturing the view and they remain important in visual landscape assessment (Arriaza, Canas-Ortega, Canas-Madueno, & Ruiz-Aviles, 2004; Pardo-Garcia & Merida-Rodriguez, 2017; (Swetnam & Tweed, 2018). However, the 3D nature of the landscape is still constrained by the 2D capacity of such recording devices. With the development of computer-based technologies, the 3D aspects could be represented more effectively within Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and Virtual Reality (VR) environments (Paar, 2006; Kuliga, Thrash, Dalton, & Holscher, 2015). This potential has recently been fully realised for wind farm assessments by Rafiee, Van der Male, Dias, and Scholten (2017) and in land management in the GeoGame platform developed by Ahlqvist, Khodke, and Ramnath (2018). In both these cases, the spatial data handling capabilities of GIS have been fully integrated within game engine software.
1.1. Assessing public views on landscapeTraditional methods to gather information about public views on the management of shared rural environments include: town meetings, focus groups, phone surveys, public consultations and community planning exercises (Fletcher, Baulcomb, Hall, & Hussain, 2014; Gyllin & Grahn, 2015). These sorts of data-gathering exercises seem archaic to the internet-enabled. The voice of the young (<25 years) therefore, is often marginalized in the landscape quality/landscape management debate. It may have been hoped that the rise of internet-enabled phones and the ubiquity of wi-fi access in many places would have helped fill this gap. Online surveys are easy to distribute via social media but issues concerning validity, ethics and uptake remain (McInroy, 2016). However, despite the apparent ubiquity of the internet, engaging this cohort in scientific research remains difficult as users have many other entertainments and virtual activities in which to engage. Our own studies in Wales, UK (Emmett, 2013, Swetnam, Prochorskaite, & Smith, 2015) mirrored this finding; a self-administered, online photographic preference survey collected 2263 responses from across the UK but only had 93 (= 4.1%) from people under the age of 25. All other age groups broadly matched that of the wider population in terms of proportion.
1.2. Young people in landscape evaluationsThe missing voice of young people in landscape assessment is therefore a concern, particularly considering the challenges that this generation will undoubtedly face in managing the impacts of rapid environmental change on their lives. It is crucial that we do understand the landscape preferences of our younger citizens. Thankfully, much groundwork has been done in this area. In particular the literature on younger children's place preferences is vast with notable contributions offered by Hart (1979), van Andel (1990) and seminal work by Matthews (1992) and Matthews (1999). Often the emphasis is developmental, exploring how younger children play and explore their local natural environment. Work with adolescents is less common and often has a social focus in an attempt to understand how young adults use shared public spaces. Owens and McKinnon’s (2009) study of 53 teenagers in California identified both formal and informal green spaces used by young adults in their locale (such as sports fields, parks and beaches) and concluded that they were important for three key activities: recreation, restoration and socializing with friends. Safe spaces were valued but so were areas where teenagers could meet and interact without constant adult supervision. Some more recent studies are beginning to explore teenagers' specific preferences for greenery and vegetation (Luckmann, Lagemann, & Menzel, 2013; van den Bogerd, Dijkstra, Seidell, & Maas, 2018). Whilst Eder and Arnberger’s (2016) landscape preference work with adolescents in riverine landscapes demonstrated that the associated recreational infrastructure (benches etc.) were important to this age group and their social dynamics.Young people are often reliant on adults to facilitate their access to natural environments. This often happens through supervised visits which are dependent on transport provision whereby the parents drive or take the children to the countryside as a recreational activity. Much has been written in increasingly anxious tones about the growing disconnect between children in urban areas and wild nature which Louv (2005) influentially termed “Nature Deficit-Disorder”. As there is increasing evidence showing the link between time spent outdoors in greenspaces and our physical and mental health (Kahn & Kellert, 2002; Bird, 2007; van den Berg et al., 2016) this lack of real engagement with reality is worrying. Even though later writers have offered critiques of the message Louv's book espoused (e.g. Dickinson, 2013), it remains influential; for example, the UK's National Trust charity heavily promotes a range of outdoor play activities for children (Percival, 2016), with similar schemes developed by the US Forest Service (Kimbell, Schuhmann, & Brown, 2009). It is certainly true that in highly urbanised developed countries such as Japan and the UK, the size of children's home range and unsupervised engagement in outdoor play has plummeted within a single generation (Witten et al., 2013; Woolley & Griffin, 2015). Reasons for this are complex and multifaceted but fears associated with high levels of road traffic, stranger-danger and risk-averse societies have been postulated by social scientists (O'Brien, Jones, & Sloan, 2000).At the same time as this sharp decline in youth's outdoor activity (Pergams & Zaradic, 2006, 2008) there has been a concomitant rise in time spent on technology-enabled play – particularly using computers, tablets and internet-enabled mobile phones. This ‘gamification’ is discussed within the context of conservation science by Fletcher (2017), Sandbrook et al. (2015) and Büscher (2013) who provide useful contributions to the theoretical debate underlying this field. Some researchers believe that this disconnect between people and Nature is creating a generation which is less aware of its intimate dependence on the natural world and the vital ecosystem services it provides to support their existence (Kareiva, 2008; Soga & Gaston, 2016). This in turn, may lead to disinterest and disengagement from pressing environmental problems such as pollution, biodiversity loss and degradation of the physical environment for all species on the planet, not just our own (Sandbrook et al., 2015).
1.3. Landscapes and computer gamesComputer gaming offers digital landscape experiences where young people are right at the forefront. Many young adults spend a large part of their free time immersed within these highly-technologized and idealised game-worlds (McGonigal, 2011; Rideout, Foehr, & Roberts, 2010). These virtual landscapes are designed to be inhabited and traversed by those virtual characters playing the game (Martin, 2011). Indeed (Aarseth, 2000, p. 163), argues that computer games are “preoccupied with space” and that one of the defining elements in computer games is spatiality. A significant number of these games are rooted firmly in fantasy and story-telling with imaginary lands recreated for artistic effect.It is sometimes a shock for older generations, who do not have frequent contact with young people, to grasp the cultural significance of computer games in their daily lives. Computer gaming is the fastest growing cultural industry in the industrialized world and an established part of everyday life for many (Aarseth, 2000; Quandt et al., 2015; McGonigal, 2011). It has been recently estimated that between 2.2 and 2.6 billion people play computer games globally with a market worth over $100 billion per annum (UKIE, 2017). In the mature markets of the Europe, US, Japan and China, the figures are startling; for example, in the US 64% of the population aged 13 + play computer games (UKIE, 2017). It is not however, an activity confined to just young people (Williams, Yee, & Caplan, 2008; Pearce, 2008), in the US the average age of gamers is currently 35, whilst in the UK, of those who play at least once a month, 22% are over the age of 50. Once seen as an alternative activity for socially awkward teenagers (Griffiths, Davies, & Chappell, 2003), it is now as mainstream as television viewing for many.
1.4. Overall aim and research questionsIt is clear, that for many young people their exploration of landscape takes place within the digital world rather than through first-hand experience. This creates challenges for landscape researchers whose task is to evaluate the reality of the here and now. For some young people, the time spent playing computer games far outweighs the time spent exploring the reality of their local outdoor environments. A recent survey of children in the UK aged between 8 and 15, found that on average they spent less than 16 min per day in outdoor locations such as parks or the countryside (ONS, 2018). This emerging disconnect between young people and their physical environments needs to be recognised by policymakers and land managers to avoid disenfranchisement of a key societal group. Young peoples' views are valid, important and need to be captured. Therefore, our research response was to create a ‘games-designed’ version of a representative 1 km2 of the Welsh landscape and use it to assess whether this virtual world could target these under-represented audiences for landscape quality assessment. We explored three questions:1.Can game landscapes engage the missing “young-voice” in landscape evaluations?2.Is it possible to represent the reality of generic landscape vistas using the Welsh landscape as a case study?3.Does familiarity with virtual reality environments impact on overall landscape ratings?
