An important role of prosody in speech processing is that it guides the division of the continuous stream of speech into smaller units that can be processed separately. Prosody allows the listener to find sentence boundaries, phrase boundaries and sometimes even word boundaries. The listener needs these boundaries in order to reduce the number of competing representations of the incoming structures he has to entertain in working memory (e.g. Van Heuven, 1994, Gussenhoven, 2015). Prosody is a safety catch for the native listener. The native listener will trust prosodic information more than poorly defined segments because experience has taught the native listener that prosody is more robust against noise and distortion than segmental information (Van Heuven, 2008, Van Heuven, 2017). This principle works for the understanding of native speech in noise, for filtered speech, and for distorted native speech. But the strategy will fail when the speech is foreign accented. For this reason it is important for non-native speakers with poor-quality segments to at least get the prosody right (Van Heuven, 2008, Cutler and McQueen, 2014). Native English listeners will search the wrong part of their mental lexicon if the foreign speaker misstresses the word (Van Heuven 2017) and the result will often be that word recognition fails.
An important point to consider is that the importance of prosody teaching for learners of English as a foreign language (EFL) should differ depending on the learner's L1. If the prosodic system of English and that of the L1 are rather similar, there is less need to teach prosody. If the systems are quite different, then prosody teaching will be crucial (e.g. Yenkimaleki and Van Heuven, 2016b, Yenkimaleki and Van Heuven, 2018). This is the case for Farsi and English, since word stress is fixed in the vast majority of vocabulary in Farsi but it is complex and weight sensitive in English. Also, the rhythmic structure in Farsi is syllable timed and in English it is stress timed (for details of prosody differences between English and Farsi see Yenkimaleki 2016).
Pronunciation-related issues such as comprehensibility, non-native accent, word stress and sentence stress in English language teaching are crucial to many questions in applied linguistics. A systematic investigation of how technological tools can be incorporated in solving these issues for EFL learners from different language backgrounds would therefore be of interest to a vast group of language learners. Some studies (e.g. Kawai and Hirose, 2000, Cauldwell, 2002, Hardison, 2004, Kaltenboeck, 2002, Levis and Pickering, 2004, Levis, 2007) into computer-assisted pronunciation teaching suggest that technological tools can be effective in addressing the pronunciation problems of students. But none of these studies compared the relative contribution of computer assisted prosody teaching (CAPT) with instructor based prosody teaching (IBPT) systematically, specifically the important issue of speaking and listening skills for interpreter trainees.
The present study begins by examining the importance of prosody training in developing speaking skills for interpreter trainees. Next, we review different studies about CAPT and its merits and demerits for pedagogical purposes in teaching prosodic features. We also discuss some key studies on explicit teaching of prosody by instructors in recent years. In our research, we address the issue of prosody training in developing speaking skills for interpreter trainees: whether training can be effective if it is done through CAPT or if it is done by instructors (IBPT). In doing so, we offer suggestions that policy makers and practitioners should observe and understand in the choice of effective methods in teaching prosody for interpreter trainees.
