Eliminating terrorism is one of topical themes for human development in the future. How to explore the essence of terrorism and terrorist organizations? How to control and avoid terrorist attacks effectively? How to safeguard social order and stability? A series of urgent problems about anti-terrorism should be researched in depth by innumerable scholars, academic industries and governments. Historical phases can show the development progress and variation tendency of terrorism intuitively. Therefore, it is usually regarded as analytical tool to support relevant prior information for decision makers (government, military and academic institutions). Research on historical phase division is very meaningful and meritorious.
1.1. Literature reviewIn the recent period, some issues about terrorism have been analyzed widely by scholars from different perspectives. Dai et al. [1] explained the relationship between the average salary of CEO and geographical location of terrorist attacks by multiple measurement methods in his paper. If companies located in the regions with terrorist attacks frequently, CEOs should obtain high salaries and development prospects. Jian et al. [2] introduced database of extreme religious terrorism in China. Scholars concentrate on the motive of terrorist attacks. The legislation models were set up to reduce or avoid related crimes. On the basis of terrorism database, Ramiah et al. [3] analyzed the relationship between terrorism attacks and commodity market. The research method of Brown and Warner was expanded to estimate risks and returns of commodity market. Jaspersen et al. [4] analyzed terrorist attacks database by adaptive learning theory model. The Luce model was used to simulate the adaptive behavior of terrorism organizations. It can provide relevant knowledge about the convergence process of conflict game by correcting parameters of models. Hausken et al. [5] simulated some dynamic relationship between labor and capital by differential equation model, which was applied to discover the coexistence relationship between terrorism organizations and government.In above papers, major of scholars focused on some views, including the progress of eliminating terrorist organizations, intervention extent of governments, action time and locations. However, when facing terrorism issue of long history, there is no effective method to divide time period that make relative research difficult. Some novel methods based on time-series network theory attracted the interest of many scholars [53], [54], [55], [56], [57], [58], [59], [60], [61], [62], [63], [64], [65], [66]. Historical information is a special type data with time-series relationship. Therefore,we select time-series complex networks as entry point to explore historical phases division method.Lacasa et al. [6] first proposed the Visibility Graph model (VG). The VG model was used to analyze dynamic structure of time-series networks. Recently, some scholars improved VG model by their original works. In 2019, Pella [7] proposed a novel algorithm by horizontal visibility graphs (HVG). Directional gradient was introduced into model of HVG. It revealed structure characters of underlying sequence data. The mapping relationship were extended ultimately between degree sequence of HVG and adjacency matrix.In application fields, some scholars solved some cases of time-series network by VG model, including energy, climate, architecture and environmental pollution. From perspective of visibility graph, Fan et al. [8] investigated and analyzed dynamic changes of coal prices. Cabezas et al. [9] considered issue of air pollution by VG model. Information of tropospheric ozone were transformed into complex networks. The parameters are contrasted to analyze environmental distinction between urban and rural areas, such as degree, centrality and shortest path and so on. Yu et al. [10] proposed an analysis method of directional finite visibility graph. It was used to observe dynamic regional relationship of sea surface temperature (SST). Variability SST is closely related to the El Nino event by analyzing of SST time series information. In 2019, Zhou et al. [11] investigated tunnel sequential parameters for architecture field by VG model, which can boost the performance, efficiency and safety of construction site.In above-mentioned cases, there are some universal core ideas. Firstly, time-series database are converted into adjacency matrix of networks. Then, application issues are analyzed by related theory of complex network. Due to historical information satisfies time-series conditions, it can be transformed into an application of community detection.The goal of community detection algorithms is to discover some structure patterns of complex networks. Nodes are assigned into different categories by their approximation extent or similar features.Girvan and Newman [12] proposed a fast and efficiency community algorithm (FAST). On the basis of hierarchical structure, similarity or connection strength between nodes is regarded as each node’s feature. Nodes are allocated into different communities by optimization criteria of modularity. Fast can adapt to time series hierarchical structure to obtain better detection accuracy.Shi et al. [13] proposed a classical community detection algorithm by genetic principle (GA). The framework of genetic algorithm has some essential contents, which contains populations (community), parameters update strategy, evaluation standards, mutation and crossover operator. Modularity is usually regarded as fitness function. Community attributes or labels are distinguished through neighbor coding patterns. Pizzuti et al. [14] proposed a multi-objective genetic algorithm (MOGA-Net). According to hierarchical structure levels, nodes are classified to explore optimal clustering results by modularity objective function. Gong et al. [15] proposed an improved genetic algorithm (Meme-Net). Some of optimal parameters are selected to obtain the best classification results by uphill strategy and optimization function.Shi et al. [16] proposed an evolutionary algorithm by multiple-objective functions (MOCD). The optimal classification results are obtained by analyzing different objective functions. Gong et al. [17] presented a multi-objective decomposition evolutionary algorithm (MOEAD-Net). The issue of community detection is taken as multi-objective optimization problem. Objective functions are optimized by degree density, which can maximize degree of internal nodes in each community. Meanwhile, degree among nodes belonging to different community is reduced to enlarge discrimination among communities. Zou et al. [18] improved multi-objective community detection algorithm (MODBSA). Discrete backtracking strategy is introduced into objective functions. The update methods of nodes are redesigned by network topology.Raghavan et al. [19] proposed label propagation algorithm (LPA). The idea of LPA is to judge labels consistency of each node and its neighbor nodes by comparing evaluation criteria. Nodes are reallocated among communities iteratively until entire network satisfies cut-off conditions. Lou et al. [20] introduced weight coefficient into label propagation algorithm (CNPE-LPA). The weight of neighbor nodes is controlled by entropy information principle, which can form an adaptive weighting detection method.Bai et al. [21] proposed an overlapping community detection method based on density peaks model (OCDDP). The density distribution of networks is calculated to obtain key nodes. The key nodes are cluster centers of communities. Non-key nodes are allocated reasonably by similarity distance and membership vector, especially for nodes belonging to multiple communities. OCDDP can select core nodes of overlapping communities accurately, and classify nodes quickly. It can adapt to different types or scales of overlapping networks. Deng et al. [22] proposed a community detection algorithm by improved density peak model (IDPM). The comprehensive similarity among nodes is calculated. The key nodes list is obtained by improving density peak model. Nodes with diversity are selected to modify their community attributes until overall network is stable by adjusting parameters.
1.2. ContributionIt is difficult to disassemble period for long historical progress accurately and reasonably. The same is obstacle for global terrorism history. Because there is no regularity of attacked incidents. The traditional method maybe leads to confusion division results by years, months, and weeks. It is not beneficial to subsequent analysis. Therefore, terrorism history should be divided into several periods by time segmentation algorithms. Compared to related research, we first change breakthrough direction to solve the disturbance of issue by complex network theory.The innovations and contribution of proposed method focus on three main contents, including time-series complex network, ILD-BNR method and information analysis of attacked incidents. a) Establishment of time-series network. We first propose an view that the number of incidents is treated as breakthrough point to extract the feature of terrorism database. Considering correlation extent among time-series nodes, visibility restrictive model is used to reassign connecting relationship and form adjacency matrix of complex network. b) ILD-BNR method. According to requirement of application, we revise local density model and selection pattern of core nodes. The improved local density operator is used to obtain core nodes of networks, which are served as centers of basic communities. Then, initial fusion of basic communities is finished. The attributes of unstable nodes are reallocated until networks are steady. Finally, we propose a novel retrieval pattern of optimal modularity. Optimal clustering results of networks are obtained by bi-directional neighbor retrieve. c) Information analysis. Networks of threatened countries are executed by ILD-BNR methods. Furthermore, historical progress is divided into several periods by classification results. Finally, incidents feature of each phase is analyzed in details, including terrorist organizations, attacked targets, weapons, casualty and core time etc.
1.3. Relate works1.3.1. Local density operatorThere are some classical and effective frameworks of clustering algorithms, which is used to discover structure relationship among points in data set. The influence extent of each point is usually discussed to form centrality of categories. Therefore, large of scholars have researched on the influence extent of data points thoroughly [23], [24], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], [49], [50], [51], [52].Li et al. [25] proposed the concept of local density. Local density γ indicates the closeness extent between each point and its neighbor points. Local density γ(pi) of point pi is defined as:(1)γ(pi)=11k∑mk(pm-p‾)2,pm∈Sk(pi)where Sk(pi) refer to k nearest points of pi. pm is neighbor point in Sk(pi). p‾ is the average of internal Sk(pi). If γ(pi) is high, it indicates that point pi has drastic impact on its surrounding area. Therefore, points with high γ usually can be reflected the macroscopical feature of data sets.1.3.2. Visibility graphLacas et al. [6], [26] first proposed the framework of time series analysis by VG model. Assume time-series vector Y={yt,t=1,2,3,…,N}. yt is the value of t time unit. Then, adjacency matrix B with size N×N can be formed by vector Y. Element yt of vector Y can be regarded as an independent node nt of matrix B.In adjacency matrix B, if node ni and nj have connection relationship, any node nk should satisfy the following condition:(2)yk<yi+(yj-yi)tk-tjtj-ti,ti<tk<tjIf Eq. (2) is satisfied in interval [ti,tj], it indicates that node ni and nj can be observed by each other. The edge bij of matrix B is 1. Otherwise, bij is 0.
