The genomic DNA of an organism, by means of the genes contained in it, encodes the information dictating the working of a complex biochemical machine whose aim is to produce proteins. In Eukaryotes, it is packed into the cell nucleus forming an extremely compact, three-dimensional (3D, for short) biochemical complex, known as chromatin. Its basic building block is the nucleosome, a spool-like complex composed of histone proteins at the center, with DNA wrapped around. Such a packaging process can achieve staggering 3D volume reduction factors. As well put in [1], geometrically, for Human DNA the reduction factor is as the one required to successfully store a 40 Km (24 miles) long very thin thread into the volume of a tennis ball. The role of chromatin is not limited to such a compression process, as it was initially thought, since it has also a deep influence on gene expression and regulation (simply put, the production of proteins and the regulation of when such a process should start and end for a given gene). In this respect, its role is so characterizing of Eukaryotes that gene regulation has a different logic in Prokaryotes, due to the absence of chromatin [2]. These fundamental differences are essential for Eukaryotic organisms to express genes in the great number of diverse patterns that are at the base of their biological complexity.
In order to proceed gradually towards the relevant issues for Mathematics and Computer Science, it is felt as appropriate to give a road map of the paper. With that objective in mind, some key biological facts regarding chromatin structure and function are highlighted in Section 2. It is quite fortunate that the past few years have seen some revolutionary advances and discoveries regarding chromatin structure, in particular with respect to its hierarchical organization. Although we provide a general picture of the State of the Art, we then focus on the first level of that organization, technically, the 10 nm fiber. Indeed, it is in the study of how that fiber is formed that Information Theory and Theoretical Computer Science have had the most impact. Consequently, Section 3 is dedicated to the presentation of State of the Art regarding how to obtain mathematical models that would account for the 10 nm fiber. The need for this type of studies was clearly stated and initiated over 30 years ago by Kornberg in a seminal paper [3], in which it is asked according to which mechanism (formalized via mathematical models) nucleosomes are positioned along a genome. From now on, this latter process is referred to as nucleosome positioning. Section 4 provides an additional level of detail in terms of computational data mining tools specifically designed for chromatin studies on the 10 nm fiber, which reveal a very rich world of “combinatorial messages” associated to chromatin organization and dynamics. Finally, the last Section offers some conclusions and future directions of investigation, highlighting the fact that chromatin studies offer plenty of challenging opportunities for Information Theory and Computer Science to make a real impact on an important area of Science: for instance, very little is known regarding the “combinatorics and mathematics” that could account for the higher levels of chromatin organization recently discovered.
