Cardiovascular disorders remain a major burden worldwide and are responsible for 30% of deaths in the world. Among them, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetic cardiac disease characterized by the thickening of the left ventricular muscle of the heart, and it is a major cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD), especially among young adults and athletes [1]. Most patients with HCM remain asymptomatic with normal life expectancy, but some of them may die suddenly of cardiac arrest with no previous signs. Getting a better clinical understanding of this heterogeneous clinical course and detect high-risk patients to provide them with appropriate treatment is therefore a challenge and a priority in the management of HCM [2].
HCM hearts suffer from structural changes such as hypertrophy [3], cardiomyocyte disarray [4], fibrosis [5], as well as ion-channel dysfunction [6], which may create an unstable electrical milieu predisposing to arrhythmia. In the past, non-invasive tools to assess the heterogeneity of the HCM population have been developed based on the electrocardiogram (ECG) [7], [8], but they lack specificity to identify the patients at higher risk [9], [10]. In the absence of reliable ECG biomarkers, conventional risk factors (non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, unexplained syncope, family history of SCD, massive left ventricular hypertrophy and abnormal exercise blood pressure response) are also used to evaluate the arrhythmic risk of the patients, and a validated HCM Risk-SCD prediction model has been proposed in 2014 [11], but still shows limitations [12]. Moreover, these clinical observations do not capture the amount of underlying myocardial abnormalities that may lead to arrhythmia, and the pathophysiological mechanisms that may increase HCM risk are still poorly understood.
In this translational case study, we present how the use of computational methods such as machine learning and high performance computing simulations helped improve the risk stratification of HCM patients and shed light on the mechanisms underlying the HCM disease. Fig. 1 provides an overall summary of the findings and potential clinical impact of the case study presented in this paper. In a first part, we report how the development of a clustering algorithm based on novel morphological biomarkers derived from the ECG helped identify four distinct phenotypes among the HCM population, which exhibited differences in arrhythmic risk and distribution of left ventricular hypertrophy. In a second part, we show how the use of high performance computing simulations based on clinical cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) images provided mechanistic understanding of the different ECG phenotypes, and helped to better understand the heterogeneity of HCM. This paper describes how, by developing novel computational technologies for analysis, integration and augmentation of clinical data, we contributed to advancing clinically-relevant insight into HCM and made a step towards individual patient management.Download : Download high-res image (590KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. Approach and clinical impact of the case-study. Using signal processing, mathematical modeling and clustering, we identified four different phenotypes in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy based on the ECG. This had a clinical impact by providing improved patient risk stratification. High performance simulations then investigated the potential mechanisms underlying these phenotypes. This provided new options for individual patient management and different therapeutic approaches.
