When asked about the inception of what is now considered a widely read and respected international journal in the field of rhetoric and composition, Beck (2013) described Computers and Composition (C&C) as a journal founded through collaborative efforts and pioneered by women with “feminist leanings” (p. 350). It was this “feminist background,” she claimed, that undergirded the exigence of C&C (Beck, 2013). At the time of the journal’s formation (as, initially, a newsletter in the early 1980s), several crucial shifts had begun to occur within the field of rhetoric and composition—namely, the “global turn,” to use Wendy Hesford’s (2006) phrase, and a heightened attention to the relationship between digital technologies and composing practices. These movements necessarily required an even more important shift, such as the move to reconsider the values and methods that defined the field and its scholarship. There was also a need for new frameworks and new voices—theoretical paradigms that would allow for a consideration of diversity and difference not as content, or the subject of scholarship, but rather as the “multiple perspectives; the complexity of layered voices; and the richness of difference” that continuously shape and reshape scholarship (Selfe, Villanueva, & Parks, 2017, p. 4).
Technofeminism was among these important early shifts, as it sought to bring attention to the intersections between gender, capitalism, and technology. In Feminism Confronts Technology, Judy Wajcman (1991) observed that technofeminist approaches “opened up an exciting new field in feminist scholarship” (p. 8). Since Wajcman’s groundbreaking publication, a wide range of technofeminist scholarship has been published in C&C, from technofeminism as a pedagogical approach (Haas, Blair, & Tulley, 2002; LeCourt & Barnes, 1999), to queer approaches to digital spaces (Dadas, 2016, Rhodes, 2004), to work on technofeminist reframings and rhetorical action (Frost and Haas, 2017, Gruwell, 2015). What was once a “new subfield” is now a thoroughly established one with a catalog of influential publications and a broad intellectual and theoretical range.
Technofeminism, however, was not the only feminist approach that gained traction in the 1990s. In 1989, critical race theorist Kimberlé Crenshaw argued that existing feminist frameworks failed to account for what she called intersectionality, or the idea that it is in the intersections of race, gender, class, sexuality, and other seemingly discrete markers of identity that we can see societal injustice and violence enacted differently; for Crenshaw, intersectionality points particularly to the differential imposition of power and state violence on women of color. Throughout the 1990s and beyond, intersectionality helped reshape how feminist scholars and practitioners understood overlapping issues of race, class, disability, and sexuality.
Yet despite the dual crystallization of technofeminism and intersectionality as critical frameworks for guiding feminist activism and scholarship, our investigation of C&C issues from 1989 to the present reveals a dearth of published research unifying these approaches. In other words, these formative frameworks have not been, for the most part, explicitly foregrounded in C&C, particularly within recent work centered on issues of big data, coding, intellectual property, posthumanism, object-oriented theory, and new materialism. C&C has published multiple articles that use the keywords women, gender, feminism, and/or technology, however, there are few explicit references to the term technofeminism and even fewer to intersectionality, although more recent work published in the journal (Dubisar et al., 2017; Gruwell, 2015) indicates some convergence between these frameworks. From 1990 to 2001, only five articles directly reference the terms technofeminism and/or intersectionality.
Our research suggests that feminist scholars working in rhetoric and composition, and specifically those publishing in C&C, have not yet fully theorized how and to what extent intersectionality can inform technofeminist scholarship, teaching, and activism, and vice versa. These matters speak to the exigence for this article. Notwithstanding Selfe and Gail Hawisher’s proclamation about the inextricable links between C&C and feminist values (Beck, 2013), we argue that technofeminism and intersectionality seem to have taken a backseat to emerging technologies and theories. Therefore, this article investigates the ebbs and flows, convergences and divergences of technofeminism and intersectionality by examining work published in C&C over the last two and half decades. In doing so, we address and expand a particular set of questions posed by the guest editors in launching this special issue: “In the 20 years since this work emerged in computers and composition, have we kept the promises of those early works? How have we extended their values and visions? What technofeminist work remains to be done?” In attending to these inquiries, we posit the absences of technofeminist and intersectional approaches, questioning how those vacancies undergird the very fabric of C&C scholarship and how we might work to incorporate these frameworks more explicitly and visibly in conversations about computers and writing. Indeed, we see this piece as a response to Hawisher and Selfe’s (2013) call for scholars in the field to reflect upon the past to chart our future by considering what both the presence and absence of technofeminist and intersectional work says about our field, our “values and visions,” and the “intersectional futures” we hope to achieve.
1.1. Positionality, Trajectory, and LimitationsIn considering Hawisher and Selfe’s (2013) call for reflection, we believe it is important to consider our positionalities as we examine the questions and conflicts at hand in this article and special issue. We write as three white, middle-class women in academia, each of whom has a terminal degree in rhetoric and composition and occupies a tenure-track position at a public university. As feminist scholars who specialize in digital rhetorics, we work to destabilize the political and rhetorical structures that oppress women and marginalized groups, particularly in online spaces. As intersectional feminists, we take up Kimberlé Crenshaw’s call for feminist reorientations that more deeply—and meaningfully—consider the inequalities of all people. This shared goal informs not only the core questions and assumptions behind this article, but also our call for more meaningful technofeminist and intersectional engagement across the field of computers and writing. These positionalities guide our research, our teaching, and our investigation into the technofeminist heritage of a journal that has shaped each of our experiences as feminist rhetoricians.We begin this work with a description of our methodology and methods, detailing the processes that enabled us to ask particular research questions and hone in on specific ideas. We next offer an overview of our findings to situate this study in a broader context of scholarship that productively engages issues outside of and/or beyond technofeminist work. In the section that follows, we articulate patterns and trends emerging from our data, emphasizing what they reveal about the feminist values, ethics, and practices of C&C. We then discuss how we, as scholars contributing to and invested in the work of C&C, might address these feminist values, ethics, and practices more actively and explicitly in our future scholarship.We recognize that our study of C&C’s feminist leanings is not exhaustive. In our attempt to assess the journal’s 35-year relationship with technofeminist influences, we plotted a mixed-methods study of article titles and abstracts, which we detail below. Although we recognize the potential limitations in reading only article titles, abstracts, and keywords, we feel that this was the most effective manner through which to gain a broad look at technofeminist and intersectional trends in the journal. Our aim was to assess the quantity of technofeminist-focused pieces and trace the influence of Selfe and Hawisher’s initial vision from the journal’s early days to present. Indeed, given the 35-year history of the journal, our study has merely scratched the surface of what is a larger project: a detailed exploration of a niche journal’s feminist roots and broad influence within writing studies. In doing so, our study responds to this special issue’s call to explore (re)generations of technofeminism while charting a bold, intersectional, and inclusive future for scholarship in C&C.
1.2. A Feminist Mixed-methods Framework: Methodology and MethodsOur methodological approach to analyzing the ways technofeminist and intersectional frameworks are both present and absent across three decades of C&C is informed by Jacqueline Jones Royster and Gesa Kirsch’s (2012) notion of strategic contemplation. They suggest that this methodological approach allows feminist researchers to carefully contemplate their data to “take as much into account as possible but to withhold judgement for a time and resist coming to closure too soon” (p. 85). Royster and Kirsch’s work guided our process of allowing keyword patterns and trends to emerge organically from the data.Royster and Kirsch described this kind of strategic tracing as “tacking out”—a process, they argued, that enables feminist researchers tosee both patterns and possibilities that may exist in support of knowledge creation and understanding—including the traces of a stream that may become visible when we stand back, observe, reflect, and meditate about the contours of various practices and the choices that rhetors make or might make. (p. 90)This process of tacking out is also informed by a critical discourse analysis methodology (CDA), an interdisciplinary methodological approach to studying the relationship between language, ideology, and power (Fairclough, 1992). Similar to grounded theory (Charmaz, 2006), in which the researcher observes and develops categories that emerge organically from the data-sifting process, these methodologies positioned us to tack out to trace patterns that reveal what feminist orientations our field values, how we talk about those values, and future directions scholars working in computers and composition might take.To tack out and observe these trends, we employed an explanatory sequential mixed-methods research approach. John Creswell (2014) described this research design as involving a “two-phase project in which the researcher collects quantitative data in the first phase, analyzes the results, and then uses the results to plan (or build on to) the second, qualitative phase” (p. 224). The first phase of our quantitative research began with a full-text search of the 18 terms listed below in the online journal database Science Direct. Because 1989 saw the coining of Crenshaw’s landmark term “intersectionality,” we began our search with this year and concluded with the fall issue of 2017, which was the most recent issue as of the time of this publication.•cyberfeminism•digital, internet, web, online•digital activism, digital feminism•feminism, feminist, feminist theory•gender, gendered•intersectional, intersectionality•inclusion, inclusivity, intervention, interrogate•power, patriarchy•queer theory, bodies•race, racial•rhetor, rhetoric, rhetorical•sexuality, sexual orientation•social justice, social media•technofeminism, technofeminist•technology, technological•woman, womenWe chose these search terms for two reasons. First, we felt these keywords positioned us to locate a broad range of articles published in C&C that explored issues around feminism, technofeminism, intersectionality, technology, and rhetoric. Second, these terms thematically and conceptually responded to the guest editors’ call to examine both the past and current “values and visions” of technofeminism and intersectionality. After collecting numerous articles, book reviews, announcements, and letters from editors, we removed book reviews and announcements from our data set unless the documents specifically addressed feminist scholarship, theory, or praxis.In total, we collected 454 texts from C&C. From 1989–1993 the journal published two issues per year, which increased to three issues per year from 1994 to 2000. In 2001, the journal shifted to its current quarterly cycle and began publishing four issues per year. To date, the journal has published a total of 99 issues. Once we established our data set, we used the data analysis software NVivo to run word frequency and word-count queries that scanned the title, body, and bibliographic references of each text. We began with the terms “feminism” and “feminist” (including plural and stemmed variations such as feminists, feminize, feminization) to establish a baseline for how many sources were using these terms, determine how frequently they showed up in each source, and identify which articles employed these terms most often.Our primary question at this stage was “How frequently does the term feminism (and related variations such as ‘feminisms’) appear in the journal and where?” Our search results revealed that out of our initial data set, approximately 217 texts used the terms “feminism” or some variation, with a total of 1,763 references to the keywords. In some texts, the word count was quite high. For example, Laura Sullivan’s (1999) article, “Wired Women Writing: Towards a Feminist Theorization of Hypertext,” used the word “feminist” (and related stemmed words) approximately 146 times, while Abby Dubisar’s (2017) article, “Haul, Parody, Remix: Mobilizing Feminist Rhetorical Criticism with Video” included 72 mentions. On the other hand, sources such as John Gallagher’s (2017) piece, “Writing for Algorithmic Audiences,” referenced the terms only once.In the following section, we offer an overview of our quantitative findings based on these keyword searches; we also discuss how these findings led to the next phase of our research.
