Fish counting is an important and necessary process in fish farming and must be carried out quickly, reliably and efficiently (Hernández-Ontiveros et al., 2016, Zion, 2012). Most fisheries adopt manual forms of fish counting that demands intensive human labor and is highly time-consuming. Automatic counting, on the other hand, not only decreases costs and time, but also improve the counting precision. The proposed system works in real time, but for the experiment in this paper, we use a database with several videos. There are several difficulties to accurately count, including the movement of the fingerlings, the overlapping of fingerlings, and lighting conditions. Fig. 1 shows some examples of the diversity of these situations.Download : Download high-res image (85KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Examples of image diversity. (A) Shows a difference in size between two fish positioned side-by-side; (B) exemplifies how fish can merge in groups visually hampering their identification; (C) is a setting with reflex on a water wave.
The Pacu Project is an important fish production company based in the city of Terenos, in the Mato Grosso do Sul state, Brazil. This company’s manager reports that manual counting demands generally six people to count fifty thousand fish in two hours and a half, similar to what has been registered in literature (Labuguen et al., 2012). There is no assurance about the quality of the counting process since measures for evaluating the counting performance such as recounting would be unfeasible and time-consuming. Thus, we have developed a solution based on computer vision to automate this expensive, tiresome and time-consuming process.
Automatic fingerlings counting can improve the development of captive fish farming activity and optimize the time for other activities. The obtained results were compared with the manual counting to validate the reliability of the proposed system. This level of precision in counting is important in the sales process and, according to the manager of the Pacu Project, the fingerlings are marketed per unit and not by weight in order to ensure a fair deal between the producer and the buyer. This form of commercialization occurs in several other countries as well (Salazar et al., 2015).
In this work, the automation of the process was developed using different computer vision techniques. Visual identification of objects, for instance, is trivial for humans, but considerably difficult for computers (Cutzu and Tarr, 1997, Pinto et al., 2008). The proposed approach develops a processing pipeline based on fish identification using blob tracking and mixture of Gaussians. And then tracking using Kalman filter to disambiguate the overlapping fishlings is carried out.
The contributions of this work are twofold: the description and evaluation of a computer vision technique for automatic fingerling counting and the synthesis of an annotated dataset with approximately one and a half thousand fish.
We present in Section 2 a literature review of similar works. Sections 3 Material and methods, 4 Proposed method report the materials and methods. The result and discussion are in Section 5. Finally, the conclusions and suggestions for future work are described in Section 6.
