This paper is situated in the context of the Special Issue celebrating the 50th anniversary of the International Journal of Human-Computer Studies (IJHCS). As indicated in the call for papers, the Special Issue is concerned with landscape papers exploring the evolution of research in areas relevant to IJHCS. Within this context, it is interesting to focus on the journal itself as a domain of analysis, to gain insights about how it has evolved in the past 50 years and what this evolution tells us about the research landscape associated with the journal.
Hence, in this paper we present an analysis of the evolution of the journal as evidenced by the associated scholarly data. In particular, we investigate how IJHCS, as well as its predecessor until 1993, the International Journal of Man-Machine Studies,1 have evolved over the years in terms of demographics, citation patterns, evolution of research areas, and other parameters. This work is therefore situated within the field of Science of Science (SciSci), the discipline that studies the interactions among scientific agents (Fortunato et al., 2018) with the aim of gaining a better understanding of the research landscape and ultimately using these insights to accelerate scientific progress.
In order to provide more data points to the analysis, in addition to studying the data associated with IJHCS publications, we also consider the scholarly data associated with the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), which is the premiere scientific venue in the area of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI). While the domains of CHI and IJHCS do not necessarily coincide entirely (in particular, IJHCS is an interdisciplinary journal with a broad scope that goes beyond HCI to include much influential research in knowledge based systems, knowledge acquisition, and ontology engineering), HCI has always been a central focus for IJHCS and, especially in the past decade, it is the case that the journal has focused more and more on its core area of innovative interactive systems. Hence, it seems to us that it is a natural choice to include CHI in our analysis, to provide an alternative viewpoint over the evolution of HCI research in the past few decades.
In what follows we will analyse the two scientific venues throughout their entire history: since 1982 in the case of CHI, since 1969 in the case of IJHCS.
