Computer simulation of materials is becoming increasingly essential not only for the discovery of new materials but also for a more fundamental understanding of the behavior of already known materials. In fact, to some extent, nowadays one can reliably predict the stable crystalline structures of a given substance at different pressures and temperatures, along with several of its physical properties, solely from the knowledge of its elemental composition [1], [2], [3], [4]. Two main approaches are commonly used in these calculations, namely ab initio (or first-principles) and interatomic potential (IP) calculations [5]. First-principles calculations are becoming increasingly capable of predicting a compound’s physical properties without any experimental input, given enough computational resources. However, the study of large systems and the simulation of events that span timescales larger than a few picoseconds are still generally beyond our grasp. The latter simulation approach, based on interatomic potentials, allows predicting the energy and properties of a system using much simpler mathematical models, that can be easily tackled by ordinary computers, even for large systems over long timescales. The bottleneck of this approach, though, is that the prediction of the structure’s behavior is just as good as the interatomic potential used and, therefore, the problem of selecting a suitable IP model and finding a proper parametrization is a prime concern. Simulations with interatomic potentials require a pre-determined mathematical model that describes the energy of the system as a function of atomic positions. Analytical models for the interatomic potentials span a wide range, from simple two-body models to more complex bond-order potentials, such as the Brenner potential [6], ReaxFF [7] and, more recently, the Gaussian Approximation Potentials (GAP) [8], to name a few. The model’s parameters are then fitted to reproduce some experimentally determined properties or a set of energies and forces calculated ab initio [9]. The number of atomic species in the material and the complexity of the model can lead to a significant number of free parameters. The high dimensionality of the IP parameter space is, by itself, a source of trouble for any minimization algorithm [10]. Added to that, the correlation between model parameters can easily lead to an energy hypersurface that has a complex landscape with severe discontinuities and local minima.
A third approach to the computational calculation of the structure and physical properties of materials consists of the use of non-analytic machine learning (ML) models for describing atomic interactions. In some implementations, the ML model is updated, on-the-fly, by new inputs from a first-principles calculation, making this approach somewhat intermediate between first-principles and interatomic potentials categories [11]. In any case, the problem of determining the model’s parameters is also high-dimensional and prone to the same pathologies of fitting parameters of an interatomic potential model [12], [10].
Local minimization approaches may lead to a set of parameters that reproduce the observables quite well, but as the minimum found is usually highly dependent on the initial guess, for such complex landscapes it is not clear if an eventual inaccuracy of the result is due to a poor analytical form or a bad starting point. Additionally, it has been shown that quasi-Newton methods can not only get stuck in but are actually attracted to saddle points, whose ratio to the number of local minima increases with the dimensionality of the search space [12].
By employing numerical methods that are inadequate to explore complex landscapes such as the parameter space of IPs may result in a poor set of parameters that do not yield the full descriptive capability of the analytic model being used. To exploit the full potential of an analytic model, one has to use a better approach to explore the parameter space. Global minimization algorithms are a class of techniques that can overcome typical difficulties encountered in exploring the parameter space, which almost always has several local minima, plateaus, and discontinuities. One class of the global optimization techniques, named Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), borrows evolutionary aspects from nature to explore the search space.
Evolutionary algorithms have been in use in computational materials science for at least 20 years, with applications including the structural optimization of atomic clusters [13], the development of new superalloys [14], optimization of catalysts [15], and even aiding the discovery of new compounds [16], [17]. Among the evolutionary algorithms, differential evolution is particularly well suited for the optimization of force field parameters. While other EAs perform well in tasks such as structural optimization, where the optimized parameters are similar in magnitude, some EAs may not succeed in parameterizing interatomic potentials whose parameters span very different scales. The differential evolution algorithm stands out in this matter because it operates on the scaled difference vector of the population. Furthermore, the DE algorithm adapts to the landscape of the objective function by varying the sampling along a particular direction when the population exhibits early clusterization in one dimension of the search space [18]. This property, known as self-referential mutation, improves the ability of DE in exploring the search space [19]. Not surprisingly, variations of the canonical DE algorithm are usually among the top-ranked EA in competitions over the past few years [20], [21]. The fact that differential evolution requires the tuning of just a few control parameters also makes it simple to use.
This work focuses on applying the Differential Evolution (DE) evolutionary algorithm to obtain the IP’s parameters that minimize a given cost function. In particular, we want to bring attention to the usually hidden difficulties and many pitfalls imposed by the cost function landscape on the process of finding the global minimum, and to assess how well the differential evolution algorithm performs in two different cases found in the literature. The difficulties we will report here reflect some intrinsic characteristics of the cost function and, therefore, are independent of the minimization algorithm of choice. The choice of the particular global minimization algorithm is guided by one’s understanding of each method, its adequacy to the problem proposed, and by the code available. We have chosen the DE algorithm based on readily available code and ease of parallelization in the Python language. The application of the DE algorithm is then exemplified by re-parameterizing IPs previously used in studies with berlinite (AlPO4) and zirconium tungstate (α-ZrW2O8) [22], [23], [24].
This work focuses on the Differential Evolution (DE) evolutionary algorithm. Given a set of observables, we want to bring attention to these peculiarities of the cost function landscape and to assess how well the differential evolution can explore the cost function. The difficulties presented here are a reflection of the inherent characteristics of the objective function and important to be kept in mind regardless of the minimization algorithm of choice. The choice of the global minimization algorithm is guided by one’s understanding of each method, if they are adequate to the problem proposed and by the code available. We have chosen the DE due to its readily available code and ease of parallelization in the Python language. Its application is then exemplified by re-parameterizing IPs previously used in studies with berlinite (AlPO4) and zirconium tungstate (α-ZrW2O8) [22], [23], [24].
Berlinite (AlPO4) is an aluminophosphate with a crystal structure similar to quartz, composed of alternating tetrahedra of AlO4 and PO4. In the work of Gale et al, the A and ρ parameters of the P-O Buckingham potential and the K parameter of the O-P-O harmonic potential were fitted while all the other parameters were held fixed in previously published values based on ab initio data [25], [26]. In their fitting, which used derivatives of the structural parameters of the experimental structure and the experimental values of elastic and dielectric constants, the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) algorithm was used to update the Hessian matrix and to seek for the potential’s free parameters that minimize the sum of squares of the difference between observed and calculated properties.
The second compound studied is the cubic phase of zirconium tungstate, α-ZrW2O8, an oxide with several unusual properties, including negative thermal expansion (NTE), amorphization under high pressure, relaxation of the amorphous phase with a continuous activation energy spectrum, anomalous high heat capacity and low thermal conductivity at low temperature, as well as stiffening with increasing temperature [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34]. Zirconium tungstate is a metastable compound whose crystal structure can be described as corner-sharing WO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra [29]. Computer simulations based on analytic interatomic potentials were first employed by Pryde et al. to calculate some of the physical properties of α-ZrW2O8 back in 1996 [23]. Later on, in 1999, Mittal and Chaplot conducted computer simulations on α-ZrW2O8 using exclusively two-body potentials and a core-shell model with a total of twelve adjustable parameters [24]. These previous works were able to reproduce, to some extent, the NTE of α-ZrW2O8 when using the quasi-harmonic approximation to calculate the equilibrium lattice parameter at different temperatures.
In this work, the structure and some physical properties of both compounds were optimized/estimated with widely used two-body analytic potentials for oxides, namely the Buckingham potential, complemented by harmonic three-body terms and the core-shell model of Dick and Overhauser [35] for the oxygen. We compare the previously found parameters with the ones found using differential evolution and map the surface of the cost function for berlinite as means to fathom the complexity of the parameter space. Furthermore, we explore the algorithm search capability by increasing the dimension of the parameter space of berlinite by fitting parameters that were previously kept fixed. For zirconium tungstate, we also propose a new potential derived from the previous ones.
