The phenomenon of big data is transforming the business landscape, impacting both the input data and the methods adopted for their analysis. The availability of unprecedented volume, velocity, and variety of primary data concerning individual consumers allows the extraction of information about consumers at a much wider and deeper level than before (Erevelles et al., 2016). The growth of available data, often of an unstructured nature, also calls for a new generation of analysis tools, turning investigation mode from deductive to inductive (Kitchin, 2014). A major class of data analysis today is represented by machine learning (ML) algorithms (Witten et al., 2016), and equally important is the use of advanced econometrics methods that support causal inference in natural experimental settings.
At the same time, a relevant geopolitical change is represented by the emergence of China as a major technology and market player. The synergic combination of these two factors – the increased availability of data and data analysis tools and the technological and market size growth – may fuel an extremely powerful research effort. In this article, we propose a view of the current research landscape on big data in China and highlight promising research paths for the near future involving causal inference.
1.1. Research questionsWith this general background in mind, we will explore three different research questions: (1) what are some of the core research opportunities in China and the Asia Pacific region for conducting empirical research on digital commerce that can take advantage of the new paradigm for causal inference that has become available; (2) what specific issues can be explored differently and more effectively than in the past; and (3) generally speaking, how does the relatively new availability of big data analytics methods that blend machine-based and statistical methods in experimental settings change the capabilities of research to explore and understand the inner workings of their research settings in greater depth? This direction in research is much different from prior emphases in data analytics in recent decades that centered on data mining (DM) and online analytical processing (OLAP), for which there was not specific effort put into the design and leveraging of natural experiments and causal inference approaches.
1.2. Research opportunities in China’s emerging marketsA huge and growing population base of 1.417 billion people includes a middle class of 430 million today and is expected to include 780 million in the mid-2020s (Kharas, 2017). The government-supported transportation and Internet infrastructure is further expected to provide capacity and sustainability for the development of the digital economy in China’s markets. Along with the penetration of the digital economy, the new technological transition is helping to connect the lives of billions of people and collect the digital traces of their production and consumption activities. This digitalization process generates massive data, and hence enables the scientific investigation into areas where it would be infeasible in the traditional economy.The attractiveness of the China’s emerging markets to IS researchers also is related to the following aspects of China’s recent history: geographical imbalances; and rapid technological innovation; and the growth of digital and high-tech entrepreneurship. First, disparities in the economy across broad geographical regions now provide unprecedented opportunities to study the impact of policies and information technologies (ITs) as an enabler in markets, and for improving the education and healthcare environments across regions. This is not limited to the expected disparity between the rural and urban areas. Longitudinal differences also exist, with China’s economy in the western area being less developed than in the eastern coastal area. Even within the same geographical region, cities are classified by various media publications into different tiers according to the development of their economy, their commercial market resources, education and healthcare environment, and so on.1For example, Tier 1 and Tier 2 cities historically pioneered Internet penetration and online shopping. The driving forces toward the digital economy are shifting to the Tier 3 and Tier 4 cities, due to the rapid expansion of their Internet and smartphone user bases, and their growing disposable income levels. In fact, in Tier 3 and Tier 4 cities, the business involving digital economy may encounter lower-entry barriers and less intensive competition from their counterparts in the less-developed real economy.Second, China has created the world’s largest middle-income class.2 This has resulted in forces that have influenced the development of global markets. With the increased demand for goods in overseas markets, cross-border e-commerce made up 7% of overall e-commerce spending in 2018 and is expected to exceed US$140 billion by 2021.3 The size and diversity of China’s middle class and elite have created the basis for the growth of diversified digital business models. They provide new products and services, trigger the formation of new business relationships, and result in interesting business and policy issues.For example, the ownership of user-generated digital items in online communities and virtual games, the liability of Internet and information-related service providers to their subscribers in the protection of intellectual property and cybersecurity, the sustainability of blockchain-related transactions, and so on. Many of these rising issues have never been addressed in past research or are unable to be explained by established theories, and thus invite extensive research with the combination of in-depth domain knowledge and creative data analytics approaches.Third, China’s emerging markets are not just imitating the business models in the U.S. and other established markets. They are moving from imitation to high-tech innovation through technology advances and transformation. Thus, the digital economy in China provides the promising prototypes for researchers to study the potential impact of mechanisms pushed by the next-generations of technology and platforms on markets and industries. These pioneering studies will be able to draw lessons, identify best practices and generate new knowledge for the interests of the other markets in the world. For example, the mobile payment (m-payment) platforms in China (namely AliPay and WeChat Pay) have leapfrogged the traditional credit card-based payment platforms. Following the huge success in China, m-payments have become more and more important in other emerging markets, for example, in India and the Philippines. As the next strategic transformation in China, artificial intelligence (AI)-based information systems (IS) are replacing the role of human beings in warehouse management, payment authentication, and transportation monitoring. It is foreseeable that the interaction and integration between AI-driven systems and humans will generate many research scenarios that deserve investigation by data scientists and IS researchers.
1.3. A proposed research paradigm for data analytics in Chinese e-commerceIn recent years, Computational Social Science (CSS) on the one hand, and DM, ML and Data Science on the other hand, have all risen rapidly as the new research methods for empirical research. For example, Chang et al. (2014, p. 67) commented in Decision Support Systems:“The era of big data has created new opportunities for researchers to achieve high relevance and impact amid changes and transformations in how we study social science phenomena. With the emergence of new data collection technologies, advanced [DM] and analytics support, there seems to be fundamental changes that are occurring with the research questions we can ask, and the research methods we can apply. … The changing costs of data collection and the new capabilities that researchers have to conduct research … suggest the possibility of a scientific paradigm shift toward [CSS]. The new thinking related to empirical regularities analysis, experimental design, and longitudinal empirical research further suggests that these approaches can be tailored for rapid acquisition of big data sets.”The combination of new perspectives on empirical research, along with dramatic changes in the philosophy of science for the discovery of new knowledge, play a special role in the broad area of e-commerce. Many potential benefits can be reaped in the collection and analysis of data by combining ML methods from Computer Science (CS), Statistics and Econometrics. Nowadays, data include both structured and an ever-growing portion of unstructured data (textual, image and audio), as well as secondary data in large archives and primary data from streaming digital sources. Those data can be used to establish the basis in overall research design from Social Science, so that causal inferences and original conclusions and insights can be acquired from very large datasets. We believe that learning will occur in the process of collecting data via machine-based methods so that research questions for a given setting can be evaluated with advanced models and computational methods, while preserving and strengthening key elements of theory development, hypothesis testing, and managerial interpretation.Our hope is that this research commentary article will guide empirical researchers in China and elsewhere in Asia and around the world, to recognize the opportunities to go beyond the currently established methods of survey research of behavioral intentions in various e-commerce contexts and traditional statistical models that only produce association and correlation results (Efron and Hastie, 2016). We encourage them to favor research designs that include experimental and quasi-experimental approaches, as well as the use of ML methods combined with explanatory statistics and econometrics, so that it will be possible to achieve retrospective and predictive insights based on causal inferences and the new ways to work with data. This will permit our philosophy of science for e-commerce empiricism to change in step with the times (Chang et al., 2014).
