Identification or counting of minerals grains in sediments or sands is a critical task in many scientific endeavors. In environmental science, some minerals can release toxic elements such as arsenic (arsenopyrite; AsFeS) or lead (galena; PbS) (Hudson-Edwards, 2003). In some engineering projects using sand as a building material, some minerals in the sand can cause major problems in mortars (Lawrence et al., 2005). In mineral exploration geology, the abundance of minerals such as gold (Au) or chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) in sediments or milled rock can indicate the proximity of a gold or copper mineral deposit (Averill, 2001). This technique is used on a vast scale by the diamond exploration industry, searching for grains of distinctive minerals such as chromium-bearing pyrope or diopside, minerals that are present with diamonds in kimberlite. It is at the base of controlling ore beneficiation efficiency in mining operation, where valuable minerals have to be concentrated from milled rocks (Wills and Finch, 2015). However, visual identification of minerals and the accurate estimation of their proportion is a lengthy, complex and an error prone task that has to be performed by highly trained personnel. Only the sheer amount of grains or particles to characterize (typically in the order of200 000 to be statistically representative) render the operation tedious and time consuming. Two approaches are typically used to identify and characterize minerals grains in sediments or milled rocks: visual sorting with optical microscopy and automated Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Gottlieb et al., 2000, Sutherland and Gottlieb, 1991). Techniques such as chemical analysis and X-ray diffraction of sands or milled rocks will not provide a real mineral count. In the case of optical microscopy a highly qualified mineralogist will identify each individual mineral grain in a Petri dish at a typical rate of 60 grains per minute. It is a tedious work that needs lot of attention where any minute distraction can ruin a day’s work. Also, it provides grain percentage instead of area percentage (Nie and Peng, 2014). The main drawbacks of the optical approach are the fatigue of highly qualified personnel leading to misidentification of minerals due to their lack of distinctive features and their small size. Alternatively, the SEM produces images of a mineral grains sample by scanning the surface with a focused beam of high-energy electrons to generate a variety of signals. Those signals are produced by electron-sample interaction and provide information such as the grain surface characteristics by secondary electrons (SE), its atomic density by backscattered electrons (BSE) and/or the chemical composition (from characteristic peaks in the X-ray spectrum). Mineral grains are then segmented from the BSE or SE image, and an X-ray spectrum is acquired on each particle. Depending on the sophistication of the software used for analysis, X-ray spectrum can be deconvoluted into a chemical analysis and assigned to a mineral species (Grant et al., 2018). However, this technology has two major drawbacks, which are the price of the SEM (500 000 US$ to 2 M US$ depending on added options) and the long processing time for a single sample (1–5 h). These two cons translate into elevated cost and machine availability. For example, the fastest machine currently available can analyze a maximum of 40 000 grains per hour. Since approximately 200 000 grains is required to obtain acceptable statistical representativeness, the complete analysis requires approximately 5 h and cost 1000 US$ to process. Mineral exploration applications are particularly demanding due to the large size of samples to be scanned, and the large number of samples involved. In fact, the task is at the limit to be handled by current SEM technique. Minerals such as those indicating the presence of diamond hosting rock (kimberlite), such as chromium pyrope and chromium diopside, are visually distinctive, but not very chemically distinctive. And a single grain in millions of grains can be considered significant. Finding new mineral deposits is a difficult task because, among other reasons, most deposits are covered with vegetation or overburden, sediments from erosion such as glacial till. In glaciated terrains such as the Canadian Shield, glaciers have eroded mineral deposits and transported their characteristic minerals over a large area (Averill, 2001). These eroded sediments can be used as a proxy in exploration geology. Among those minerals eroded from a deposit, some will be diagnostic of the mineralization. The higher density minerals (above 3.3 g/cm3; named heavy minerals in exploration) include the most characteristic minerals of deposits (named indicator minerals) such as gold and sulfides of copper, zinc, arsenic etc. For example, a large number of gold grains found in heavy mineral concentrates within a glacial till sample suggests proximity to a gold deposit (Shelp and Nichol, 1987).
Considering that in both aforementioned approaches (visual sorting and electron microscopy), identification of mineral grains is done sequentially, grain by grain. However, the present goal is to use images of a group of grains made with a relatively inexpensive tool, the optical microscope, where all grains can be characterized simultaneously from a single image. In this context, only few researchers have proposed computational methods based on cluster analysis to identify minerals (Baklanova and Shvets, 2014) using optical images. Indeed, with the recent emergence of the machine learning approach, computer science coupled to an optical microscope might become an interesting alternative to the SEM. Nevertheless, the current works in the literature deal only with the mineralogy. It focuses on detailed description of mineral grains such as the color (optical spectrum) to compute grain size and abundance.
The work proposed in this paper aims at demonstrating that computer vision coupled with data science and machine learning allow to perform mineral recognition. Indeed, an RGB image is acquired representing the sample of sand grains. Then, the same sample is scanned with an automated SEM programmed in order to generate a mineral map used as ground truth for the proposed approach. However, those two images representing the dataset are still unfeasible for mineral recognition. Thus, we had to implement a sophisticated methodology lying on segmentation, feature extraction and data cleaning in order to make the dataset acceptable. Finally, the mineral recognition was tested using three popular non-parametric classification methods, namely classification and regression trees (CART), the k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) and the random forest. Also, the convolutional neural network (CNN) approach was used as a baseline to assess the performance of our approach.
The first contribution presented in this study is the implementation of a sophisticated methodology for the creation of an acceptable dataset. Also, it is the first time that such a dataset is created for mineral recognition based on traditional machine learning algorithms. Due to the sand grains distribution on the sample and their characteristics, traditional segmentation techniques, such as edge-based segmentation, do not perform properly. Thus, we had to implement an original approach which is the superpixel segmentation. The second contribution is the extraction of new mathematical features on each sand grains of the sample. Indeed, it is the first time that mineral recognition based on machine learning is done. Thus, any mathematical sand grain features exist in the literature. The third contribution is the use of a machine learning algorithm in order to clean the dataset. In point of fact, an important amount of data is mislabeled due to random and large displacements of sand grains between the RGB image and the ground truth provided by the SEM. These displacements do not allow applying alignment algorithms, which are also very time consuming. Thus, it is very important to clean data in order to make acceptable the dataset for machine learning algorithms. The fourth and last contribution denotes the failed of the CNN approach in the segmentation (with the purpose of mineral recognition). Indeed, using CNNs in the present study is not suitable due to the difference (alignment, missing mineral sand grains in the ground truth between the original image and the ground truth image.
To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that such a research is proposed to classify individual mineral grains with the use of such image processing, and the results presented in this paper prove the concept that mineral grains can be properly recognized by traditional machine learning algorithms.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a brief state of the art on the mineral recognition methods. Section 3 describes the proposed method to classify mineral grains in a mineral species. Section 4 introduces the evaluation conditions of the machine learning algorithms, and then presents and discusses results. Finally, Section 5 briefly draws conclusions and provides an overview of potential future works.
