Electric distribution systems have witnessed a rapid integration of distributed energy resources (DERs), including photovoltaic (PV) panels, electric vehicles (EV), and smart appliances, etc. The electric energy generation from DERs is projected to be 317,323 GW h in 2040 (D. of Energy, 2017). Among different types of DER technologies, the rooftop solar PV is seeing dominant popularity mainly because of its continuous declining in installation cost, and federal and state government incentives. For instance, in order to achieve 32 percent CO2 reduction by 2030, a goal set by the Clean Power Plan 2015, both federal and state governments have issued different policies to promote the distributed renewable resources, such as the Renewable Energy Credits and Renewable Electricity Production Tax Credit (Anon, 2019). Although the actual installation cost varies, it was reported that residential PV systems typically sized as 6 kW have an average installation cost of 2.80 $/watt in 2017 compared to 3.92 $/watt in 2013 (Fu et al., 2017). Another noteworthy technology that flourishes at the electric distribution systems in recent years is plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs). There is a clear trend of increasing popularity of people owning and driving EVs. According to the Global EV Outlook 2020 (Global ev outlook, 2020), sales of EVs topped 2.1 million globally in 2019. After entering the commercial markets in the first half of the decade, EV sales have soared. There were only about 17,000 EVs on the world’s roads in 2010, however, by 2019, that number had swelled to 7.2 million. The prosperity of the EV market is mainly dependent on three driving forces: (1) incentives from federal, state, local governments, and utility companies; (2) price drop due to peer competitions with current EV prices as low as $25,000; and (3) performance improvement of EVs brought by technological advancements which make many concerns about EV such as range anxiety no longer big issues.
The future electric distribution system customers are switching their roles from pure electricity consumers to prosumers equipped with different DERs, specifically, rooftop PVs, EVs, smart appliances, and other demand management solutions. Indeed, if properly managed, DERs of prosumers could not only bring significant benefits to the distribution system operations but also change how the retail electricity markets are cleared. Instead of purchasing electricity from the utilities at high fixed tariff or time-of-use (TOU) prices (Thumann and Woodroof, 2020) and selling excessive electricity at low feed-in tariffs via long-term power purchase agreements (PPA) (Research and Authority, 2020) back to the utilities, prosumers are exploring more flexible ways to achieve a win-win outcome via seeking a proper electricity price between the high TOU prices and low feed-in-tariffs for the benefits of both the buyers and the sellers. Different energy trading mechanisms and models have been proposed and analyzed (Zhou et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Abdella and Shuaib, 2018; Sousa et al., 2019; Park and Yong, 2017; Li et al., 2016a; Parag and Sovacool, 2016) in the literature, and several pilot energy trading projects have been implemented, including Piclo, Vandebron, SonnenCommunity, etc. (Zhang et al., 2017). Many of those energy trading mechanisms fall into two major categories: (1) Auction-based energy trading, which is similar to the wholesale electricity markets. A distribution system operator (DSO) is designated to securely and reliably operate the system and administrate a competitive energy trading market, while the prosumers or groups of prosumers are considered as self-interested market participants with respective economic objectives; (2) Bilateral contract-based energy trading, with the DSO only taking care of the distribution system operation, and not in charge of administrating the electricity markets. The DSO operates a platform where trading offers are posted, and handshakes are made among all the prosumers.
In this paper, a peer-to-peer energy trading framework for a direct current (DC) grid cell is proposed based on distributed ML techniques. A DC grid cell is defined as a building level DC grid penetrated by many rooftop PVs, EVs, and other DC loads of different prosumers, which is regarded as one of the future residential electricity delivery solutions. Such DC grid cells will act as building blocks to generate larger scale community grids by connecting multiple buildings, or even networks of such community grids. A DC electric power distribution system offers the ability to connect DC DERs within a grid at increased efficiency, power quality, and reliability, while minimizing the reliance on support from the local utility if adequate local resources are managed properly. However, in a smaller scale system such as a building level DC grid cell, first, it is hard to find a trusted entity to be in charge of the system operation or market clearing, second, the flexibility of DER connection/disconnection requires a plug and play operation flexibility, and third, the concerns about household privacy will increase if information is required to be submitted centrally. To enable the efficient energy trading inside such smaller systems, a fully distributed mechanism is a better option. However, challenges such as how to secure the operation of the physical system, how to guarantee the convergence of the market clearing, and what are the enabling techniques for each prosumer to participate in such energy trading remain major concerns.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the major challenges for a successful distributed energy trading solution, and detailed literature survey is conducted in exploring technologies to address those challenges; Section 3 proposes a distributed ML based peer-to-peer energy trading framework for DC grid cells, and detailed functional components are discussed; Section 4 summarizes this paper, and presents some future works.
