Image analysis and computer vision are powerful techniques that are already successfully used in a variety of fields (e.g. medicine [1], biomedicine [2], face recognition [3], environmental sciences [4] and economic areas [5], [6]). In the energy and real estate sector, these methods have not played a significant role to date. Unconstrained external views of buildings, however, contain rich information about e.g. the type, condition, construction year and also the energy consumption of the building, which can be extracted with the help of image analysis methods.
In the field of image analysis, there are already approaches that derive detailed and spatially coherent estimates of the heating energy consumption of buildings from aerial photographs [7], [8]. The present work focuses on determining the HED classes and construction age-period classes based on the visual appearance, which can be derived from unobstructed exterior views of buildings.
The energy consumption of buildings is usually determined with the help of collected consumption data or with (rather expensive) infrared thermal imaging [9], [10], [11], [12]. These approaches use infrared radiation to detect the energy loss of e.g. facades, walls, windows, doors, roofs, etc. caused by air leaks through gaps in the construction of buildings [13] and thus provide real-time information on the health and efficiency of buildings, facilities or processes [14].
There are a number of factors that influence the energy consumption of a building. These factors include, among others the condition of the building, the size of the building, the degree of re-development, and the parts and materials used in the construction of the building [15], [16], [17], [18]. In recent decades, a large number of regulations and design criteria have been defined, which have resulted in energy-efficient construction and buildings [19], [20]. As a consequence, the age of a building correlates to some extent with energy consumption.
The advantage of the deep neural network is that it is able to model high-level structural and semantic properties from the images. By learning a hierarchical representation, starting with simple shapes like edges in the lower layers, contour-like patterns for different building structures in the middle layers, the network is able to model high-level features and common objects and shapes typical for buildings. In the context of HED, such high-level features are the properties of the building envelope such as e.g. materials used, construction and facade features (e.g. historical building substance), roof, plinth, windows and doors. During the training, the network learns the relationship between the true HED classes and the presence of building features in the image.
The visual analysis of buildings from unconstrained external views of buildings, as used in this work, is however a challenging task. On the one hand, buildings can appear in various locations of the image, from different distances and perspectives as well as under different weather and lighting conditions. On the other hand, foreground objects like trees, cars, etc. often cover essential areas of the building.
The method presented in this paper is a first attempt to the joint analysis of building age and HED in a computer vision framework. This is a novel method, so far unexplored way to estimate the HED. Established methods, e.g. based on thermal cameras are most likely more accurate. Our approach provides a coarser estimation but at actually no additional cost, as only one image of the building is necessary. The results indicate that such a visual analysis could be a useful tool in the field of energy economics and may contribute to a more cost-efficient determination of the construction year, the HED and possible need for the re-development of buildings. Thus, our approach complements other existing methods and may save costly inspection time in future. In addition, it represents the methodological foundation for future on-demand services for building assessment by end users (e.g. cloud-based mobile phone application: Users can take a picture of the building with their mobile phone and get the year of construction and the HED of the building).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we introduce the relevant literature for our study. In Section 3, we show the method we have developed and applied to evaluate the data. The data set we used is described in Section 4. Finally, the results of our study are presented and discussed in Section 5.
