Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by the demonstration of social communication deficits in diagnosed individuals. The deficits in social communications may appear in nonverbal communications, such as abnormal use of facial expressions during social interactions. Facial expressions are primarily a physiological manifestation of facial muscles, which can reflect a variety of mental states, cognitive processes, mimicry of expressions, and other voluntary or involuntary motor actions. Hence, atypical traits in facial expressions may reveal useful behavioral biomarker and differential attributes that promote a better understanding of neurodevelopmental disorders like ASD. Facial expressions have been studied in a number of neurological disorders such as ASD (Stel, van den Heuvel, & Smeets, 2008; Volker, Lopata, Smith, & Thomeer, 2009), Schizophrenia (Hamm, Kohler, Gur, & Verma, 2011), Alzheimer's disease (Seidl, Lueken, Thomann, Kruse, & Schroder, 2012), and Parkinson's disease (Simons, Pasqualini, Reddy, & Wood, 2004). However, these studies involve one or more of several approaches such as subjective encoding of facial expressions, intrusive probing of facial muscle activations, or analyzing 'target' expression imitation skills of TDC. We believe that the recent advancements in facial imaging and computer vision techniques can provide more quantitative, unobtrusive, contextual analysis of facial traits as a promising alternative to current methods in psychophysical studies. In this paper, we propose facial image and computer vision-based novel experimental frameworks that may alleviate a number of methodological limitations and serve as a generalized framework for many of similar applications.
The organization of the remaining paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a background review highlighting the limitations in ASD literature and prospects of using facial imaging in this context. Section 3 outlines the experimental setup, human-study protocol, and the proposed framework for encoding and analyzing facial imaging data. Section 4 presents the results and Section 5 discusses the findings in the context of ASD-related differential traits, and the paper concludes in Section 6.
