Technological developments are rapidly changing learning and teaching methods, which are requiring teachers to lead with technology to support and enhance it before they arrive in the classroom. These changes include not only access to various digital devices in the classrooms, but also the increasing emphasis on preparing teachers to use the technology effectively (U.S. Department of Education, 2017). Unfortunately, most teachers struggle with incorporating modern technology into their teaching practices and acquiring an in-depth understanding to align certain technology applications to specific learning objectives (Cuhadar, 2018; Heitink, Voogt, Verplanken, Braak, & Fisser, 2016; Instefjord & Munthe, 2015). What is even more problematic and worrisome is that although pre-service teachers are more familiar with technology than at any time in the past, they are seemingly incapable of integrating technological skills and knowledge into education effectively (Mouza, Karchmer-Klein, Nandakumar, Ozden, & Hu, 2014). Consequently, increasingly more research has focused on the question of how teacher education programs can provide a technology-rich environment that allows teachers to integrate technology into teaching (Foulger, Graziano, Schmidt-Crawford, & Slykhuis, 2017; Instefjord & Munthe, 2015).
There are different terminologies used to define the ability to adequately use technology in educational practice. The terminologies most frequently used in the last several years include information and communication technology (ICT) competency, digital competency, educational technology competency (ETC), etc. (Instefjord and Munthe, 2015; Ritzhaupt, Martin, Pastore, & Kang, 2018; Tondeur et al., 2017). Although these terminologies have particular and different meanings, their utilization is usually interchangeable under similar situations. In this study, ETC is considered due to its emphasis on the pedagogical or learning uses of technology.
Pre-service teachers' ETC is different from ordinary technology users due to their attention to teaching and learning, besides the basic competencies of applying technology to daily actions, such as sending/receiving e-mail, online communication, and internet shopping. Several studies have been conducted to establish ETC standards for pre-service teachers (ISTE, 2012; UNESCO, 2011; U.S. Department of Education, 2017). Others have focused on developing strategies for fostering pre-service teachers' ETC (Dalgarno, Gregory, Knox, & Reiners, 2016; Mouza et al., 2014). The aim of these programs has been to transform pre-service teachers from passive users to active designers of technology. Additionally, limited studies have investigated the measurement of ETC. Common efforts have focused on developing questionnaires or self-reported instruments (Sang, Tondeur, Chai, & Dong, 2016; Tondeur et al., 2017). However, a small amount of research has studied portfolios, standardized tests, performances, etc. Therefore, this research attempts to fill this gap in the existing literature by developing different modalities of test items that effectively measure pre-service teachers' ETC.
1.1. The frameworks of ETCAs mentioned above, many frameworks are available to help pre-service teachers develop the necessary ETC that they should acquire. For instance, Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK) is currently regarded as the most widely accepted framework that can be used to interpret the competency of integrating technology into education for pre-service teachers. Mishra and Koehler (2006) first introduced TPACK, which has three teachers' professional knowledge components: content, pedagogy, and technology. However, in recent years, the TPACK framework has been shown to have drawbacks, such as having ambiguous boundaries and lacking discrimination amongst knowledge areas (Angeli & Valanides, 2009; Drummond & Sweeney, 2017). Due to these weaknesses, the TPACK framework seems to be inappropriate when discussing the standards and indicators of pre-service teachers' ETC.Some international and national standards have also been set to provide the framework for the educational technology of pre-service teachers. For example, the International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) has developed a standard for teachers to use technology in learning, collaborating, leading and empowering students (Smith, 2017). Similarly, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) released an Information and Communication Tools Competency Framework for Teachers (ICTCFT) based on technology literacy, knowledge deepening, and knowledge creation with six aspects – including understanding ICT in education, curriculum and assessment, pedagogy, ICT, organization and administration, and teacher professional learning – as a guiding framework (UNESCO, 2011). Moreover, the National Education Technology Plan (NETP) has set a national vision and plan for learning enabled by technology through building on the work of classroom teachers (U.S. Department of Education, 2017). To illustrate key ideas and recommendations, the plan involves instances regarding the integration of technology into educational practice and offers operable recommendations to apply technology and implement research that can support the effective use of technology to enhance learning and teaching. However, these frameworks were considered mainly in a conceptual sense and lacked empirical validation.Many field-specific professional institutions associated with pre-service teacher education, such as the National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE), the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA), the National Council for Social Studies (NCSS), the Council for Exceptional Children (CEC), and the International Literacy Association (ILA), have developed their own set of standard frameworks that relate to the educational technology that pre-service teachers need. For example, the NCTE Framework for 21st Century Curriculum and Assessment states that students will “Develop proficiency and fluency with the tools of technology”, which implies that teachers can plan, support, and assess their students' learning process with technology (NCTE, 2008). As another example, one specific indicator in the NSTA pre-service science standard states that pre-service teachers will “understand the central concepts of the supporting disciplines and the supporting role of science-specific technology” and “include science-specific technology … in the lessons when appropriate” (NSTA, 2012). In sum, these instances show that professional institutions from different subject areas have reached a consensus that technology plays a vital role in pre-service teacher education projects. However, the problems of ambiguous orientation and details that are relevant to the choice and application of area-specific technology still remain in these standards.Some Chinese experts in educational technology have also developed an educational technology standard for pre-service teachers that is applicable and suitable for teacher education programs. Its goal is to standardize and guide the training of ETC for pre-service teachers and to establish an effective format that could be applied to specific contexts (Ren, Yan, & Li, 2018). Following a review of the various ETC frameworks, while the Chinese educational technology standard has been developed specifically for pre-service teachers, it also more explicitly identifies the competencies that pre-service teachers need to learn and teach with technology. Thus, on the basis of Chinese educational technology standard, this study developed evaluation indicators and items of different modalities that assess the requisite competency for pre-service teachers in the final training test, which is used to help them learn how to teach with technology. By doing so, this study intends to offer deep insight into the level of pre-service teachers' ETC in terms of their learning outcomes.
1.2. Technology-enhanced testCurrently, the assessment of learning outcomes has become an increasingly important topic in education. With increasingly more educational tests being administered on computers and other digital devices, the comprehensive validity of tests has more potential to be improved. In addition, more useful data can be collected in the test process, which is rarely available or unavailable using traditional tests (e.g., paper-and-pencil tests) (Kuo & Wu, 2013). Hence, an increasing number of different levels of tests are beginning to take advantage of technology and adopt videos, graphics, and animations to enhance the effectiveness of testing and expand assessment standards (Quellmalz et al., 2013).The use of videos, graphics, and animations in testing, a category of technology-enhanced testing, has had its reliability, validity, and item difficulty investigated (Lindner, Eitel, Strobel, & Köller, 2017a; Lindner, Ihme, Saβ, & Köller, 2016; Lindner, Lüdkte, Grund, & Köller, 2017b). These researchers have reported that if the context of the scene was depicted by a representational picture in the item stem, the difficulty level of multiple-choice items would be decreased. In addition, Wu, Kuo, Jen, and Hsu (2015) found that the differences in the item difficulty between static and dynamic items varied with the task type. The findings of this study suggest that more attention should be paid to content visuals when designing multimedia items since they have more influence on the performances of examinees than context visuals. Using eye tracking, Lindner, Eitel, et al. (2017a) further evaluated the effect of multimedia in testing and observed that, similar to learning, presenting pictures in testing could improve the performance of examinees since they might function as mental scaffolds, supporting comprehension and decision making. These findings can be interpreted in light of the integrative model of text and picture comprehension (ITPC; Schnotz et al., 2014) and the cognitive theory of multimedia learning (CTML; Mayer, 2014), which assume that multimedia (i.e., text and pictures) entails choosing and organizing information from text and pictures into different mental models in working memory. Hence, when developing test items, several design guidelines derived from the ITPC and CTML should be incorporated to focus examinees' attention and reduce extraneous cognitive processing.This study aims to develop items of different modalities that can be used to measure pre-service teachers' ETC. Three significant domains were employed from the Chinese educational technology standard for pre-service teachers: (a) basic technology competency (involving technical competency and confidence with respect to using technology), (b) technology-supported learning (competency for resource access, collaboration, and data management), and (c) technology-supported teaching (competency for connecting technology, pedagogy, and content with specific teaching goals for specific groups). Rather than traditional text tests, graphics and videos are conceived as alternative means for more effective testing in the future (Lindner, Eitel, Strobel, & Köller, 2017a; Wu et al., 2015). Therefore, three different assessment modalities were developed in this study. The text modality is the same as traditional assessment in which the system presents multiple-choice, true/false, and fill-in-the-blank type of questions. The graphic modality portrays phenomena that test-takers can view and analyze. Last, the video modality displays contextual and lively information that can enhance understanding and support test-takers in imagining how to resolve a complicated task (Ackermans, Rusman, Brand-Gruwel, & Specht, 2019).
1.3. Purpose of the studyThe main purpose of the present study is to develop and validate a measure of ETC for pre-service teachers. More concretely, the following three research questions are addressed: (1) To what extent are the convergent and discriminant validity of the three assessment modalities supported? (2) To what extent is ETC explained by the three different modalities of assessment? (3) To what extent is the internal validity of educational technology assessment confirmed?
