Natural Language Processing is associated with natural languages and machine translation. It digs into the idea of how computers can help interpret routine sentences or phrases to produce beneficial outputs. NLP analyst plan to collect data about how people figure out and interpret language so that relevant approach and techniques can be created so that computers can manipulate and manage such languages to execute required tasks [1]. Applications of NLP cover a various perspective of study, for example, machine translation, multilingual and CLIR, speech recognition, artificial intelligence and decision support systems [2]. On another hand of machine translation is Computational Linguistics that is an integrative area of science which involves the statistical or rule-based modeling of natural language from a computational angle. It revolves around the domains of cognitive sciences, artificial intelligence, mathematics and theoretical linguistics [3]. Translation is the procedure of converting the content of one language to another, such that its significance does not change. It can be applied to written documents or in verbal communication. The primary objective of translation is to make the connotation of the source and targeted language equivalent. The importance of translation in our routine life is largely structural. Translation leads a path towards worldwide communication as well as gives access to nations to create relationships in order to lead towards technological growth, political and cultural advancements etc. [4]. All the important information for translation has been collected to translate the Roman text into the English language. Since Roman Urdu does not follow any regular standard and can be illustrated in several ways, so rule-based translation has been followed in for which dozens of grammar rules were built to implement them in a POS Tagger. Moreover, many words in Roman Urdu do not follow any specific spelling pattern and can be spelt in different ways. With a view to solve this problem, we have maintained a collection of the corpus in a knowledge base [5], in which maximum possible words are saved, and occurrence of each word in the input string is matched with all the similar words of our knowledge base.
Fig. 1 illustrates the essential steps and overview of the translator from the input source to output translation. Section 2 provides a literature review of Urdu language that we take as a sample to build Roman Urdu approach. Sect. 3, describes the method of data collection and construct a knowledge base model for a novel translator. In Sect. 4, the description of translator along with its components and how we process Roman Urdu data, normalization of text and translation from Roman Urdu English language is shown. Sects. 5 and 6 show the working of the translator with the involvement of constructed algorithm for Roman Urdu. Finally, we have discussed the results of Google translator and Transtech.Download : Download high-res image (60KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A systematic overview of Roman Urdu Translator.
Previously, no research has been done to translate Roman Urdu language to the English language because of no attention of research communities and lack of Roman Urdu resources like linguistic etc. Limited research papers were written for the translation of Urdu language into the English language which highlighted its associated problems. Most of them are focused on translation with specific wordlist one [6, 7, 8, 9]. The contribution of this paper is to develop a novel translator that converts Roman Urdu to the English language which gives the benefit to 11 million people. Key features of this translation process include:
•Spell checking with the help of a self-maintained dictionary•Learning and inclusion of new words into Knowledge Base•Urdu Parts of Speech tagging at runtime•Syntax and semantic checking of grammar•Corpus collection of Roman Urdu words•Context Free Grammar for generation of production rules
