Numerous efforts have been made in recent years to reconcile the concept of informal learning with formal educational models. In this sense, Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) provide the ideal environment to articulate these modes of learning. In particular, ICTs provide a suitable platform for deploying emerging learning process management models, while providing the resources and tools needed to exploit such emergent learning within the formal education framework.
The development of emerging technologies in the area of education, such as new models of education, advancements in social learning theory, e-learning, the development of learning networks, among others, requires the redefinition of the processes of teaching-learning, in a highly interconnected and constantly changing world, where contextual analysis is considered as a primary task within this process [1].
Emerging learning can be defined as a type of learning that spontaneously appears from interactions between learners, and between learners and learning resources [34]. In this case, learning is seen as a process that evolves all time, allowing learners to achieve learning objectives. For this end, an emerging learning management system systematically analyzes the behavior of the learner, in search of patterns of behavior, participation, collaboration, integration, among other things, to improve this process.
Emerging learning has been approached from different perspectives. This article adopts the notion described by [2], which proposes a learning paradigm called Connectivism. This paradigm considers that learning occurs in dynamic and non-linear environments (Internet), and is addressed using the principles of chaos theory. In Connectivism, the learners' behavior is related to the development of metacognitive capacities (“know where” and “know how” to transform), and the knowledge to be explored and exploited is called “connective knowledge” [3].
An essential aspect in the management of emerging learning is the definition of the environment where it is developed. This virtual space, in addition to be open and flexible, should promote the spontaneous interaction between learners. Each learner is free to incorporate into the learning process the resources and individuals that contribute to their particular interests.
A tool for the analysis or evaluation of the emerging learning must define at least two elements of management [2]: a model of interaction per learner, that is, the resources and individuals that the learner spontaneously incorporates into their learning process; a workspace of interaction and collaboration, defined by common interests or activities. In order to respond to these requirements, there are different proposals; in this article, we use in the first case, the notion of Personal Learning Environment (PLE) [6]; and in the second case, the notion of learning ecosystem [7].
A PLE refers to the set of tools, sources of information, connections and activities that each individual assiduously uses to learn [6, 9]. It is shaped by the processes, experiences and strategies that the learner can put in place to learn. A PLE uses the Internet and other technologies to develop the learning process [6]. On the other hand, the learning ecosystems consist in the incorporation of actors throughout the learning process chain, learning programs and learning environments, within specific limits dominated as environmental learning boundaries [8]. In particular, a learning ecosystem is a learning community formed by learning resources and groups of individuals, which can interact synchronously and asynchronously [7].
An eco-connectivist community refers to a set of learning ecosystems that evolve within a higher degree component, called knowledge ecology [9]. In eco-connectivism, each apprentice is represented by his/her PLE, whose properties evolve naturally according to his/her interests and environmental conditions. To achieve this, the eco-connectivism specifies a set of Data Analysis (DA) tasks grouped into three major processes [27, 38]: a configuration process, with DA tasks to describe the current state of the learning process; a stabilization process, with DA tasks to predict events in the learning process; and a unification process, with DA tasks to autonomously prescribe the actions that must be followed to optimize the knowledge ecology.
In a previous work [9, 27], we have defined a computational system to support the eco-connectivism, called ARMAGAeco-c (ARMAGAeco-c (an acronym in Spanish of multi-level autonomous reflective architecture for the management of eco-connective processes). In ARMAGAeco-c, PLEs are represented by a set of links corresponding to collaborative learning resources for reading, writing, etc. The interaction between individuals is represented by a set of nodes and links, called the Personal Knowledge Network (PKN). For the eco-connectivist configuration process, ARMAGAeco-c uses Web mining techniques; for the stabilization process uses graph mining techniques, and finally, for the unification process, recommendation techniques are used [47].
The main problem with platforms as ARMAGAeco-c, are the adaptive capabilities to adequate the context to the emerging learning process. An ecology of knowledge can have a great diversity of technological requirements. Each requirement seeks to satisfy the particular needs of the individuals that compose it. In the simplest cases, these particularities are related to the personalized selection of the elements of the PLE according to the learning style, but in more complex cases, there are parameters related to physical limitations of the individuals (e.g., visual or auditory problems), or contextual (e.g., the bandwidth available for the Internet), which have a fundamental role in the personalization of the learning processes.
To address this problem, we introduce the notion of Learning Object (LO), a configurable and reusable unit that defines different educational resources (usually, multimedia elements), whose metadata information allows determining both its pedagogical intentionality and the characteristics of the elements that it includes. This meta-information, combined with information about the contextual parameters of a learning community, together with a mechanism of reasoning based on rules, could not only allow the reconfiguration of the LOs, but also, improve the precision of the personalization. In this paper, we propose the process of adaption of LOs to learning communities based on these ideas.
In this way, this work uses a novel concept, called Adaptive Learning Object (ALO), which is an autonomic Learning Object (LO) capable of getting contextual information of a learning process, and adapts it to the particular needs of that context [10]. Technically, an ALO is a multimedia digital resource that contains metadata with its description, and is able to adapt to the context.
ALOs are important for the learning ecosystems, because they can be customized according to the particular characteristics of learners and learning communities. In a previous work has been defined MALO [36, 37], a system that allows the management of ALOs.
In this paper, we specify the DA task in the eco-connectivist stabilization process implemented by ARMAGAeco-c. In addition, we specify the integration of MALO with ARMAGAeco-c, in order to enrich the adaptive capability of the unification process. For that, we extend ARMAGAeco-c with a new technique of graph mining based on the notion of centrality [10], and the notion of personalization based on learning paradigms [11] (hereinafter, referred as the Apprentice Model, AM). Then, the previous information is used by MALO, to adapt the ALOs to a particular learning ecosystem.
This article is organized as follows, the next section presents related works about autonomic systems of learning process management and adaptive learning resources. Next, we present some theoretical aspects; afterward, it is characterized our approach, using the concept of eco-connectivist communities and ALO. Then, a case study is presented. Finally, our conclusions and comments about the development perspectives of this work are presented.
