In the last decades, the amount of deaths due to cancer has significantly increased, overcoming the number of deaths caused by heart attacks and stroke, as emphasized in the reports of the World Health Organization [1]. In detail, in several industrialized countries there are specific neoplasias with a high incidence, where an early non-invasive diagnosis and staging can luckily prevent bad prognosis in some of these cases. The three tumour forms considered in this survey have been evaluated among the top ten in the world for estimated number of deaths [2], [3]. This can be well noticed in Fig. 1 where, in 2012, the amount of deaths for liver tumour has been estimated at the second position all over the world, the amount of deaths for breast tumour is at the fifth position, whereas the number of deaths due to leukaemia has the tenth value in the world. On this proposal, a first basic concept can be pointed out: Image Diagnostics is a great choice for its high ability to stage the course of each of the considered three diseases, without being excessively invasive [4], [5]. In detail by considering:•breast cancer: (i) ionizing radiations during tomosynthesis examinations are more reduced than conventional Computed Tomography (CT) [6], [7] where Magnetic Resonance (MR) does not use ionizing radiation [8];•hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC): in CT with contrast medium, the contrast medium is very characteristic and therefore able to reduce the frequency of subsequent examinations [9];•leukaemia: in the peripheral strips, the method of capturing the images is absolutely non-invasive because it requires only a blood draw [10], [11].Download : Download high-res image (186KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Estimated number of deaths caused by tumours worldwide in 2012 [2].
Medical imaging is a fundamental methodology for representing the internal organs of the human body, allowing non-invasive and accurate diagnosis of several diseases, including neoplasias [12], [13]. On this proposal, it should be pointed out that there are different imaging techniques able to highlight the characteristics of the human body, on the basis of the sensors used to acquire information and produce the representation of each internal organ. Moreover, beside the diagnostic capabilities, medical imaging is also crucial for staging and monitoring the clinical course of each disease under investigation [14], [15], [16].
All the previously described advantages led the scientific community to study and develop a large number of automatic systems, based on medical imaging, with the aim of supporting physicians in diagnosing, staging and monitoring different pathologies. On this proposal, a large number of works focused on Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) systems can be found in the literature. Fig. 2 shows the number of publications per year from 2006 to 2016 in the field of medical imaging, highlighting the popularity achieved by CAD systems in recent years. In fact, as reported in [17], CAD systems can support clinicians in diagnosing, offering a cheap and suitable alternative to a double data reading, intended as a mean for reducing errors.Download : Download high-res image (204KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Number of publications per year from 2006 to 2016. Topic: Computer Aided Diagnosis & Medical Imaging. Indexes: SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, CPCI-S, CPCISSH, ESCI.
In this work, a survey on CAD frameworks for the segmentation and the automatic classification of images of tumours is presented. Existing CAD systems are herein analyzed by considering the workflows on which these automatic systems are based, starting from the acquisition methods, progressing to image processing algorithms and, finally, to classification methods. In this regard, recent works reporting a survey on similar topics have been previously studied [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]. In particular, [18] reviews various recent CAD systems used for the classification of liver diseases using CT scan images and summarize results of several methods. Conclusions of the analyzed work highlight that the described applications not only increase efficiency and productivity, but also enhance public health services. Then, the stages and the relative approaches used to detect and classify breast cancer by means of a CAD system are described in [19]. In particular, the workflow considered in this survey, that is composed of four stages, is described considering: acquisition, pre-processing/segmentation, features extraction and selection/classification. Since the reported workflow is very similar to the one considered in this paper, the approaches used for each stage are discussed and the performance of the analyzed CAD systems are investigated. In [20], a review on segmentation and classification techniques for MR images of the human brain is made. The authors propose a hybrid intelligent machine learning technique as a Computer-Aided Detection system for automatic detection of brain tumours through Magnetic Resonance images. The proposed technique involves a feedback pulse-coupled neural network for image segmentation, discrete wavelet transformation for features extraction, a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for reducing the dimensionality of wavelet coefficients and a feedforward back-propagation neural network to classify normal/abnormal inputs. Obtained results reveal that the proposed approach is accurate, fast and robust. Furthermore, in [21], a survey on the applications of intelligent computing techniques for diagnostic sciences in several biomedical image classification is presented. This study gathers representative works that exhibit how Artificial Intelligence (AI) is applied to the solution of very different problems related to several diagnostic science analysis. It also detects AI-based methods that are frequently used together to solve specific medical problems such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Artificial Neural Networks for classification and Genetic Algorithms (GA) or Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) for feature extraction and selection.
The topic of this survey will focus on the cited typologies of cancer, i.e., breast cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma and blood tumour. The motivations of this choice are several and could be listed as follows:
•detection and diagnosing procedures can reach high levels of accuracy for these kinds of neoplasias thanks to medical imaging;•acquisition protocols are shared, and they are not invasive;•an analogous workflow to reach the goal of cited tumour detection is developed, which consists of four stages: acquisition, segmentation, feature extraction and classification;•the described CAD frameworks share both the approaches used in the feature extraction stage: a hand-crafted one or via Convolutional Neural Networks;•analogous approaches, which are based on supervised machine learning techniques as in [22], [23], [24], are used in the classification stage.
The authors of this survey strongly point out that all analyzed and developed CAD systems have to be intended as important support to clinicians’ diagnosis, and not at all a substitution to medical decisions.
This survey is organized as follows: an introduction shows the common aspects of the three considered malignant tumour forms, among which the potentiality of early diagnoses, and the importance of staging. Moreover, the possibility of using not too invasive techniques is explored, as well as, the need of doing both a continuous monitoring and a periodic one and if conditions of familiarity exist, or what else. It will be shown that CAD frameworks for these diseases are similarly classified by following the same data processing chain both in literature and in some already published applicative cases herein considered. In Section 2 of this survey, the peculiar workflow needed to perform the automatic classification of the different tumours and shared by the existing CAD systems explored in this survey [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30] is introduced. In Sections 3–5 the existing CAD systems will be detailed, focusing on the cited cancers. In Section 6, the examined frameworks adopted in the literature will be finally discussed.
