The adhesion of microparticles to specific surfaces is a general problem in surface and colloid sciences with a relevance in a wide range of fields. A number of industrial process such as printing [1], steel polishing [2] and polymer surface coating involves an interaction between micrometer sized particles and flat surfaces. In paper making the adhesion between cellulose and silica microparticles is of interest for controlling the production process and understanding flocculation [3]. Measuring the adhesion force generated by certain surface-adsorbed polymers is important for applications such as the stabilization of suspensions, biomedical implants and industrial coatings [4]. Colloid particle deposition is a general method to characterize surface interaction between adsorbed protein layers through the observation of particle attachment to a surface [5]. Humidity [6], surface roughness [7], the presence of specific solutes in an aqueous environment [8] as well as several other parameters can influence microparticle adhesion processes, which calls for simple and effective techniques for their measurement. Despite its importance a high throughput and sensitive method to characterize microbead adhesion with an extensive force range is still missing.
The adhesion of living cells (that can be regarded as a special type of microparticles) has been of great interest in biological sciences due to its importance in key processes such as tissue formation and development. Cell adhesion itself is a substantially complex active biological process involving signalization pathways [9], numerous adhesion proteins [10] and further structures such as glycocalix [11] elements. Traditional methods for measuring cell adhesion rely on population averaging, however modern advances in cellular biology point to the fact that exploring population inhomogeneity is crucial for understanding in vivo tissue function and creating novel therapeutic and diagnostic methods [12].
One of the early techniques for the measurement of microparticle adhesion (including cells) is the shear stress generating washing assay, where a laminar fluid flow parallel to the surface is applied to the adhered particles and the fraction of the microparticle population remaining attached to the surface is measured. While these methods are relatively easy to execute, they lack the possibility of calibrated force measurements. Similarly, centrifuge based methods have been developed to detach a fraction of the particles, depending on the adhesion strength between them and the surface [13], [14]. Although this method can characterize the overall effect of surface coatings in some cases [15], [16], its widespread application is hindered by certain drawbacks, most importantly the limited force range and inaccurate force characterization [17], [18]. Furthermore, both shear flow and centrifuge-based methods measure the population average of the adhesion force of particles without the capability to target individual beads or cells.
In recent years acoustic force spectroscopy (AFS), a method using acoustic waves to manipulate surface attached single cells and beads has been developed and applied in several studies [19], [20]. In these experiments, acoustic waves were applied in a measurement chamber to lift up beads from a surface. This way one can stretch single DNA or other polymer strands in a precisely controlled manner as well as probe the adhesion force between living cells. While this method can achieve high throughput by measuring a large number of beads at the same time, the available force range is limited to under 15 nN [21]. Moreover, the perquisite for AFS calibration is a homogenous shape distribution which hinders the measurement of spread out, irregularly shaped cells [22].
Colloid force spectroscopy is a well-established method to quantify microbead adhesion [4]. It applies atomic force microscopy (AFM) to record the force-distance curves of the interaction of the beads and a planar surface. The measured particle is immobilized on the tip of the AFM cantilever by application of an adhesive coating. Similar techniques, such as the surface force apparatus [23], [24] and AFM tip functionalization [25], [26], [27] have been successfully used to explore the structure of noncovalent molecular bonds. Using high speed force spectroscopy Rico et al. [28] were able to map the loading rate-dependent unbinding pathways of the streptavidin-biotin bond emphasizing the highly complex energy landscape that a single binding pocket can exhibit.
In spite of the impressive advances of force spectroscopy, the throughput of most methods is insufficient for collecting data from a large population of particles or cells. Typically, the throughput of these techniques is limited to 5–10 measurements per day, being a strong limitation of in-depth characterization. The limiting factor is the time-consuming functionalization of the AFM tip as well as the limited range of movement of the probe making it impossible to cover sample areas of several square centimeters. Furthermore, most techniques focus on the measurement of single molecular bonds and cannot be readily adapted for the probing of microparticle adhesion with several hundreds or thousands of adhesive molecules.
A significant development to overcome these challenges has been the introduction of fluidic force microscopy (FluidFM) [29]. This novel technology is based on AFM cantilevers with an incorporated microfluidic channel ending in an aperture at the tip. The other end of the fluid filled channel is connected to a pressure controller unit. By applying a negative pressure to the channel, the cantilever tip can grab the microparticle eliminating the need for time consuming immobilization procedures. Using FluidFM, the exchange of the colloid or microparticles becomes trivial as a positive pressure in the channel removes the particle from the aperture, after which the next bead can be readily attached [30]. It increases the throughput of measurements by an order of magnitude. Helfricht et al. [31] demonstrated that the interaction of beads as small as 500 nm can be evaluated by FluidFM opening the possibility for measurements in the colloid particle size range. FluidFM is also applicable for live cell adhesion measurements, however, the throughput remains limited by unspecific binding of cells to the cantilever and the resulting clogging. An important development was the introduction of the FluidFM BOT technology, where the fluid force measurements and manipulations can be performed on mm-cm scale areas in a completely automatized manner [32], further increasing the throughput of this powerful technology
In the present work we introduce a novel method for the measurement of the binding/adhesion force of microbeads, based on a computer controlled micropipette (CCMP), potentially offering even larger throughput and upper force limit in an automatized manner. In our setup, a glass microcapillary is automatically positioned above the beads recognized by computer vision. The micropipette probes their adhesion to the surface by the application of a negative pressure. This negative pressure between the inside of the micropipette and the environment results in an upwards flow that exerts a hydrodynamic lifting force on the bead. In order to attain an accurate calibration of the hydrodynamic force acting on the particle, we devised a model system based on 10 μm biotinylated polystyrene beads attached to a polymer-functionalized glass surface through an avidin crosslinker. The noncovalent bond between the small organic molecule biotin (vitamin A) and the 66 kDa protein avidin is the strongest known non-covalent bond found in biological systems. It has been extensively studied and became a standard biochemical immobilization technique due to the possibility of covalently binding biotin to a number of different molecules and surfaces. We successfully applied the data acquired by optical waveguide lightmode spectroscopy (OWLS) to measure the avidin density on the functionalized surface. We used FluidFM BOT to directly measure the adhesion force of 47 individual beads. Detachment of hundreds of microparticles was measured by CCMP and the adhesion spectrum was compared to the one measured by FluidFM. The peaks of the histograms were correlated with each other to interpret the negative pressure measured by the micropipette. Such calibration of the CCMP enables the applications of this method in the field of molecular biophysics for high-throughput nanonewton scale microparticle binding/adhesion force assays. FluidFM BOT proved to be a high-throughput direct force measurement apparatus for characterizing functionalized microbead binding thus calibrating indirect force measurements.
