Collaborative problem-solving (CPS) is defined as “a joint activity where dyads or small groups execute a number of steps in order to transform a current state into a desired goal state” (Hesse, Care, Buder, Sassenberg, & Griffin, 2012, p. 39). CPS has become an essential component of modern academic curricula, used across primary and secondary schools to teach and assess the 21st-century skills of collaboration, communication, critical thinking, and creativity (Care, Griffin, & Wilson, 2017).
CPS activities are gaining increasing global recognition, with recent evidence suggesting at least 50 nations are progressively incorporating CPS into their curricula and teaching pedagogy (Care, Anderson, & Kim, 2016). Given this rapid rate of adoption, there is an urgent need to investigate the cognitive and affective factors that may be associated with student performance in this new CPS subject domain. In respect to the affective factors, existing research reveals that achievement emotions, understood as emotions experienced by students in achievement-related contexts, for example, while attending classes, studying, completing academic tasks, or sitting examinations (Pekrun, 2006), are particularly relevant to students' performance during collaborative learning scenarios. For instance, in collaborative learning situations including classroom discussions, small group instruction, and, more recently in computer-based CPS tasks, achievement emotions have been found to affect several aspects of student performance including the quality of the interaction between problem-solving partners, as well as the extent of the student's participation, attention, effort regulation, and on-task engagement (Camacho-Morles et al., 2019, Do and Schallert, 2004, Kwon et al., 2014, Linnenbrink-Garcia et al., 2011).
Given the integrative role of achievement emotions in collaborative learning, it is essential to investigate their origins and causes. While the last two decades have seen a growing interest in investigating the antecedents of achievement emotions, the majority of studies have focused on individual learning contexts (see Frenzel et al., 2007, Muis et al., 2015b, Pekrun et al., 2010), and have largely overlooked the role of students' emotional arousal process in computer-based collaborative learning scenarios. Some noticeable exceptions are qualitative studies (See Jarvenoja and Jarvela, 2005, Naykki et al., 2014, Robinson, 2013, Wosnitza and Volet, 2005) which usually focus on diffuse positive versus negative affect opposed to discrete emotions. Consequentially, the links between discrete achievement emotions and their origins or antecedents in computer-based collaborative learning remain to be explored empirically. A quantitative evaluation of the experience of discrete achievement emotions in CPS scenarios will allow for the estimation of the relative incidence of emotions in collaborative settings, and whether these emotional experiences are predicted by student's appraisals about the CPS task, such as the student's perceived academic control or the value attributed to the task at hand. The following discussion examines the role of academic control and task value as predictors of achievement emotions in more detail, with reference to Pekrun's (2006, 2018)) control-value theory of achievement emotions.
