Ultrasonography (US) has been used extensively in the diagnosis of developmental dysplasia of hip in the last 3 decades because the cartilaginous structure of the newborn hip creates difficulties in defining the borders of the proximal femur and the acetabular edge in an X-ray examination. Graf introduced a reproducible method for US examination of the newborn hip [1], [2]. He recommended use of the standard plane of the newborn hip and proposed a classification method for developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) according to measurements of the bony and cartilaginous roof angles. Graf refined his method by defining the required positioning of the infant and the US probe during measurement, and clearly explained the strategy applied in his work. Three intersecting lines are used: the base line, the line of the bony roof, and the line of the soft tissue coverage based on 2 angles, alpha (α: the angle of the bony roof) and beta (β: the angle of the cartilaginous roof). These 2 angles are used to classify the different types of the newborn hip [2].
Hip US is a noninvasive and inexpensive method that offers excellent results in DDH screening. Compared with other hip US methods to detect DDH, such as the Harcke, Suzuki, and Terjesen methods, the Graf technique has the advantage of being a numerical classification system [3]. The Graf classification is a valuable tool in both treatment decision-making and follow-up of affected hips. Unfortunately, a lack of experience may lead to high inter- and intra-observer differences in the interpretation of the alpha and beta angles, which raises questions about the reproducibility of Graf’s method [4], [5].
Computer-aided decision-making systems are useful tools for clinicians in the evaluation and measurement of medical images to help diagnose many conditions. There are few studies related to hip segmentation in the literature, and they have a limited scope. Most have concentrated on iliac bone morphology and only alpha angle measurement. Luis-Garcia et al. studied segmentation of the femoral head and the iliac bone based on energy function and texture information [6]. The research was an attempt to simulate hip anatomy, rather than a study of hip dysplasia classification. Hareendranathan et al. proposed a semi-automated perspective for the evaluation of hip US and developed a different bony roof measurement called the contour alpha angle using a graph-based technique [7]. They stated that the contour alpha angle provided a slightly lower intra-examination variability than Graf’s alpha angle. They did not take the beta angle into consideration. Golan et al. measured the alpha angle using convolutional neural network-based segmentation and reported a different metric to reconstruct Graf’s alpha angle [8]. Quader et al. proposed a different evaluation method based on extracted geometric features of bone and cartilage and classified neonatal hip US images as adequate or not for evaluation using a random forest classifier [9]. Although Graf’s method was defined for 2-dimensional (2D) US, there are also 3D US studies to evaluate hip US images in the literature that primarily concentrate on eliminating probe orientation defects and measuring bony coverage [10], [11].
In spite of the fact that Graf’s method is the most widely used technique for the classification of hip dysplasia, an extensive literature search on CAD systems for DDH did not yield any studies that retained Graf’s original method and fixed rules. There is a tendency to make some alterations to Graf’s method and use different approaches to define the hip [7], [9]. The most logical explanation for this is the complexity of the images, which causes segmentation difficulties. Although the criteria described by Graf for a measurable hip ultrasound were clearly defined, the demonstrations used in many studies lack important anatomical landmarks, and angle measurements were not conducted using Graf’s method. Many studies used only the alpha angle and did not take into consideration the angle of the soft tissue coverage (beta angle), likely due to challenges in the segmentation of the labrum and determination of the turning point of the iliac bone [7], [8], [11]. There are also 3D ultrasound studies in the literature in order to evaluate bony roof angles and handle probe orientation related problems [10], [11], [12]. Although these studies intended to assess bony relations between femoral head and the acetabulum up to our knowledge there is no numeric evaluation system based on 3D ultrasonograms.
Image segmentation is the process of sectioning an image into homogeneous parts in terms of color, texture, intensity, or another common property. The most widely used of several methods proposed to segment images is the active contours model (ACM). The main idea of the ACM is to define the borders of a region based on an energy-minimizing policy. ACM directs curves toward targeted features, such as lines or edges, by optimizing the interior and exterior force applied to the initial contour. The result is a series of shrinking and expanding evolutions that ultimately define the true border of the region.
ACM is categorized into 3 groups: edge-based, region-based, and hybrid models. Edge-based models use image gradient information to localize a region [13]. In the presence of noise or weak boundaries, edge-based methods demonstrate poorer performance. Region-based ACM is not dependent on the image gradient. This model uses statistical information from an image to evolve the curves, which helps to survey the ROI despite weak edges. Region-based ACM uses the assumption that objects in the image are statistically homogeneous. Medical images, however, are often extremely complex and include irregularities [14]. Global information-guided curve evolution of this method seems to be the main cause of insufficiency to solve local intensity inhomogeneity problem. Many local region-based methods have been proposed to overcome such limitations of region-based ACM [15], [16], [17], [18].
The existing local region-based segmentation methods still cannot overcome the segmentation problem created by more than 1 region in a medical image, such as a hip US, which contains many adjacent tissues of different intensities (Table 1).
The 3 primary concerns related to local region-based segmentation methods are as follows:

•They provide poor segmentation outcomes in the presence of a high degree of irregularity and complexity. The missing global information may render these methods inadequate for the desired segmentation results, particularly with locations such as the newborn hip.•They assume that an image has intensity inhomogeneity in the global region and homogeneity in smaller local regions. This assumption may work effectively when intensity inhomogeneity in the image domain varies gradually; however, US images create sharp variations of intensity inhomogeneity, even locally.•Local information-based methods may lead to a misclassification of images with overlapping intensities in the desired object and image background. The 2 indispensable keystones of the hip ultrasound for measurement, the labrum and the deepest point of the acetabulum, are susceptible to this problem of overlapping intensities.
To overcome these problems, a weighting function that uses the global and local variance information as a discriminating feature is necessary to measure the distance between the evolving curve and the object boundary. Such a complex model would be difficult to implement, however, and may even be insufficient to solve the problem of segmentation of the 3 different major target objects in hip images with different intensities and anatomical structures with both global and local inhomogeneity problems.Table 1. Comparison of existing region based active contours model.MethodsCategoryCharacteristics of methodsInhomogeneity Segmentation[14]Global region basedDependent on global information and location of initial contourNo[19]Hybrid (Geodesic active contours + CV model)Dependent on global informationNo[20]Hybrid (Snake Model + CV)More effective in localizing objects rather than defining edgesNo[21]Local Region based (Dirac Functional + region descriptor)Level set evolution act locally and has tendency to be trapped into local minima.Yes[15]Local region based (local mean intensities)Utilizes particular uniform distribution +increased computational burden (convolution operation)Yes[22]Local Chan Vese (LCV) + Extended Structure Tensor (EST)LCV uses EST in a fixed direction limiting its ability to differentiate between the bias and real object informationYes[23]Local region based + Texture informationDependent on initialization of initial contour.Yes[24]Local statistical analysis + global similarity measurement by Bhattacharyya coefficientsProne to failure in case when the intensity distribution of background and the object were exhibiting mimicryYes[25]Local region basedSegmentation success is dependent on the image natureYes[17]Local region based active contours model (RLSF) relying on local similarity factorRLSF is based on the local spatial distance within specified window and local intensity differenceYes[26]Local region basedDependent on initialization of initial contour.Yes
Zhang et al. addressed intensity inhomogeneity with statistical level set (SLS) method using Gaussian distributions of different means and variances. They mapped the original image into another domain using sliding windows [26]. This method assigns each pixel to more than 1 class, thereby creating sharp separations between regions. However, we could not achieve satisfactory results in the segmentation of a newborn hip US image with this method, most likely due to a local information-based intensity term, which is prone to miss some of the global statistical data. At the same time, an intensity term based on global information cannot capture the intensity values of complex, overlapping areas. The segmentation success of the method is also dependent upon the position of the initial contour.
A cascaded framework was proposed to achieve segmentation of the 3 major determinants of a hip in the standard plane US image: the iliac wing; the deepest point of the acetabulum, which consists of bony structures; and the labrum, which is cartilaginous tissue. The proposed framework was structured to capture global information using the particle swarm optimization (PSO) method and SLS method to retrieve the local information in order to adequately localize the 3 anatomical landmarks required to measure a hip US image.
PSO is a successful swarm intelligence-heuristic algorithm. It was introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 [27]. Since then, it has gained popularity because of its simplicity and computational efficiency. The inspiration for PSO was the social behavior of groups of birds and fish. Every member of a swarm, here called a particle, follows simple rules, building an environment of cooperation and communication that results in global behavior. PSO utilizes this behavioral pattern to solve complex optimization problems. PSO utilizes both personal and cognitive learning to calculate the possible behavior of each particle to solve a specific problem; knowledge of the fitness of each particle can provide a solution.
In the literature, there are numerous studies of PSO, including analysis, evolution, and applications of the algorithm [28]. Hala et al. proposed a cascaded framework based on fractional-order Darwinian particle swarm optimization (FODPSO) and a mean shift (MS) clustering algorithm [16]. The output of FODPSO was used as input for the MS to create segmentation of brain magnetic resonance images (MRIs). Patel et al. combined PSO with a fuzzy c-means (FCM) algorithm to segment brain MRIs [29]. They determined the number of clusters and their centroids with PSO and used these 2 parameters as an input for the FCM algorithm to overcome an initialization problem. A similar approach was used for liver segmentation using CT images by Abder-Rahman et al. [30]. Zhu et al. combined Wellner’s thresholding algorithm with PSO to find the optimum threshold for segmentation of liver cysts in US images [31]. In a study conducted by Tseng et al. multi-population PSO was used to find the best movement of control points of an ACM [31]. They succeeded in a search of the boundary concavities in a larger search window using multi-population PSO without extra computational time. In our study, a PSO algorithm was used to define the location of the initial contour, which increased the segmentation success of the SLS by preventing it from becoming trapped in a local minimum.
The first step of the proposed system was to apply the PSO method to capture the global structure of the hip US image. Next, connected component labeling was applied to the segmented binary image to label each object. Shape features were extracted for each connected component to delineate the location of the iliac wing. The ROI was selected based on the localization of the iliac wing. Then the SLS method was applied to segment the ROI in detail with the automatically determined initial contour position in the iliac wing. Finally, the segmentation results were used to automatically measure the alpha and beta angles and to classify the images (Fig. 1).
In summary the main contributions of this paper can be listed as:Download : Download high-res image (377KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Flow diagram of the proposed CAD system for DDH.

•Segmentation of the labrum has key importance fordecision-making on a hip US, whether it is measurable or not, and for the determination of the beta angle. In the literature, measurement of the beta angle has generally not been addressed, most probably due to the difficulty of segmenting the labrum [6], [7], [8]. In this study, segmentation of the iliac wing, the deepest point of the acetabulum, and the labrum was achieved.•These three different regions with individual tissue characteristics were segmented at the same time using US images by combining the merits of PSO and level set methods. Although a level set model alone was powerful against noise and had bias correction capacity, this model could not segment all 3 targets at desired levels without the addition of the PSO method to determine the location of the initial contour and the ROI.•Graf categorized neonatal hips that have an alpha angle of less than 60°but which are not dislocated as Type II. Type II hips are further grouped as Types IIa and IIb, reflecting mild dysplasia, and Types IIc, indicating severe dysplasia. As the severity of the hip dysplasia increases, the prognosis of the hip joint decreases; therefore, more severe hips require urgent treatment. Our extensive literature search revealed no CAD system that considered the severity of dysplasia. The proposed CAD system is unique in the ability to determine subclassifications of dysplastic hips using the categories of normal (Type I), mild (Type IIa, IIb), and severe dysplasia (Type IIc, D) according to automatically measured alpha and beta angles.•This tool was designed in order to help US evaluators with the determination of anatomical structures and the drawing of lines and angle measurements for the classification of neonatal hips. The proposed system provides a complete demonstration of the definition of anatomical points, draws the lines and measures the angles automatically from a hip US image taken in the standard plane of Graf. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first tool in the literature designed to facilitate completion of Graf’s classification process.
