Teaching the computer to plan multistep chemical syntheses leading to non-trivial targets has been an elusive goal for over five decades,1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and it has only been recently that the first comprehensive validation of in silico synthetic predictions has been provided. Specifically, in Klucznik et al.,7 we described how the Chematica program (see Computational Methods for a synopsis and Szymkuć et al.6 and Klucznik et al.7 for a detailed description) designed, without any human supervision, complete pathways leading to eight structurally diverse and medicinally relevant targets and how these pathways were subsequently executed in the laboratory, offering substantial improvements over previous approaches or providing the first documented routes to a given target. With such reassuring examples at hand, one can consider expanding the scope of automated retrosynthetic design modalities. One of the interesting and important possibilities is to challenge the machine to search for pathways significantly different than those already published or patented. In principle, this can be done by excluding specific intermediates or reaction types along the route (see Supplementary Section 6.4 in Klucznik et al.7). In practice, however, creating lists of “excluded” substances or reaction types is not only cumbersome for the software’s user but can also be of limited value—indeed, it does not prevent the machine from using intermediates chemically equivalent to those present in original routes or alternative methodologies resulting in identical retrosynthetic disconnections. Here, we describe a more convenient and robust approach in which the machine helps identify the target’s “key” bonds (whose disconnections are most common in a patent portfolio and also most structure simplifying) and performs synthetic planning with these bonds “preserved” to ultimately find qualitatively different, patent-circumventing synthetic plans. The computer can succeed in this task because it has a vast knowledge base of methodologies (in Chematica, ca. 60,000 reaction rules) that can substitute for reactions used in the patents and has access to diverse collections of starting materials (in the current study, ∼ 200,000 commercial chemicals from Sigma-Aldrich with prices per gram and >7 million literature-known substances). We illustrate the strength of this bond-preservation approach by designing patent-evading syntheses (each constructed within a few minutes) of three commercial drugs: linezolid (Figure 3), sitagliptin (Figure 4), and panobinostat (Figure 5). The computer-generated plans are chemically sensible and, in many cases, are substantiated by literature examples of similar methodologies used for the syntheses of other targets. Although Chematica is now a commercial product,8 the bond-preservation algorithm we introduce here is generic and may benefit and extend the scope of other retrosynthetic software,3, 4, 5 especially those that are trained on collections of reaction precedents and thus inclined to find solutions that closely resemble previously published syntheses.5
