In recent year, the education sector has been undergoing digital transformation, just like all other job sectors. The use of new technologies in education has resulted in the emergence of numerous trends such as VLEs or Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) [1].
This type of technology has made it possible to disseminate knowledge to any place in the world, converting it into an essential tool for schools and universities. As a result, students no longer have to live in the place of the educational institution in order to benefit from its services. Although there are numerous VLEs that offer MOOC, such as Absorb, Schoology or Blackboard, Moodle is the most popular one and it has been used to conduct the case study described in this article. There are numerous scientific studies focusing on the many advantages of Moodle, for example, its usability [2].
These platforms provide numerous functionalities, but none of them incorporates a system that would allow to predict the academic performance of students. The identification of ineffective study patterns would be an important functionality that would help students assimilate concepts correctly. In this case, the platform could act as an autonomous tutor, ensuring that the student is correctly prepared and will pass the course.
Nevertheless, human teachers still exist, especially in schools and universities; these continue to be the standard places for obtaining an education. In such institutions, much of the knowledge is disseminated face-to-face, this situation could change if VLE were smarter.
Currently, in the education sector, the main objective of both students and teachers is to achieve the highest possible pass rate. Normally, the students who attend face-to-face classes and pay attention can get through their exams. The amount of study hours they dedicate to their studies and their reasoning capacity are essential factors. However, there have always been students who have had more difficulties, this is frequently associated with a series of social variables that directly affect poorly performing students. Families with economic problems, negative peer pressure or low class attendance are clear examples of this.
As a result, much of the research in the field of education has focused on identifying the external factors that affect the academic performance of students, such as age, gender, education level, geographic region, disabilities, among others [3]. Many studies have pointed to VLEs as one of the most positive factors in student achievement; their use encourages and accelerates the learning process by facilitating access to many online learning resources [4], [5]. Thus, researches in this field help universities and colleges eliminate or minimise negative factors for their students while maximising the positive ones.
Once a sample of data had been obtained from different student profiles, it was possible to apply different methodologies such as statistical studies or artificial intelligence techniques. The purpose of a statistical study may vary [6], [7], in this case however, its aim was to identify pass and fail rates versus other variables. Furthermore, it has been possible to identify the variables that most affect students by applying machine learning techniques to a sample of data. In addition, they make it possible to train a predictive model that would allow to anticipate and improve future cases [8].
This article employs ANNs to identify and study the factors affecting the academic performance of students who study over a Moodle-based MOOC platform and how the number of students passing their exams could be increased on the basis of the studied factors. The objective of the evaluation is to identify the students who are at risk of not passing their final exams. The results obtained in the case study indicate that it is possible to discern between the students who are likely to pass their final exams and those who are not. In this way, the students whose study patterns are incorrect can be guided and advised personally, as if VLE itself were a virtual tutor.
The rest of the article is structured as follows: the background is presented in Section 2, it describes the main VLE platforms on the market with a brief comparison between them, and the most used artificial intelligence techniques in data analysis and how they can be applied to the field of education. The architecture of the proposed ANN is described in Section 3. In Section 4, the proposed system is presented and evaluated with different datasets. Finally, the conclusions and future lines of research are outlined in Section 5.
