Cancer, as a set of diseases, is where cells divide without stopping and spread into the surrounding tissue and accumulate to create a lump called a tumor or malignancy [1]. The normal cells in the human body divide in order to generate new cells as the body requires them for the purposes of repair or replacement. Normal cells perish over time, whereas cancerous cells act abnormally due to mutations in the cells that crowd out the normal cells [2], [3]. One of the more commonly seen cancer types is Breast Cancer (BC) that predominately affects the adult female population. There are different BC types, depending on which cells become cancerous in the breast. The breast consists of three basic parts that are lobules, ducts, and connective tissue [4], [5], [6]. The lobules are the glands yielding the milk, while the ducts are the tubes used to transport milk to the nipple, and the connective tissue keeps everything together and forms the physical breast. Generally, cancerous cells in BC start to grow in the lobules and ducts [7]. Although the symptoms of BC vary according to the individual, there are certain significant major warning signs such as lumps found in the breast or the underarm, thickening or swelling of a part of the breast, abnormal changes in the nipple area, reddening of the breast skin tissue, or pain experienced in the breast [8]. BC can present as a painless lump or as a painful hard mass developed inside the breast.
Any suspected breast lump or growth should be immediately checked by the appropriate medical professional, in addition to regular screening tests. It is well known that the mortality rate of BC is quite high, and is a substantial public health concern since one in eight adult females face this diagnosis at least once in their lifetime [9], and one out of 37 women may die due to BC [10]. For this reason, early detection and diagnosis of BC are of vital importance. In the current clinical practices, the early diagnosis of BC can be realized by way of non-operative, non-invasive techniques such as contrast-enhanced (CE) digital mammography, breast ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and positron emission tomography (PET) [11]. It should also be noted that patient self-awareness is of considerable importance for early BC diagnosis. Today, mammograms are routinely applied in clinics and have been adopted as one of the most promising means of early BC diagnosis. MRI tests utilizing magnets and radio waves to capture the breast image are also used along with mammography in order to screen adult females who are considered at high risk of contracting BC.
In summary, BC can be evaluated as a heterogeneous disease that is examined based on clinical, radiological and pathological assessment. In clinical assessments, familial history and lifestyle-related risk factors of patients are traditionally taken into account. Mammography and ultrasound devices are used in the radiological assessment of BC detection. Mammography produces more effective results for women over 40 years old and in dense tissue breasts, whereas ultrasound is appropriate for patients of all ages. Core biopsy or fine needle aspiration cytology are applied in the pathological assessment of BC detection where an abnormality has been determined through either clinical or radiological assessment. Through biopsy, the histopathological images are divided into two types of lesion; benign and malignant. Lastly, a scoring system based on this triple assessment approach is used by specialists as the basis for reaching a diagnosis decision regarding the cells.
The diagnosis of BC based on computational approaches using histopathological microscopic images has been considered less attractive since this process takes time, and is error-prone and labor-intensive. However, histopathological images are considered the gold standard for BC diagnosis. In this regard, several studies have been carried out for this specific task. Convolutional Neural Network Improvement for Breast Cancer Classification (CNN-BCC) system using mammographic images, which are provided by Mammographic Image Analysis Society (MIAS) and include 21 benign, 17 malignant and 183 normal cases, have been presented. The model achieved a 90.50% accuracy [12]. A novel BC intelligent diagnosis approach equipped with several optimization methods was presented, tested on Wisconsin Original Breast Cancer (WBC) and Wisconsin Diagnostic Breast Cancer (WDBC) datasets, and classification success reported to be 97.57% [13]. An incremental boosting CNN was developed to recognize normal tissue, benign lesions, in situ carcinomas, and invasive carcinoma patterns. The experiments were performed on BC microscopic histology images, and the researchers achieved 96.9% accuracy using histology images with 200× zoom rate [14]. A combination of nonparametric Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) and CNN was presented for BC classification. The experiments was performed on the BreaKHis dataset. The classification rate was observed as a 92.1% at a 40× magnification factor [15]. A novel Gauss–Newton representation based algorithm (GNRBA) was introduced as a novel expert system for BC diagnosis. The key feature of the model relies upon finding optimal weight coefficients of the significant training samples. The authors’ all experiments were conducted on two publicly available datasets named WBCD and WDBC. They reported an overall accuracy of 99.27% for 60–40 training and test partition [10]. A hybrid deep neural network exploiting the multilevel feature representation of the histopathological image patches was suggested. The hybrid convolutional and recurrent deep neural network exploits the richer multilevel feature representation of the histopathological image patches. The model was applied to a new publicly available BC dataset consisting of 3771 samples categorized into four classes. The average accuracy of the model was observed at 91.3% [16].
The diagnosis of BC has also been realized using Back Propagation Neural Network (BPPN) and radial basis neural networks (RBFN) in another work, with accuracy obtained as 59.0% and 70.4%, respectively [17]. A new fuzzy-logic-based system including clustering, noise removal, and classification techniques was proposed for BC classification. Expectation Maximization (EM) was utilized as a clustering method, Regression Trees (CART) was used to generate fuzzy rules, and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was preferred to tackle the multicollinearity issue. As a result, the proposed knowledge-based system significantly improved the prediction accuracy of BC [18].
Pre-trained deep CNN architectures such as GoogLeNet, VGGNet, and ResNet have been investigated using standard benchmark datasets for BC diagnosis. The proposed framework returned an average accuracy of 97.67% [19]. Similarly, VGG-16, VGG-19, and ResNet deep architectures have been employed for the BC histology image classification task. The combination of VGG-16 and logistic regression (LR) yielded the best results with 92.60% classification success [20]. Ultrasound images have been evaluated in order to discriminate benign and malignant breast tumors by using neural network and multi-fractal dimension features in another study, with classification accuracy reported as 82.04% [21].
As mentioned in the related works, various attempts have been conducted to improve the performance of computational approaches to diagnosing BC and to ensure the development of a more robust and consistent system of diagnosis. To this aim, we came up with a novel model based on the fully convolutional network (FCN) and bidirectional long short term memory (Bi-LSTM) for BC detection. FCN is adopted to directly handle high resolution histopathological images, free of the demand to compress or enlarge the input to a fixed-size in order to keep critical information from being lost. FCN encodes the biopsy samples into a high-level representation, while the Bi-LSTM mechanism impels the remaining sublayers of the model to focus on specific regions of the input array.
The contributions of this study are listed as follows:

(1)We introduce an end-to-end model based on FCN and Bi-LSTM to diagnose types of BC. This proposed model differs from conventional deep learning methods with regard to its structure.(2)We propose exploiting an FCN as an encoder, making it possible to process largescale images efficiently and, hence, allowing variable input sizes.(3)Although a Bi-LSTM model is actually used in time series problems, we have shown how this model is able to be integrated into image processing applications.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: the proposed method is described in detail in Section 2, the experimental work and results are presented in Section 3, and concluding remarks are given in Section 4.
