Renal cancer is among the ten most common forms of cancer, a report by National Cancer Registry Program and Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Result states that renal cancer accounts for 3–4% of all new cancer cases in India and Western countries. According to American Cancer Society and National Cancer Institute, kidney cancer will cause 14,970 deaths and 65,340 new cases in the United States in 2018. The overall five-year survival rate of people with kidney cancer is 74%, and it relies on different factors which include type, stage and cell type of cancer [1]. The key to survival for patients with kidney cancer is early detection and treatment using different non-invasive medical imaging modalities. Presently imaging of renal cancer primarily relies on CT, which is considered as the gold standard for detection and classification of renal lesions. Accurate classification of kidney lesions ensures that patients will receive the correct treatment which in turn minimizes the risk of unnecessary biopsy or surgery [2], [3], [4]. However, increasing usage of abdominal CT scans in medical practice directly increases the workload for the medical experts who have to examine a large number of cases in less duration of time. It may result in errors or misinterpretation of lesions while detection. Therefore, there is a requirement of computer-aided systems to assist radiologists in the determination and characterization of lesions. There are two kinds of computerized systems to help radiologists, i.e., Computer-Aided Detection System (CADe) and Computer-Aided Diagnosis System (CADx). A computer-aided detection system helps to identify the lesions in medical images and is specialized for pathological detection or identification whereas computer-aided diagnosis system is used to classify the lesion as benign or malignant and is specialized for pathology classification, characterization or diagnosis. CADe is primarily used to identify and delineate the suspicious area inside the image and CADx is used to determine the likelihood that the considered lesion is malignant or benign [5].
In spite of certain differences among the CADe and CADx systems, both of them work to achieve common goals which include: (i) To improve the accuracy of diagnosis tasks. (ii) To help radiologist in early diagnosis of renal cancer. (iii) It should be able to decrease the time taken by a medical expert for lesion examination. CADx has now become an important research area in medical image processing. The objective of this article is to highlight different contributions made by CADx for examining renal lesions. Moreover, it also discusses some of the requirements for the CADx system as cited by the radiologists, which are listed below [6]:
i.A system must be able to classify suspicious areas as the normal renal tissue or lesion, i.e., a lesion should be categorized as a lesion, and a normal tissue should be categorized as normal. This will reduce the evaluation time of radiologist and prevents misclassification or unnecessary surgery of a patient.ii.High processing speed: System should respond to classification requests by taking less computation time which in turn increases the processing speed.iii.High level of automation: It should involve minimum manual operations and must be able to perform all processing steps semi-automatically or automatically once the Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) files are loaded.iv.It should be made at a low cost of implementation, training, testing, and support.v.It should be able to diagnose or classify the lesion with varying shapes and sizes.
However, many computer-aided diagnosis systems developed so far have not yet covered all the requirements of the radiologists; they lack in one or the other. Moreover, it is a very challenging task to propose a computerized system which fulfills all the above-mentioned requirements because one parameter is compromised at the cost of other and there is need to explore this area to fulfill all the requirements. Presently, the CADx systems have proven to improve the efficacy of radiologists in classification of lesions, but still, they are not commonly employed by medical experts [7].
In the literature, limited work has been done for the development of CADx systems for renal lesions. This discussion aims to develop a viewpoint on the selected research area that could be beneficial to the researchers working in the domain for identifying innovative ideas which can help the medical image processing community in recognizing new research challenges. After analyzing the literature, it is observed that because of lack of standard databases for kidney cancer, the researchers had tested their techniques on the datasets acquired by themselves from different hospitals. However, it is very important to understand that the nature of data captured from different machines under variable conditions significantly affects the outcome of different image processing techniques. Consequently, it become difficult to find out the efficiency of particular image processing technique as they have not been tested on standardized datasets. Therefore, an attempt has been made to provide an idea about the performance of existing preprocessing and segmentation techniques on a common set of images.
The main contribution of this article is to provide an introduction to the beginners to initiate their research in the field of computer-aided diagnosis for renal lesions. It provides an overview of different contributions made by distinct researchers by highlighting their limitations and advantages. Further, the comparative analysis of considered techniques has been performed on a common dataset to check the scope of their applicability. Additionally, some of the open challenges in this field have also been mentioned which require the immediate attention of the researchers.
The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. Section 2 describes the generalized algorithmic steps involved in a typical computerized diagnosis system. The details of different techniques proposed in the literature for image acquisition; pre-processing; lesion segmentation, and the classification methods for the renal lesion have been discussed in Section 3. In Section 4, the experimental results and analysis of the state-of-the-art denoising and segmentation techniques are illustrated along with their advantages and disadvantages. Section 5 highlights certain open challenges and future avenues for the researchers working in this field. Lastly, the conclusion is given in Section 6.
