With the rapid development of computer and network technology, information security has become the key technology in information transmission and storage. Image encryption technology is an important subject in the field of information security. Refregier [1] proposed the double random phase encryption method in 1995, the basic principle is placing irrelevant random phase plates on the input plane and the Fourier spectrum plane respectively. After phase modulation and Fourier transform, a white noise encrypted image is obtained on the output plane. Subsequently, more and more image encryption methods are proposed, such as phase shift interference encryption [2], joint transform correlator encryption [3], polarization encryption [4], and digital holographic encryption [5]. However, these image encryption methods can only encrypt one image which has made it difficult to meet the growing information needs. Recently, more and more scholars begin to study multi-image encryption. Current multi-image encryption methods can be roughly divided into four categories. Firstly, multi-image encryption technology based on digital hologram, Wan [6] proposed a multi-image compression encryption algorithm based on improved Mach–Zehnder interferometer and digital hologram, Wang [7] proposed an optoelectronic image encryption and decryption technique based on coherent superposition principle and digital holography. Secondly, multi-image encryption technology based on Compressed Sensing, Deepan [8] applied compressed sensing to dual random phase space multiplexing technology to realize multi-image encryption, Li [9] proposed a multiple-image encryption method based on modified logistic map algorithm, compressive ghost imaging, and coordinate sampling. Thirdly, multi-image encryption technology based on other optical transformations, Liu [10] proposed multiple images encryption based on optical asymmetric key cryptosystem to improve the security, Liu [11] proposed an optical encryption method allowing the parallel encryption for multi-channel images based on a joint transform correlator (JTC). Last but not least, multi-image encryption technology based on Multiplexing, includes position multiplexing [12], [13], region multiplexing [14], wavelength multiplexing [15], space multiplexing [16], random phase mask multiplexing [17], [18], fractional order multiplexing [19] and the most useful angular multiplexing. Matoba and Javidi [20] present the first demonstration of an encrypted optical storage based on double random phase encoding by using angular multiplexing in a photorefractive material. In addition, combining angle multiplexing and digital holography technology, Shen [21] proposed a multi-image encryption method based on Fresnel holography, and Shen [22] replaced the optical Fresnel transform with 4f system and using spherical wave illumination, the encryption and decryption process is greatly simplified. Moreover, Xu [23] replaced the random phase plate with random amplitude in the encryption system mentioned above and proposed multi-image encryption method based on random amplitude plate and digital hologram. Because of the multiplexing techniques mentioned above, the number of encrypted images is greatly improved. But the complexity of the system is also increased, meanwhile, the time and complexity of data processing also increase along with the increase of encryption capacity. Moreover, this kind of methods are also limited by the requirement of pixel-by-pixel alignment of random phase keys in practical decryption experiments [24]. Therefore, these methods mainly are concentrated on digital systems and difficult for optical implementation.
Consequently, we propose an optical encryption method of multi-image based on θ modulation and computer generated hologram (CGH). CGH is introduced to record the encrypted complex images which can solve the problem that encrypted results are difficult to record and transmit. This multi-image encryption method can successfully resist various attacks because the relationship between the original image and the final encrypted CGH image is not linear in nature. More importantly, the introduction of CGH can greatly simplify the decryption experimental requirements [25] and the optical implement for the decryption process will maintain the parallel processing speed of optical encryption. At first, each image is modulated by random phase and amplitude sinusoidal grating in Fresnel and Spatial filtering system. Then the modulated images are superimposed together and the phase is removed while the amplitude is retained to be encrypted by random phase to break the linearity of the system. At last, the encrypted image and decryption phase keys are encoded into CGH which can overcome the problem of strict setup alignment requirements to improve the validity of proposed experimental method and the encrypted CGH has strong ability to against noise disturbance. The experimental decrypted results show good agreement with the simulation results.Download : Download high-res image (324KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The schematic of encryption process based on θ modulation and CGH, FrTz1[•] is the Fresnel transform with distance of z1, G(θ°) is grating with angle θ between the stripe and the X-axis.
