The increased sedentary behavior of people globally is a major public health concern (Matthews et al., 2014; Owen et al., 2010). Long durations of sitting and physical inactivity are associated with increased risks of obesity, type-2 diabetes, some forms of cancer, cardiovascular disease, and premature mortality (Chambers et al., 2019; Chau et al., 2013; Dunstan et al., 2012; Young et al., 2016). Moreover, hours of computer use can increase risks for musculoskeletal disorders of upper extremities (Rempel et al., 2006; Village et al., 2005), though causal pathways for this association are unclear (Asundi et al., 2011; Wærsted et al., 2010). Time use data suggests that people spend approximately 8–9 h of the day in sedentary behaviors, and much of this happens in the workplace (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009; Healy et al., 2011; Parry and Straker, 2013). From an employers’ perspective, the increase in occupational sedentarism is associated with absenteeism, reduced quality and quantity of work, short-term disability, work impairment, and additional healthcare costs (Pronk and Kottke, 2009). In 2013, the direct and indirect costs associated with sedentary behavior and physical inactivity were estimated to be $67.5 billion worldwide (Ding et al., 2016). Demographic projections suggest a global trend towards increased sedentary behaviors and physical inactivity in the future (Ng and Popkin, 2012).
In response to the public health concerns of increased occupational sitting, the updated Physical Activity Guidelines for the U.S. acknowledges the ‘need to move more and sit less,‘ (Piercy et al., 2018), while in the U.K. an expert statement recommends office workers to – reduce sitting time, accumulate 2 h of standing in a workday, and include short bouts of light physical activity such as walking (Buckley et al., 2015). Recommendations are based on evidence that intermittent bouts of non-exercise physical activities throughout the workday - such as sit-to-stand postural transitions and walking - can have a protective effect on health risks associated with increased sedentary behaviors (Dohrn et al., 2018; Ekblom-Bak et al., 2014; Ekelund et al., 2016; Pulsford et al., 2015). In recent years, use of sit-stand workstations (SSWs) which enable office workers to alternate between sitting and standing at work, show promise in reducing occupational sedentary behaviors. Reviews suggest that SSWs reduce sitting time and increase standing time (Karakolis and Callaghan, 2014; Karol and Robertson, 2015), attenuate musculoskeletal discomfort and pain (Agarwal et al., 2018), and minimize self-reported fatigue (Neuhaus et al., 2014), without impacting productivity in computer-based work (Chambers et al., 2019; Kar and Hedge, 2016; Russell et al., 2016). However, replacing a proportion of sitting time with intermittent bouts of standing does not increase physical activity significantly or elevate energy expenditure substantially above the sedentary behavior threshold of 1.5 Metabolic Equivalents (Tudor-Locke et al., 2014; Júdice et al., 2016; Burns et al., 2017). Therefore, there is need to design sit-stand-activity interventions that increase physical activity and energy expenditure significantly above the sedentary threshold, while offering health and productivity benefits associated with SSWs.
The introduction of SSWs does not necessarily mean that office workers transition from seated to sit-stand work (Straker et al., 2013). Wilks et al. (2006) found that 60% of office workers, across four companies who had recently been provided with SSWs, reported using the sit-stand function once a month or less, while Gilson et al. (2012) found that office workers provided with a choice of working at a SSW or at a traditional seated desk, worked at the SSW for only an hour per day. More recently, Bao and Lin (2018) reported that only 30% of office workers who had access to a SSW used the sit-stand function, while Caple (2018) reported that approximately 50% of office workers do not adjust their SSWs, but leave them at a seated height. These findings suggest that access to an SSW does not necessarily translate to optimum usage of the sit-stand function. Office workers attribute low usage of the sit-stand function to behavioral, environmental, and cultural barriers to sit-stand work. Wilks et al. (2006) surveyed 98 office workers to report that most common reasons for not using the sit-stand function were – they did not bother to use the sit-stand function (62%), found the worksurface when standing to be too small (32%), had difficulty finding an acceptable standing posture (16%), and encountered problems in manually adjusting the worksurface height (11%). Similarly, Nooijen et al. (2018) surveyed 547 office workers to report that the most common barriers to use of the sit-stand function were - sitting as a habit (67%), standing being uncomfortable (29%), and standing perceived to be tiring (24%). More recently, Wilkerson et al. (2019) have reported on environmental barriers that hinder use of the sit-stand function, while Ojo et al. (2019) reported that the heavy workload and fatigue in the workplace can be a barrier to breaking up sitting with intermittent bouts of standing.
The adoption of SSWs in place of the traditional seated desk may not always be beneficial for worker health and well-being. Studies show that lack of ergonomics training and self-adjustment of SSWs may result in office workers experiencing greater discomfort and pain (Green and Briggs, 1989). Demure et al. (2000) found that office workers provided with fully adjustable workstations reported increased discomfort for neck/shoulder and arm/wrist compared to office workers in partially adjustable workstations. This led the authors to state that ‘maladjusted furniture is ergonomically worse than non-adjustable equipment.’ Ebara et al. (2008) found that use of SSWs resulted in greater discomfort among office workers, due to improper desk height adjustments which may have increased non-neutral postures in sitting and standing work. Asundi et al. (2011) demonstrated that when users were given height-adjustable SSWs, they tended to select set ups that did not conform to guidelines for seated work, and often the self-selected worksurface heights were lower than guidelines for standing work (Lin et al., 2016). Also, when office workers self-adjusted their SSWs, keyboards were positioned sub-optimally, resulting in non-neutral wrist postures, greater wrist extension (Hedge et al., 2005), and increased musculoskeletal risks for neck, shoulder, and upper arm (Marcus et al., 2002; Sauter et al., 1991). These findings highlight need for optimal adjustment of SSWs based on the anthropometrics of the office worker (Verbeek, 1991), as well as need for ergonomic guidelines for safe and effective use of SSWs in the workplace (Grunseit et al., 2012; Wilkerson et al., 2019).
Another approach to reduce the deleterious health impacts of occupational sitting involves change in the temporal pattern of work. The use of microbreaks - which are short, rest breaks of 30–180 s duration, at 10–20 min intervals – have been known to attenuate musculoskeletal discomfort and fatigue, without reducing productivity in computer-based work (Bennett, 2015; Galinsky et al., 2000, 2007; Hedge and Evans, 2001; Henning et al., 1994; McLean et al., 2001). Recent studies provide evidence that use of active breaks – which are microbreaks with 2–3 min of light-intensity physical activity – can lower musculoskeletal discomfort and pain (Thorp et al., 2014; Van Eerd et al., 2016; Waongenngarm et al., 2018), improve cardio-vascular health (Bailey and Locke, 2015), reduce mental fatigue (Engelmann et al., 2011), and attenuate risk of premature mortality associated with increased sedentary behaviors (Fuezeki et al., 2017). Recently, research on simulated work in a laboratory setting has shown evidence for benefits in combining postural transitions afforded by SSWs with intermittent light-intensity physical activity enabled by active breaks (Kar, 2019). The use of a sit-stand-walk intervention - comprising of 20 min of seated work, 8 min of standing work, followed by a 2-min active break – shows promise in reducing sitting duration, increasing frequency of postural transitions, and elevating light-intensity physical activity in the sedentary office (Kar and Hedge, 2020).
Given the negative health consequences associated with occupational sedentary behaviors, there is a critical need to investigate the efficacy of sit-stand-activity interventions that reduce sitting time and increase physical activity in computer-based work. The adoption of SSWs shows evidence of attenuating musculoskeletal discomfort and fatigue, without negatively impacting productivity (Karakolis and Callaghan, 2014). However, physical activity in sit-stand work is not significantly higher compared to seated-only work (Chambers et al., 2019). Active breaks reduce musculoskeletal discomfort and fatigue and increase light-intensity physical activity. The sit-stand-walk intervention – combining postural transitions afforded by SSWs with intermittent light-intensity physical activity enabled by active breaks – may provide a practically feasible approach to reduce sitting time, increase postural transitions, and elevate physical activity in the sedentary workplace (Kar, 2019; Kar and Hedge, 2020). However, as previously described, there are barriers to effective use of SSWs (Wilks et al., 2006; Nooijen et al., 2018; Ojo et al., 2019; Wilkerson et al., 2019); office workers lack knowledge and training to set up their SSWs according to ergonomic guidelines (Asundi et al., 2011; Lin et al., 2016); and self-adjustment of SSW by untrained office workers increases musculoskeletal risks (Demure et al., 2000; Hedge et al., 2005; Ebara et al., 2008).
For sit-stand-activity research, therefore the question remains whether the SSWs should be self-adjusted by untrained office workers based on personal preference, or the SSWs be customized to their anthropometric requirements based on ergonomic guidelines for seated and standing work. In this context, the authors wanted to: (1) test the feasibility of using a novel SSW configuration, custom-fit to the office worker based on ergonomic guidelines for seated and standing work (Ergo-Fit configuration), and (2) compare the novel SSW configuration to a standard SSW configuration, self-adjusted by the office worker based on personal preference (Self-Adjusted configuration). The sit-stand-walk intervention, experimentally verified in prior research (Kar and Hedge, 2020), was the sit-stand-activity protocol in both workstation configurations. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of the workstation configuration on four dependent variables – (1) musculoskeletal discomfort; (2) perceived fatigue; (3) typing task productivity operationalized by typing speed and typing error; (4) postural risks operationalized by RULA scores for seated work, and REBA scores for standing work. Using a repeated-measures study design, participants from the working age population performed a 60-min computer-based transcription task in the two workstation configurations – (1) Ergo-Fit (E-F) and (2) Self-Adjusted (S-A), described in detail in the following section.
It was hypothesized that –(H1)Change in musculoskeletal discomfort will be higher in the E-F configuration, i.e. there will be a main effect of workstation configuration on perceived musculoskeletal discomfort.(H2)Change in perceived fatigue will be higher in the E-F configuration, i.e. there will be a main effect of workstation configuration on perceived fatigue.(H3)Typing speed will be higher in the E-F configuration, i.e. there will be a main effect of workstation configuration on typing speed.(H4)Typing error will be lower in the E-F configuration, i.e. there will be a main effect of workstation configuration on typing error.(H5)RULA score in seated work will be lower in the E-F configuration, i.e. there will be a main effect of workstation configuration on RULA score for seated work.(H6)REBA score in standing work will be lower in the E-F configuration, i.e. there will be a main effect of workstation configuration on REBA score for standing work.
