The rapidly expanding urban areas of the world constitute challenge for the 21 st century that requires both new analytic approaches and new sources of data and information (Miller and Small, 2003). Modern management of the urban area is to be considered from many aspects, where one of them, is access to the tailor-made information within the smart cities systems. The Miller and Small (Miller and Small, 2003), Gillanders et al. (Gillanders et al. (2008)) and Zhou et al. (Zhou et al. (2012)) point out that increasing availability of remotely sensed observations and a variety of other geospatial information significantly support the development of new tools and approaches for understanding the urban space. Land cover relate the physical and biological cover over the surface of land, including water, vegetation, bare soil, and/or artificial structures. Land use usually refers to signs of human activities such as agriculture, forestry and building construction (Banzhaf and Hofer, 2008). The structure elements of buildings are one of a scale-dependent of the urban analysis elements (Rashed and Jurgens, 2010). Process of urbanization at the scale of local and regional area effects must be documented, analysed, evaluated and if possible, predicted. This goal can be only achieved by involvement of researchers and stakeholders to cooperating and exchanging knowledge (Longley, 2002; Grimm et al., 2000; Lee and Sasaki, 2018). Indispensable in that scope is defining and monitoring of land-cover and land-use as a part of urban environment with the Urban Remote Sensing technologies. The Urban Remote Sensing (URS) according to Rashed and Jürgens “has proved to be a useful tool for cross-scale urban planning and urban ecological research” recently (Longley, 2002).
Buildings are principal components of urban environment. Sooner or later everyone has contact with buildings that are a place for life, work, investment and relaxation. That is why buildings are part of many decision-making systems related to valuation, taxes, land planning and sustainable development of the areas. However, due to the complex specificity of properties (many functions, influenced by many unstable and stagnant features, unspecified relations and strong behavioural impact), these are very difficult /troublesome components (subject) of the decision-support systems. For this reason information technology is increasingly being utilized in this field (AlZaghrini et al., 2019).
Decision-making systems fed with property (building) information are based on different methods and models. One of them is based on geostatistical analysis which additionally takes into account property geographic location or use geographic information systems (GIS) integrated with others (Abbas et al., 2019; Renigier-Bilozor et al., 2019; McCluskey et al., 1997; Renigier-Biłozor et al., 2018). Another approach, currently even more dominant, involves artificial intelligence-based methods, data mining and machine learning in the framework of GeoComputation uses (Zavadskas et al., 2017; Barber, 2017; Park and Bae, 2015; Bello and Verdegay, 2012; McCluskey et al., 2012; Bieda et al., 2019). Even though public authorities in many countries are responsible for running public property information registers, the information provided from them in terms of property analysis seems inadequate or incomplete (Kustra et al., 2019; Benduch, 2017; Christidou and Fountas, 2017). The problem of insufficient property data or unavailability of information on the property market increases uncertainty in the analysis (Renigier-Biłozor et al., 2019, 2017; Yigitcanlar, 2015; Foord, 2013; Yovanof and Hazapis, 2009; Szulwic et al., 2015).
Due to the above the paper proposed new automatic algorithm presented in experimental work related to building usable floor area estimation in the following work structure. First, an explanation of the reasons for looking for a usable floor area estimation new solutions is provided - Section 2. Section 3 presents methods, data, and algorithm methodology of BUFA estimation. Section 4 presents workflow of proposed BUFA estimation algorithm and empirical results obtained on the basis of residential buildings case studies. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusions and future directions of research.
