MicroRNA (miRNA) is a class of important regulator non-coding RNA that interacts with its target mRNAs through sequence complementarity (often observed at the 3′ UTR of the mRNA), subsequently regulating the corresponding mRNAs' translation level by degrading the targeted mRNAs (Bartel, 2009). Mature miRNA has a length between 21 and 25 nucleotides (nts), usually with the 28th nucleotide perfectly complementing its target mRNA, serving as the seed region of the binding. The miRNA-mRNA binding and subsequent mRNA degradation are facilitated by the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), a microRNA ribonucleoprotein complex. The Argonaute protein (AGO) within RISC contains two RNA-binding domains (PAZ and PIWI) that bind the miRNA and mRNA, respectively, and plays key roles in facilitating the miRNA-mRNA interaction. The biological function of the miRNA is often understood through the function of its targeted mRNAs. For example, cancer-causing miRNA point mutations or aberrant expression can lead to the positive regulation of the targeted cancer-causing genes or the negative regulation of the targeted cancer-repressing genes (Zhang et al., 2006, Volinia et al., 2006, Calin and Croce, 2006). As a result, elucidating the miRNA target is key to the understanding of miRNA function and its regulating biological processes.
MicroRNA targets can be identified in three ways primarily. First, they can be predicted computationally through models (Wang, 2016) that summarize, e.g., the sequence complementarity (Agarwal et al., 2015) and site accessibility (Kertesz et al., 2007) information. Although computational approaches have successfully recovered many genuine miRNA targets, their false-positive rates remain high. Second, the next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based CLIP (Crosslinking Immunoprecipitation)-seq on the AGO protein is capable of probing the potential miRNA-binding sites across the entire genome, but fails in specifying the targets of a specific miRNA family (Chi et al., 2009). Finally, experimental approaches can be used to validate a specific miRNA-mRNA interaction, yet in a low-throughput manner (Jin et al., 2013).
Recently, the Cross-linking Ligation and Sequencing of Hybrids (CLASH) technology was developed for high-throughput genome-wide probing of in vivo miRNA-mRNA interactions (see Figure 1). CLASH (Kudla et al., 2011, Helwak and Tollervey, 2014) first pulls down the interacting miRNA-mRNA strands through AGO immunoprecipitation, followed by the covalent cross-linking of the interacting miRNA-mRNA strands, and eventually sequences the cross-linked miRNA-mRNA duplex. As the covalent cross-linking is proximity induced, the miRNA/mRNA strands could ligate to spatially adjacent free-floating nucleotide fragments (red clouds in Figure 1) before being cross-linked to each other. These nucleotide fragments could also be ligated to the terminus of the miRNA/mRNA strands. Intuitively, the mapping of the resulting duplex reads will reveal direct evidence for the corresponding miRNA-mRNA interaction. In practice, the inclusion of the random nucleotide fragment contaminants complicates the CLASH read mapping.Download : Download high-res image (218KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. Schematic Illustration of the Generation Process of the CLASH ReadsStep 1 (immunoprecipitation): the interacting miRNA and mRNA are enriched through immunoprecipitation of the Argonaute (AGO) protein. Step 2 (cross-linking): the interacting miRNA and mRNA are covalently cross-linked through proximity-induced ligation. Potential contaminants (floating short nucleotide fragments) could be incorporated at the terminus of the miRNA or mRNA. Step 3 (sequencing): the bound AGO protein is washed and the cross-linked miRNA-mRNA duplex is subjected to standard library preparation and sequencing to generate the CLASH reads.
In the original CLASH analysis (Helwak et al., 2013, Helwak and Tollervey, 2014), BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997) was used to map the CLASH reads, leading to a 2%–3% mapping rate. The same group further tested BOWTIE2 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012) as the aligner in a subsequent analysis pipeline called Hyb (Travis et al., 2014). Although BOWTIE2 greatly improved the computational efficiency of the CLASH read mapping, it was comparable with BLAST in terms of mapping sensitivity. The main reasons for the low-sensitivity mapping of the CLASH reads are (1) random nucleotide fragment contaminants lack apparent pattern and therefore are difficult to detect and can mislead the read mapping and (2) the resulting CLASH reads can be very short (owing to the intrinsic length of the AGO-binding site). For example, the average read length of a real CLASH dataset (SRR959751) is 20 nt (after adapter trimming), corresponding to 10 nts per miRNA/mRNA strand.
In addition to BLAST and BOWTIE2, other read-mapping tools such as BWA-MEM (Li and Durbin, 2009), STAR (Dobin et al., 2013), and HISAT2 (Kim et al., 2015), are expected to perform similarly because they share a similar read-mapping objective. Subsequent analyses (such as Hyb, Travis et al., 2014) take the mapping results as the input and attempt to prioritize confident miRNA-mRNA interactions. However, they cannot create new read mappings and hence cannot be used to tackle the low-sensitivity issue. A dedicated CLASH reads aligner is in demand.
In consideration of the unique CLASH read layout and the limitations of the existing alignment and mapping tools, we provide a novel formulation for the CLASH read-mapping problem. We term a single miRNA/mRNA an arm of the read, and we seek to find a single arm (when the miRNA-mRNA cross-linking fails) or two non-overlapping arms (when the miRNA and mRNA cross-linking is successful) from a read such that (1) each arm can be mapped to the reference database under a given sequence similarity threshold and (2) the total length of the mapped single or two arms is maximized. This formulation assumes that, under successful experimental conditions, bona fide miRNA/mRNA sequences should dominate contaminants in the CLASH reads. This problem is subsequently solved through efficient identification of the set of all candidate arms through Burrows-Wheeler Transformation (BWT)-assisted searches against the reference database, followed by a dynamic programming chaining algorithm to identify the arm(s) with maximized total length.
We implemented the algorithm into a program called CLAN (the CrossLinked reads ANalysis toolkit). We summarized the details of the CLAN algorithms in Figure S1 and the Transparent Methods section of the Supplemental Information. We benchmarked CLAN with popular alignment and mapping tools BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997), BWA-MEM (Li and Durbin, 2009), STAR (Dobin et al., 2013), HISAT2 (Kim et al., 2015), and BOWTIE2 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012). All mapping tools are capable of handling spliced alignments, which approximates the duplex mapping problem we are attempting to address here. On both simulated and real datasets, we have demonstrated that CLAN, BLAST, and BWA can satisfactorily map duplex CLASH reads, with CLAN outperforming the other tools by >25% F-score (a comprehensive measure of both sensitivity and specificity).
