The Common Core State Standards (CCSS) have placed an increased emphasis on cross-curricular writing. These standards encourage writing activities in all content areas, including science and social studies in 2nd through 12th grade (Common Core State Standards, 2010). Due to this increased emphasis on writing across the curriculum, responding to prompts in a written format is required on many state and national assessments in the areas of writing, science, and social studies (National Governors Association for Best Practices and Council of Chief & State [NGA], 2010). Specifically, in science and social studies, students might be required to respond to prompts in a short argumentative essay format to demonstrate their understanding of specific topics using evidence and facts. The ability of individuals to express their thoughts and reasons in order to influence others or share what they believe is essential to their success beyond the classroom. Our increasingly diverse global culture requires the ability to engage with the ideas of others and to actively participate in society. Students use higher-order thinking skills to make a logical argument with supporting claims and sound evidence in their argumentative essays. In addition, they are expected to use domain-specific vocabulary and a variety of transitional words to sequence events. Although the mechanics of writing are typically not the focus of these higher-order writing activities, highly organized writing that is free of mechanical errors increases the student's ability to convey their understanding of the topic. Unfortunately, responding to argumentative questions in writing might be challenging for some students in inclusive settings. It is common to have students with a wide range of abilities in the same classroom. While some students show advanced abilities in writing performance, others may struggle with responding in writing. The latter include students with high incidence disabilities (HID), English Language Learners (ELLs), and students at-risk for school failure. Struggling writers have a greater chance of performing poorly on the written portions of standardized assessments and in classroom activities, which could greatly impact their overall academic performance. This is evident from the low percentage of students performing at the proficient or advanced levels on the standardized writing assessments (National Center for Education Statistics, 2011). It is imperative to use interventions that support ALL learners in today's inclusive classroom regardless of abilities and needs. Answering argumentative questions in writing should not interfere with the ability of all students to demonstrate what they know in the content areas.
Writing interventions that are leveraged with technology have the potential to not only alleviate some of the challenges that students encounter during writing, but may also reinforce students’ digital literacy skills. For example, the CCSS require students beginning in kindergarten to explore digital tools to produce and publish writing, making the use of digital tools for reading, writing, and communicating a requirement rather than a preference. Emphasizing the idea that digital tools can no longer be supplementary, the CCSS do not include a separate strand for digital technology, but rather, requirements to utilize digital technology and media are infused throughout the standards (NGA Center & CCSS, 2010). The standards assume that being literate means being digitally literate. These changes produce a need to support teachers in successfully integrating digital tools into their writing instruction. Using digital tools in the writing process require a wide range of skills that must be explicitly taught to students (Hutchison, Woodward, & Colwell, 2016). One such digital tool that supports argumentative essay writing for the diverse student population in inclusive settings is the computer-based graphic organizer (CBGO). Thus, the purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of a CBGO with embedded self-regulated learning (SRL) strategies on the argumentative writing performance of students with various abilities and needs in the inclusive social studies and science classrooms.
