Nowadays, the omnipresent informatization of the society forces changes in teaching computer science in all types of schools, starting from primary schools up to universities (Chen et al., 2017). The computer science curriculum in primary schools should reflect the current level of the students’ computer expertise. Most children beginning their school career at the age of 6–7 can use many digital devices, such as tablets, smartphones, or game consoles, e.g. Xbox One or PS4. The operation of those devices is so intuitive for children that students who use those technologies for the first time usually catch up quickly. Correct use of those resources should prepare students to live their lives in the information society and to use modern information and communication technologies (ICT) (Margolis, 2010).
In recent years in Poland, most urban primary schools have been equipped with computer rooms with permanent access to Internet; however, the manner of teaching computer science has failed to keep pace with the universal presence of ICT. Studying computer operation, simple graphic applications, text editing devices, calculation sheets, or searching for information on the Internet is certainly necessary but not sufficient. The information obtained from primary schools of the Lodz Voivodeship (1118 children) show that during computer science and programming classes students use the MS Office package (41 per cent), Paint (26 per cent), Scratch (23 per cent), and other applications, such as Gimp, Photoshop, or Movie maker (10 per cent). Data indicate that a great majority of children does not develop the skill of logical and computational thinking which are involved in the study of programming (Hsu & Wang, 2018; van Niekerk & Webb, 2016); those children who have the possibility of learning basics of programming start their studies definitely too late, i.e. at the age of 13 (in many countries e.g. Great Britain, Japan, Lithuania, the Czech Republic, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia or Turkey children as young as 6–10 years old start learning programming).
To improve the existing situation, in 2016 the Ministry of National Education introduced a new core curriculum for computer science in primary schools (www.ore.edu.pl/nowa-podstawa-programowa). It predicts the following results in future: easy solution of problems in everyday and professional situations involving technology, support of other disciplines in innovation, optimization of processes, more frequent choice of further computer science education in secondary schools, increase in the number of students sitting a computer science maturity exam, increase in the number of computer science students at universities, and satisfaction of the expectations of the labor market. The core curriculum includes an increased number of computer science hours (see next Section). All primary school students are required to begin with computational thinking, supported with a visualization or simulation of algorithmic actions. This way, students make their first steps in a visual programming language. Simple applications steering a robot or a different creature on a screen are developed. They use specific Internet resources safely and legally. Students of higher years, who have already been introduced to computational thinking, develop and expand their expertise and computer science skills by learning fundamental IT notions and solving selected issues using algorithms; they also implement solutions and make their first steps in a text programming language.
However, despite the introduction of the core curriculum, the study of algorithmics and programming is still neglected in most primary schools. The success of covering that syllabus depends, to a great extent, on a proper preparation of teachers to teach classes of that type. Computer science in I-III grades is usually taught by early school teachers with no experience in teaching algorithmics or programming. In IV-VIII grades, there are also no well-prepared teachers. Primary school teacher competencies in computer science is described in greater detail in the next Section. To teach classes of that type, it is necessary that a teacher has expertise and skills in algorithms and programming environments, visual as well as other ones, e.g. enabling steering a robot. Therefore, constant improvement of one’s competences related to the subject taught is an essential element of teachers’ work (Worek, Jelonek, & Kocór, 2017). At present, in Poland, it has been noticed that it is necessary to support professional improvement of computer science teachers through training courses organized by Teachers’ Improvement Centres, using EU subsidies or subsidies provided by Polish state institutions. However, the results of changes in the computer science curriculum and improved competences of teachers will not be visible in teachers and candidates for universities until a few years’ time; we are in a transitional period now.
A separate issue is the relationship between educational failures in higher education and the condition of the education system at the earlier stages. A high rate of failures in universities in technical courses, in particular in computer science courses, and mediocre opinions on the preparation of candidates for those courses may suggest, that it is an imperfect system of teaching in primary and secondary schools that is responsible for such a situation (Smużewska, Wasilewski, & Antoniwicz, 2015). Undoubtedly, the introduction of obligatory algorithmics and programming classes at the early stage of education will improve the quality of teaching and the university study efficiency ratio. However, the effects of the introduced changes will not be visible until a few years’ time; therefore, out-of-school education remains a temporary form of supporting students in learning programming.
A great part of primary school students shows, even now, a great interest in learning programming, which is, unfortunately, absent from their schools. Work-related expectations of parents towards their children also include the need of obtaining that knowledge as early as at the stage of a primary school. Kozłowski and Matczak (2016) show that the profession of a computer scientist and a programmer is one of the most expected for children, followed by medical professions (28.8 per cent); in 2011 it was 6.5 per cent and in 2014 it grew to as much as 10.9 per cent (Brzezińska & Rekosiewicz, 2016). As a result, children and their parents seek other, out-of-school possibilities of learning programming in the form of workshops or training courses (Glušac, Makitan, Karuović, Radosav, & Milanov, 2015; Hawrot, 2015). This work presents effects of out-of-school teaching of computer science in a visual programming course (Scratch) for children aged 9–14, held at the Lodz University of Technology. Computer classes of that type have become a new manner of spending spare time by children, apart from sports and foreign language classes, which have been popular so far. In the process of programming, children develop the skill of computational thinking, problem-solving strategies, and creativity in game-based learning. In the parents’ opinions, the improvement in those computer competences should also translate into a change of the manner in which children use computers, smartphones, or tablets, not only as devices for gaming or browsing the Internet, but also as tools for creating one’s own applications.
