Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) is one of the globally highly produced and consumed agricultural product (Van de Poel et al., 2012; Wan et al., 2018; Wei et al., 2016). According to FAOSTAT (2017), global production of tomatoes in 2017 was 182 million tons. Over the years, tomatoes have become an essential vegetable because it is rich in minerals, and anti-oxidants for the human diet (Rizzolo et al., 2010). Additionally, consumption of tomato has been associated with decreased risk of some cancers, osteoporosis, and cardiovascular disease, since it is also rich in fiber and vitamins A and C (Chang et al., 2006; Kumar et al., 2012; Saad et al., 2016; Takeoka et al., 2001; Wan et al., 2018).
With largescale production, arises the challenge of grading and sorting in the supply chain management. Geometrical attributes, size, and dimensions are regarded as crucial factors in the grading of raw agricultural produce (Khojastehnazhand et al., 2010a). Appearance is the primary quality feature considered by consumers despite the inherent quality of a fruit and vegetable being essential (Arendse et al., 2018). It is the external quality that significantly impacts market prices and consumers. The shape, color, size, texture, shelf life (maturity) and visual flaws are mainly inspected to evaluate the outside quality of ripe fruits (Naik and Patel, 2017). These factors also affect storage and transportation options, which directly influences the sales and marketing of the products by food industries (Du and Sun, 2006b).
Tomatoes have traditionally been classified by manual sorting according to their physiological maturity (Van de Poel et al., 2012). However, this technique is time-consuming, expensive, subjective, and inaccurate (Ehsani et al., 2016; Satpute and Jagdale, 2016). Currently, several computer vision techniques have been introduced and are increasingly becoming vital in fruit and vegetable sorting (Chen et al., 2002). These systems offer many advantages, such as consistency and uniformity in grading, speed, and accuracy in sorting. Moreover, they have a high success rate and non-destructive methods (Gül and Özdemir, 2017).
Computer vision systems in fruits and vegetable sorting mainly focus on features such as maturity, color, defects, and size of the fruit (Jadhav et al., 2019). Size determination is an appropriate step in fresh fruit post-harvest operations (Concha-Meyer et al., 2018). The size of a fruit corresponds to its volume, surface area, and mass (Omid et al., 2010). Thus, these variables can be used as essential descriptors in sorting and grading of fruits (Moreda et al., 2009). Volume computation is essential for density-based sorting of fruits and optimization of space in volume based packaging (Jadhav et al., 2019; Moreda et al., 2009). Suppose the density of a product remains constant, its volume can help ascertain its mass (Duzyaman and Duzyaman, 2005; Ioana et al., 2007). When the volume is combined with the mass, the average density can be established, which is vital in detecting hidden defects such as internal damage and frost damage. The average density can additionally provide biomass, water content, and consistency information of agricultural produce. Alternatively, if the fruit densities are assumed to be almost constant, then the system can estimate fruit mass from the volume, replacing the need for a weighing device (Chopin et al., 2017; Iqbal et al., 2011). Several kinds of literature have reported having developed systems that could determine volume, surface area, and mass information of agricultural food products based on computer vision techniques (Costa et al., 2011; Eifert et al., 2006; Khojastehnazhand et al., 2010a, 2010b; Lee et al., 2002; Li et al., 2002; Moreda et al., 2009; Omid et al., 2010; Schulze et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017; Ziaratban et al., 2017).
A study by Siswantoro et al. (2013) classified food products into axys-symmetric shaped and irregularly shaped objects; the study established that a product could be regarded as an axys-symmetric object if its cross-sections are circular while perpendicular to its major axis. Additionally, Sabliov et al. (2002); Wang and Nguang (2007) concluded that surface area and volume of axys-symmetric products such as eggs, peaches, limes, and lemon, can be estimated by capturing one image from a fixed projection and dividing the image into a set of cylindrical objects. Furthermore, Vivek Venkatesh et al. (2015) determined the relationship between the mass of axys-symmetric fruits (oranges, apples, lemons, and sweet-limes) and their estimated volume using image processing-based techniques. Likewise, Koc (2007); Rashidi and Gholami (2008) estimated the volume of watermelons and kiwi fruits by ellipsoid approximation techniques. Du and Sun (2006a) developed an automatic method for estimating volume and surface area of ham using an image partitioning and spherical modeling methodology.
In the sorting of irregular shaped agricultural products, Siswantoro et al. (2013) suggested the use of 3D reconstruction using silhouettes from multiple views of the object for volume estimation. Thus, the volume can be measured by counting the number of voxels in the reconstructed 3D object or by a mathematical model. This technique was successfully applied by Jadhav et al., (2019) to estimate the volume of apple, orange, mango, strawberry, and pomegranate fruits using volumetric 3D reconstruction in multiple cameras fruit grading system. Lee et al. (2006) designed a computer vision system that could measure volume using multiple silhouettes based on a mathematical model for volume approximation from a 3D wireframe model, which used images acquired from multiple views of a rotating irregular shaped object using a turntable in a fixed, regular interval. Also, Ireri et al., (2018) introduced a low-cost tomato sorter using a monochrome camera.
Computer vision techniques for estimation of volume and mass of axys-symmetric fruits are an essential aspect towards improved post-harvest technologies. This paper outlines an investigation of the interrelation between tomato mass and volume and developed models to predict the two variables based on 2D and 3D image features. The correlation of the predicted variables was compared to those of the real mass and volume. Several tomato grading and sorting systems already exist based on computer vision techniques (El-Bendary et al., 2015; El Hariri et al., 2014b; Semary et al., 2015). However, this study presents a novel approach based on the combined 2D and 3D image system and develops a comparative approach between the introduced system and solely 2D and 3D tomato sorting systems.
The primary objective of this study was to develop a computer vision system for the estimation of mass and volume of cherry tomatoes. The specific objectives were (1) to develop an efficient depth image processing algorithm, (2) to develop both 2D and 3D feature extraction algorithm, (3) to develop mass and volume estimation regression models based on the extracted features, and (4) to investigate the relationship between tomato mass and volume.
