After heart disease, brain stroke is the most common reason for death around the world [1]. Due to which the majority of survivors need to live with changeless or long-term injury. Brain imaging methods like magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CT are quite helpful for a doctor in order to start the initial screening of the patient. There are also many imaging modalities for the analysis of brain, which may include X-ray imaging, diffuse optical imaging, magnetoencephalography, functional MRI and positron emission tomography [2], [3]. However, all these imaging techniques require high operating cost and well-trained operator, hence most of these imaging methods may not be available in all the clinics and hospitals.
Image classification is widely used in medical imaging [4]. However, for better accuracy of the classification system, results should be close to the manual diagnosis. Nowadays, deep learning has been extensively used as a classification method because it automatically calculates features within the convolutional layers of the deep system [5], [6]. The main advantage of using deep learning is that it outperforms other conventional methods for image classification [7]. Many deep learning methods have come into existence such as recurrent neural networks, long short-term memory (LSTM) [8], CNNs [9], deep belief nets (DBN) [10], etc. Among these methods, CNN has been generally utilized in computer vision and medical image processing problems like ImageNet, face recognition, house numbers digit classification, patch classification from medical images etc. Classification methods other than deep learning methods are random forest (RF), k-nearest neighbors (kNN), decision tree (DT), multilayer perceptron (MLP), support vector machine (SVM) and many more [11], [12], [13].
In this article, an automatic classification method has been proposed to predict the category to which brain CT scan image belongs, images are of hemorrhagic, ischemic and normal category. Hemorrhagic stroke occurs due to fragile blood vessel which burst and drains into the neighboring brain tissues. The main causes of hemorrhagic stroke are hypertension, trauma, abnormal blood vessels (like arteriovenous malformation (AVM)), bleeding disorders, aneurysm and use of cocaine. On the other side, ischemic stroke occurs when blood supply in the brain stops due to the presence of blood clots. Brain hemorrhage can also occur after ischemic stroke which results in a serious complication [14]. Sample images of stroke are depicted in Fig. 1, the first row of the figure depicts the images of ischemic strokes and the images of hemorrhagic strokes are shown in the second row, and cases which do not have any problem i.e. normal are placed in the third row. Regions in the brain where strokes have occurred are marked with red color and are shown in Fig. 2 in order to help the novice reader to identify stroke.
 Towards the diagnosis of stroke, doctors first confirm symptoms from the patient or family members. The most important thing which will help in accurate identification is the stroke history. If patient had stroke previously, then there is more chance that the patient is suffering from a stroke. Otherwise, some other symptoms are asked from family if they match to stroke symptoms, then doctor will ask the other staff members to generate a neuro imaging recording of patient. The most commonly used neuro imaging method used by experts is CT scan and makes it their first choice for diagnosing brain strokes. The main reason behind it is that their images are cheaper than the images generated by other imaging devices and thus affordable by the patients. The prediction of stroke from CT scan images serve as the initial step towards the proper diagnosis of a patient. After that those images are sent to radiological expert in order to identify what type of stroke has occurred. Thereafter, physical and manual examination of patients is performed and based on their manual examination treatment procedure starts. Sometimes when a large number of patients which are having stroke symptoms reaches hospital on the same day then it is very difficult to provide accurate treatment to the patients on time. Thus, this manual diagnosis procedure may lead to death of a patient as it is very tiresome, error prone and slow. Many researchers have worked in this area for providing a computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system, in spite of the significant requirement, there is no clinically accepted CAD system for stroke [15], [16]. The system proposed by [15] was not automated and they themselves in their paper wrote the future scope of their work which includes the need to increase the performance of a CAD system and to make it automated. Peixoto and Filho [16] have worked on the classification of hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke CT scan images. Their method was developed for small dataset where each case had 100 images and for future work they have to test their method on large datasets. Thus, some effective automated systems should come into existence those can automatically identify stroke medical emergency and therefore help physicians to start the treatment procedure in early stage of stroke onset. Hence, in this paper, a new method has been proposed which is able to detect the type of stroke from which the patient is suffering at the time of CT scan image generation.Download : Download high-res image (670KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Sample CT images of (a) ischemic, (b) hemorrhagic stroke and (c) normal brain.Download : Download high-res image (441KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Red region marked the location of ischemic and hemorrhagic lesions in images.
Contributions The main contributions of the paper are as follows:

•Proposed an automatic method which is based on the new CNN approach that will help the experts in the early start of the patient’s treatment procedure and thereby helps reducing the permanent damage or life ending situation.•Image fusion method has been used so that more meaningful features can be extracted from different layers of proposed CNN.•The work is based on real datasets which have been collected from Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences (HIMS), Dehradun, India. The datasets consists of ischemic, hemorrhagic and normal CT scan images.•Experiments have been carried out by categorizing images in two and three different categories. The first dataset consists of ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke images and the second dataset include one more category i.e. normal CT scan images of brain.•Experimental results show that proposed CNN approach gives better performance over AlexNet and ResNet50.
Further the paper organization is as follows: discussion about the previous work is given in Section 2, proposed classification methodology is described in Section 3, Section 4 contains the particulars of CT image datasets, the implementation details and experimental results. Discussion of the experimental results is given in Sections 5 Discussion, 6 Conclusion conclude the whole paper.
