Technology has become an integral part of our jobs and workplaces, with ever more functions - once performed by humans - becoming automated (Ghislieri, Molino, & Cortese, 2018; Hancock, 2014). Were computers1 in clerical work once mainly used by human workers for simple calculations and typewriting, nowadays, we find sophisticated decision-support systems that assist human workers with analyses and interpretations of complex data, e.g., stock rates, business development, medical data, epidemiologic or demographic trends (Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 2014; Haenssle et al., 2018; Lisboa & Taktak, 2006; Richards, Yeoh, Chong, & Popovič, 2017). This technological advancement is reflected in the paradigms used in HCI (human-computer interaction): As long as computers and machines ‘only’ performed tasks on the orders of their human users or operators, clear ‘master’-‘slave’ or ‘user’-‘tool’ paradigms were appropriate to model their interaction. With technological progress, more sophisticated computers and machines were able to perform and thus were allocated increasingly complex tasks, so that they have become modelled and perceived more and more as ‘partners’ or ‘teammates’ than as ‘tools’ (e.g., Christoffersen & Woods, 2002; Madhavan & Wiegmann, 2007; Wynne & Lyons, 2018). In these constellations, humans and computers are no longer in a ‘master’-‘slave’ relationship but on a more equal level of hierarchy (e.g., Jarrassé, Sanguineti, & Burdet, 2014). Thus, with technological progress, an additional paradigmatic conception of computers as interaction entities evolved, one in which computers moved up the hierarchy from being perceived in a subordinate role (‘tool’) to a more equal role (‘partner’ or ‘teammate’).
Yet, technological progress has not stopped and has brought about and will increasingly bring about situations in which computers do not only assist humans with specific allocated tasks, but in which computers will lead humans, i.e., guide them through their working day, allocate tasks, set the working pace, etc.. In these interactions computers are actually the source of decision-making rather than mere decision-support for human workers. One specific example for an existing application that performs leadership functions is the system ‘iCEO’. This application represents an automated system that takes over the management of complex work (e.g., compiling a research report for a client) by dividing it into smaller tasks, which it then assigns to internal and external workers using multiple software platforms (such as oDesk and Uber), and email or text messaging (Fidler, 2015). The system autonomously hires and compensates workers, defines and allocates tasks, gives feedback and controls the results. Another example, and probably one of the most advanced automated management systems to date, is used by Uber Technologies Inc.. This system processes customer pickup requests and assigns these to drivers based on their availability and location. It then monitors drivers' accepted requests and evaluates customers' ratings. Based on the accumulated information, the system provides feedback to the drivers about improving customers' driving experiences but also adjusts driving fares or suspends drivers for low acceptance rates or negative customer ratings. Moreover, the system queries the drivers regarding their prospective working days and hours and incentivizes them to work or not at specific dates in order to optimize the supply of available drivers in each region for the forecasted demand at all times (Lee, Kusbit, Metsky, & Dabbish, 2015; Simonite, 2015). The Uber system thus automates several leadership functions such as task allocation, shift planning, performance feedback and compensation.
Taking these examples into account and anticipating further technological progress, we argue that it is necessary to add another paradigm to model interactions between humans and computers, one that conceptualizes computers again one hierarchy level higher: the paradigm of ‘computers as leaders’. We argue that current and future technological developments make such inverted hierarchical relations possible (i.e., relations, in which humans perform tasks on the command of computers) and that such inverted hierarchical relations between humans and computers have so far not been covered in HCI research.
We are aware that the idea of humans taking orders from computers is at odds with most people's experiences and expectations and challenges firmly held axioms in HCI. Principles of human-centered automation (Billings, 1991, 1996) and interaction design (e.g., Nielsen, 1994; Shneiderman & Plaisant, 2004) stress the importance of the operator being in command and the user being in full control at all times. Acknowledging these axioms, we nevertheless deem it necessary to explore the paradigm of ‘computers as leaders’ to keep pace with current technological developments and applications (see also Geiskkovitch, Cormier, Seo, & Young, 2016).
There are three reasons why we regard it important to enlarge the set of paradigms used to model human-computer interaction to adequately reflect hierarchical relations in the workplace: Firstly, as Jamieson & Skraaning, (2018) emphasize, HCI-paradigms (or interaction metaphors as they call it) establish a likeness between a specific human-computer constellation and an analogous familiar pattern (e.g., a desktop workspace). These paradigms guide researchers' and designers' thinking away from seemingly unsuitable and toward seemingly suitable ideas (e.g., physical folders and files) in the analogous situation (for metaphors and representations in HCI, see also Benyon & Imaz, 1999). Jamieson & Skraaning, (2018) argue that the ‘computers as tools’ paradigm is no longer appropriate for modern human-computer interaction and misguides researchers and designers in their approaches. While they advocate to endorse the ‘computers as teammates’ paradigm, we go a step further and call for endorsing the ‘computers as leaders’ paradigm to appropriately reflect technological advancement. By this, we do not imply that the paradigms of ‘computers as tools’ and ‘computers as partners’ become obsolete. There will be computers that function as tools of human work, just as there will be computers assuming the role of a team-member in human-computer teams. But we argue that with technological progress there will also be an increasing number of computers that perform leadership functions over humans, which calls for an enlargement of our paradigmatic conceptions of human computer interactions at work. Secondly, we regard it important that research conceptions keep pace with technological advancement to fulfill the societal responsibility of science (Ghislieri et al., 2018). The scientific discourse should objectively broach the risks and opportunities associated with computers in leadership positions. Indeed, this should be independent of commercial providers of products and applications and should be addressed before such systems are widely implemented in practice. And thirdly, the profound change in hierarchy (humans as subordinates and not as users or consumers of technology; e.g., Lee, 2018) requires a re-evaluation of existing knowledge and models in HCI regarding their suitability for computer-human leadership (CH leadership) constellations. Only the understanding of the specific interaction dynamics in CH leadership enables researchers to delineate recommendations to develop automated leadership systems that satisfy both organizational interests regarding system performance and human subordinates' interests regarding job-related satisfaction, motivation, and well-being.
In the following sections, we will explore the appropriateness of the paradigm ‘computers as leaders’, propose a working definition, define the involved interaction roles in a structural model, and reflect upon evaluative criteria for successful CH leadership and related questions of function allocation. We subsequently discuss the pivotal role of acceptance of computers as leaders and draw on the human-human leadership (HH leadership) concept of legitimacy. We bring our propositions together in a theoretical model (leadership-technology acceptance model) suggesting influencing factors and consequences of CH leadership as a basis for future research and future developments of automated management systems. We conclude by discussing research implications of the proposed paradigm ‘computers as leaders’ and possible directions of future technological developments relevant for CH leadership applications and finally call for an awareness of ethical issues when researching, designing, and applying CH leadership.
