The unprecedented scale of building and infrastructure development is driving the demand for intensive use of labour (Chea, Gurumurthy, & Ruwini, 2019). The construction sector is the fifth largest industry in the New Zealand economy, employing 36,000 more workers in 2012 than it did in 2002 (MBIE, 2013). Workplace accidents in this sector are also on the rise, resulting in increased rates of injury and economic loss (Zhao, McCoy, Kleiner, Smith-Jackson, & Liu, 2016). It was estimated that about 15% of all occupational injuries generated in 2015 in New Zealand occurred in the construction sector, causing a substantial economic loss of roughly $108 million (New Zealand dollars) (ACC, 2016).
H&S training has been essential to the success of construction projects (Guo, Yu, & Skitmore, 2017). A H&S training programme helps the personnel to identify hazards and to react appropriately to control hazards (Seppala, 1995). There are a number of ways in which H&S training can be implemented, such as traditional tools (TT) and computer-aided technologies (CAT) (Gao, Gonzalez, & Yiu, 2017). TT includes traditional techniques such as lecture, toolbox talk, handout, audio-visual material (e.g., video demonstration), computer-based instruction, and hands-on training (Blanchard & Simmering, 2014). However, TT has been considered by some researchers as not an ideal solution for the construction workforce (Guo, Li, Chan, & Skitmore, 2012; Li, Chan, & Skitmore, 2012). As noted in Nielsen (2015), the effective transference of H&S knowledge needs to be in accordance with employees’ preferences. Construction workers are experiential learners who tend to lose interest in memorising safety regulations, lack continuous engagement with TT approaches, and would prefer more proactive learning styles (Harfield, Panko, Davies, & Kenley, 2007).
The criticisms of TT have led to an intensive search for new methods, such as computer-aided technologies (CAT) (Guo et al., 2012; Sacks, Perlman, & Barak, 2013). Latest innovations in CAT, such as Serious Games (SG), Computer-generated Simulations (CGS), Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR), and Mixed Reality (MR) have now matured, representing interactive and portable solutions to support H&S training in the construction sector (Chi, Kang, & Wang, 2013). In recent years, training with CAT has gained increased attention from many construction companies all over the world (Kivrak & Arslan, 2019). However, many researchers considered that the construction sector is rushing headlong into CAT without adequate evidence of educational effectiveness (Choi, Hwang, & Lee, 2017; Gao et al., 2017; Kizil & Joy, 2001; O'Neal, Jones, Miller, Campbell, & Pierce, 2007; Ray & Teizer, 2012; Sacks et al., 2013). Effectiveness is essential for successful H&S training in construction firms (Ho & Dzeng, 2010). Benitti (2012) highlights that both industry and academia should understand exactly the effectiveness of new technologies and resist getting caught up in what may turn out to be nothing more than a passing fad.
A number of literature reviews have been published over the past decade on CAT-based construction H&S training (Bhoir & Esmaeili, 2015; Gao et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2017; Li, Yi, Chi, Wang, & Chan, 2018; Wang, Wu, Wang, Chi, & Wang, 2018; Zhou, Irizarry, & Li, 2013). However, these previous reviews contain several limitations. First, although previous reviews have summarised the evidence for some aspects of CAT (e.g., application areas, technical advantages), none of them have provided a comprehensive summary of the effectiveness of CAT. Second, previous reviews in this field have not been very comprehensive, focusing on the literature of CAT rather than performing a systematic review of both TT and CAT studies. This is fundamental to understand the effectiveness of new technologies against traditional methods (Kumar, 2012).
The aim of this study is therefore to carry out a systematic review to overcome the weaknesses identified in previous reviews and attain the following objectives:
•To undertake a review of previous studies on the use of TT and CAT for construction H&S training;•To present a synthesis of the empirical evidence available thus far on the effectiveness of TT and CAT for construction H&S training.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 presents background on CAT techniques (i.e. SG, CGS, VR, AR, and MR). Section 3 specifies the stages involved in the systematic review as the research method. Next, we summarise and interpret the results in Section 4. Section 5 discusses our findings. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper, lists the limitations, and recommends directions for future research work.
