With the continuous development of science and technology, modern warfare has higher and higher requirements for ammunition, which must be able to effectively armor targets such as tanks, light armored infantry vehicles and combatants[1], so many new charge structures came into being. The multi-mode charge structure can realize different initiation modes by means of fuzes and the like, then according to the detection and recognition of the target by the missile load sensor, finally forms different types of damage elements for the target characteristics. Therefore, the multi-mode charge structure improves the combat effectiveness of ammunition, achieves multi-purpose operations, timely eliminates various targets on the battlefield, grasps the initiative of the battle, meets the requirements of precision strike targets and long-distance operations in modern warfare, it has become an important direction in the future weapon development.
Fong [2] proposed an alternative charge structure, the forming process of the damage element of this charge structure was modeled and simulated by computer. The results show that it could convert the damage element between EFP and multi-fragment.
Bender et al. [3] obtained different types of damage elements by different initiation modes, and studied the effect of grid on the formation and penetration performance of multi-fragment damage element by computer numerical simulation, and the experimental verification was carried out, as shown in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (108KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Experiments results of multi-fragment damage element [3].
Arnold et al. [4] proposed a new EFP/multi-fragment dual-mode charge structure that does not require adding a grid in front of the charge liner, and the damage element penetration experiments in two modes were carried out, the specific results are shown in Fig. 2.Download : Download high-res image (258KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Penetration results of EFP and multi-fragments damage elements [4].
Arnold et al. [5] proposed a new PELE/EFP dual-mode charge structure. By changing the position of the initiation point, two-layer EFP and a PELE-like damage element were formed, respectively. The schematic diagram of the principle is shown in Fig. 3. However, Arnold et al. only put forward the idea of this new charge structure, which did not fully verify its feasibility, and need further study. The experimental results showed that the two-layer liners cannot be bonded tightly and separated from each other under PELE mode, which resulted in a large gap between simulation and test results, as shown in Fig. 4.Download : Download high-res image (250KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Schematic diagram of PELE/EFP axial mode conversion charge structure [5].Download : Download high-res image (285KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. Computer simulation and experimental comparison of PELE mode [5].
Jiang et al. [6] studied the formation and penetration performance of a dual-mode damage element formed by a cylindrical-conical charge structure using computer numerical simulation. The warhead can form EFP and rod penetrator respectively by changing the initiation mode. In the process of numerical simulation, the multi-mapping method was adopted, and the optimal calculation method was adopted according to the research object.
Zhang et al. [7], [8] studied a cross-cut reseau charge structure. The finite element software LS-DYNA was used to simulate the formation and penetration process of damage element, and the experimental verification showed that the two results were in good agreement, which provided guidance for the research of multi-mode charge structure. In addition, the influence of the cutting reseau, the material density and the distance between the reseau and the liner on the fragment scattering angle were also analyzed.
Gao Wei et al. [9] explored the way to form EFP/JPC/Jet damage elements on the same warhead. By adding pre-charge and reserving charge space, a new multi-mode charge structure was designed.
From the research status at home and abroad, we can see that in the development of new charge structure, the combination of experiment and computer numerical simulation is often used [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23]. With the development of computer modeling and numerical simulation technology, computer simulation technology plays an increasingly important role in the research due to funding and cycle. The dynamic finite element program of the computer is solved according to the conservative governing equation, material constitutive model and state equation of the system. It can simulate and study the dynamic response of the liner under the action of explosive load and the whole process of penetration of the target plate. The computer numerical simulation can reveal some phenomena that are not easy to observe at present, and can show some physical processes that cannot be seen in the experiment. The computer numerical simulation can also analyze the influence of various factors on the design effect by adjusting the shape of the structure, material performance parameters, initial boundary conditions and so on, and evaluate the sensitivity of parameters.
From the research status at home and abroad, we can see that in the development of new charge structure, the combination of experiment and numerical simulation is often used [24], [25], [26], [27]. With the development of computer modeling and numerical simulation technology, computer simulation technology plays an increasingly important role in the research due to funding and cycle. The computer dynamic finite element program solves according to the conservative governing equation, material constitutive model and state equation of the system. It can simulate and study the dynamic response of the liner under the action of explosive load and the whole process of penetration of the target plate. The numerical simulation can reveal some phenomena that are not easy to observe at present, and can show some physical processes that cannot be seen in the experiment. The computer modeling and simulation method can also analyze the influence of various factors on the design effect by adjusting the shape of the structure, material performance parameters, initial boundary conditions and so on, and evaluate the sensitivity of parameters.
So in this paper, computer modeling and simulation analysis method was used to study the forming and damage process of PELE in the new charge structure [28], [29], [30]. In particular, the EFP/PELE dual-mode charge structure proposed in this paper adopts composite structure, adding a wave-shaper to control detonation waveform, the PELE damage element was formed by detonation at the bottom center point of the inner charge, and the EFP damage element was formed by detonation at the bottom center point of the outer charge.
