In many cities throughout the United States, considerable effort is being put into improving neighborhood walkability. For example, in Akron, OH, the director of planning and urban development is putting big, four-lane roads, originally built to serve as highways instead of neighborhood streets on “road diets.”1 By “road diet,” the Akron director's intention is to narrow many of the streets in Akron to accommodate the addition of bike lanes and pedestrian paths. For a variety of reasons, including urban job growth and declining crime rates, young professionals are more frequently choosing to live in cities than in the past.2 By adding bike lanes and pedestrian paths, Akron hopes to attract new and younger residents whom value bikeable and walkable neighborhoods.
Road and walkway improvement projects are being considered across the United States, particularly as roadway funding becomes more scarce (U.S. Department of Transportation, 2014). Because of these constraints, planners are constantly searching for cost-effective solutions, such as road diets, for improving safety of roadways and the quality of the pedestrian experience as well as reducing maintenance costs. However, even the most cost effective solutions for improving roadways and pedestrian pathing still comes at a steep cost – the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) estimates that road diets, one of the more cost-effective roadway improvement solutions, averages costs between $38,000 and $83,000 per mile (about $24,000 to $52,000 per km) to transform a 4-lane street into a 2-lane street with sidewalks, bike lanes, and a dedicated two-way left-turn lane.3 Because even cost-effective additions of or improvements to pedestrian infrastructure, like sidewalks, can be exceedingly expensive, it is essential to determine the value of walkability to residents.
In this paper, I consider the relationship that walkability has with residential real estate sale prices, in an effort to arrive at an estimate of the value of walkable neighborhoods to homeowners. I combine the Walk Score® measure of proximity to nearby establishments with information gathered from street-level images of the walkways near home sales to more thoroughly describe the walkability of a given space. Computer vision procedures were used to teach computers to process and categorize images based on a number of visual characteristics of the residence and its surroundings. Computer vision analysis of these street-level images allows for the relatively costless gathering of information about the pedestrian pathing outside of a given home and can supplement Walk Score's measure of walkable access to local establishments to more wholly represent the walkability of an area.
This work makes quantifiable many measures proposed in the urban planning literature concerning the nature of pedestrian walkways and contributes to research about the impacts of land use mixing on real estate markets. I find that walkability, as it pertains to both access to local amenities as well as to the quality and aesthetic properties of pedestrian pathing, is an amenity reflected in house sale prices. Consistently across various specifications, ownership of private walkways and nearby access to public sidewalks are associated with higher home value. While proximity to local establishments is shown to improve housing value across most specifications, I show that when access to sidewalks is lacking, homeowners do not value being within walkable distance to nearby amenities.
This is an intuitive result with policy implications for urban planning, suggesting that the attraction of new businesses or creation of public spaces like parks may not improve real estate value without adequate and safe pedestrian pathing. Developers, who often cut costs by neglecting to build sidewalks, may wish to reevaluate their business strategies as the construction of a sidewalk may lend value to the development in excess of the costs.
