Streaming data analytics has increasingly become the bedrock in many domains, such as bio-medical sciences, healthcare, and financial services. However, the majority of streaming data systems assume that the distributions of streaming data do not change over time. In reality, the streaming data obtained from real-world systems often possess non-stationary characteristics [1]. Such systems are often characterized by continuous evolving natures and thus, their behaviours often shift over time due to thermal drifts, aging effects, or other non-stationary environmental factors etc. These characteristics can adversely affect environmental, natural, artificial and industrial processes [2]. Hence, adaptive learning in a non-stationary environment (NSE), wherein the input data distribution shifts over time, is a challenging task. Developing machine learning models that can be optimized for non-stationary environments is in high demand. Currently machine learning methods for non-stationary systems are majorly categorized into passive and active approaches [2]. In the passive approach to non-stationary learning (NSL), it is assumed that the input distribution should be continuously shifting over time [2], [3]. Thus, passive scheme based methods adapt to new data distributions continuously for each new incoming observation or a new batch of observations from the streaming data. In contrast, an active scheme based NSL method uses a shift detection test to detect the presence of shifts in the streaming data, and an adaptive action is initiated based upon the time of detected shift[4]. There exits a range of literature on transfer learning and domain adaptation theory, which aims to adapt to NSEs by transferring knowledge between training and test domains. In this case, one can match the features distribution of training and testing by the density ratio estimation approaches such as kernel mean matching [5], Kullback–Leibler importance estimation procedure, and least-squares importance fitting [6]. In addition to density ratio estimation methods, several methods, such as domain adaption with conditional transferable components, try to minimize the domain shift by finding invariant representation across training and target domains [7]. In fact, to favorably transfer knowledge between domains, one needs to estimate the primary causal mechanism of the data generating process. These methods have, however, a limited applicability in real world problems, where the data in test domain are generated while operating in real-time.
A typical brain-computer-interface (BCI) system aims to provide an alternative means of communication or rehabilitation for the physically challenged population so as to allow them to express their wills without muscle exertion [8]. An electroencephalography (EEG)-based BCI is such a non-stationary system [9] and quasi-stationary segment in EEG signals have duration of nearly 0.25 s [10]. The non-stationarities of the EEG signals may be caused by various events, such as changes in the user attention levels, electrode placements, or user fatigues [11], [12], [13]. In other words, the basic cause of the non-stationarity in EEG signals is not only associated with the influences of the external stimuli to the brain mechanisms, but the switching of the cognitive task related inherent metastable states of neural assemblies also contributes towards it [14]. These non-stationarities cause notable variations or shifts in the EEG signals both during trial-to-trial, and session-to-session transfers [13], [15], [16], [17]. As a result, these variations often appear as covariate shifts (CSs) wherein the input data distributions differ significantly between training and testing phases while the conditional distribution remains the same [6], [18], [19], [20], [21].
Non-invasive EEG-based BCI systems acquire neural signals at scalp level to be analysed for evaluating activity-specific features of EEG signals e.g. voluntary imagery/execution tasks, and finally the output signals are relayed to different control devices [8]. The EEG signals are acquired through a multichannel EEG amplifier, and a pre-processing step is performed to remove noise and enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. Then the discriminable features are extracted from the artefact-cleaned signals using feature extraction techniques, such as spatial filtering (e.g., common spatial pattern (CSP)) [22]. Such a system operates typically in two phases, namely the training phase and the testing phase [23]. However, due to the non-stationary nature of the brain response characteristics, it is difficult to accurately classify the EEG patterns in motor imagery (MI) related BCI systems using traditional inductive algorithms [23], [24]. For EEG-based BCI systems that operate online under real-time non-stationary/changing environments, it is required to consider the input features that are invariant to dataset shifts, or the learning approaches that can track the changes repeating over time, and the learning function can be adapted in a timely fashion. However, the traditional BCI systems are built upon passive approach to NSL for EEG signals. In passive schemes, both single and ensemble classifiers have been developed to improve the MI classification performance. In contrast, an active scheme based NSL in BCI systems provide a new option by estimating CSs in the streaming EEG features, in which an adaptive action can be initiated once the CS is confirmed. Our previous studies have demonstrated that the active approach to single-trial EEG classification outperformed existing passive approaches based BCI system [11], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28].
The aim of this paper is to extend our previous work and present a novel active scheme based unsupervised adaptive ensemble learning algorithm to adapt to CSs under non-stationary environments in EEG-based BCI systems. Different from the existing passive scheme based methods, the proposed algorithm is an active ensemble learning approach under non-stationary environments wherein a CS estimation test is used to detect at which point an updated classifier needs to be added to the ensemble during the evaluation phase. The transductive learning is implemented to enrich the training dataset during the evaluation phase using a probabilistic weighted K nearest neighbour (PWKNN) method. Thus, a new classifier is added to the ensemble only when it is necessary, i.e. once the data from a novel distribution has to be processed. Specifically, we considered an exponential weighted moving average (EWMA) based algorithm for the estimation of CSs in non-stationary conditions [19]. To assess the performance of the proposed algorithm, this study extensively compared the proposed method with various existing passive ensemble learning algorithms: Bagging, Boosting, and Random Subspace; and an active ensemble learning via linear discriminant analysis (LDA)-score based probabilistic classification. A series of experimental evaluations have been performed on two publicly available MI related EEG datasets.
The contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:
•An active adaptive ensemble learning algorithm is proposed wherein new classifiers are added online to the ensemble based on covariate shift estimation.•The adaptation is performed in unsupervised mode using transduction via PWKNN classification.•The proposed system is applied to motor imagery based BCI to better characterise the non-stationary changes that occur across and within different sessions.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows: Section II presents background information for CS, NSL methods in BCI and ensemble learning methods. Section III details the proposed methodology for estimating the CSs and related adaptive ensemble algorithm. Section IV describes the proposed MI related BCI system, and gives a description of the datasets and the signal processing pipeline. Next, Section V presents the performance analysis. Finally, the results are discussed in Section VI and Section VII summarises the findings of this study.
