Traffic control mechanisms employed at city junctions are key factors determining the transit time of city commuters. Intelligent traffic signal timing is important to manage busy city intersections. Even though a better infrastructure can improve the traffic flow, however, often intersections are managed by human observers or by using controller. This call for the development of an automatic traffic signaling mechanism that can intelligently optimize various traffic parameters.
Computer vision-guided automatic or semi-automatic traffic analysis (Fathy, Siyal, 1998, Quek, Pasquier, Lim, 2006, Wang, Djahel, Zhang, McManis, 2016), though not new to the research community, has not been explored substantially owing to lack of standard datasets. Moreover, wrong driving makes it difficult to apply existing methods for traffic control in chaotic intersections (Park, Chen, Kiliaris, Kuang, Masrur, Phillips, et al., 2009, Zhao, Dai, Zhang, 2012). Even in developed countries, signal timing is done either through observation or with the help of sensor guided vehicle count estimation (Janecek, Valerio, Hummel, Ricciato, Hlavacs, 2015, Li, Nie, Wilkie, Lin, 2017, Rohani, Gingras, Vigneron, Gruyer, 2015). To the best of our knowledge, research contributions on intelligent traffic-actuated control using computer vision, are limited (Indu, Nair, Jain, Chaudhury, 2013, Osman, Psyche, Ferdous, Zaman, 2017).
Traffic signal timing is an optimization problem. Manual signal timing may not achieve optimum throughput. However, human intervention or subjectivity can be reduced with the help of computer vision-based methods. In this paper, a computer vision-guided intelligent method has been proposed to optimize traffic throughput and minimize average waiting time for traffic intersections. In addition, we also publish two video datasets (4WAY and IITBBSR)1 to the computer vision research community. The overview of the proposed system is shown in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (675KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Overview of the proposed system. Optical flow is extracted on each frame and then TUIC-based clustering (Santhosh et al., 2018) has been applied. Instantaneous positions of the cluster centers are fed to the Density accumulator module. It measures the cluster count of each approach road in real-time and updates the database to reflect the cluster count at the time of estimating the phase duration. Learner module learns the departure rate and cycle duration (Ti) based on the existing signal timing for different cluster count information. Once the learning is over, the scheduler uses the cluster count information to estimate the green time for the specific approach road.
1.1. Related workPre-timed traffic control has been popular and widely used for traffic control at isolated intersections. Sensor-guided intelligent transportation systems (ITS) are emerging with the advancements in machine learning and artificial intelligence-based methods. Real-time traffic information can be collected from various sources like camera, road sensors, or crowd sourced data (Fathy, Siyal, 1998, Zhang, Wu, Costeira, Moura, 2017). Janecek et al. (2015) have discussed a traffic control system using cellular technologies. GPS (Li, Nie, Wilkie, Lin, 2017, Rohani, Gingras, Vigneron, Gruyer, 2015) and inductive loop-based (Covell, Baluja, & Sukthankar, 2015) systems are also used to control traffic. In Li, Wen, and Yao (2014), authors discuss various traffic control systems and their relations to vehicular communications. Araghi, Khosravi, and Creighton (2015) present a review of traffic signal control mechanisms using computational intelligence. The survey reported in Florin and Olariu (2015) summarizes the research done on optimization of traffic control using vehicle communication.In Elhenawy, Elbery, Hassan, and Rakha (2015), game-theory-based algorithm for controlling autonomous vehicles equipped with Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control (CACC) systems, has been proposed. Similarly, the signaling method proposed in Wang et al. (2017) uses a collaborative strategy without separate intersection management. In Zhu and Ukkusuri (2015), autonomous intersection control is applied using the traffic dynamics within a connected vehicle environment. Pandit, Ghosal, Zhang, and Chuah (2013) have proposed a method to control traffic based on per-vehicle real-time position and speed data with an aim to reduce waiting time at intersections. The work proposed in Maslekar, Boussedjra, Mouzna, and Labiod (2011) can time the signals at traffic intersections based on car-to-car communication to reduce the waiting time and queue length at an intersection. In Chen, Sharma, and Tseng (2013), a lane with the highest passing rate is given the top priority to realize real-time vehicle scheduling using vehicular communication. Abdoos, Mozayani, and Bazzan (2013) have proposed a multi-agent based approach to avoid over-saturation for networked intersection management resulting in reduced average delay time and higher flow rate. Deployment of in-vehicle functionalities that rely on vehicle probe data streams for reliable prediction of signal phase and timing (SPAT) has been proposed in Fayazi, Vahidi, Mahler, and Winckler (2015). A distributed traffic signaling based on Lagrangian relaxation and subgradient method has been proposed in Zhang, Su, and Gao (2015). The work proposed in Gao, Zhang, Sadollah, and Su (2016) tries to solve the signal timing problem using a networked approach with a centralized model with an objective to minimize the network-wise total delay time. Another centralized method has been proposed in Gao, Zhang, Sadollah, and Su (2017) to minimize the network-wise total delay time of all vehicles within a fixed time window. Ghanim and Abu-Lebdeh (2015) have proposed a preferential signaling algorithm using a coordinated approach to reduce transit vehicle delay to improve schedule adherence of vehicles. In Younes and Boukerche (2018), a traffic light signaling algorithm has been proposed for handling emergency vehicles. An adaptive traffic control mechanism has been proposed in Khamis and Gomaa (2014) to reduce average trip and waiting time. An enhancement proposed in Khamis and Gomaa (2012) minimizes the trip time and increases safety. Traffic control adaptive to the high dynamics and non-stationarity proposed in Khamis, Gomaa, and El-Shishiny (2012) tries to minimize average trip and waiting time. A multi-objective traffic control system has been proposed in Khamis, Gomaa, El-Mahdy, and Shoukry (2012) and it is adaptive to environment change and road network non-stationarity.A simulation-based algorithm, namely longest queue-maximal weight matching (LQ-MWM) for traffic signal timing has been proposed in Wunderlich, Elhanany, and Urbanik (2007), which uses maximal weight matching to minimize the queue sizes such that the system remains stable. Intelligent Traffic Light Controlling (ITLC) (Younes & Boukerche, 2016) tries to maximize throughput and minimize queuing delay. In Ahmad, Mahmud, and Yousaf (2017), minimum destination distance first (MDDF) and minimum average destination distance first (MADDF) have been proposed to reduce the traffic congestion. Wu, Ghosal, Zhang, and Chuah (2018) have proposed a delay-based traffic signal control algorithm to achieve optimal throughput. Relative backlog rate-based signaling has been proposed by Shi, Jiang, and Li (2016). However, the aforementioned simulation-based methods do not deal with real-life scenarios. Our proposed method uses actual data for intelligent signal timing for isolated intersections.
1.2. Motivation and contributionsVehicle count can be used as a measure of flow via object detection (Seenouvong, Watchareeruetai, Nuthong, Khongsomboon, & Ohnishi, 2016). However, accurate tracking is needed for signal timing prediction. Accurate tracking in complex situations is a challenge (Bae, Yoon, 2017, Choi, Jin Chang, Jeong, Demiris, Young Choi, 2016, Henriques, Caseiro, Martins, Batista, 2015). One illustration of Kernalized Correlation Filter (KCF) tracker (Henriques et al., 2015), known to be one of the best trackers as depicted in Fig. 2(a). Kanade–Lucas–Tomasi (KLT) feature tracker (Tomasi & Kanade, 1991) fails in similar situations as can be seen from Fig. 2(b). Hence we use clusters obtained using a new inference scheme on TUIC model (Santhosh, Dogra, & Roy, 2018), namely temporal clusters to represent traffic flows. Such clusters can closely approximate the spatial occupancy of vehicles on road rather than relying on the actual number of vehicles. This is better as compared to actual vehicle density measure since the size of the vehicles can be misleading for estimating density. For example, assuming the length of a car is half as compared to a bus, the time taken by the bus to cross a typical traffic signal will be twice that of the car when both vehicles are moving at similar speed. However, the clearance time of the vehicles in a fixed road segment as depicted in Fig. 3(a), is expected to be similar irrespective of the type of vehicles. This means, clearance time is not directly proportional to the number of vehicles. Therefore, using the vehicle count to decide the clearance time without considering the vehicle’s spatial occupancy can be erroneous. KLT features do not provide a similar number of feature points even for same sized vehicles as can be observed from Fig. 2(b).Download : Download high-res image (587KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Depiction of tracking failures and ambiguity in feature-based tracking. (a) In KCF tracker, out of the nine objects that were initialized, only three were tracked successfully. (b) In KLT feature tracker, similarly sized vehicles were represented by varying number of feature points. Hence vehicle spatial occupancy may not always be correlated with feature points.Download : Download high-res image (553KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. (a) Depiction of the relevance of spatial occupancy in traffic signaling. (b) A toy illustration of a typical 4-way intersection and corresponding traffic flows. All flows except free left turns are controlled through phase sequencing. The number of clusters present in the regions highlighted in green and red is used for estimating the signal duration in the proposed method. Traffic flows are indicated by arrows. In the figure, only the L1 is active and others are inactive except the free left turns. In the regions highlighted as red, only vehicle entries are allowed. Entry and exit of vehicles are recorded at each approach in the Arrival-ROI and Departure-ROI, respectively as demarcated. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Usage of temporal clusters in the estimation of queue clearance time for a single approach road has been explored in the work proposed in Santhosh, Dogra, and Roy (2019). In the present traffic signaling solution, we consider all approach roads of an intersection to achieve optimized average waiting time and throughput. In accomplishing this, we have made the following contributions:(i)We propose a new inference scheme that works approximately 5-times faster than the method proposed in Santhosh et al. (2018) for a dense traffic intersection and it can trace fully occluded objects without losing cluster labels.(ii)As temporal clusters approximate vehicles-in-motion and spatial occupancy on the roads, we propose temporal cluster count as a measure to predict traffic phase duration.(iii)Using the learned parameters as a function of cluster count, an intelligent algorithm referred to as Throughput and Average Waiting Time Optimization (TAWTO), has been proposed. The algorithm guarantees maximization of the throughput and minimization of the average waiting time.(iv)We publish the video datasets (4WAY and IITBBSR)2 of a 4-way intersection and IIT Bhubaneswar campus road to the computer vision research community.Rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the background of temporal cluster generation, traffic density estimation, and derive the proposed signal timing algorithm. In Section 3, we discuss the datasets, experiments, and results. In Section 4, we conclude the work with a few insights into the future directions of the present work.
