Computer Aided Diseases Diagnoses (CADD) is a continuous process of innovation and creation of new ideas to ease human life. The ultimate goal of CADD is to diagnose diseases from medical images in digital form [1]. There are many bio-medical imaging technologies available in modern days such as Radiography (X-Ray image), CT-Scan, ECG, Ultrasound, MRI, etc. All these medical imaging are best suited depending on the type of diseases to be detected from human body [1, 2]. The X-Ray, usually suggested by orthopaedics, is easily available and low cost imaging technology solution to capture image of injured bone parts of human body. The following Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) depicts X-Ray images of human right and left hand respectively.Download : Download high-res image (229KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) Right hand of human being. (b) Left Hand of human being.
To design a comprehensive CADD system for human X-Ray images, one needs to understand the basic methodology of image processing. Edge detection is one of the crucial pre-processing stages of digital image processing. It, basically, aims at identifying points in the image where the contrast and brightness changes abruptly [3]. In edge detection stage, the input is the original image and output is image in the form edges based on selected algorithm or method. This pre-processing stage is very crucial for next stages of digital image processing such as segmentation, feature extraction and image interpretation.
Edge detection is the stage before image segmentation and feature or ROI extraction. It should be completed with high accuracy, low noise and in minimum computational time to achieve overall success of targeted tasks for example to detect fracture from digital X-Ray image. P.M.K.Prasad et al. [4] and paper [5] have discussed that there are two categories of traditional edge detection operators such as first order derivative/gradient based (Roberts, Prewitt and Sobel) and second order derivative (Laplacian, Laplacian of Gaussian and Difference of Gaussian). Canny edge detection can be optimal or running standard. As per paper [6] these operators are noise sensitive because they have high frequency amplification property.
In this paper, we have proposed a method to detect edges from X-Ray image of human being's arm based on Gaussian filter and statistical range. We have also shown that the proposed algorithm also detects edges much effectively on other types of standard image dataset. Further, we have also presented a comprehensive comparison of our proposed method with four existing latest methods/algorithms of edge detection based on MSE, RMSE, PSNR and computational time parameters. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses related work on latest edge detection methods. Section 3 describes methodology of edge detection from X-Ray images which includes background of statistical range, flowchart of proposed method and discussion on comparison parameters. Section 4 describes an algorithm for proposed method and pseudocode of an algorithm. In Section 5, we have conducted experiments in terms of comparison and discussed experimental results. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 6 with future attempts to be made.
