The invention of the computer has changed and shaped the lives of many generations, and it has transformed the workplace. Office work has always involved a range of activities, such as typing, filing, reading, and writing. With the evolution of the computer, all these tasks can now be completed using the one device. (Blehm et al., 2005). The computer has even become an integral part of daily life at home. Eighty-six percent of Australian households have access to the internet, with 94% owning a computer (ABS, 2016). It has been reported that 64–90% of computer users experience symptoms of computer vision syndrome (CVS), defined as the collection of symptoms that result from prolonged computer use (AOA, 2017; Blehm et al., 2005). These include ocular symptoms, such as eye strain and irritation of the eyes, visual symptoms such as blurred vision, and musculoskeletal symptoms such as neck and shoulder pain (Anshel, 2005; Blehm et al., 2005; Gowrisankaran and Sheedy, 2015; Yan et al., 2008). As the number of computer users and time spent using a computer are likely to increase, it is necessary to further understand the links between computer use, musculoskeletal, and visual symptoms.
The combined visual and neck symptoms in CVS is intriguing as the neck is an important and sensitive sensory organ. It has a high percentage of proprioceptors that trigger reflexes in the eyes and the inner ear. This allows for precise control of head and eye movements, as well as posture (Armstrong et al., 2008; Della Casa, Helbling, Meichtry, Luomajoki and Kool, 2014). Apart from pain and dizziness, people with persistent neck pain have reported numerous visual symptoms, such as tired eyes or blurred vision, which are consistent with the presentation of CVS (Thorud et al., 2012; Treleaven and Takasaki, 2014). Oculomotor deficits in those with neck pain are thought to be the cause of these visual symptoms. The deficits include: poor eye-head coordination, gaze stability, and smooth pursuit eye movement control; resultant of altered cervical afferent input (Treleaven et al., 2011; Treleaven et al., 2005; Treleaven and Takasaki, 2014).
The visual ergonomics of the computer environment influence both the visual system and musculoskeletal structures around the neck (Blehm et al., 2005; Gowrisankaran and Sheedy, 2015; Hood and Hood, 2016). Visual ergonomics is defined as interactions between humans and other elements of a system such as the visual environment (lighting and workstation setup), visually demanding work, visual function and performance, visual comfort and safety, optical corrections, and other safety tools (Toomingas, 2014). Consequently, inadequate lighting, incorrect computer viewing height and distance, as well as continuous periods of computer use, are associated with an increase in visual discomfort, and neck strain, ache and pain in healthy individuals (Blehm et al., 2005; Hemphälä and Eklund, 2012; Yan et al., 2008). It is possible that the number of computer screens used may have an impact on CVS, but limited research has been conducted to identify any association.
While intermittent neck pain is a small component of CVS, it is also plausible that ocular symptoms occur in relation to neck pain or are independent of computer use in those with persistent neck pain. To date, it is unknown if people with persistent neck pain experience an exacerbation of CVS compared to those without persistent neck pain, due to the potential ability of computer use to exacerbate both neck pain and visual complaints. As such, the primary aim of this research study was to examine the differences in the presentation of CVS symptoms in computer users with and without persistent neck pain. The secondary aim was to identify relationships between selected visual ergonomics features (e.g. number of screens, duration, and type of computer use) and CVS in those with and without persistent neck pain. It is hypothesised that subjects with persistent neck pain will experience greater CVS than those without. In addition, certain individual characteristics and visual ergonomic features will be associated with greater CVS in those with persistent neck pain.
