Several models of the origin of self-reproducing systems were proposed: the hypercycle model (Eigen & Schuster, 1979), the stochastic corrector model (Szathmáry, 1986a, Szathmáry, 1986b, Szathmáry and Demeter, 1987), the chemoton model (Ganti, 2003a, Ganti, 2003b, Ganti, 2003c), the syser model (Ratner and Shamin, 1980, Ratner and Shamin, 1983, White, 1980, Feistel, 1983). The current article develops the syser model.
The term syser is the abbreviation of “SYstem of SElf-Reproduction”. The syser includes a polynucleotide matrix (polynucleotide chain), a replication enzyme, a translation enzyme, and other enzymes and proteins. The syser model characterizes a rather general scheme of self-reproducing systems, which is similar to self-reproducing systems of biological cells. We can note that the scheme of sysers is similar to that of the self-reproducing automata that were proposed and investigated by John von Neumann (Von Neumann & Burks, 1966).
It should be noted that the syser model is similar to the stochastic corrector model that was constructed and investigated by Szathmáry with coauthors (Szathmáry, 1986a, Szathmáry, 1986b, Szathmáry and Demeter, 1987). In the stochastic corrector model, the protocell contains several types of replicators that compete but nonetheless complement each other. The number of replicator molecules in the protocell is small; during the life of the protocell, the number of replicator molecules increases. There is a mechanism for duplication of protocells. Descendants with the “correct” proportion between the numbers of replicators of different types become alive, whereas descendants with an “incorrect” proportion between replicators die out.
In the current work, we study the model of sysers with a small number of macromolecules in the protocell; the process of replication of protocells is similar to duplication of protocells in the stochastic corrector model. The article is structured as follows. First, we describe the general scheme of sysers and outline the main results for the syser model with a large number of macromolecules (Section 2). Then we present the description of a new syser model with a small number of macromolecules (Section 3) and the results of computer experiments for the new model (Section 4).
