With the advancement of technology, the demands for high-speed computing are needed increasingly. The main means of speeding up the electronic computer is to increase the computing speed of the CPU, which mainly depends on the improvement of the chip integration. Since the first electronic computer was introduced in 1946, the computing speed of the CPU has been continuously improved according to Moore’s Law. However, due to the limitation of the RC time constant of the wire, the integration of the CPU is about to reach its upper limit. Therefore, scientists began to consider the parallel operation of multiple CPUs and multi-processor cores to improve the overall computing speed of the computer. This method plays a certain role, but also faces the irreconcilable contradiction, that is, the extra communication caused by parallel operation and the high energy consumption caused by data I/O. This forces people to start thinking about other new computing components [1]. The TOC is a photoelectric hybrid computer that realizes optical calculation by using mature liquid crystal technology, and uses the common and inexpensive electronic chip on the market as a control component. Besides, it stores data by means of photoelectric hybrid complementary mode, constructs an optical computing, electrical control, and photoelectric hybrid storage architecture. The new generation of optical processors for TOC has thousands of bits of data width, and the number of bits is easily expanded. It has two advantages i.e. a large number of data bits and a processor reconfigurable [2]. In addition, the TOC is constructed using liquid crystal devices (LCDs) that consume very little energy and an embedded systems. So the TOC has a large number of data bits while consuming less energy. In the current experiment, a TOC is equivalent to dozens of CPUs in the consumption ability while it has a power consumption of about 500 watts. Compared with the existing ternary optical processor, the Double-Rotator-Structure Ternary Optical Processor (DRSTOP) [3], [4] has certain advantages in terms of reconstruction speed and efficiency, and its computing ability will reach 9216 bits×1 GHz. When processing large-scale data, its computing ability is estimated to be equivalent to hundreds of CPUs, but it does not require special cooling equipment, and the energy consumption is extremely low. At present, the research on the logic operator and the one-step adder of the DRSTOP has made a breakthrough, and start to have the conditions for practical application. In practical applications, especially in engineering and scientific computing, multiplication is one of the most basic operations, and the speed and efficiency of multiplication is crucial. Although multiplication operation can be implemented by using adders and reasonable algorithm, these algorithms often contain a large number of loops, making it difficult to implement fast multiplication operations [5]. In this paper, the minimum module of the MMM is designed and implemented by using the one-step MSD adder, numerous data bits and reconfigurable features of the DRSTOP, and its computational efficiency and expansion method are discussed. The MMM of TOC greatly improves the speed and efficiency of multiplication, which will provide a strong guarantee for engineering and scientific operations [6].
