Office workers show a higher risk of developing neck and shoulder pain relative to the general population (Ariëns et al., 2001; Chiu et al., 2002; Côté et al., 2009); and several studies have shown that the risk of upper-extremity MSDs increases with duration of computer work (Blatter and Bongers, 2002; Gerr et al., 2006; Jensen, 2003; Marcus et al., 2002). Computer workers have a higher annual prevalence rate (27.1–47.8%) and incidence rate (41–67 cases per 100 person years, depending on symptom case definitions) of pain in the neck and shoulders compared to workers in other occupations (Côté et al., 2009; Wigaeus Tornqvist et al., 2009). Several reviews have examined the relationship between computer work and neck-shoulder pain (e.g., IJmker et al., 2007; Wahlström, 2005), and emphasized that non-neutral arm postures and continuously active neck-shoulder muscles may be key physical factors associated with pain in the neck and shoulder region.
The trapezius muscle in the upper back and neck region controls various movements of the neck and shoulder, and has been implicated as an important muscle lying in the affected region among those with neck and shoulder pain (Kuijpers et al., 2004; Pope et al., 2001). The pathophysiology of persistent neck-shoulder pain, including myalgia, has been reviewed in a number of papers, with the conclusion that there are multiple possible etiological mechanisms (Forde et al., 2002; Sjøgaard and Søgaard, 1998; Visser and Van Dieën, 2006). Among these, a review on the plausible connection between muscle activity and muscle damage (Visser and Van Dieën, 2006) concluded that both epidemiological and mechanistic studies support the Cinderella hypothesis of sustained low-intensity muscle activity causing continuous activation of type I motor units (Hägg, 1991), which may, in turn, lead to overload.
Accordingly, various studies have found that people whose movement patterns are associated with less ‘rest’ in the trapezius muscle, i.e. less periods at very low activity (referred to as “gaps” in electromyography (EMG) recordings) have a higher risk of developing trapezius myalgia (Hägg and Åström, 1997; Veiersted et al., 1990; Veiersted and Westgaard, 1993). A prospective study of newly hired manufacturing workers reported that those who showed a lower number of EMG gaps in the trapezius during their work were more likely to develop neck-shoulder pain in future (Veiersted et al., 1993). Some studies have reported excessive muscle activity in the upper trapezius among computer workers with chronic neck-shoulder pain (Johnston et al., 2008; Madeleine et al., 2016; Szeto et al., 2005; Xie and Szeto, 2015). These studies suggest a possible causal relationship between muscle activation and neck-shoulder pain, making it imperative to study trapezius muscle activation patterns to improve understanding of the development and prognosis of neck-shoulder pain. However, EMG gap analysis methods have been unable to differentiate between subjects with and without pain in computer work specifically, probably due to the inherently low levels of muscle activation during computer tasks (Blangsted et al., 2004; Vasseljen and Westgaard, 1995; Westgaard et al., 2001). Thus, a more detailed analysis of temporal activation patterns is of interest. In an occupational context, it may also be particularly relevant to investigate activation patterns in those subjects that have not yet developed severe, continuos pain conditions precluding work, but who still perform work at close-to-normal paces although they suffer from recurring pain at mild-moderate intensities.
Many studies have emphasized the importance of quantifying “variation” in trapezius muscle activation patterns, assuming that chronic pain may be associated with low levels of variation (Côté et al., 2009; Madeleine et al., 2008; Mathiassen, 2006; Srinivasan and Mathiassen, 2012). Some studies have expressed variation in terms of cycle-to-cycle variability in exposure, but in non-repetitive work such as computer work, this approach is not useful. Hence, there has been little consensus in the literature on a reliable and sensitive method of quantifying variation during computer work. As a consequence, a long-standing hypothesis that individuals with chronic pain would present longer durations of sustained muscle activation when performing computer work, and hence exhibit lower variation in muscle activation patterns, has not been confirmed.
In this context, exposure variation analysis (EVA) (Mathiassen and Winkel, 1991) is a tool that expresses continuous exposure-vs-time data in categories defined by exposure amplitude and accumulated time, thus giving way to an understanding of the differences in the temporal structure of exposures at different amplitude levels. EVA has been shown in studies of muscle activity, in particular in the upper trapezius, to be sensitive in various tasks outside computer work (Attebrant et al., 1997; Bao et al., 1996; Delisle et al., 2005; Fjellman-Wiklund et al., 2004; Januario et al., 2018; Mathiassen and Winkel, 1996; Reynolds et al., 2014). Specifically with regard to upper trapezius muscle activity during computer work, EVA has been shown to be sensitive to variation in task (Ciccarelli et al., 2013; Jensen et al., 1999; Mathiassen et al., 2003; Straker et al., 2009; Wærsted and Westgaard, 1997), demographic groups (pain, age and pregnant vs. non-pregnant) (Dumas et al., 2008; Hägg and Åström, 1997; Maslen and Straker, 2009), and configuration of work environment (Dumas et al., 2009; Samani et al., 2009a, 2009b). Of these studies, Hägg and Åström (1997) is the only study to have compared workers with and without pain using EVA. However, this study analyzed typing and paper handling tasks performed by medical secretaries (different from modern computer work), and while they illustrated EVA plots of average differences between groups, they performed statistical testing of group differences only in EMG gaps. Thus, to date, EVA has not been used to characterize differences in trapezius muscle activation patterns accompanying chronic neck-shoulder pain during computer work.
On a related note, the day-to-day variability among individuals in muscle activation patterns expressed by EVA, i.e., the reliability of EVA, is also of interest. Studies by Delisle et al. (2005), Reynolds et al. (2014) and Fjellman-Wiklund et al. (2004) have investigated the consistency within workers of selected EVA variables. However, these studies addressed activities such as sign language interpretation and violin playing, and used a variety of statistical procedures to express reliability, including testing data only for systematic differences between days (Fjellman-Wiklund et al., 2004). Thus, no study has, to the best of our knowledge, explicitly estimated the day-to-day reliability in a wide selection of EVA variables describing trapezius muscle activation of computer users.
Hence, the aims of this study were to: (i) Determine the extent to which individuals with chronic neck-shoulder pain and non-symptomatic individuals differ in muscle activation patterns when performing computer work, as expressed by EVA; and (ii) Quantify the day-to-day variability of EVA metrics describing trapezius muscle activation among non-symptomatic individuals performing computer work. In order to be applicable to those individuals with chronic pain that still perform routine office work, our chronic-pain group was focused on identifying individuals with mild to moderate levels of pain, that still allowed them to perform regular computer work. Our hypothesis was that individuals with neck-shoulder pain would exhibit longer durations of sustained muscle contractions in the trapezius muscle than the non-symptomatic group.
