
“The problem that I am stuck on at this point, and I don't have anything like a solution to it, is how does a glance become an action? What kind of a world do you have to build to make a glance an action?” (Sacks, 1992: 84)
Psychologists have for a long time recognised that we overwhelmingly perceive the world visually by dropping quick glances at the objects in our environments. As Bruner and Goodman (1947: 36) noted in a classic paper that helped pave way for the ‘cognitive revolution’ in the social sciences:
“For in everyday life, perception is, by and large, a series of quick looks, glances, inattentive listenings, furtive touches.”
Prominent sociologists have made similar observations. For example, Erving Goffman argued that brief glances constitute actors' primary source of information about other people and their businesses in the domain, which he called ‘unfocused interaction’ (1963: 24); and David Sudnow proposed a theory about the constituents of what he called ‘glance-based interpretation’ (1972: 259).
Recent technological development has enabled cognitive and experimental psychologists to explore other aspects of vision in details (e.g. Schütz et al., 2011). In a stationary position, the human eye provides us a perceptual span that allows us to perceive only a fraction of the environment in front of us in high resolution - though the arc degree increases considerably when one includes also our peripheral vision (Strasburger et al., 2011). But we have mobile heads, eyes and full bodies that make it possible for us to reconfigurate our visual attention within a split second. One of the options that we use this mobility for is to glance briefly at elements in our surrounding environment. The two perhaps most canonical ways to accomplish such a glance are via head turns and saccades (i.e. eye movements). They are often used in conjunction (see Doshi and Trivedi, 2012). In fact, sophisticated inspection reveals that eye movements occur continuously during our waking hours, notably as microsaccades in connection with fixated gazes (Martinez-Conde et al., 2004). As I discuss below, this paper concentrates on head movements alone.
The study approaches glances from a different perspective: as embodied communicative action. The two functions are by no means mutually exclusive. Frederico Rossano (2012: 324) wisely reminds us:
“Yet it is clear that in a single stretch of interaction, the same individual will be confronted with the need to pay attention to the environment and still use his/her eyes for communicative needs.”
Point of departure is that video-recordings of general practice consultations in Denmark show that doctors repeatedly turn their heads towards their computer screens for a very short period of time while they interact with patients - as if they glance shortly at the screen. A brief example from the opening of a visit is depicted in excerpt 1. As with the remaining examples, it has been transcribed using conversation analytic principles of notation (see Jefferson (2004) and the list of symbols at the end of this paper). Doctors are abbreviated DO and patients PA. English translations are placed immediately below the (italicised) original Danish transcriptions. Doctors' glances at their computer screens are depicted with dashed lines, aligned with simultaneous talk using asterisk symbols (*), and followed by a notation of its duration. Unless otherwise noted, doctors gaze at patients before and after they glance at the computer screens. While this patient takes her seat, the doctor comments:Download : Download high-res image (128KB)Download : Download full-size image
It is perhaps tempting to dismiss such glances as fulfilling purely cognitive purposes and, thus, being essentially non-communicative. That is, doctors may simply read something very quickly. However, a closer inspection reveals that this is unlikely here because of the coordination between the glance and the doctor's verbal noticing that it is the patient's first visit to the clinic in line 01 (see Schegloff, 1988), which solicits the patient's narrative explanation about why she changed her family doctor (line 02 and onwards). Two clauses constitute the turn: a subordinate, ‘this is the first time you're here’, followed by a main, ‘I can see’. The glance is commenced mid-turn and ends just before the doctor completes the second clause. This position is crucial for the appreciation of the glance as a communicative act. The doctor has already uttered the item ‘first time’, which arguably makes the gist of the turn projectable, prior to the glance. He, thereby, informs the patient that he already knows that this is her first visit, before he looks at the computer. Variants of the perception verb ‘see’ are commonly invoked in utterances across languages to create grammatical evidentiality, which is very important in communication (e.g. Boye and Harder, 2009: 17). However, had it not been for the glance, it would have been difficult for the patient to infer, which kind of evidentiality ‘see’ creates here. She could relevantly have asked: where do you see/how do you know this? Thus, the glance's primary function in this case appears to be to index the meaning of the item ‘see’, that is, to bodily communicate that the doctor has read this information on his computer.
This function is quite similar to the case in example 2 where a pregnant woman is concerned whether the medication, which she was on before she found out about the pregnancy, has damaged her child. The doctor assures her that it is not a problem. Here, she informs the patient that she was aware of the situation even before the patient told her:Download : Download high-res image (153KB)Download : Download full-size imageDownload : Download high-res image (440KB)Download : Download full-size image
This glance ensures that the patient knows how the doctor knows about her condition: from reading records. Had it not been for the glance, it would probably be more troublesome for the patient to infer where the doctor had read about her medication, that is, to appreciate the reference to ‘it said’ in line 01. In addition to the accompanying pointing gesture (see figure #2), the verb's past tense (‘så’) makes the glance disambiguous by conveying explicitly that it is not something she currently reads. Furthermore, the three stills may help visualize the bodily appearance of doctors' glances and depict how they are produced as head movements. Figure #1 represents the moment immediately before the glance where the doctor gazes at the patient and supports her chin in a typical listening position (Kendon, 1990, chapter 4); figure #2 depicts the glance proper and, in this case, the doctor's accompanying point; figure #3 illustrates the doctor's return to gaze at the patient.
It is not always this easy to determine whether doctors glance at their computer screens mainly for communicative or cognitive purposes, for instance to scan the medical record to find a single piece of information necessary for the business at hand, or if they just need a pause from the engagement with the patient to rest their minds or consider what to say. However, we do find plenty of evidence that doctors' glances may be enacted to make a reference to something that is or can be found on their computers like in the two first excerpts. The main purpose of this study is to investigate in details how the glances are produced to bodily enact references to (content on) desk-top computers that supports doctors' current actions – or project subsequent action.
