The development of machine learning tools for computer-aided design in chemistry is a dynamic area of research [[1], [2], [3], [4]]. In the last decades, among many other artificial intelligence approaches, the use of quantitative structure-property relationship (QSPR) models has increased noticeably [5]. The design of QSPR models constitutes a particular case of predictive modeling problem in which a domain expert is focused on discovering the relationship between some molecular descriptors and a target variable. To infer a QSPR model, it is necessary to identify which descriptors are more related to the target property [6,7]. Molecular descriptors are variables with a key role in characterizing the structure of chemical compounds [8]. Software tools for molecular descriptor computation can calculate thousands of variables but, in general, a regression QSPR model only requires a short number of descriptors for estimating the property under study. Consequently, within the well-known feature selection (FS) problem studied in Computer Science, the selection of descriptors in QSPR modeling is a particular case of it [9].
The computer-aided design and virtual selection of new materials can take advantage of these computational models [[10], [11], [12], [13]]. However, the QSPR modeling in Polymer Informatics is particularly complex [[14], [15], [16], [17]]. In this field, a careful computational modeling of polymeric materials is required. Polymers are huge molecules that consist of a large number of similar structural repetitive units (SRUs) linked together in chain structures [18]. Moreover, a human-made polymer is formed by several chains with different lengths and molecular weights. Therefore, in contrast with a typical drug molecule, a polymeric material is better characterized by a molecular weight distribution curve instead of a single molecular weight value. This is known as polydispersity, and it is a distinctive characteristic of polymeric materials. Considering this characteristic, each of the molecular descriptors of a polymer should be associated with a discrete distribution of values and not with a single value. This distribution is obtained by calculating the molecular descriptor for all chain polymers of different weights [19].
Nevertheless, in general, traditional QSPR approaches proposed for predicting polymer properties in computer-aided design of new materials do not consider polydispersity, oversimplifying the computational representation of each polymeric material to its SRUs [20,21]. In other words, these QSPR models are inferred from datasets in which the molecular descriptors are only computed for the shortest polymeric chain that characterizes each material, without considering neither the remaining polymeric chain lengths nor its associated frequencies (molecular weight distribution curve).
A first preliminary study to consider polydispersity in the prediction of polymer properties is presented in Cravero et al. [22]. In that work, the explored hypothesis is introduced in a general way, and the reported results correspond to a single mechanical property: elongation at break. In addition, the evaluation of the generalizability of QSAR models was performed by calculating an average of the performance values obtained for each of the material representations.
In this work, our main goal is to analyze the impact of this oversimplification in the computational representation of polymeric materials and to evaluate alternative strategies for addressing the molecular descriptor selection problem in a context of polydispersity, considering the molecular weight distribution curve. In particular, we attempt to answer the following questions:
Q1)Is the structural information given by the molecular descriptors related to the SRU-based representation enough for achieving accurate QSPR models?Q2)Are there any other structural representations of materials based on some characteristic parameters of the molecular weight distribution curves of the materials that yield to predictive models that improve SRU-based models?Q3)Is it advisable to integrate in a single database the molecular descriptors corresponding to polymeric chains of different characteristic weights related to the molecular weight distribution curves of the materials?
To address these points, we present several databases and QSPR modeling experiments for predicting different mechanical properties of polymeric materials associated with the tensile test. Nonetheless, note that our goal is not the proposal and discussion of QSPR models for these properties. This research is focused on answering the questions related to the structural computational representation of materials previously enumerated to explore a central hypothesis: QSPR models inferred by using structural information corresponding to several polymeric chain lengths of different characteristic weights of these materials should yield more accurate estimations than QSPR models generated from SRU-based representations.
The paper is organized as follows: in the next section, the proposed methodology for the analysis is explained. After that, preliminary results are presented for the prediction of three material properties known as tensile modulus, elongation at break, and tensile strength at break, using in-house polymeric material databases. Finally, conclusions and potential further research are discussed.
