The importance of students' conceptual understanding is increasingly emphasized in policy documents worldwide (Songer & Kali, 2014). Science education should discourage the memorization of inert, disciplinary science facts, and favor instructional activities promoting the use of arguments, data analyses, and the application of acquired knowledge to real-life situations (Mayer, 2002; Songer & Kali, 2014). However, the development of a deep conceptual understanding of science takes effort, time, guidance, and repeated exposures (Brown, Ellery, & Campione, 1998). Therefore, there is a need to support students to achieve a deep conceptual understanding in science, so that they reach the education system goals of meaningful learning and knowledge transfer (Anderman, Sinatra, & Gray, 2012; Gallagher, 2000; Johnstone, 1991; Ploetzner, Lippitsch, Galmbacher, Heuer, & Scherrer, 2009).
Many instructional approaches for addressing students' conceptual learning have been developed (Harrison, Grayson, & Treagust, 1999; Karplus, 1981; Posner, Strike, Hewson, & Gertzog, 1982; Thornton & Sokoloff, 1990; Wiser & Amin, 2001). One such promising approach is to have students generate concept maps (Pérez-Rodríguez, Suero-López, Montanero-Fernández, Pardo-Fernández, & Montanero-Morán, 2009). By eliciting self-explanations, the task of constructing a concept map can stimulate students' awareness of their own implicit causal models of the physical phenomenon being dealt with (Chi, Slotta, & De Leeuw, 1994). Concept maps are tools known to contribute to students' deeper conceptual understanding, especially when utilized as a tool for knowledge co-construction in collaborative learning (Okebukola, 1990; van Boxtel, van der Linden, & Kanselaar, 2000). Collaborative learning, which has been used in education for several decades, often aims to foster students' meaningful learning, in the sense of appropriating a deeper conceptual understanding by co-constructing knowledge, and not only that the students solve problems together (Baker, 2015; Correia & Infante-Malachias, 2009; Ng & Hanewald, 2009).
The use of concept maps in collaborative learning (i.e., collaborative concept mapping; CCM) can be supported by computers in both face-to-face and not co-located situations. In this sense, computer-support facilitates rearranging, editing and sharing the map, as well as working together and communicating when students are apart. Different instructional designs can be used to implement computer-supported collaborative concept mapping (CSCCM). First, students could be instructed to collaborate directly on CSCCM (Gijlers & de Jong, 2013). Second, an initial individual concept mapping phase could be used as preparation for CSCCM (De Weerd, Tan, & Stoyanov, 2017). Third, instruction could leverage the affordances of CSCCM to support cognitive group awareness (i.e., group members' knowledge of who knows what). Research on computer-supported collaborative learning has indicated that supporting cognitive group awareness in these environments enhances knowledge co-construction (Schreiber & Engelmann, 2010; Stoyanova & Kommers, 2002). However, no research has explored the addition of cognitive group awareness support to the CSCCM capabilities for stimulating conceptual understanding. To the best of our knowledge, the aforementioned instructional designs have not been studied in unison. For example, Stoyanova and Kommers (2002) found that the form in which knowledge is shared during computer-supported collaborative problem solving using concept maps affects the effectiveness of the collaboration. In their design, an individual preparation phase was not considered. De Weerd et al. (2017) found that an individual preparation phase resulted in higher-quality knowledge co-construction, but their design did not include sharing the outcomes of the individual phase to enhance cognitive group awareness.
Accordingly, in this paper, we aim to investigate the effects of the different instructional designs mentioned above, which leverage CSCCM, on students' conceptual understanding and quality of knowledge co-construction. Importantly, we consider factors which might affect students' engagement with CSCCM, such as students' communication skills, self-regulated learning capabilities, and attitudes towards online collaborative learning.
