Rice is one of the most widely produced crops in the world, ranking below only sugar cane and maize according to Food and Agriculture Organization Corporate Statistical (FAOSTAT) data (Trade and Market division of FAO, 2016). In order to improve the efficiency of rice-farming work in paddy fields, tractors, transplanters, and combine harvesters are used instead of farmers for tasks such as tilling, transplanting, and harvesting. In recent years, many intelligent devices were proposed to innovate the agricultural machinery in rice production (Hirafuji et al., 2004, Nagasaka et al., 2004, Prisilla et al., 2012, Zhang et al., 2014). However, fertilizing and spraying of herbicides are difficult for tractor sprayer to execute because the row spacing of paddy is normally 25–30 cm in paddy fields (Sasaki and Kawano, 2012). Tractors could easily damage the sludgy soil and paddy unless wide tractor roads are constructed in paddy fields, which would waste planting area. In addition, paddy crops, as semi-aquatic plants, are cultivated in the wetland fields. The paddy field is submerged in 2–10 cm of water for the long period of paddy growth, especially in the early stage of growth (Brouwer et al., 1989). Nowadays, a few agricultural machinery enterprises in Japan, such as Yanmar Co., Ltd., Takakita Co., Ltd., Shikari Co., Ltd., are developing and producing a kind of agricultural airboat which could be used to weed and fertilize in the early stage of paddy growth. These airboats are controlled by a radio controller to run on the water surface and spray liquid herbicide through a pipe on the flat bottom of the airboat hull. Farmers can utilize the airboat to improve the work efficiency of weeding and fertilizing. However, the airboat is hard to control when it is far from the farmer because it is difficult for the farmer to monitor the running state of the airboat when it is out of sight. Under this circumstance, the airboat could easily overlap its predefined task path and even hit the edge of the paddy field. To solve this problem, Liu and Noguchi (2016) developed a GPS-compass-based autonomous navigation system for an agricultural airboat (RB-26, Hokuto Yanmar, Japan). The navigation accuracy was 0.25 m RMS error. Nevertheless, if there are tall trees or buildings near the paddy field, or in the bad weather conditions, the GPS receiver cannot obtain adequate positioning signal from the satellites. Consequently, the navigation performance is degraded and becomes unstable under these outdoor conditions.
In addition, the UAVs have been made more flexible and more stable in current years. Nowadays, the UAVs are becoming increasingly popular and widely used for different purposes in different fields, such as forest fire monitoring (Casbeer et al., 2005) and the classification of building damage after earthquakes (Rehor, 2007). Some researchers have also used UAVs to survey and make 3D models of areas under archaeological study (Fausta et al., 2013). In agriculture, the use of UAVs is also currently under in-depth discussion (David et al., 2008, Rango and Laliberte, 2010, Primicerio et al., 2012, Richard, 2014). Zarco-Tejada et al. (2012) used a micro-hyperspectral imager and a thermal camera on an UAV to detect water stress in a citrus orchard. Senthilnath et al. (2017) used two UAV platforms to detect the vegetation for tree crown classification by using spectral-spatial methods. These mentioned above studies focused on the remote monitoring of crop or vegetation growth conditions through using the UAV-based computer vision system. Besides, the UAV could be used to spray pesticide or herbicide directly through loading an electric sprayer. Many research achievements on UAV-based spraying have been reported recently (Giles and Billing, 2015, Kale et al., 2015, Xue et al., 2016). However, the natural wind and propeller-produced wind could easily lead to spray drift, which would cause the pesticide or herbicide to drop far away from the target area (Franklin, 2007). Spray drift of UAV can harm people’s health and cause damage to plants, herbicide waste, and some terrible environment problems. In this paper, the authors attempted to integrate the UAV and the airboat into one system for autonomous navigation to realize autonomous fertilizing and herbicide application in paddy fields. The developed UAV-based computer vision system instead of a GPS can obtain the airboat position information with respect to the paddy field for airboat autonomous navigation, especially in environments where the GPS signal is weak and unstable. On the other hand, under UAV-based navigation guidance, the airboat can navigate automatically and spray herbicide directly into the water, thus avoiding the spray drift problem that often occurs with UAV spraying from the air. Hence, the airboat-based spraying style without spray drift can reduce the impact of herbicide on human health and the environment. This UAV and airboat cooperative system is a meaningful supplement in precision agriculture.
