Computers & Chemical Engineering (CACE) was launched in 1977 with the goal of providing a permanent record of computer applications to chemical engineering problems (Hughes and Ware, 1977). As seen in Fig. 1, CACE’s volume has grown remarkably over the last four decades. In the mid-1990s, CACE saw pivotal growth and published at least 200 papers each year. In addition to a strong volume increase, Fig. 2 also shows an increase in CACE’s impact factor. Today, CACE is one of the leading journals in chemical engineering, with 4000 pages published in 2018 alone. Given its growth and influence, we use CACE to study research trends and topic popularity in its field. A full analysis of the journal’s topic coverage and topic trends may provide helpful insights that can be used by researchers exploring the future of this field. Although area experts may recognize some new modern topics in the field, it is increasingly difficult to uncover the entire topic landscape of the journal manually.Download : Download high-res image (204KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The number of papers published in CACE during its first four decades.Download : Download high-res image (209KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Annual citation and journal impact factor of CACE from 1997 to 2017.
Recent developments in latent topic modeling have produced exciting results for automatic field discovery. A topic model is used to summarize a collection of documents and label them by topics. Fine-grained topics provide a clear view of topical divisions and interactions within a body of literature. Griffiths and Steyvers (2004) studied the abstracts published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences between 1991 and 2001. They used the latent Dirichlet allocation topic model to extract meaningful topics from the data set, and studied relationships between scientific papers in various disciplines. Blei and Lafferty (2007) applied topic modeling to articles from the journal Science. Hall et al. (2008) studied papers in ACL Anthology to analyze historical trends in computational linguistics. Mimno (2012) analyzed 24 journals in classical philology and archaeology to identify changes in the nature of classical scholarship. To clarify the notion of big data, Hansmann and Niemeyer (2014) applied topic models to 248 computer science publications. They discovered that the field of big data consists of four topics.
In this paper, we explore three main questions about CACE:
•How did the journal’s scope change in its first 40 years?•What are the popular topics in process systems engineering today?•What are some topic coverage characteristics of highly cited papers in CACE?
The remainder of this paper includes five sections. In Section 2, we introduce text mining basics and topic modeling. In Sections 3 and 4, we detail the method of nonnegative matrix factorization for topic modeling and outline our approach. In Section 5, we provide several topical analyses, and in Section 6, we summarize our main results.
