The invention of writing systems and the continuous advancement of technology has had a profound impact on not only the way we store information, but how we access it as well. One study which looked at the “Google Effect” on memory found that people have lower rates of recall when they expect to have future access to information (e.g., the Internet), as compared to items that they do not think will be externally available. Surprisingly, however, the researchers found that participants who expected information to be easily accessible instead tended to have higher recall of where the information was stored: “people don't remember ‘where’ when they know ‘what’ but do remember where to find the information when they don't recall it” (Sparrow et al., 2011, pg. 778). This finding suggests that the philosopher Plato (circa 370 B.C., Phaedrus 275a) was correct in his suspicion that the invention of writing would “create forgetfulness in the learners' souls, because they will not use their memories; they will trust to the external written characters and not remember of themselves”.
However, while the advent of the Internet has simply taken information-sharing to the extreme, it has long been known that groups of people will form a kind of group memory (i.e., a transactive memory system) which combines information that is directly known, and that which can be accessed through someone of the group who knows (Lewis & Herndon, 2011; Wegner, 1986). As notetaking essentially serves the purpose of a transactive memory system, the current study sought to determine the relative effect of writing medium on the rate of information recall. A population of tertiary-level Japanese English-as-a-Foreign-Language (EFL) students, writing in their second language (L2; English) were investigated notetaking either on paper or by smartphone, in order to answer the following questions:
①How does transcription speed compare between the two media?②To what degree does the rate of information recall differ between the two media?③Are correlations present between transcription speed and rate of information recall?
While much research has been conducted comparing computer typing and handwriting, very few studies have looked at the cognitive effects of smartphone writing and how it could impact students, particularly language learners. The current study follows precursor research which found that while Japanese tertiary students tend to be faster when tapping on their smartphones in their native language (L1; Japanese), they are significantly slower when it comes to their L2 (i.e., English) (Lee, 2020b). Research question #1 is therefore a partial replication, while the other questions are unique components that were inspired by previous investigations in an effort to fill the current knowledge gap.
