The computer science and application community is increasing exponentially by contributing high quality research works and new findings. The authenticity of these high-quality works is approved and governed by the standardized journals. There are many well respected and influential journals who publishes such research works. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence (EAAI) is one of the most prominent journal of computer science, which is published by the Elsevier. The publications in this journal can be broadly categorized in few subject areas: Artificial Intelligence, Control and system engineering, and Electrical and electronic engineering. According to the Journal Citation Report 2018 by Thomson Reuters, EAAI is one the high impact factor (IF = 3.526) journal within computer science. IFs are standard to measure the quality of the journal by evaluating a value which gives the average number of citation count of the journal referenced by other journals. EAAI has been publishing Survey papers/tutorials, Contributed papers, and Case studies or software reviews for last 30 years. Thus, in this paper, we have provided a retrospective exploration of the publications in EAAI.
Bibliometrics or sometimes referred as Scientometrics is an evaluation criterion of the research performed (Alvarez-Betancourt and Garcia-Silvente, 2014). It is one of the widely accepted quantitative and statistical analysis of the journals or the articles to generate some useful knowledgeable structures. When performed for a journal, it is basically concluding the overall growth structure, the quality of publication, the structure and citation landscape of the journal. Bibliometric analysis can also be used for identifying research strength and weakness, influencing authors in the area, best performing nations etc. Not only it is a part of library and information science, but it has been widely used in various research areas over the years (Du and Teixeira, 2012, Chen and Ho, 2015, Yataganbaba and Kurtbaş, 2016, Shukla et al., 2018, Muhuri et al., 2019). Heck and Bremser (1986) gave a first analysis where they presented the precise summary of the author and institutional contribution in the Accounting reviews journal. Over the years many authors have performed the bibliometric study of the various journals including: Naqvi (2005) on Journal of Documentation, Van Fleet et al. (2006) on Journal of Management, Chen et al. (2008) on Data & knowledge Engineering, Cobo et al. (2015) on Knowledge based systems etc. In 2017, few of the high-quality work on bibliometric study of prominent computer science journals can also be observed from the literature survey. Xu et al. (2017) presented an analysis on Transactions on Fuzzy Systems from 1994–2015, and evaluated structural and temporal analysis of the journal. On the auspicious occasion of the 40th anniversary of the European Journal of Operational Research, Laengle et al. (2017) showed the bibliometric overview of the journal since its inception in 1977. A retrospective analysis with text mining and bibliometric study of the Information Science Journal was presented by Yu et al. (2017) from 1968–2016. Other recent journal specific scientometric works include (Muhuri et al., 2018, Janmaijaya M et al., 2018). The bibliometric study of these significant journals is very crucial from research growth point of view. Thus, bibliometric analysis of EAAI journal is obligatory for its research participants to excel the quality of publications.
The journal of Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence is one of the sought-out journals in the field of the artificial intelligence (AI) and maintains a very high reputation among the research fraternity. EAAI is ranked 17 out of 61 in Web of Science (WOS)’s ‘Automation & Control Systems’ category, 31 out of 132 in ‘Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence’, 13 out of 86 in ‘Engineering, Multidisciplinary’ and 75 out of 260 in ‘Engineering, Electrical & Electronic’. The prominence of EAAI in WoS research categories explain the large reader base it has maintained throughout the years. The popularity of EAAI publications is very evident from the fact that they attract a large number of citations. This kind of scientometric/bibliometric study is on this journal would not only benefit the research community to assess the performance of the journal but also help the young researcher to get an overall view of the AI field including sought out authors, hot areas, highly cited papers etc. It also provides an aerial view of the intrinsic structure of publication and citation distribution over the years. The major objective of this paper is to perform an extensive bibliometric analysis to explore the publication structure and growth of the journal of EAAI in last 30 years. The data of all the documents considered for this study have been retrieved from the WoS and Scopus database and the results are visualized side-by-side. This paper also presents the general bibliometric overview of the EAAI publications by taking into consideration the top cited publications, highly influential authors, institutions and countries along with their collaborations. Such analysis determines the nature of the EAAI citations and structure of the journal.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 includes the data source and the methodology used for the study. Section 3 shows the publications and citation structure of EAAI along with co-citations analysis of citing journals and the co-occurrence of author keywords of EAAI publications over the years. Section 4 depicts the authorship and co-authorship of the journal along with most productive and influential institutes and their bibliographic coupling. Section 5 shows the country vise analysis of EAAI publications along with a temporal analysis of top contributing countries in four phases. A conclusion is drawn in Section 6.
