As users of computer-mediated communication (CMC) are exposed to an increasing number and variety of risks associated with online deception, it has become more and more important—and increasingly challenging—for users to guard against deceptive activities (e.g., fake review, opinion spam, spear phishing, identity fraud). The key is the ability to correctly interpret and codify the underlying intent of the message sender. In face-to-face (F2F) communication, the assessment of context is informed by words that are accompanied by other physical cues such as body language and facial expressions. CMC, in comparison, is “cue lean.” Thus, to derive context, a message receiver has only words to consider during a message exchange. Context is often difficult to ascertain; however, as Dourish (2004) states, context is a relational—or even an occasioned property. Context is not static, but dynamically defined by activity and the associated interaction. In CMC, we may only derive context (and hence intent) from the interaction itself—including the words used, and any other associated non-verbal cues. Thus, our research question is: How do language-action cues derive context, and further the identification of spontaneous computer-mediated deception?
In this paper, we first discuss the creation of interaction context through language-action cues, and then argue that language-action cues can reveal and visualize communicative intent. Different types of communication modes and media can have an impact on computer-mediated deception, which is further examined. Our research considers and models a sociotechnical system that represents synchronous computer-mediated interaction. An online game was designed and developed to simulate interpersonal computer-mediated deception in pairwise interaction. We collected and analyzed the data to uncover patterns that can provide subtle cues to deceptive intent. Specifically, linear, logistic regression and mixed model ANOVA approaches were deployed to analyze the efficacy and accuracy of certain language-action cues for detecting computer-mediated deception in synchronous, spontaneous communications. The paper concludes with some reflections on implications, limitations, as well as potential directions for future research.
