Computer-intensive office work has been associated with a number of risk factors for developing musculoskeletal symptoms in the neck and shoulders, such as constrained postures with insufficient variation, and repetitive movements while performing keyboard and mouse work (Gerr et al., 2006, 2004, 2002; Hakala et al., 2006; Marcus et al., 2002; Wahlström, 2005). It is generally believed that increased postural variation would decrease risks in computer-intensive jobs (Mathiassen, 2006). However, how to achieve more variation in computer-intensive office work is still debated, let alone the effects of specific interventions of postural variation on relevant outcomes such as fatigue and discomfort. Some studies have argued that vigorous tasks beyond what is normally thought of as office work, such as cleaning, need be introduced to obtain sufficient variation (Barbieri et al., 2015; Richter et al., 2009; Straker and Mathiassen, 2009), but the potential for increased variation offered by more conventional office initiatives is still insufficiently explored.
Sit-stand workstations are becoming increasingly popular in office environments, where they are being introduced with the primary intention of replacing some of the time spent sitting by standing, and thus reduce cardiometabolic risks associated with sedentary behavior (Benatti and Ried-Larsen, 2015; Chau et al., 2014; Duvivier et al., 2017; MacEwen et al., 2015; Neuhaus et al., 2014), or even decrease fatigue and musculoskeletal discomfort (Thorp et al., 2014). Seated and standing office work may lead to different postural exposures to the upper body, with possible effects on musculoskeletal outcomes. For instance, some studies have reported sitting office work involving computer-intensive tasks to be associated with more flexed lumbar postures than standing (e.g. Callaghan and McGill, 2001). Recently, Ghesmaty Sangachin et al. (2016) measured neck, trunk and shoulder postures when workers performed standard office work tasks while sitting, standing and walking. They found that standing and walking were associated with more switches between five posture categories (0–5, 5–15, 15–30, 30–45 and > 45°) than sitting, and concluded that standing and walking were associated with more posture variation than sitting. Babski-Reeves and Calhoun (2016) had 24 participants doing a data entry task in three 20/5 min cycles of sit/stand. A non-neutral posture of the neck, elbow and back occurred more often in sitting than in standing. Lin et al. (2017) compared differences in upper extremity posture between sitting and standing workstations for 20 participants performing simulated office tasks. They showed that variation (measured as the difference between the 90th and 10th posture percentile) was larger for shoulder rotation and wrist extension during standing work than during sitting.
Based on these findings, it appears reasonable to assume that a combination of sitting and standing computer work, as likely facilitated by access to a sit-stand workstation, would lead to larger variability in upper extremity, neck and trunk postures than if work was performed only sitting. However, the extent to which postural variability would change with different combinations of sitting and standing work has not been examined.
Thus, the objective of the present study was to quantify the changes in upper arm, neck and trunk posture variability when combining seated and standing computer work, compared to performing computer work only seated. The research questions addressed in the study were:
1.To what extent does variability in neck, trunk and right upper arm postures change when computer work is performed both sitting and standing at a sit-stand station, compared to only sitting?2.What temporal composition of sitting and standing computer work can be predicted to give the largest variability in neck, trunk and right upper arm postures?
These questions were addressed by first determining the mean and minute-to-minute variance of neck flexion, trunk flexion and upper arm elevation angles in sitting and standing postures among users of sit-stand workstations as they performed their routine computer-based work in their regular work environment. Numerical simulations based on this data were then performed to identify, for each individual participant, the temporal composition of seated and standing computer work that would hypothetically result in maximum possible posture variability.
