Obesity is one of the important causes of health-related problems affecting people of all ages. It has been attributed to be the precursor of health problems such as diabetes, hypertension, and heart disease. According to a World Health Organization (WHO) report, there is a steadily increasing growth of over 300 million obese people in the world [1]. People suffering from obesity condition could have high mortality and morbidity rate compared to normal individuals. The predominantly used conventional method to assess obesity is the Body Mass Index (BMI). However, it is difficult to measure the percentage body fat relying only on BMI due to its inaccuracies, particularly when calculating for different age groups of population. The other most frequently used methods to evaluate the body composition in obese subjects are bioelectric impedance analyzer (BIA), bio-impedance spectroscopy, dilution technique, hydrostatic weighing method, air displacement plethysmography (ADP), dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA), ultrasound, CT and MRI modalities [2].
Extensive review of various literatures suggests that segmental BIA and multi-frequency BIA tend to overestimate the percentage body fat in human adults [3]. But these diagnostic methods are less accurate compared to laboratory methods. DEXA can be used to predict the intra-abdominal fat and assess the regional body composition in obese subjects. But its limitations include high cost, requirement of expert technicians to operate, and being sensitive to difference in body thickness which leads to over estimation of body fat [4,5]. Computed tomography can be used to assess the fat content in skeletal muscle, but fails to detect the fat content due to higher levels of adipose tissue surrounding the muscle in obese subjects [6]. MRI has been used to quantify body fat and abdominal fat in the obese subjects [7]. The visceral adipose tissue present in the abdominal region of obese subjects could be arduous to scan in MRI due to the separation of compartment between the intra-peritoneal and intra-abdominal regions [8]. Ultrasound could be used as a validation method to measure the subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue in the abdominal region [9]. But the limitations of using ultrasonography include artifacts, assistance of trained sonologists, and standardized procedures that are not well defined for body composition assessment. Thermal imaging of human body for quantification of adipose tissue for obesity detection is an actively researched topic. Non-invasive and simple experimental setup of thermal imaging procedure has motivated researchers to use this technique for obesity detection.
As per the existing literature, the application of deep learning in Obesity detection and classification based on thermal imaging has not been carried out. This study aims to construct the customized deep learning CNN for classifying the thermal images of abdomen, forearm and shank regions into obese and normal subjects and to compare its performance with pre-trained network in the detection of obesity.
The different architectures of customized CNN and pre-trained models are proposed for the automated feature extraction and classification of normal and obese subjects. A comprehensive computer aided diagnostic tool is proposed for the detection and classification of obesity using CNN. The customized CNN models were compared with various pre-trained models and machine learning algorithms such as the LDA, k-NN and SVM classifier.
The organization of the proposed work is as follows: Section III deals with the proposed methodology which involves description about the deep learning architectures, transfer learning based pre-trained models and customized convolution networks. Section IV demonstrates the experimental results and includes illustration about the training and validation of custom-2 architecture. Section V and VI comprised of discussion and conclusion of the proposed work.
