In the current era, digital cameras associated with smart mobile phones and similar devices, are frequently used to capture the paper documents. As a result, various types of distortions are often found in those images. Warping is one of the important distortions in these camera captured images. The traditional systems for optical character recognition [1], optical character detection [2], text recognition [3], and other document processing tasks often fail to perform with a significant accuracy if warped document images are used as input. So, the documents must be restored to improve the performance of OCR/other document processing tasks. Most of the existing dewarping methods are traditional learning-free approaches and tested on Alphabetic scripts like English. They often fail to produce accurate results for Alpha-syllabary scripts like Bangla. In the recent past, the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [4], [5] and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [6], [7] based techniques perform well in the domain of Document Image Analysis (DIA). So, we propose a deep CNN based approach for dewarping and test the algorithm on both Alphabetic and Alpha-syllabary scripts. Generally, deep learning-based approaches need a large number of images during the training phase. The following warped document image datasets are publicly available: (i) ’DFKI document image contest dataset’ [8] and (ii) ‘Doc3D dataset’ [4]. DFKI document image contest dataset contains 102 and 130 images present in the ‘Doc3D dataset’. We create another dataset ‘WDID’ that contains 258 images. The number of images in the datasets mentioned above is not sufficient to train a deep CNN model. Manually capturing such a large number of warped document images and preparing the ground truths is difficult. A procedure for synthetically generated warped document image is an alternative. In this paper, a synthetic warped image generation model is also proposed.
To generate synthetic images, similar to a real warped image, we need a suitable mathematical model. The model should incorporate all the necessary geometric parameters like the curvature of the surface, camera angle, the position of the camera over the document, distance from the document surface to the camera, etc. In this paper, we propose such a mathematical model, which is discussed in Section 3.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the related works. In Section 3, the proposed warping generation model is discussed. Next, Section 4 describes the process of the generation of synthetic images using the proposed warping model. The deep CNN based framework is described in Section 5. Experimental results and evaluation of the proposed method are shown in Section 6. Finally, the concluding notes are put in Section 7.
