At present, the number of elderly people in the world is growing rapidly. In many countries and regions in the world, there have been many “aged” societies. Alzheimer's disease caused by aging is also increasing year by year. Alzheimer disease (AD) is a progressive degenerative neurological degenerative disease. Alzheimer's disease is more common in elderly people younger than 70 years old and develops under the influence of physiological or psychosocial factors (Kapogiannis & Mattson, 2011). A small number of patients develop rapidly after a fracture, physical illness or mental stimulation. Patients with Alzheimer's disease may have behavioral disorders, mental symptoms, decreased cognitive function, and progressive decline in daily living ability. Drug therapy combined with nursing intervention is of great significance for memory recovery and behavior correction. With the development of computer technology, the combination of computer and cognitive barriers has entered the stage of application product development from theoretical research. In particular, the emergence of human-computer interaction technology has promoted the combination of computer technology and cognitive science at a higher level. In the rehabilitation assessment and training of cognitive disorders, it shows the advantages unmatched by traditional methods (Bannon, 2011, González-Ortega et al., 2014). The use of human-computer interaction technology for the rehabilitation of cognitive disorders has been reported in many foreign countries. Human-computer interaction technology refers to the design of the relationship between people, people and things, people and the environment through the medium of products (physical, virtual services, and even systems) to support, satisfy, and create each other. Kind of interactive behavior. So, under the concept of human-computer interaction design, this study uses puzzle games as an entry point to observe the impact of puzzle games on cognitive function guidance and improvement in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Expecting to provide daily rehabilitation for patients with Alzheimer's disease (Albert, DeKosky, & Dickson, 2011). It is also hoped that it can promote the cognitive ability recovery of Alzheimer's patients, effectively delay the progress of dementia, improve the daily living ability and adaptability of patients, and improve the quality of life and life.
1.1. Application of human-computer interaction technology in cognitive improvement and rehabilitationThe virtual reality environment represented by the computer can immerse people in the three-dimensional environment generated by the computer in real time, and can interact with the virtual environment under various stimuli (Bahar-Fuchs, Clare, & Woods, 2013). This allows psychiatrists to provide patients with a controlled stimulus environment for improved treatment of cognitive impairment and to measure and monitor a variety of important indicators during treatment. At the same time, this is an interesting and novel treatment for Alzheimer's patients. The entire treatment is carried out in a familiar and safe environment. If the treatment process is designed to be ingenious, the treatment process will be as fascinating as the game. Alzheimer's patients are also happy to participate, and this approach eliminates the weaknesses of traditional treatments. Perception, attention, pattern recognition, memory, thinking, language, etc. are all categories of cognition (Bechi, Bosia, & Spangaro, 2015). Cognitive impairment due to various causes has a great impact on patients. The virtual reality technology provided by the computer shows very good prospects in providing treatment and evaluation methods for patients with cognitive impairment, and also shows the advantages unmatched by traditional methods in the recovery and functional improvement of cognitive impairment.
1.2. How Alzheimer's patients interact with puzzle gamesDuring the interaction between Alzheimer's patients and puzzle games, Alzheimer's patients can interact with the game through physical movements, interact with the game through voice, or interact with the game through images and data (McKhann, Knopman, & Chertkow, 2011). Alzheimer's patients communicate information to puzzle games in a way that conveys feedback to Alzheimer's patients. This is a cyclical process in which the interactive parties exchange information continuously until the Alzheimer's patient wants to terminate the process. This process of information exchange is also a process to help people with Alzheimer's brain and brain puzzles, as shown in Fig. 1 (González-Ortega et al., 2014).Download : Download high-res image (122KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Interactive process diagram of Alzheimer's patients and puzzle games.
1.3. Analysis of current situationDeveloped countries are entering an aging society earlier than China, so they are concerned that the market for Alzheimer's patients is earlier than China. In the early days of the market, there were mobile phones for Alzheimer's patients, as well as life-supporting products for Alzheimer's patients, such as elderly wheelchairs that are easy to carry, elderly bathtubs that can be opened and closed, elderly crutches without bending, and health massage. Functional sitting toilet and more. It can be seen from these products that the development of elderly products in foreign markets is extensive. With the recent increase in the age of global aging, the demand for Alzheimer's patients is constantly increasing. Older consumers are no longer ignored by society, and the consumer market for Alzheimer's patients has become one of the top ten markets in the future. The old-age market in China is currently in its infancy, and there is a certain gap compared with developed countries. In China's elderly market, it is not very valued. The number of products developed specifically for Alzheimer's patients or middle-aged people is small and the species is single. There are nowhere to find old-fashioned counters or franchised stores in the mall. China's old-age market is not only non-scale, but there are no uniform specifications for manufacturers (Borel & Alescio-Lautier, 2014). The market share of products is low and there is no characteristics of old products. In addition to the development of the elderly health care products as a “outstanding” in the elderly products, most of the remaining products are in the initial stage, even in the lag period.
