The omnipresence of information and communications technology (ICT), which plays an important role in all aspects of human life, is a basic characteristic of modern society. Knowledge and skills related to modern ICT usage have thus become an integral part of education. The ability to use digital technology efficiently, independently, and responsibly is considered to be a key prerequisite for successfully integrating people into both society and the economy (European Commission, 2007; Poynton, 2005; Spante, Hashemi, Lundin, & Algers, 2018). One of the key tasks of contemporary schools is the development of digital literacy1 (Erstad, 2011; Lankshear & Knobel, 2008; Sefton-Green, Nixon, & Erstad, 2009; Tsitouridou & Vryzas, 2011), which is a part of a larger framework of “21st century skills” (Binkley et al., 2012).
However, school and formal education present only one environment in which young people can acquire and develop their digital literacies. In fact, research suggests that the development of digital literacy also takes place in the form of informal learning at home, among peers, and in other, out-of-school contexts (Arnseth, Erstad, Juhaňák, & Zounek, 2016; Erstad, 2012; Fraillon, Ainley, Schulz, Friedman, & Gebhardt, 2014). As access to technology and the internet becomes generally universal in many countries (OECD, 2017a), children are starting to use digital technology at ever younger ages (Chaudron, 2015; Chaudron, Di Gioia, & Gemo, 2018; Holloway, Green, & Livingstone, 2013). This raises a number of questions regarding how the use of ICT at an early age projects into the life and development of children and in what manner their development is affected by digital technology. This field still has many unanswered questions. One reason for this phenomenon is the fact that the use of technology by very young children has been outside of the focus of attention of researchers, especially in comparison to older children or adolescents (Staksrud, Livingstone, Haddon, & Ólafsson, 2009; Ólafsson, Livingstone, & Haddon, 2014). Even less attention has been dedicated specifically to the relationship between ICT usage at a young age and the subsequent development of digital competence of children and young people. Nevertheless, Chaudron et al. (2018), on the basis of extensive qualitative research across European countries, published the major discovery that children's ability to use ICT develops from a very young age in the home environment and that this period is absolutely essential for the development of children's digital competence.
With this study, we would like to contribute to a deeper understanding of the relationship between the digital competence of fifteen-year-old students and the time at which they started using ICT. Specifically, we will focus on the relationship between the age at which children start using a computer and the degree of their perceived competence and autonomy in ICT usage at a later age. Using data from the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2015, which provides representative samples of fifteen-year-old students in dozens of countries around the world, we primarily aim to determine: (1) the extent to which the development of the perceived ICT competence and autonomy of students is affected by both the school and out-of-school environments; (2) the relationship between the age when computers are first used and the degree of perceived ICT competence and autonomy of students at the age of fifteen; (3) whether this relationship is mediated by other relevant ICT-related variables; and (4) how the investigated relationship differs across European OECD countries.
