Radiation has wide useful application areas such as nuclear power plants, industrial uses, medical and scientific applications. Although many advantages of radiation could be listed, hazardous drawbacks of its applications cannot be disregarded. The safety of human being, environment and involved workers is a worldwide basic subject and should be handled carefully since exposure of radiation could cost lives. In order to prevent undesired exposure of radiation, materials with high attenuation performance on nuclear radiation are needed to be utilized. In this regard, different radiation shielding materials are being used and further studies have been conducted to increase the quality and quantity of these attenuator materials.
Well-known radiation protection materials, concrete, steel, lead, tungsten and etc., have high densities, and their usage may not be convenient for all kind applications due to their physical properties: hard and not flexible. On the other hand, it is possible to improve quality of the traditional protection materials, for example, Akkurt et al. (2010a) investigated photon attenuation coefficients of concrete contains different barite fractions in a gamma energy range of 1 keV to 1 GeV in order to improve the shielding characteristics of concrete. Although the authors reported that additive barite increase attenuation performance of the concrete, enormous volume of these well-known radiation attenuators, another physical disadvantage, could be required to block/absorb the radiation properly. Besides its physical characteristics, commonly used heavy metals lead and tungsten are chemically hazardous and some manufacturers prefer alternatives such as zinc due to possibility of toxicity and penetrative secondary radiations. In this regard, some theoretical and experimental studies have also been conducted by researchers, and some could be found in Refs. (Alwaeli, 2013; Çullu and Bakırhan, 2018; Agar, 2018). In essence, there could be improvement studies on these conventional materials and the usage of mentioned attenuators might be convenient for huge structures such as nuclear reactor buildings or radiation shielded rooms, but in some cases, such as protective clothes, clinics, spacecraft and etc., flexible and lightweight materials might be required. Therefore, polyester composites reinforced with different elements, more flexible and durable compared to traditional materials, have been proposed and investigated by many researchers up to now (Shin et al., 2014; Cherkashina et al., 2019; Harish et al., 2009; Li et al., 2017, 2019; Chang et al., 2015; Soylu et al., 2015; Özkalaycı et al., 2020; Tekin et al., 2020; Akman et al., 2020a).
Various studies reported that usage of polymer composites with additive materials provides effective gamma radiation attenuation and promising upgrade on shielding properties. Nambiar et al. (Nambiar and Yeow, 2012) reviewed and summarized the usage of polymer composites reinforced with micro/nanomaterials in order to attenuate/block radiation, and they highlight the importance of polymer based composite materials as an effective radiation protection material. Besides, Akman et al. (2020b) investigated the impact of PbI2 on gamma attenuation properties of polyester composites theoretical and experimentally as a function of gamma radiation energy, and they reported significant contribution of PbI2 to the composites' gamma radiation attenuation. Similarly, Alsayed et al. (2020) studied gamma-ray attenuation parameters of ZnO/HDPE composite at only four different gamma energy values ranging from 59.5 keV to 1332.5 keV, and they revealed significant performance of composites in radiation shielding. El-Toony et al. (2020) synthesized a Pb2O3 doped composite and compared with traditional gamma absorbers, and they found that their nanocomposite can be efficiently used in gamma shielding. In another study, Kaçal (Kacal et al., 2020) et al. conducted study on gamma radiation attenuation performance of different polymer composites doped with Zn, and they report the enhancement of composites' gamma shielding capability with the increase on Zn amount. As can be seen from literature, the polyesters are principally doped with elements/compounds that have high density and atomic numbers, so that the probability of interaction between gamma radiation and nuclei is increased and then radiation protection occurs. More experimental and theoretical studies on improving composites' radiation shielding capabilities can be found in literature (El-Sarraf and Abdo, 2013; Abdo et al., 2003; Zeitlin et al., 2006; Tajiri et al., 2006; Stewart et al., 2007; Erdem et al., 2010; Jackson and Hawkes, 1981; Manohara et al., 2008; Azman et al., 2013). All these reports increased the quantity/quality of radiation attenuation materials and enlarge the knowledge on attenuators. Recently, in addition to the studies for radiation attenuation properties of composites, the studies for radiation attenuation properties of some samples such as concrete (Kharita et al., 2008; Akkurt et al., 2010b; Tekin et al., 2017; Lotfi-Omran et al., 2019), alloy (Tekin and Kilicoglu, 2020; Akman et al., 2019a; Agar et al., 2019; Tellili et al., 2017), ceramic (Kacal et al., 2019; Akman et al., 2019b; Oto et al., 2019; Jawad et al., 2019) and glass (Kaewkhao et al., 2010; Rammah et al., 2020; Halimah et al., 2019; Kara et al., 2020; Issa et al., 2020) have increased.
Since the improvement of scintillator is highly related to quantum dots with unique and excellent physiochemical properties, high atomic number of quantum dots and the fast decay of polymer matrix enhance the photoelectron production and high gamma attenuation (Urdaneta et al., 2011). Thence preparation of this class of cadmium telluride (CdTe) quantum dots based sensors which offer the advantages such as low cost, high density and electron mobility, ease of synthesis is quite remarkable (Feizi et al., 2018; Strassburg et al., 2011). Therefore, CdTe is a stable crystalline compound and mainly used in the various technologic applications.
In present work, in order to serve the purpose of contributing new polyester to the literature, a composite with CdTe dopant was produced and its gamma ray attenuation parameters were investigated. To the best of the author's knowledge, there is no study that CdTe is doped into polyester composite in order to investigate its gamma attenuation properties. Since the radiation protection efficiency is strongly depend on radiation energy (Akman et al., 2020b), gamma shielding properties of newly produced composites were evaluated in 22 different gamma energy ranging from 59.5 to 1408.0 keV experimentally with the use of HPGe detector and theoretically with help of XCOM computer program.
