The visual work environment can affect our well-being in many ways. Glare from luminaries or windows may cause discomfort and reduced performance in visually demanding work tasks (Anshel, 2007; Rosenfield, 2011). In addition, non-visual exposures such as flicker from luminaries may cause eyestrain and headache (Osterhaus et al., 2014). Although mostly recognized in computer work (Blehm et al., 2005; Dainoff et al., 2005; Habibi et al., 2014; Shieh and Lin, 2000), the impact of high visual demands on workers’ well-being has been demonstrated in other types of occupations as well (Bogdanova et al., 2016; Fritzsche et al., 2012; Hemphälä, 2014; Juslén and Tenner, 2005; Lindegård et al., 2012, 2016). Studies have shown that visual fatigue and eyestrain can lead to musculoskeletal discomfort, which may even aggravate with time when visual demands are high (Zetterberg, 2016).
In order to detect risks in the visual environment, and to evaluate workplace interventions, valid and reliable risk assessment methods are needed. Preferably, they should cover all aspects of the work environment, such as workstation arrangement, task demands, and the worker's perceived visual comfort (Jackson et al., 1997; Long, 2014). Leccese et al. (2016) argued that objective measurements of luminance should be performed at the workstation (e.g., the desk) as well as in the surroundings (e.g., the surrounding walls) to get a complete assessment of the lighting conditions. Further, they stressed the need to also consider the worker's perception of visual comfort in the assessment (Leccese et al., 2017).
Questionnaires for assessing visual fatigue and eyestrain associated with office work have been introduced previously (Knave et al., 1985; Rajabi-Vardanjani et al., 2014; Segui et al., 2015). In Knave et al. (1985), a comprehensive set of questions about the frequency and intensity of eye discomfort, as well as skin and musculoskeletal symptoms, was distributed to office employees, some of whom performed computer work most of their working day. The study showed associations between ratings of eye discomfort, musculoskeletal discomfort, headache and skin disorders (Knave et al., 1985). Rajabi-Vardanjani et al. (2014) described the development of the 15-item Visual Fatigue Questionnaire for video display terminal (VDT) users, including questions about eyestrain, impaired vision, and symptoms from the eyes. They confirmed its validity and reliability relative to physiological measurements of fatigue (Rajabi-Vardanjani et al., 2014). Segui et al. (2015) designed and validated a Computer Vision Syndrome Questionnaire for assessing ocular and visual symptoms related to VDT use. While these questionnaires may be useful for assessing exposures during office work, there is a need for more generic visual risk assessment methods that are applicable to all kinds of occupations.
The Ocular Surface Disease Index is a 12-item questionnaire concerning symptoms and function of the eyes. It has been shown to be a valid and reliable instrument for assessing dry eye syndrome (Schiffman et al., 2000; Özcura et al., 2007), and can be used for screening for symptoms among workers in any occupation. Conlon et al. (1999) also demonstrated validity of the Visual Discomfort Scale for assessing frequency of perceived visual discomfort. When evaluating workplace exposures, however, complementary information about the work station and task demands would be needed to determine the presence of risks in the visual environment. To satisfy the need for a generic risk assessment tool, we have developed a computer-based Visual Ergonomics Risk Assessment Method (VERAM) that can be used in a variety of work types. It contains subjective ratings by the worker as well as objective measurements of the work environment. Together, they form the basis for assessing risks associated with the visual environment.
The aim of this study was to describe the development of VERAM, and assess its face and content validity. Further, we aimed to assess the internal consistency of VERAM in a sample of workers with different types of work.
