Three-dimensional (3D) holographic display is one of the most important technologies in the 21st century. It is an important means of representing real-world information and can be applied to a variety of fields, including 3D entertainment, Virtual Reality, and military training. Three-dimensional holographic display is autostereoscopic 3D display based on a reconstruction of the optical field that contains all depth information [1]. Because of its true 3D characteristics, it is generally considered the ultimate 3D display technology in the industry [2], [3].
Holographic imaging implements 3D display based on wave optics. In traditional optical holography, the hologram is recorded using a chemical plate. Computer-generated holography (CGH) is a promising technology that implements the interference recording step in traditional hologram generation by computer-simulated light propagation [4]. Depending on the type of modulation, CGHs can be divided into the amplitude CGHs and the phase CGHs. The amplitude CGH requires to simulate interference to encode phase distribution, while the phase can directly encode [5]. The hologram is then loaded onto a spatial light modulator (SLM) for optical reproduction of the hologram. CGH can not only record objects by using information collection equipment, but also virtual objects generated by computers, which has a wider scope of applications.
The occlusion effect provides depth information concerning objects in 3D space. It can reflect the spatial relationships among objects. This is the most important factor in implementing deep vision that influences the effect of 3D display. General hologram generation algorithms do not consider the occlusion effect among objects. This leads to a loss of important depth information and a lack of depth cueing, rendering the quality of the images undesirable [6]. Because each pixel of the hologram contains information concerning all objects in the given scene, the generation of a digital hologram is a computationally intensive process. Massive computation is thus a bottleneck in the implementation of 3D display using CGH. If hidden object points can be discovered through occlusion calculation, we do not need to determine them in hologram generation, which can improve the efficiency of the process while improving quality.
The ray tracing algorithm is a mainstream rendering technology. By simulating the process of the propagation of light in nature and based on the properties of objects in scenes, we can calculate the reflection and refraction of light therein. The spectral contribution of each ray to each pixel of the final image can be obtained by a recursive tracing of the various rays. By simulating the interaction between light and the object, the 3D scene can be rendered more vividly. Therefore, this paper proposes an occlusion calculation algorithm for CGH based on ray tracing that calculates the occlusion information of objects. The structure of the KD-Tree is used to accelerate the scene traversal algorithm in the ray tracing process. To improve efficiency, we consider only the occlusion relationship between leaf nodes and ignore such relationships among object points inside the leaf nodes, and a KD-Tree traversal algorithm for GPU based on the virtual stack is proposed to achieve efficient parallel computation in ray tracing. At the same time, it considers the characteristics of motion parallax in holograms, and implements a hologram calculation algorithm with occlusion effects for point cloud models.
The remainder is organized as follows: In Section 2, we analyze the related background and state of research. We analyze the problem of occlusion handling in hologram calculation and compare it with the occlusion issue in computer graphics in Section 3. In Section 4, we analyze the application of the ray tracing algorithm in hologram, elaborate the occlusion calculation algorithm for CGH based on ray tracing, and detail the algorithm. In Section 5, we conduct numerical and optical experiments to verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm from the perspective of the occlusion effect, and the motion parallax effect, and its efficiency in terms of time and space. Section 6 concludes the paper and proposes directions for future work in the area.
