The nitrogen oxides NOx, including nitrogen dioxide NO2, nitrogen monoxide NO, and dinitrogen tetroxide N2O4, belong to the most prominent air pollutants that cause environmental pollution and represent a health risk for humans and animals [1]. If oxygen is available, NO will quickly convert to NO2. Thus NO2 and N2O4 are the most important representatives of the NOx family. Nitrogen oxides are formed in nature e.g. by bacterial respiration, volcanos, and lightenings. More important is their emission from industrial processes and from combustion engines burning fossil fuels. The percentage of nitrogen oxides in the air is carefully monitored by international organizations. It constitutes one reason for blocking cars from accessing city centers to protect air quality. The removal of NOx from mixtures of exhaust gases by common technical processes like condensation may not be sufficient to fulfill emission limit values and the creation of low temperatures needed for condensation requires additional efforts and causes energy losses.
Therefore, in this paper we intend to study a possible use of some Zeolitic Immidazolate Frameworks (ZIFs) to remove NO2 from a N2/NO2 mixture by adsorption or membrane separation. ZIFs, as a sub-family of Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs), are well known as promising adsorption materials because of their relative high thermal and chemical stability in comparison with other MOFs [2].
N2 is the main component of air. Moreover, in [3] it has been shown that the adsorption properties of N2 and O2 in ZIF-78 are almost identical. In the present paper it is shown that also for the other ZIFs investigated here at 373 K the adsorption isotherms of N2 and O2 are very close. Thus, the adsorption of NO2 from the mixture with N2 is representative of the adsorption of NO2 from air in these ZIFs.
We have chosen 3 well known ZIFs that are also well examined regarding the adsorption and diffusion of small guest molecules. ZIF-8 is sold by industrial companies and it was examined in many experimental and simulation papers (see e.g. [4], [5], [6]). ZIF-90 has also been examined with respect to gas separation in several papers (e.g. [7], [8]), because its average window size is (like that of ZIF-8) close to the size of technically important molecules (CH4, N2, CO2, NO2 and others). ZIF-78 showed outstanding adsorption selectivity for the separation of CO2 from air [3]. Thus the question if it can also be used for the N2/NO2 separation will be examined in this paper. However, the investigation of the system NO2/N2 is delicate, since NO2 at ambient conditions can be found only in a reaction equilibrium with N2O4. The partial pressure of NO2 in the NO2/N2O4 mixture at 1 bar total pressure as a function of the temperature, resulting from the reaction equilibrium, can be seen in Fig. 2 of the supporting material. At 1 bar total pressure and 273 K, the partial pressure of NO2 in a NO2/N2O4 mixture is only 0.13 bar. However, at 373 K it is 0.96 bar and at 400 K it would even be more than 0.99 bar. Both NO2 and N2O4 are toxic.
In this paper we restrict ourselves to ZIF materials with small pores because the selectivity for the separation CO2/air was found to be high for ZIF-78 having small pores [3]. A promising way to scan several materials for the N2/NO2 separation cheaply and without health risk seems to be computer simulation [9], [10] of adsorption and diffusion of NO2, pure and in mixtures, in such materials. Particularly because of restrictions that apply to experiments with dangerous substances, computer simulations can help to avoid unnecessary experiments. A few papers about NOx adsorption in special cases can be found in the literature. In [11] 14 porous materials, including several MOFs and zeolites, are investigated with respect to removal of SO2 and NOx from flue gas. The flue gas was represented by a mixture of CO2, N2, O2 and H2O. These investigations have been done at 1 bar and 313 K. In [12] the competitive co-adsorption of CO2 with H2O, NH3, SO2, NO, NO2, N2, O2, and CH4 in MOF-74 is considered and the role of hydrogen bonding is examined. In [13], [14] palm shell activated carbon (PSAC) for simultaneous removal of SO2 and NOx from flue has been examined at 100 °C. In [15] the adsorption of N2, CO2, CO, NO in several materials was measured at 273–398 K. The natural zeolite clinoptilolite showed promising selectivities for the separation of NO from N2. If these results are to be extended to the separation of NO from air, then it must be taken into account that in the presence of oxygen NO will be converted into NO2 and that, at least at the lower part of this temperature range, a part of the NO2 will be converted to N2O4.
Neither experimental nor simulation papers about the selective adsorption of NO2/N2 in MOFs at higher temperatures and at different pressures seem to exist in the literature. The role of the chemical reaction NO2/N2O4 for the adsorption process at lower temperatures has not yet been examined.
For the choice of the 3 ZIF materials we took into account the following considerations: a) Porous materials with strong attractive centers, like open metal centers, could have high adsorption capacity and selectivity. However, they have the disadvantage that the adsorbed molecules can be removed only with very high energy efforts in regeneration. Thus their use is restricted. b) We have found high selectivity for CO2 in ZIF-78 [3]. Hence we decided to explore ZIF-78 and some similar ZIFs.
Another question is, whether water can influence the adsorption process, yet water can be neglected if the gas to be purified can be dried before.
N2O4 molecules are too large to pass the windows that connect adjacent cavities in the ZIFs under study. On the other hand, the cavities themselves are larger than the N2O4 molecules and hence dimerization of two NO2 molecules to a N2O4 molecule within a cavity cannot be excluded. Therefore, we investigated the NO2/N2 mixture at 373 K where N2O4 will exist only in small percentage. NO2 can be a product of combustion machines that work at even higher temperatures than 373 K and the emitted exhaust gas can have this temperature. At 373 K the N2O4 molecules have a short lifetime. If an N2O4 will be formed by dimerization within the cavities of a MOF, then it will influence only short time the adsorption/diffusion patterns before it disappears, even if the probability of formation can be somewhat increased by restricted space and higher pressure. An overview over the reaction equilibrium in the gas phase of this reaction using reaction constants from the literature is given in the Supporting Material.
High throughput computer simulation studies consider many (up to several hundred) MOFs in one batch (see e.g. [16], [17], [18], [19]). Such studies are a useful and necessary tool with the merit to obtain an overview over the large number of existing and possible MOF structures. This examination, however, treats each MOF individually. This has two main reasons: On one hand simulations of a lot of MOFs in one project can be done only with rigid lattice. In [5] it has been shown that this simplification can lead to diffusion selectivities wrong by up to 5 orders of magnitude. Hence, in the present work the examination of diffusion by MD will be done with flexible lattice even though this requires a larger computational and programming effort (e.g. about 10,000 data lines have to be written in the input file for the simulation package DL_POLY to define the bonded interactions (stretch bond elasticity, angle bond elasticity and torsional elasticity). Torsion is even a 4 body interaction, which is computationally expensive. In contrast to diffusion the flexibility of the lattice is of minor importance for adsorption if no structural changes, like 'gate opening', occur. Whether such effects appear can be checked e.g. by MD simulations with flexible lattice (see e.g. [6], [8]). On the other hand, parameters and charges for the lattice atoms depend upon the nature of the bonds and upon the geometry of the neighborhood of each lattice atom. Hence we have not used the same parameters (e.g. from Dreiding or UFF) in all simulations. Instead, we have used for each type of MOF such parameters, that have been proven to work well for this specific type of MOF.
In order to check the performance of the 3 ZIF materials under consideration first the adsorption of N2 and NO2 is investigated separately. These adsorption data obtained from pure gases can be applied also on ideal mixtures at low pressure.
In the linear adsorption regime (Henry’s law region) the adsorption is characterized by the following equations(1)Nads,i=kipi(2)pi=Ngas,ikBT/V(3)Nads,i=kiNgas,ikBTV(4)p=∑ipi=∑iNgas,ikBTV(5)αijadsorption=DefNads,i/Nads,jNgas,i/Ngas,j(6)αijadsorption=kikjNgas,i is the number of gas molecules of kind i in the volume V at the temperature T, kB is Boltzmanns constant. Nads,i is the number of adsorbed molecules of kind i in a porous solid. pi is the partial pressure of this kind in the gas around the porous solid and ki is a specific constant for the adsorption of this species in that porous solid. This constant can be found by measurement or, by computer simulation. ki will in general strongly depend upon the temperature. It will be larger for lower temperatures.
At temperatures far enough above the condensation temperature, at low pressure the gas will be an ideal gas and also the mixture will be ideal and the partial pressures can be calculated from the ideal gas Eq. (2) even in a mixture. In this linear regime the total pressure is simply the sum of the partial pressures (4).
Eq. (5) is the definition of the adsorption selectivity αijadsorption for adsorption of two species i and j from a mixture. This definition can be used for non-ideal mixtures as well. Using Eqs. (1), (2), (3), (4), (5) for low pressure, Eq. (6) results. Interestingly, this selectivity at low pressure does not depend on the concentrations of the species in the mixture and also not on the existence of additional gas components. However, Eq. (6) and the mentioned conclusions are not valid for non-ideal mixtures and at pressures out of the region of validity of Eqs. (1), (2).
