Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) aims to improve cardiac function through resynchronizing electrical activation in heart failure patients. CRT is recommended (or considered) in patients with a reduced left ventricle (LV) ejection fraction (≤35%) and baseline electrical dyssynchrony measured using the QRS duration (QRSd) ≥130 ms (European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines) or ≥150 ms (American College of Cardiology Foundation (ACCF)/American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines) with (or without) left bundle branch block (LBBB) (1, 2).
Clinical studies have found sex differences in CRT response at different QRSd. Males with wide QRSd (≥150 ms) had an improved CRT response compared to narrower QRSd (130–149 ms) values, whereas no such difference was reported in females (3). CRT response in males with wide QRSd (150–175 ms) was also found to be equivalent to female CRT response at lower QRSd (135–150 ms) (4).
Patients with narrow QRSd (<130 ms) are currently contraindicated for CRT treatment because these patients had increased mortality rates (5). However, there is growing evidence that females with narrow QRSd are at less risk of harm from CRT and may benefit from CRT treatment at shorter QRSd than males (3, 4).
Females in general had improved outcomes in response to CRT (3, 4); however, relatively fewer females receive CRT. Females have been underrepresented in CRT clinical trials, biasing the current CRT guidelines to males, which use the same QRSd thresholds for both sexes. This has led to interest in sex-dependent QRSd criteria for CRT. Although quantitative recommendations adapting the ACCF/AHA guidelines have been made (6), the specific mechanism to explain the sex difference in CRT response has not been demonstrated, with heart size, body size and height, conduction delays, or etiology of heart failure all being proposed as potential causes (7).
Varma et al. (4) proposed that the prolongation of the QRSd in LBBB patients was due to the decrease in the myocardial conductivity in the cardiac substrate and/or the increase in conduction path length. The conduction path lengthens with increasing LV size, which could change because of body size, sex, or heart failure remodeling, leading to LV dilation. Assuming that there is no sex difference in the underlying cause for reduction in the conduction in the cardiac substrate and, hence, response to CRT at the same level of cardiac substrate pathology, then the sex difference in response to CRT at different QRSd would arise from the LV size sex difference.
Females have been shown to have a smaller LV size and QRSd in healthy (8) and patient (4) populations. The correlation between the baseline healthy LV size and QRSd (8) and the sex difference in LV size in CRT patients (4) means that QRSd thresholds in the current CRT guidelines may be indicative of a higher level of ventricular conduction abnormality in females. This offers a mechanistic explanation for CRT response sex differences at different QRSd (3).
Our hypothesis is that LV size is a significant contributor to CRT response sex differences at different QRSd. We tested this hypothesis using computer models of the heart in healthy and patient cases to isolate the LV size effects on QRSd. Initially, we confirmed that males and females have different-sized hearts and that LV size correlates with predicted QRSd. We then quantified the degree to which LV size explains sex difference in QRSd. Finally, QRSd recommendations in the current guidelines for CRT, which were primarily determined from males, were calibrated using computer models to predict the female QRSd threshold for CRT treatment, taking into account female LV size.
