Table grape (Vitis vinifera L.) is a non-climacteric fruit subject to serious quality loss after harvest, mainly due to water loss, which cause stem browning and sensitivity to microbial decay. Rachis browning is the most important physiological disorder of table grapes post-storage, while the primary pathological spoilage problem is decay caused by Botrytis cinerea (Lichter, 2016).
Colour characteristics, firmness (skin, pulp and whole berry), chemical and volatile composition are the main sensory attributes evaluated by consumers. Usually, a green rachis is an indicator of freshness and hence a brown rachis can be a cause of consumer rejection and fruit waste. Generally, the quality level of table grape is determined through sensory and subjective determination combined to analytical and destructive techniques, which are time consuming and sometimes may require sophisticated equipment. Research has been focused on developing non-contact, rapid, environmental-friendly and accurate methods for non-invasive evaluation of quality in fruits and vegetables (Liu et al., 2017). Among these, Computer vision systems (CVSs) may be applied to extend quality prediction and discrimination along the whole supply chain from harvesting up to consumers. CVS combines mechanics, optical instrumentation, electromagnetic sensing and digital image processing technology (Patel et al., 2012). Computer vision systems are widely used to accomplish quality control on fruit and vegetables (Blasco et al., 2017). As reported by many Authors, CVS was used to assess quality and marketability of tomatoes (Arias et al., 2000), artichokes (Amodio et al., 2011), fresh-cut nectarines (Pace et al., 2011), fresh-cut lettuce (Pace et al., 2014), fresh-cut radicchio (Pace et al., 2015) and rocket leaves (Cavallo et al., 2017). Moreover, assessment of solid soluble content of table grape was also conducted using the hyperspectral imaging systems with the scatter mode by Baiano et al. (2012). In addition, Bahar et al. (2017) evaluated quality of table grape measuring rachis browning through no destructive image analysis. Pothen and Nuske (2016) proposed a vision-based system to evaluate the ripeness of grapes with the aim to monitor the temporal evolution of vineyard and the spatial map of fruits to support the decision about harvest dates and locations. The system uses the H component of the Hue Saturation Value (HSV) colour space to be independent on spectrally uniform illumination change. The thresholds on the H information that separate the considered classes of ripeness are set empirically by the designers of the system. Unfortunately, the illumination often changes in its spectral distribution both indoor and outdoor: it is therefore generally better to check the constancy of colour measures and to correct them whenever needed as the proposed system does using a colour reference in the scene. Rodrìguez-Pulido et al. (2012) used image analysis to evaluate the maturation of grapes and the cultivar by analyzing the seeds and the berries. A colour-chart and a carefully controlled set-up are used to make consistent the acquisition process and manually set thresholds are used to separate the classes of interest. Raban et al. (2013) developed a statistical method of image analysis to measure rachis browning in four table grape cultivars in growth or storage. In Rahman and Hellicar, 2014, a classification of mature grape bunches was shown. Their work consists of a segmentation step to detect circles (berries) in the scene, RGB and HSV colour features extraction and SVM classifiers training to predict mature grape bunches and undeveloped grape bunches. Nogales-Bueno et al. (2014) presented a hyper-spectral imaging system to predict, on grape skin, total phenolic concentration, sugar concentration, titratable acidity and pH using Modified Partial Least Squared Regression (MPLS). Diago et al. (2015) developed an image analysis system to predict yield components (berry weight, number of berries per cluster and cluster weights) by means of contour extraction and circle detection. These predicted variables are key components and have an impact on cluster architecture and compactness. Aquino et al. (2018a) use image analysis, on an android-smartphone platform, to assess the number of berries in grapevine bunches at a phenological stage between berry-set and cluster-closure. Their system requires a dark background box to be placed behind the cluster to isolate the cluster, to enhance its separation from the background and to prevent mutual reflections between adjacent bunches. The RGB image are converted to the CIELAB colour space before any processing. Maximum light reflection points and morphological processing identify and select potential berries. False positives are discarded by a neural network trained on a proper set of berry descriptors. Mean and standard deviation of the a and b components in the CIELAB colour space are used as colour descriptors. Moving the CVS on a portable hardware platform such as a smartphone certainly extends its applicability along the supply chain but require further efforts to solve all the problems related to weaker constraints on the acquisition set-up (background, geometry and lighting). In Aquino et al. (2018b) a non-invasive and in-field yield prediction was presented. This research involves several stages as input images pre-processing, identification of berry candidates and neural network training in yield components prediction. Sollazzo et al. (2018) have verified the correlation between colour and chemical compound related to the assessment of grapes ripeness using colour measures obtained by a colorimeter or subjectively evaluated using a properly designed colour chart. On the other hand, our system has been designed to reduce the manual interventions in both configuration and tuning of the algorithms to enhance the performance and to simplify its application to different products. The aim of the proposed system is to achieve contactless and no destructive quality evaluation of table grape during cold storage using a colour reference in the scene: the system fully exploits image analysis and machine learning techniques to reduce human intervention in configuration and tuning to the minimum. This significantly simplifies its deployment and application in several points of the supply chain extending the quality monitoring and improving the product management.
