More than 1.6 billion students have had their schools close temporarily because of the COVID-19 pandemic, over 91% of total enrolled learners (UNESCO, 2020). This has led school systems around the world to attempt to rapidly transition to remote learning. However, it is unclear how prepared students are to respond to this challenge, and whether a lack of availability of electronic devices and internet connections prevents many students from engaging in remote learning. Even when students do have access, there is little available evidence on how much of their time they will devote to learning. Newspaper reports from U.S. schools report high absence rates for low-income students, with fewer than half of students regularly participating (Goldstein et al, 2020). The concern is that these problems of low access to remote learning technologies and limited attendance may be even greater in developing countries, resulting in limited schooling taking place during school shutdowns.
We examine remote learning of high school students in Ecuador, a country which suffered one of the worst outbreaks of Coronavirus in the world (Cabrera & Kurmanaev, 2020). Schools in Ecuador were closed on March 13, 2020, and a national lockdown and quarantine period imposed. We began a rapid response phone survey on March 31, 2020 of over 1500 students who are part of an ongoing evaluation in high schools in the Zone 2 administrative region of the country. Over the month of April we were able to interview 64 percent of our baseline sample, asking them questions about their access and use of remote learning technologies, detailed time-use questions, and questions on their mental health and the main stressors they face because of COVID-19. We then examine heterogeneity in these responses by gender, school grade, wealth quartile, mother’s education, ethnicity, province, and internet access.
We find that most students are engaging in remote learning. Access to remote learning technologies are reasonably high, with 74 percent having internet access at home, and 59 percent also having a computer or tablet. Three-quarters of students have done some form of online or tele-educative learning in the past week, and 86 percent have done some form of schoolwork. The median student spends 4 h on schoolwork per day. Gender differences in remote learning are small, with females doing slightly more schoolwork. Female students also do more household tasks than males, while male students are more likely to be working than females. Final year (Grade 12) students spend more time on schooling than younger grades. Students from more disadvantaged groups – the lowest wealth quartile, indigenous students, students whose mothers have secondary education or lower, and students without internet access - have less access to remote learning technologies, and are less likely to be doing schoolwork. For example, 22 percent of students without internet access did no schoolwork in the past day, compared to 9 percent of those with internet and a computer or tablet. Nevertheless, while these differences exist, the majority of students in the lowest wealth quartile and of those with no internet access are still engaging in remote learning.
In addition to detailed information on remote learning and time use, our surveys directly ask students questions on mental health status, and on how the COVID-19 pandemic is most affecting them. Most students had spent zero hours outside their house in the past day. The majority identify disruptions in schooling as the biggest issue they face because of COVID-19, with feelings of social isolation the next biggest concern. Despite this, more than two-thirds say they were happy most or all of the time during the past month. While the majority appear to be coping, 16 percent have mental health scores that lie below a threshold indicative of major depression. This suggests scope for psychosocial support to supplement remote learning efforts.
The information provided here is, to date, unique in providing detailed time use information and reports directly from students during the COVID-19 pandemic. Less detailed information in other developing countries is being collected from parents or other household adults as part of rapid response household surveys. An early example is provided by Le Nestour et al. (2020) for Senegal, who provide a more pessimistic view of remote learning there: most students were either doing no educational activities, studying alone, or doing exercises given by parents; with fewer than 5 percent doing exercises given by teachers and less than one percent doing online courses. Debenedetti et al. (2020) report that only half of children in Burkina Faso are spending any time on education at home. Asadullah et al. (2020) report an 80 percent decline in the amount of time rural Bangladeshis spend learning. Bosumtwi-Sam and Kabay (2020) report that 26 to 32 percent of secondary school children are spending no time on education, and under one-third of households had been contacted by their child’s school since schools had closed. Kihui (2020) reports that a survey of household heads in Kenya found that only 22 percent of their children were engaged in online learning, and another survey in Kenya found parents to be more worried about the educational impacts of COVID-19 than the impacts on their income or health (Kantar, 2020). Given these problems in access, Bolivia and Kenya went as far as to cancel the entire school year of 2020. Ecuador therefore provides an example of much more engaged remote learning.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides details of the context and survey methodology; Section 3 summarizes access to and use of remote learning technologies; Section 4 examines time-use; Section 5 mental health; and Section 6 concludes.
