Archaeological drawing is an indispensable part of the archaeological work, which concretely applies cartography to archeology work and research and uses cartographic theory and technique to document and illustrate archaeological materials. It directly serves for archaeology. The objects of archaeological drawings are all kinds of historical remains and relics in archaeological work. Fig. 1 shows the half-section view of a pottery. With the improvement of modern archeology, as an archaeological method, archaeological drawing is developing continuously (see [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]).Download : Download high-res image (236KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A pottery bowl and its half-section view.
Compared with the archaeological drawing, it is difficult to visualize the objects in words [7]. As for the photograph, though vivid, it does not emphasize the point of the object, causing some key information to be easily overlooked. Besides, photographs cannot reflect the profile. Archaeological drawings can directly reflect the size, shape and other information of the relics, and indirectly reflect material, production process and other information. In addition to this, archaeological drawings, as a platform for the display of relics, can highlight the part that need to be emphasized and reflect the characteristics and evolution law of the relics of different times, which help to give readers a visual and true vision effect. What is more, archaeological drawing is also a means of recording and preserving the information of the remains. As a result, these relic graphs are also the foundation of archaeological research, teaching and publishing, which is of great value to archaeologists. Therefore, archaeological drawing plays an important role in the archaeological work, and it has crucial value and status in the archaeological excavation and related research.
At present, the commonly used method of archaeological drawing is to combine hand drawing with computer-aided drawing [8]. Generally, it measures data by measurement tool at first, and next uses rulers, pencils and graph paper to draw a picture, then imports the picture into the computer by scanning, finally uses drawing software such as Photoshop, AutoCAD to redraw and gets the line graph that can be published. Although this method is the most widely used one, its disadvantages are also obvious. First of all, it is time-consuming and laborious because it includes drawing the base map and tracing. Besides, it is not accurate enough. Moreover, being exposed to work environment for a long time is not conducive to protection. Last but not least, there is a high demand for draftsmen, and the professionals who can meet this requirement are not enough, which cause the quality of published line graphs uneven. In order to avoid repetitive work, it is necessary to use the computer drawing software to draw line graphs directly instead of drawing base map.
Nowadays, with the development of digital science, computer technology is widely used in cultural heritage. Appolonia et al. [9] used computer to assist in monitoring buildings of historical importance. Gultepe et al. [10] exploited unsupervised feature learning to predict and group digitized paintings. At the same time, as an important part of cultural heritage, archaeological drawing is of great importance. De Paola et al. [11] analyzed rainfall data based on the archaeological drawing of the Augustan aqueduct route. What's more, 3D technology is widely used in cultural heritage. Galeazzi [12] recorded intra-site data by assessing 3D documentation. Koutsoudis et al. [13] built a tool to generate 3D models for ancient Greek pottery. Other 3D researches contribute to archaeological drawings as well [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]. So, it is a trend to apply computer science to generate archaeological drawings.
To get archaeological drawings, the generation of basic line drawings is needed. A lot of work has been performed for generating line drawings automatically. Lee et al. [19] presented a line drawing generation method based on likelihood-function estimation. Liu et al. [20] proposed an improved non-photorealistic rendering method that automatically generated colorized line drawing from an input image. Hu et al. [21] processed a technique, which transferred an image into a clean drawing fully automatically. However, all these work is done for natural image, they can not be directly used in archaeological drawings. A special line drawing method for archaeological drawing is required.
In view of this situation, we put forward a new method which can generate basic line drawings especially for archaeological drawings automatically. And based on this a system with some special features is built to complete the archaeological drawings. The main contributions of our method can be summarized as follows:
•we put forward an automatic line drawings generation method targeted for archaeological drawings.•we develop a new edge tracing method which can meet the special need of archaeological drawings.•a simple but effective method for automatic generation of central axis was proposed.
