Team-based learning (TBL) has become increasingly popular in health care education because of the importance of team management in providing quality patient care (Wilson-Delfosse, 2012). It emphasizes active learning, collaboration, and the use of authentic application exercises following a sequence of three activities: phase 1 = pre-class preparation (out of class), phase 2 = readiness assurance (in class), phase 3 = application exercises (in class). This approach which originated from business education (Michaelsen, Sweet, & Parmelee, 2008) underscores students' accountability by coming to class prepared thereby saving time for a more important in-class activities (Michaelsen, Knight, & Fink, 2002). As Sweet and Pelton-Sweet (2008, p. 29) explained, “what sets TBL apart from other forms of small group learning is its accountability structure—a rhythm of moments in which students' social and intellectual experiences of the classroom become interlocked and amplified”. This sense of accountability enables the students to have an overview of the fundamental concepts that will prepare them to contribute meaningfully in the team-based learning session (Anwar et al., 2012, Cheng et al., 2014, Kumar and Gadbury-Amyot, 2012, Letassy et al., 2008, Stein et al., 2016, Vasan et al., 2011, Wiener et al., 2009, Zingone et al., 2010). The extant literature has shown that pre-class preparatory activities (e.g., making sense of pre-class study materials such as book chapters, journal papers or even video clips) are linked to a higher level of learning and promotion of active rather than passive learning (Letassy et al., 2008, Nieder et al., 2005, Punja et al., 2014, Vasan et al., 2011). These studies have shown the direct effects of preparedness on achievement but do not capture the psychological processes of students involved in TBL. Less is known about the mechanisms through which students' preparation individually and as a team member influence their academic learning in teams.
To gain a more nuanced understanding of students' experiences in a TBL environment, there is a need to take into account the key psychological processes that underpins students learning experiences in TBL. To date, it appears that there are scant studies regarding the systematic analysis of the learning process on TBL from psychological perspectives most especially in the context of interprofessional education (IPE) where TBL is posited to be a suitable pedagogy (Bishop et al., 2015, Chan et al., 2017).
What are the motivational processes of students who internalize accountability and demonstrate preparedness in team-based learning activity? Does this readiness, indexed by students' perceived preparedness to engage in interprofessional activities, directly impact their learning or are there other mediating factors (e.g., motivation, enjoyment, utility) which lead to achievement outcomes? To find answers to these questions, it is necessary to have a nuanced understanding of the psychological pathways that students go through before, during, and after the team-based learning activity. These are important research questions which suggest a closer examination of mechanisms through which positive perception of teamwork drives task value (motivation and enjoyment) and utility (usefulness) which may lead to better achievement gains. These are the gaps in the literature that this study intends to investigate.
1.1. Computer-assisted interprofessional team-based learning (CS-IPTBL)Interprofessional education (IPE) works by putting students from two or more disciplines together to learn with, about, and from one another to enable effective collaboration leading to improved health outcomes (Centre for the Advancement of Interprofessional Education, 2002, D'Amour et al., 2005, Leathard, 2003, World Health Organization, 2010). The use of active learning pedagogy called team-based learning (TBL) is relevant as a means to attain the outcomes of IPE (Black et al., 2015, Chan et al., 2017). The integration of IPE with TBL gave way to IPTBL which is a large-scale project involving students from The University of Hong Kong (biomedical sciences, Chinese medicine, medicine, nursing, pharmacy, and social work) and The Polytechnic University of Hong Kong (medical laboratory science, nursing, occupational therapy, physiotherapy, radiography, and social work).Traditional TBL has been popularly implemented using the immediate feedback assessment technique or IF-AT (e.g., Barak and Rafaeli, 2004, Beatty et al., 2009, Koles et al., 2010, Michaelsen and Sweet, 2008, Michaelsen and Sweet, 2011, Orr et al., 2015, Whitley et al., 2015). IF-AT is a system of scratch-off answer forms for multiple-choice questions (MCQs) with the correct/best answer indicated by a star hidden in MCQ choices (Whitley et al., 2015). It is a self-scoring form where the number of attempts to get the correct answer determines the score in a given MCQ. If the answer is correct on the first attempt, a full mark is given but is reduced depending on the number of attempts before arriving at the correct answer. IF-AT is particularly useful in a number of TBL activities (e.g., team readiness assurance test, application exercise) when dealing with small number of teams. However, the greatest challenge of this method is efficiency when dealing with a large number of students (Haidet and Fecile, 2006, Michaelsen et al., 2002, Michaelsen and Sweet, 2008, Parmelee and Michaelsen, 2010).To address this limitation, an electronic platform called Learning Activity Management System (LAMS, developed by LAMS Foundation, LAMS International, and the Macquarie E-learning Centre of Excellence) was adapted for IPTBL. LAMS facilitated the management of the complex but structured TBL process and is especially useful in managing a large number of participants. It is a system for creating, managing, and implementing sequences of learning activities which can be customized to suit specific requirements (Fig. 1). With the use of mobile devices, students completed activities using the LAMS which provided them immediate feedback to stimulate them to enrich their discussion in teams. During peer evaluation, the LAMS allowed them to check in real time the average scores given to them by all other team members on the four interprofessional collaborative practice competencies: values/ethics, roles/responsibilities, interprofessional communication, teams and teamwork.Download : Download high-res image (740KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The IPTBL process using the learning activity management system (LAMS) for the project “Interprofessional team-based learning for health professional students” (Chan et al., 2017). iRAT = Individual readiness assurance test, tRAT = team readiness assurance test.The content experts received instant statistics about specific answers of the teams and the class in general, got the summary of team appeals real-time, and monitored the team progress across all the IPTBL activities (Chan et al., 2017). The use of LAMS as an electronic platform was expected to aid students in achieving the goals of IPE using TBL.In comparison with traditional TBL, the implementation of TBL with technology (e.g., LAMS) can potentially offer students with a tool in fostering a social interaction and feedback amongst learners and teachers. This can trigger a higher level of motivation and enjoyment to impact students' learning and readiness for interprofessional learning given that digital natives in general respond with enthusiasm to technology-assisted activities (Brown, 2001, pp. 71–72). Theoretical and empirical data lend strong support to the benefits of computer-aided learning environments in improving students' achievement gains, particularly computer-supported collaborative learning (Beer et al., 2005, Keller and Suzuki, 2004, Lehtinen, 2003). However, the motivational processes of students in an interprofessional team-based learning remain underexplored which the present study intends to examine. Attending to these gaps in literature, this study hopes to provide understanding about students' psychological processes in the context of computer-supported interprofessional team-based learning.In the recent years, there has been an intensified interest in the use of technology in teaching and learning (e.g., Plass et al., 2013). The proponents of technology-based learning suggest that technology can be used to translate educational and learning theory into best practices in education (e.g., Clair and Chihara, 2012, Collins and Halverson, 2009, Gee, 2003, Mayo, 2007, Shaffer, 2008, Squire, 2008). In TBL, perhaps because of the recognition of the importance of technology integration in teaching and learning, there is a methodological shift in the way TBL is delivered from traditional paper format to computer-supported TBL (e.g., Antoun et al., 2015, Chan et al., 2017, Hernández-Leo et al., 2014, Kam and Katerattanakul, 2014, Khogali et al., 2014).Specific to the technology used in the current study, the interactivity in the way LAMS was developed is expected to make IPTBL learning fun, engaging, and interesting. Given these essential features of the LAMS, it is therefore necessary to formulate research agenda that will promote an understanding of students' psychological processes in computer-assisted IPTBL.
1.2. The 3P modelThe 3P model (Biggs, 2003) of student learning provides a framework in understanding how students approach learning. Central to the model is the relationship of the sequence of three activities: presage, process, and outcome. We utilized this model to help examine the psychological pathways that contribute to students' academic achievement in the context of IPTBL which is a program designed to promote collaborative working. This model has been commonly used to investigate students' learning and psychological processes (e.g., Kizito et al., 2016, Zhang, 2000).The presage component refers to individual or institutional states or characteristics. At the individual student level, it refers to the students' characteristics which include prior knowledge, abilities, approaches to learning, values, and expectations (Biggs, 1996). Presage includes variables that exist prior to classroom learning (Huang, 2008, Nield, 2007, Zhang, 2000). In the context of the study, presage represents the individual students' perception to engage in TBL activities and perception of team member's valuable contributions to learning prior to learning engagement (Freeth & Reeves, 2004). Tempone (2001) defined presage factors to include prior experience and beliefs that students bring into the learning experience and their expectations of the new experience. Extant literature suggests that presage factors affect the process factor (Biggs, 1987, Freeth and Reeves, 2004, Jones, 2002, Tam, 1999).The process component represents students' learning experiences from classroom teaching. The process refers to students' expectancies (how confident they are to succeed) and task values (how significant, useful, or enjoyable the tasks). In the context of the present study, the process includes students' expectancies (perceived motivation) and value (perceived enjoyment and perceived usefulness) during the learning process which is consistent with the expectancy-value theory (Eccles, 1983, Wigfield and Eccles, 2000). We conceptualized that subjective task value which represents students' motivations for engaging in CS-IPTBL subsumes intrinsic values (perceived motivation and perceived enjoyment in CS-IPTBL) and utility value (e.g. What is the usefulness of CS-IPTBL to me?). The process component leads to the product component of students' learning.The product represents the learning outcomes (Biggs, 2003). In the current study, this represents the perceived learning, readiness to engage in interprofessional learning and the attainment of IPE learning outcomes. Furthermore, aside from perception of learning, we also included perception of readiness to engage in interprofessional learning, and attainment of desired IPE learning outcomes to underscore the outcomes of IPE component of the model. Taken together, students who show optimism by means of preparing both individually and as a team member (presage) will demonstrate high motivation, enjoyment, and utility (process) which will facilitate their eventual achievement (product).
