Proteins are macromolecules with a complex and heterogeneous structure, which is partly due to post-translational modifications (PTMs). One of the most critical PTMs is glycosylation. About half of the mammalian proteome is glycosylated, and approximately one-third of the approved biopharmaceuticals are glycoproteins [1]. Glycosylation is an enzyme-mediated process where carbohydrates (glycans) are covalently attached to proteins. The glycans can be attached to a serine or threonine residue (O-glycosylation) or an asparagine residue (N-glycosylation) of the backbone of proteins [2]. N-glycans share the same core structure and are classified into three different types: oligomannose, complex and hybrid [3]. In contrast, O-glycans do not have a distinct core structure. The attachment of glycans may affect the tertiary structure and physicochemical properties of the protein, such as stability, solubility, and folding [4]. In biopharmaceuticals, these effects could result in a change of the quality, safety, and efficacy of the product. Therefore, it is of great importance to be able to monitor and check the glycosylation of these biopharmaceutical products [1].
There are three major approaches to study the glycosylation of proteins: analysis of released glycans [5], analysis of glycopeptides (either by bottom-up or middle-down approaches) [6], [7], and analysis of intact glycoproteins [8]. Released glycans are obtained by enzymatic or chemical cleavage. This approach can help with the determination of the different glycan structures present, but results in a loss of information on the protein attachment sites of the glycans [9]. For the analysis of glycopeptides, the glycoproteins are digested by specific endoproteinases (e.g., trypsin). With this approach, a complete overview of the glycosylation sites of proteins can be obtained. However, information on co-occurring glycosylation sites and the number and distribution of glycoforms is lost [10]. For the determination of the actual glycoforms, the analysis of intact glycoproteins is a more suitable approach [11]. So far, several analytical techniques have been described for the glycoform profiling of intact proteins, including capillary electrophoresis (CE) and liquid chromatography (LC) [8], [12]. Coupling of CE or LC with high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) enables the determination of the accurate mass of separated intact proteins. More structural information regarding protein sequence and PTMs can be obtained when employing tandem MS approaches [13].
When considering LC for the analysis of intact glycoproteins, different modes can be applied. For example, reversed-phase (RP) LC enables to resolve protein heterogeneity according to sequence (amino acid composition) but has limited selectivity toward glycoforms [9]. An attractive alternative for the separation and characterization of intact glycoproteins is hydrophilic-interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) [14]. Currently, this technique is mostly applied to the chromatographic separation of small polar molecules [15] peptides and glycopeptides [16]. The precise retention mechanism of HILIC is debated, but the generally accepted idea is that retention derives from a combination of partitioning processes and electrostatic interactions (ion exchange and hydrogen bonding) between the analytes and the surface of the hydrophilic stationary phase. When analyzing proteins with HILIC, relatively high percentages of water are needed to assure protein solubilization and elution, leaving electrostatic interactions the predominant cause of retention.
Different types of stationary phases, such as hydroxylated stationary phases and weak ion-exchangers, have been adopted for the analysis of proteins by HILIC. These materials have proven to be useful for the separation of hydrophobic proteins (e.g., membrane proteins [17]) and charge variants of proteins [18]. Recently, amide-based stationary phases have demonstrated good performances for the separation of intact proteins [19] demonstrating interesting selectivity for the separation of glycoforms of glycoproteins [7], [20], [21]. The acetonitrile (ACN)-water mobile phases used for amide-based HILIC of proteins typically contain 0.05–0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). TFA lowers the pH of the mobile phase protonating the acidic residues of the protein and the free silanol groups of the stationary phase material. At the same time, TFA acts as an ion-pairing agent, interacting with the protonated basic residues of the protein. As a result of this, the HILIC separation of proteins is mainly driven by polar, but neutral, groups on the protein backbone (incl. glycans) and not by charged residues [11]. Such HILIC systems can separate a wide range of proteins, as demonstrated by the analysis of a cell lysate [19]. When applying shallow gradients (e.g., decreasing the ACN % of the mobile phase of 10% over 30 min), highly efficient glycoform separations of glycoproteins such as monoclonal antibodies [7], therapeutical glycoproteins [11], and neo-glycoproteins [9], [12] are obtained.
Unfortunately, the determination of the optimal gradient for a set of protein glycoforms can be a cumbersome process as it can be difficult to determine a suitable gradient program. To facilitate efficient method development in LC, computer-aided approaches, such as ChromSword, DryLab and PIOTR, have been developed [22], [23], [24]. These software use models (based on, e.g., linear solvent strength (LSS), ion exchange or mixed-mode) to describe retention and to make predictions of protein retention times based on a limited number of scouting gradients. The possibilities of automated method development in liquid chromatography for large biomolecules, such as therapeutic proteins, have been the topic of a recent review [25]. An example is the recent work of Bobaly et al. in which the DryLAB software was used to develop a generic HILIC method to study the glycoforms of Ides digested monoclonal antibodies and antibody drug conjugates [26]. In this study, the gradient steepness and temperature effects were tested, monitoring the increase of resolution of already resolved features and assuming a linear relationship between gradient time and gradient retention factor.
Retention models have been objects of recent studies to verify their applicability to different classes of compounds and separation modes. In particular, Tyteca et al. tested three retention models (LSS, quadratic, and Neue-Kuss) for the separation of small molecules, peptides and proteins in RPLC. In this study, the LSS model was described as the most suitable to describe the retention behavior [27]. Recently, five different retention models were applied to model the gradient elution in HILIC of small molecules and peptides using PIOTR [28], concluding that the adsorption model had the best fitting and prediction for the analyte set discussed.
In the present study, retention and chromatographic behavior of proteins in HILIC (using an amide stationary phase) were first compared to RPLC (C4 stationary phase). After that, accelerated optimization of HILIC methods for the separation of protein glycoforms was developed using a computer-aided approach. Different retention models (mixed-mode, Neue-Kuss, adsorption, LSS, and quadratic model) were compared for predicting the gradient conditions needed for optimal resolution. Finally, a PIOTR method employing the HILIC adsorption retention model and a Pareto-optimization approach was evaluated as a prediction tool to obtain gradient separation conditions of glycoforms from proteins varying in degree and complexity of glycosylation (Fc parts of trastuzumab, ovalbumin, fetuin, alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, and thyroglobulin).
Our results demostrate that the adsorption model describes protein (and glycoprotein) elution in HILIC adequately. Gradient conditions resulting in efficient glycoform separations could be readily derived from scouting gradients, which by itself did not provide glycoform resolution.
