One of the greatest challenges of modern neuroscience is to find reliable and sustainable treatments for the disabling effects caused by many chronic and incurable brain conditions. With the greatest impact carried by stroke (Feigin et al., 2017) and traumatic brain injury (Maas et al., 2017), brain disorders are among the leading causes of disabilities worldwide. Owing to recent advances in bioelectronics and in neural and neuromorphic engineering, direct interfacing of artificial circuits with large neuronal networks is possible to develop novel “neurobiohybrid” systems (such as neuroprostheses Vassanelli and Mahmud, 2016), which are envisaged as potentially interesting clinical applications for brain lesions (Broccard et al., 2017). In this paper, we introduce an innovative bioelectronic system acting as a neuroprosthesis, which, thanks to a neuromorphic real-time hardware interface, can re-establish the communication between two disconnected neuronal populations.
Neural interfaces are promising solutions for brain repair (Soekadar et al., 2015). Modern neural interfaces are mainly designed to restore lost motor functions in only one direction, i.e., from the brain to the body (Abdulkader et al., 2015) or from the body to the brain (Flesher et al., 2016). Additionally, recent neuroprosthetic developments have shown the enormous potential of neural interfaces to aid and accelerate functional recovery (Bouton et al., 2016, Rosin et al., 2011). However, a major obstacle in developing novel neuroprostheses for bidirectional communication with and within the brain is the complex nature of interactions among different brain areas, which in turn presents a challenge for the development of appropriate stimulation protocols as well as for testing such devices using in vivo models (Kohler et al., 2017).
Despite very recent technological progress (Jun et al., 2017, Steinmetz et al., 2018), in vivo models still have two main bottlenecks. The first bottleneck is the technical challenge to faithfully reproduce specific/focal network lesions (mainly due to their complexity) that the neuroprosthesis aims to treat, whereas the second is the difficulty in disentangling the actual effect of the adopted electrical therapy from the complex activity of a brain constantly processing sensory inputs and producing behavior. Therefore, since in vivo models exhibit inherent complexity and low controllability, using in vitro reduced neuronal systems to model precise and reproducible neuronal network lesions and test neuroprosthetic devices for their treatment may be advantageous. This approach is also justified by a growing recognition that in vitro testing of both research and medical devices can be more effective in terms of cost, time consumption, and ethical issues and much more reliable than in vivo testing (Myers et al., 2017).
In this work, we bidirectionally interfaced in real-time a neuroprosthetic system with an in vitro culture constituted by interconnected “neuronal assemblies” (Hebb, 1949). Therefore, our first objective was to create a simplified yet plausible in vitro model of a focal brain lesion by using bimodular cultures grown onto micro-electrode arrays (MEAs) (Bisio et al., 2014, Bonifazi et al., 2013, Shein-Idelson et al., 2011) with reciprocal connections cut by a custom-made laser setup (Difato et al., 2011) to mimic the pathological effect of a traumatic brain injury (Hayes et al., 2016). We created a neurobiohybrid system connecting the biological element (the bimodular culture) following the lesion with a neuroprosthetic prototype. Our hardware neuroprosthesis could perform low-power computations in hard real-time (Pirog et al., 2018), collecting the inputs coming from neural recordings, processing those signals, and generating suitable electrical stimulation triggers as an output. With this experimental setup, we tested two specific applications, namely, bidirectional bridging (BB) to artificially reconnect two disconnected neuronal modules and hybrid bidirectional bridging (HBB) in which a real-time spiking neural network (SNN) replaced the activity of one of the two modules in real-time while implementing bidirectional connectivity with the remaining neuronal module.
The motivation of our research is to provide a new technological instrument as a novel form of neuroprosthesis aimed at treating disabling brain pathologies. The hardware choice (field-programmable gate array, FPGA) maximizes the real-time performances of the system and allows for a faster development of a future implantable bioelectronic device for biomedical applications. The adoption of bidirectional communication allows the development of a generalized non-specific approach that is applicable to the central nervous system (CNS) or peripheral nervous system. In particular, prostheses for the CNS should restore the communication between two or more neuronal assemblies whose functional and anatomical path could be distributed and sparse and not necessarily known a priori.
Indeed, our idea to develop a generalized approach comes from the future perspective of creating a cerebral neuroprosthesis for direct implantation in the brain that could be used by patients affected by stroke or brain injury. Our proof-of-principle results are the first for a next-generation neurobiohybrid system to restore brain functions (Broccard et al., 2017, Vassanelli and Mahmud, 2016).
