The free distribution of social media content and advanced social networking capabilities increase the risk of misconduct and illegal behavior over social networks. Trusted social media platforms in our days have made significant steps for the provision of trusted services and authorization.
Nowadays, social media is used extensively for a variety of activities. Taking into account that social media is the dominant communication method for a high percentage of population, the development of a novel terrorist behavior detection system capable of grabbing, analyzing, and detecting behavioral patterns on a fast, reliable and accurate way is critical. The idea of behavior analysis over social media and the analysis of content favorable to terrorism is a complex scientific problem. Beyond the capabilities of modern social mining methods we have also to consider numerous behavioral factors that affect the realization and the execution of the phenomenon. In our approach the social aspect of the phenomenon leads to the necessity to promote advanced social profiling.
Many countries in the third word such as Middle East and North Africa, are ideally suited for such Terrorist Behavior Detection systems. Young people use extensively social media for their interpersonal communications and the services made available by social media platforms have replaced the traditional communications through email or file sharing and web communications.
The difficulty in social media and social networks analysis is since the identification of information providers is not simple. Users with terroristic behavior develop a huge network of non-accurate profiles and from this perspective any method applied to this untrusted network has, by default, detection limitations. On the other side, the availability of a variety of technological infrastructures for distributed information processes and advanced data mining posed critical challenges to the design of a terrorist detection system. Consequently, there is a need to deploy non-traditional information processing mechanisms for an approximation of terroristic behavior.
In this context, the current work proposes a system that provides a smart algorithm for the detection of terrorist behavior by attaching dynamic characterizations to pieces of shared information and shared activities. Fig. 1, provides an overview of the proposed ALT-TERROS system and its integrated framework. The key objective of this article is to introduce a low-cost, functional test bed for the semi-automatic processing of social media content in the context of anti-terrorism act.
From several scientific works [1], [2] on the domain it is evident that the following are only a few of the problems related to terrorist behavior detection:Download : Download high-res image (300KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. ALT-TERROS: The integrative framework for Terrorist Behavior Detection.

•Limited access to critical data in social media•A non-transparent detection system makes it quite easy to be recognized by terrorists, thus leading to behavior avoidance•Limited perspective in the codification and the semantic analysis of what is perceived as terrorist behavior as expressed in social media•Difficulties in rating posts in social media or comments shared publicly or privately through users.•Difficulty to understand fake profiles in social media, which are the typical vehicles for communicating or executing terrorist behavior.
The previous statements highlight the complexity of the phenomenon under research and provide some key research objectives that will be summarized in Section 3. Furthermore, it is important to clarify from the beginning that one of the most difficult aspects of this research problem is the complexity and richness of Arabic language along with the nonexistence of fully functional semantic and syntactic analysis capabilities.
The main aspects of our research problem can be clarifying as follows:

•How a peer within a social network can be rated as “terror”-favorable?•Which are the necessary methods to understand the syntax and the meaning in complex languages like Arabic, for which we do not have fully functional linguistic and syntactic computational methods available?•How can we embed a real time approach to the analysis of online processing of social media content shared in platforms like twitter?•Which is the right lexicon to use for comparing terror-favorable content in social media for Arabic content?•How can we embed a functional process for the understanding and rating of social media content toward the provision of understandable analytics for monitoring and alert?•Which are the required policy making guidelines, toward a cost effective, sustainable web observatory in any country?•How can we embed learning capabilities to such a system to train itself in the long term securing better efficiency and performance?
Our research paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we elaborate on a relevant literature review of social mining for Arabic content as well as for antiterrorism detection systems. The key objective is to inform our research model and our approach with a significant benchmark of related approach and critical integration. In Section 3, we introduce our heuristic approach to the research problem. This research in fact summarizes the first approach. We intend in the future to proceed to further development and to integrate the key findings of this research. Following, in Section 4, we provide the empirical analysis of our work and we summarize the key findings. Soon we plan a second run of empirical testing of our approach and comparison with other methods. These are summarized in section number 5, where also limitations of current approach and future research directions are discussed.
