Research on computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) focuses on how people learn together with the aid of computers (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). CSCL is reported to be an effective approach for helping learners reflect on their own thoughts and develop social experiences by interacting with peers (Fu & Hwang, 2018). Most previous research in the field of CSCL has explored knowledge building, support for argumentation, discourse analysis, and the use of design-based research or quasi-experimental studies to examine technologies and pedagogies in different subject domains (Stahl, 2015). Researchers have proposed that the ultimate goal of collaborative learning is to advance the knowledge of individuals and collectives through interactions with peers (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014).
However, Dillenbourg and Fischer (2007) proposed that collaborative learning does not often occur spontaneously. Similarly, Soller (2001) reported that simply dividing students into different groups does not necessarily produce productive social interactions. Previous studies indicated that learners need the support of scaffolding during collaborative learning (Yoon, Anderson, Park, Elinich, & Lin, 2018), since scaffolding can provide just-in-time support to engage students in acquiring skills during problem solving (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976). Scaffolding appears in different forms, including tools, strategies, guidelines, questions, prompts, and feedback (Simons & Klein, 2007). Furthermore, it has been reported that scaffolding has significant impacts on students' learning performance (Belland, Walker, Kim, & Lefler, 2017; Hsu, Chiu, Lin, & Wang, 2015) and can be beneficial for building collaborative knowledge during collaborative learning (Lin & Reigeluth, 2016). Hill and Hannafin (2001) differentiated four kinds of scaffolding, including conceptual scaffolding, metacognitive scaffolding, procedural scaffolding, and strategic scaffolding. Conceptual scaffolding helps learners to identify and understand concepts (Hogan & Pressley, 1997). Metacognitive scaffolding helps learners to assess what they know, and to reflect on their own learning (Hill & Hannafin, 2001). Procedural scaffolding helps learners identify how to use resources and strategic scaffolding provides alternative ways to perform tasks (Hill & Hannafin, 2001).
While most previous studies have focused on providing conceptual scaffolding during collaborative learning (Rummel, Mullins, & Spada, 2012; Vogel, Wecker, Kollar, & Fischer, 2017), only a small number of studies have implemented metacognitive scaffolding at the individual level in a collaborative learning context (Kwon, Hong, & Laffey, 2013). One study reported that metacognitive scaffolding promoted positive interdependence, productive interactions, and group productivity in online collaborative learning (Kwon et al., 2013). However, little attention has been paid to methods for providing metacognitive scaffolding at the group level in online collaborative learning environments. Most online collaborative learning environments have included online discussion forums (Koh, Herring, & Hew, 2010), tools for constructing concept maps (Sangin, Molinari, Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2011), and tools for sharing knowledge (Stahl, 2006), whereas few studies have developed metacognitive scaffolding at the group level in online collaborative learning environments. To the best of our knowledge, the effects of group metacognitive scaffolding (GMS) on metacognitive behaviors, group performance, and cognitive load have not been previously examined. In the current study, we sought to fill these research gaps by developing a GMS approach and validating its effectiveness in facilitating online collaborative learning.
