The contemporary opportunities provided by online connectivity facilitate individuals in carrying out many activities through digital devices. This has resulted in a situation in which individuals overlook their own cognitive abilities when carrying out simple operations, and to lose the ability to apply skills that cannot be delegated to machines (Alter, 2013). In order to overcome such a situation, it is important to face with cognitive difficulties for an active engagement. Such cognitive difficulties can be helpful also in instructional settings (Bjork, 1994), that is, they can be useful in breaking the study routines of the individual, varying the predictable nature of the instructional material and creating an unusual instructional pattern for effective learning (Bjork & Bjork, 2011).
Challenges that slow down the learning process can revive long-term memory and improve the transfer of learning (Bjork & Bjork, 2011). One of the cognitive challenges is the Disfluency Effect, which is created through the interruption of fluency. According to Oppenheimer (2008) fluency is “the subjective experience of ease or difficulty associated with completing a mental task” (p.237). Fluency is not regarded as a separate cognitive process, but rather a facilitator of the cognitive processes. For instance, a frequently or recently viewed object is regarded as fluent, although there are several fluency types, such as perceptual, linguistic and memory-based (Alter & Oppenheimer, 2009b). Disfluency, on the other hand, can be defined as the subjective and metacognitive difficulties associated with cognitive tasks (Diemand-Yauman, Oppenheimer, & Vaughan, 2011). Disfluency is associated primarily with perceptual fluency, which is implemented through font manipulations (Alter and Oppenheimer, 2008b, Alter and Oppenheimer, 2009a). For instance, some scholars changed font type (French et al., 2013, Song and Schwarz, 2008) whereas some manipulated the font size (Rhodes and Castel, 2008, Strukelj et al., 2016).
The theoretical basis of the Disfluency Effect is derived from James (1950) assumption that people have two different processing systems: System 1 and System 2. While System 1 is effortless, quick, associative and intuitive, System 2 is slow, analytical and deliberate, which requires effort. More specifically, learners monitor challenges before initiating the relevant control mechanisms (Serra & Metcalfe, 2009). If the learning process appears to be easy, learners feel self-confident and devote little effort, as they believe they will quickly reach the desired outcome. On the other hand, when they face difficulties, they feel less confident of reaching the desired outcome, and thus activate their controlling activities to make more effort. According to the Disfluency Effect, high perceptual fluency activates System 1, whereas low perceptual fluency (i.e., disfluency) leads to the operation of System 2 (Kühl & Eitel, 2016). Accordingly, effortless activities that trigger System 1 are regarded as fluent, whereas cognitively demanding activities that trigger System 2 are regarded as disfluent (Alter & Oppenheimer, 2009b).
Cognitive interventions appear to have potential in improving the effectiveness of instruction (Diemand-Yauman et al., 2011). For instance, minor modifications associated with disfluency (e.g., font changes) can contribute to learning outcomes (Diemand-Yauman et al., 2011, Eitel et al., 2014, Faber et al., 2017, French et al., 2013, Lehmann et al., 2015, Sungkhasettee et al., 2011, Weissgerber and Reinhard, 2017). In addition, none of these perceivably useful manipulations require major changes to either the curriculum or the method of instruction, and therefore, even prominent metacognition scholars as Dunlosky and Mueller (2016), who are skeptical of the effect, agree on the significant potential pertaining to disfluency. That said, empirical studies are yet to come up with convincing evidence on the affordances of the effect, and so it is important to investigate the role of disfluency in contemporary computer-assisted learning environments that are commonly used in educational practices. Accordingly, theoretical justifications and critical variables to consider are discussed in the next section.
