Rapid growth of the Internet has encouraged the evolution of new technological concepts and paradigms, cloud computing being among them. Using this paradigm, enterprises can have access to infrastructures without much hassle and spending lots of effort and cost on the management issues. Moreover, computing resources which have become cheaper and more powerful, can be employed without the need to plan ahead for provisioning. Cloud computing gains benefits from different concepts such as distributed computing, grid computing, and parallel computing [1] and has realized many computer scientists' dream of using computing resources as a utility. As a result, these resources can be leased and released in an on-demand fashion and with a usage-based pricing model through the Internet [2].
Cloud service providers (CSPs) usually argue their capacity to be unlimited and it's not their desire to reject a customer's request due to lack of resources. Hence, the CSPs typically procure their physical resources in order to handle the demand in peak conditions. As a result, a considerable amount of physical resources are unused most of the time, which are called spare resources. An idea leveraged by a number of today service providers is to rent the spare resources with a price lower than the on-demand price. This price is called the spot price and varies over time regarding to the market and the internal state of the CSP. Here, we assume the CSP's spot price to be a function of its load. A user presents a bid to the CSP and can use the spare resources while the spot price is less than the bid.
Although the spot price is usually less than the on-demand price, unavailability of resources due to the spot price exceeding the bid is a risk. In addition, variability of the spot price makes the long-term costs unpredictable for the users. Hence, many users prefer to use the always-available reserved resources with the fixed on-demand price. The goal of this paper is to let the users use spare resources with high availability and at a fixed price in order to decrease the mentioned risks for them.
Imagine a user is going to use cloud resources provided by a cloud service provider. After investigating different price schemes, the user finds himself in a trade-off between price, availability and predictability. If he chooses to use spot prices to reduce the costs, a risk of being unavailable arises and also the future costs will not be predictable. What if the user can use the spot prices in a highly available manner and with a fixed price?
In this paper, we introduce the concept of a parasite CSP, which is in fact a virtual CSP exposing resources to its customers with an on-demand price lower than that of the normal CSP (called the host CSP). A parasite CSP has no physical resources by its own, but rents a number of resources from some host CSPs with their varying spot prices and rents them to its customers with a fixed on-demand price.
The main contributions of this paper include:
1.Introducing the concept of a parasite CSP which is a new concept to our best of knowledge2.Proposing the overall architecture and interaction model of a parasite CSP3.Mathematical analysis on the amount of spare resources in host CSPs and the virtual capacity of the parasite CSP which relies on several host CSPs4.Mathematical analysis on the SLA of the parasite CSP, the probability of SLA violation and upper bounds for the expected penalty
In section 2 we express the problem context, introduce our basic idea and propose an overall architecture as well as interaction model. Mathematical analysis on the host CSPs' loads, the parasite CSP's virtual capacity and its SLA is formulated in section 3 and evaluated in section 4. Section 5 summarizes the previous related research and finally, section 6 concludes the paper.
