Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurological condition affecting more than 10 million people worldwide, including 100,000 and 145,000 people in Australia and the UK, respectively. It is one of the costliest diseases, with a burden of approximately $23,000 per patient. The symptoms of PD arise from decreasing levels of the chemical messenger dopamine, occurring due to gradual loss of dopamine-producing nerve cells (neurons) in the brain. Symptoms typically start to appear when the majority of dopamine-producing cells (about 70%) have stopped working normally. PD cannot be cured but its progression can be delayed by management of symptoms, i.e., people with PD can live independent and productive lives if treated appropriately with a combination of medication and multidisciplinary support including speech and occupational therapy, dietetics, and physiotherapy.
Despite its pathological features being well-established, the etiology of PD and related diseases, and appropriate disease-modifying treatments remain elusive. PD is associated with multiple symptoms, with the most prominent indicators being tremor, muscle stiffness (rigidity), slowness of movement (bradykinesia), and postural instability. Other symptoms can include memory loss, mild cognitive impairment, sleep disruption, anxiety, and depression [1], negatively affecting patients’ daily lives. PD has a male preponderance and develops gradually, most commonly appearing between the ages of 50 and 60, although so-called young onset PD can occur in people (10%–20%) younger than 50 years of age. Currently, diagnosis is based on performance in tasks such as those involving facial expression [2], [3], writing [4], [5] drawing [6], walking [7], [8], [9], and speaking [10], [11].
PD is a progressive neurological condition whose etiology remains unclear. Various stages of PD have been defined to help determine its progression and associated loss of neurons. Patients often ask what stage of PD they are in, how far their symptoms have progressed, and what they can expect to happen next. The range, order of onset, and intensity of PD symptoms varies significantly between individuals. Stage of PD progression is commonly assessed using two rating scales: The Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) and the Hoehn and Yahr (H-Y) scale. In first stage, PD symptoms typically affect only one side of the body, progressing to both sides of body in the second stage. In the third stage of PD, movement is affected. In the last two stages, PD patients are unable to perform daily activities without assistance. PD diagnosis is a complex and challenging task, yet early-stage diagnosis is important. Existing diagnostic tools include the MiniMental State Examination [12] questionnaire used to evaluate PD disability, the UPDRS [13], and brain scans [14]. These methods are expensive and require significant expertise to administer. Therefore, research has moved towards development of automated systems that can employ algorithmic methods to differentiate people with PD from healthy individuals.
Currently, diagnosis is based on assessment of performance in activities such facial expression [2], [3], writing [4], [5], drawing [6], walking [7], [8], [9] and speaking [10], [11]. People with PD have difficulty controlling body movements due to changes in neuronal mechanisms. This can negatively affect fine motor skills, such as those used in writing. Hence, handwriting changes can be an early indicator of PD. In the early stages of the disease, changes in handwriting are small and barely noticeable. Thus, it is important to detect such small changes in writing patterns as they can signal the presence of subclinical PD. Cramped handwriting (micrographia), or sudden changes in writing size (often becoming smaller) could indicate early PD. The handwriting of PD patients is affected by shaking, stiffness, slow movement, and imbalance. Several previous studies have reported handwriting impairment in the majority of PD patients, hence it is considered an important biomarker for PD identification.
On the basis of such previous research findings, handwriting analysis is known to be a successful diagnostic strategy for PD, compared to more costly and time-consuming neurological tests and brain scans. Analysis of handwriting by experts is a widely used approach for identifying PD. Thus, a current focus of computer science research is automation of this process. However, due to a lack of sufficient data, and the high variability of PD, both traditional machine learning and deep learning methods have been unable to provide accurate results. Recently, the performance improvements offered by transfer learning have made it an essential tool in many applications [15], [16], [17], [18]. Usually in transfer learning the feature layers of a network pre-trained for a given source task are transplanted into a second target network which is then fine-tuned for a different source task by merely refining the original model using target data for the second task. In this paper, we performed PD identification on handwritten samples from PD patients using deep transfer learning-based techniques. Extensive experimental analysis confirmed that our proposed approach considerably improves diagnostic performance, compared to state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods. The key contributions of this work are as follows

•We present an end-to-end deep transfer learning method to transfer pre-learnt knowledge onto handwritten samples from PD patients to develop a tool for early identification of PD.•We investigate early PD identification through handwriting using different architectures of deep transfer convolutional neural network (CNN) to achieve state-of-the-art performance.•To improve the overall classification performance and achieve effective results for early identification, we increased the input space by combining different PD handwritten datasets, and applied various data augmentation techniques.•We investigated different types of handwriting task performed by PD patients to determine the optimal task for disease detection.•We performed an extensive evaluation study, demonstrating that our proposed system considerably outperforms current state-of-the-art techniques.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing literature on PD identification. Section 3 provides a description of the datasets, data augmentation techniques, and the proposed architectures and network parameters selection used in our approach. Section 4 summarizes our experimental setup, and presents our results and a comparative evaluation. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and provides directions for future work.
