Aggregates are the most important components in flexible pavements, as it has a major role in deformation resistance, and it is used as the main material in the subbase layer. Aggregate contributes in bout 80–95 percent of the bituminous mixture volume. Asphalt concrete performance is highly affected by the aggregate size, shape properties and gradation. Subsequently, the optimum asphalt content is influenced greatly by aggregate characteristics, which in turn affects all other HMA characteristics [1]. Natural crushed aggregate is commonly used in asphalt concrete mixtures. Recently, researchers start looking into using Recycled Aggregate Concrete (RAC) as an alternative aggregate [2], [3]. The mutual bonds between coarse aggregate particles and the interaction with the asphalt binder is related directly to the coarse aggregate characteristics (angularity, shape and texture). Aggregate shape properties measurement is crucial in good quality control of the aggregate. In addition, such measurements may help in better understanding of the effect of aggregate characteristics on the pavement structure performance [4].
HMA strength and workability are effected by surface texture of the coarse aggregate. Strength of the HMA is increased with rough surface texture of aggregate, which in turn requires higher asphalt content to provide the proper workability.
In addition, rough aggregate particles produce higher voids in the compacted mixture. Stronger mechanical bond between rough aggregate surface and asphalt binder is produced compared to smooth aggregate surface [5].
Cubical aggregate particles are desired in the Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) rather than flat and elongated. Cubical aggregate caused strong bonds in the hot mix asphalt, while the flat and elongated aggregate create weak bonds and this cause segregation in the future [6]. Furthermore, Angular shape particles provides better stability for the HMA through the higher internal friction and higher aggregate interlock. Conversely, rounded aggregate particles (such as natural sands and gravels) in HMA produce better workable mixture that needs less compaction effort to obtain the desired density. Microstructure of HMA has great influence on mixture properties. The experimental characterization of the microstructure of the HMA is highly related to the HMA macroscopic behavior. Microstructure distribution influence on the material macroscopic reaction will be better quantified [7].
Flatness Index (FI), Elongation Index (EI), and Roundness Index (RI), are the most aggregate shape properties that affect the aggregate performance in the hot mix asphalt [8]. Rounded particles are expected to have less stability and less particle to particle interlock than fractured aggregate particles. ASTM D 4791 [9] specifies that the aggregates, which are not flat nor elongated, will have higher compressive strength than flat or elongated particles of the same material.
