Additive manufacturing (AM), also known as 3D printing, has experienced a rapid development in the past decades, with a dramatic increase of available materials and printed part properties. Recently, the emerging cloud-based AM services make it much easier to access ubiquitous AM resources. Users only need to send design models to the 3D printing service providers via the internet, then the parts will be printed and sent back to the users. This kind of cloud manufacturing paradigm can improve the utilization efficiency of AM resources. Meanwhile, it can avoid the investment on expensive machines and training for users who only need it occasionally [1], [2]. The rapid expand of companies such as Shapeways and 3D Hubs have shown their promising demands in the market.
Most of AM technologies still suffer from low production throughput speed [3]. A 3D printer usually has a printing space where printing tools (e.g. nozzle, laser, UV light) can cure materials following a predefined toolpath. For each print (i.e. one printing setup), a toolpath file (e.g. Gcode) is sent to the printer to control the movement of printing tools in the printing space. There is usually a printing plate placed in the horizontal direction in the printing space. The printing tool finishes one layer that is horizontal to the printing plate, then move the plate vertically to start the next layer. It usually takes hours or even longer to finish a print, commonly involving pre-processing [4] and post-processing (e.g. post-curing, heat treatment [5]). By manufacturing multiple parts in a single print, the printing space can be more efficiently utilized and the printing time and cost can be reduced [6]. As a 3D printing service provider, various printing tasks consisted of parts with different shapes and sizes can be received. Properly packing these printing tasks to achieve higher printing space utilization can dramatically decrease the production time and cost [7], [8]. Considering one local 3D printer with a group of parts to be printed, it is usually acceptable to take a relatively long time to find the optimal packing strategy. However, in the cloud-based AM environment, there are much more printing tasks from different customers often consist of parts with different sizes and various shapes. The cloud platform needs to efficiently schedule these tasks for all the distributed 3D printers connected to it. Meanwhile, the task list may change frequently when customers add, edit or delete tasks they want to print. This requires the scheduling algorithm to be fast and flexible enough to provide quick responses to these changes. There are two fundamental questions in the scheduling process:
1)how to group parts for each print;2)how to place each part in the printing space of each print.
It is crucial to put as many parts as possible in each print so that they can be produced with higher production rates and minimum cost in the cloud environment. These two questions are highly interrelated because different placements in one print may lead to different part numbers in this group that can be printed in one print. To obtain a globally good solution, they must be considered simultaneously. Therefore, this paper considers both questions in the production planning process.
This problem can be regarded as a cutting and packing (C&P) problem [9]. Regarding to AM processes, there are usually some constraints on the packing strategies to ensure the quality of the printed parts [10]. As to the selective laser sintering (SLS) and binder jetting processes, parts can be stacked vertically because support materials are not required. In this case, it becomes a 3D C&P problem [6], [11], [12], [13]. Conversely, other AM processes often require support materials in the printing process (e.g. material extrusion, material jetting, Stereolithography) [5]. In this case, parts can only be placed alongside each other to avoid part surface damages [10]. Therefore, it becomes a 2D C&P problem. 2D and 3D problems have different challenges and requires different methods. This paper mainly focuses on the 2D problem as it is involved in many widely used AM processes [5], [14]. Although the problem of 2D C&P has been studied for years, its applications on 3D printing job scheduling is still at its infancy stage, especially in the cloud-based AM environment. To bridge this gap, this research proposes computer vision-based AM production planning (CVAMPP) approach for efficient job allocation in the cloud environment to achieve shorter production time per part. To fulfill the requirements of quick response in the cloud-based AM environment, the proposed method dramatically reduces the computation time required for task packing while still provides competing results comparing to the existing scheduling method.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews current research on this topic and identify research gaps. Next, the problem is explained in detail in Section 3. Afterwards, Section 4 presents the methodology of the proposed intelligent production planning system. A comparative study is displayed in Section 5. Then, a case study is illustrated in Section 6. At the end, Section 7 concludes the paper.
