Cholinesterases (ChEs), acetylcholinesterase (AChE, EC.3.1.1.7) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE, EC. 3.1.1.8), are widespread serine hydrolases. AChE terminates the action of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine [1]. Though physiological functions of BChE are only tentatively known [2,3], this enzyme plays an important pharmaco-toxicological role in catabolism of some ester-containing drugs and xenobiotics. It also acts as a stoichiometric bioscavenger in neutralizing poisonous carbaryl- and organophosphoryl-esters (OPs) [4]. In particular, administration of highly purified human BChE has proven to be effective against the most dreadful nerve agents [5,6]. Changing the catalytic activity of BChE is an important goal for making catalytic bioscavengers against poisonous carbonyl esters such as (−)-cocaine [7] and organophosphorus agents [8,9].
The catalytic machinery of ChEs depends on the integrity of a catalytic triad. X-ray structures of AChE [10] and BChE [11] showed that unlike serine proteases whose catalytic triad is Ser∙His∙Asp, ChEs’ catalytic triad is Ser∙His∙Glu.
The first attempts to convert human BChE into an OP hydrolase, in order to make catalytic bioscavengers, were carried out more than 20 years ago [12]. However, despite knowledge of the modeled and X-ray structures of the enzyme, a site-directed approach failed to make fast OP-hydrolyzing mutants [8]. QM/MM calculations of energy profiles for reactions of echopthiophate with the most effective OP hydrolyzing BChE mutant so far, G117H, revealed key factors for a successful reactivation of OP-conjugated BChE: 1) Lower the energy barrier, i.e., the energy level of transition states TS1/TS2 to accelerate kinetics of the process. 2) Stabilize the intermediate and products to favor thermodynamics of the process. 3) Lower the TS2 level for proton transfer to the oxygen of S198 rather than to the OP alkoxy oxygen atom to make reactivation much faster than aging [9]. Subsequent QM/MM calculations led to additional insights about mutants capable of hydrolyzing OPs [13].
Detailed analysis of reactions in human BChE [13,14] suggests that orientation of the catalytic histidine, the major active site catalyst, plays an important role in both the aging and reactivation reactions. Changing the orientation of the catalytic histidine can confer new properties onto BChE. Such site directed mutagenesis can be accomplished by changing the third member of the catalytic triad, glutamic acid. Analysis of the X-ray structure of human BChE suggests that the catalytic glutamate (E325) could be moved to one position among several possibilities at adjacent β-sheet strands, maintaining operative the catalytic triad. Removal of the original glutamic acid residue at position 325 by converting it to glycine and introduction of a new glutamic acid residue at position 322, in place of asparagine, retains the functionality of the catalytic triad and changes the orientation of the imidazole ring of His438 (Fig. 1). These changes to the catalytic triad could alter both enzyme structure and activity. Molecular dynamics simulations supported by the Мarkov state model (MSM) analysis were performed to test the stability of the mutant and functioning of the new catalytic triad. QM/MM calculations of reaction pathway of the mutant with echothiophate also were performed.Download : Download high-res image (226KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Change in orientation of the catalytic histidine (H438) in the N322E/E325G mutant. Carbon atoms of H438 and E325 are shown in green for the wild-type conformation. Carbon atoms of H438 and E322 are shown in blue for the mutant. Here and in further figures the phosphorus atom is shown in orange.
Analyses of reaction mechanisms of OPs with ChEs [14] show that the phosphylation reaction can follow two possible pathways, depending on the orientation of the OP molecule during nucleophilic attack: 1) backside attack with the leaving group in an apical position relative to the catalytic serine; 2) frontside attack with the leaving group aside to the catalytic serine. Results indicate that nucleophilic substitution for pentavalent phosphorus occurs mainly via the backside mechanism [15]. In numerous studies devoted to modeling of the reactivation and aging reactions of phosphylated ChEs, initial configurations with deprotonated catalytic histidine suggest that the inhibition reaction may proceed via the frontside mechanism [14]. Because of this discrepancy, energy profiles for reaction of wild-type BChE with echothiophate were initiated with both the backside and frontside mechanisms. Then, reaction modeling between the mutant and echothiophate were compared.
The present work reports the computer-designed structure of an active BChE double mutant bearing an alternative catalytic triad. Experimentally, this mutant was expressed in Expi293 cells. Qualitative analysis shows that it hydrolyzes BTC and it is capable of self-reactivating after phosphorylation by echothiophate and/or paraoxon.
