In many parts of the world, invasive species are causing environmental problems. It has long been suggested that island ecosystems, especially ecosystems on oceanic islands, are susceptible to damages caused by invasive species (Elton, 1958). The Ogasawara Islands, registered in 2011 as a World Natural Heritage Site, is no exception. Following the start of human settlement in the 19th century, the unique ecosystems of the islands were severely damaged by the introduction of multiple alien species. Therefore, projects are currently underway on many of the islands in an attempt to eradicate such species.
However, invasive species cannot simply be removed from the environment because many have already established an interactive system with local native species in the host ecosystem. Removing invasive species can have a negative impact on the native species with which the invasive species interact. Human intervention can affect many native species if indirect effects are included, especially if the interactions between native and invasive species are complex. Therefore, removing component species from an ecosystem – even if they are invasive species – may disrupt the ecosystem (Pimm, 1980; Zavaleta et al., 2001; Quince et al., 2005). In addition, some invasive species may flourish in the host ecosystems and represent a large portion of the ecosystem’s biomass. Goats, rats, beefwoods, white popinacs, and bishop woods are examples of this on the Ogasawara Islands. Removal of these species would greatly alter the material circulation of the ecosystem and concerns exist about the impact on native species.
It is desirable that the potential impacts of a project on the native ecosystem via material circulation are identified prior to starting an eradication project or during the early stages of an eradication project. One effective method is the use of computer simulations. This allows for the estimation of the effects of human intervention and the proposal of specific eradication methods that exert the least influence on the native ecosystem. Some theoretical studies on the effects of species removal have been conducted (Pimm, 1980; Quince et al., 2005). These studies aimed to reveal the general trends of the effect on biological communities. In cases where the target area for the computer simulation is specified, it is necessary to conduct the simulation using a mathematical model capable of representing the ecosystem of the area. Recently, several studies have been published (Raymond et al., 2011; Sahasrabudhe and Motter, 2011; Bode et al., 2015; Baker et al., 2017) that reveal interesting behavior of biological communities and can contribute to managing the target ecosystems. Such studies should continue to advance.
A potential method is to incorporate actual material cycle processes into the model ecosystem. Previous studies considered only predator-prey interactions by using simple forms of equations. However, real ecosystems are more complicated. Material cycles in real ecosystems involve several types of interactions (e.g. competition, one-handed interference) and processes. In real ecosystems, the growth of producers cannot be expressed by “r” alone. Even if plants receive adequate sunlight, they cannot grow without nutrients. Complicated models are not always good (Ludwig and Walters, 1985; Iwasa, 1990). However, overly simplified models cannot analyze the complex phenomena in real ecosystems. Therefore, we developed an ecosystem model incorporating material cycle processes (Yoshida et al., submitted). This model provides a good reproduction of the current state of ecosystem on the Nakoudojima Island (the target island of this study) in the Ogasawara Island Group.
The location for this study was the Nakoudojima Island in the Ogasawara Islands. The Nakoudojima Island belongs to the Mukojima Islands located 50 km north of Chichijima Island in the Ogasawara Islands.
On Nakoudojima Island, two invasive species, feral goats and rats, were an issue in the 1990s (Ogasawara Islands Ecosystem Conservation Action Plan: Kanto Regional Environment Office of Japan et al., 2010). Feral goats often destruct vegetation and accelerate soil erosion by grazing and trampling (Coblentz, 1978; Coblentz and Van Vuren, 1987). This has occurred on Nakoudojima Island. On this island, grassland and denuded areas expanded, while deforestation continued (Hata et al., 2007; Kachi, 2010). In addition, feral goats interfere with seabird nesting by trampling nests (McChesney and Tershy, 1998; Chiba et al., 2007). Because black rats are known to be generalist omnivores, they have substantial effects on plants and invertebrates (Hashimoto, 2010). In particular, impacts on endemic land snails (Chiba, 2007), endemic insects (Karube, 2010), and small seabirds have been severe (Jones et al., 2008; Kawakami et al., 2010). However, a project for the eradication of invasive goats on the island ended in 1999 (Hata et al., 2007). In addition, the eradication of rats is now being planned (Ogasawara Islands Ecosystem Conservation Action Plan: Kanto Regional Environment Office of Japan et al., 2010).
Approximately 20 years have passed since the completion of the goat eradication project and it is important to identify changes in the ecosystem resulting from their removal. Consequently, a simulation model reproducing the ecosystem of Nakoudojima Island was warranted. We developed such a model, which could reproduce ecosystem conditions on Nakoudojima Island as disturbed by invasive species (Yoshida et al., submitted). Using this model, we may be able to make strong predictions regarding changes in the ecosystem of Nakoudojima Island after eradication of invasive species. In this study, simulations of the eradication of invasive goats and rats were conducted. The goals were to identify changes in the post-eradication ecosystem and propose a desirable eradication scenario.
