Evaluation of oculomotor function and subsequent identification of oculomotor dysfunction may serve different purposes. In the developing child, adequate oculomotor functioning is necessary to support the development of other basic functions such as eye-hand coordination, as well as the development of functional skills such as reading and writing (Schneck, 2010). The assessment of potential contributing factors, such as oculomotor dysfunction, to problematic development of basic functions and functional skills, is vital to the development of therapeutic interventions (Schneck, 2010).
The evaluation of oculomotor functioning can also assist towards the diagnosis and monitoring of neurodegenerative disorders (Antoniades and Kennard, 2015). Although eye movements are not routinely assessed for the initial diagnosis of neuro-degenerative disorders, recordings of eye movements may provide supportive data regarding disease severity, progression of the condition and regression of functional abilities in the patient. In addition to tracking unique manifestations of neurodegenerative conditions in patients, recordings of eye movements may also be used to evaluate the effectiveness of proposed neuroprotective and neuro-restorative therapies (Anderson and MacAskill, 2013).
The purpose of this paper is to introduce a novel computer-based eye tracking system for the evaluation of oculomotor functioning, particularly saccades and smooth pursuits, through the integrated visualisation of eye movements and quantification of eye tracking data. Even though evaluation and testing procedures are standardised, results from clinicians are variable and the same results are interpreted differently by different clinicians. By tracking the eye movements on camera and having the “luxury” to review eye movements repeatedly, better diagnoses and conclusions may be made.
We do not propose a new visualisation technique, but rather a new combination of existing techniques to provide a multidimensional and integrated view of the same data. To date, remote video-based eye tracking systems have not provided a contextual overview of gaze data that integrates the eye video recording with the stimulus and gaze data. The contribution of this paper lies in the introduction and description of an integrated system to allow clinicians and researchers to obtain multiple views of an eye movement recording. This will allow detailed observations and analyses of oculomotor function and abnormalities, for example abnormal visual reaction times, over and undershoots, and smooth pursuit impairments. The system addresses shortcomings in current video-based eye tracking systems as well as challenges with psychometric and observational tests of oculomotor function.
This integrated system will be of interest to clinicians such as neurologists, optometrists and occupational therapists to evaluate oculomotor function as part of diagnostic, monitoring and therapeutic procedures. Researchers who are interested in eye movements and eye movement visualisation techniques will also benefit from the system. Although at this stage the system does not yet provide normative data, it allows future studies to develop norms for comparison of quantitative measurements.
The paper is organised as follows: The literature review covers two main areas, namely
(a)an overview of eye movements that are relevant to this paper, with a focus on saccades and smooth pursuits, and(b)current practices and challenges in the evaluation of oculomotor function.
The literature review is followed by a detailed description of the proposed system for the integrated visualisation of eye movements and quantification of eye tracking data. Four main areas are addressed in the description of the system, namely
(a)the hardware and software;(b)a description of specific tasks to generate saccade and smooth pursuit data;(c)the proposed visualisations of saccadic and smooth pursuit data and how they are integrated and presented in context with the gaze target, as well as the various possibilities for customisation, filtering, smoothing and corrections;(d)the proposed method for quantification of eye tracking data in statistical graphs and how they should be used to quantify aspects of gaze behaviour and identify abnormal gaze behaviour.
The paper is concluded with a short summary and reiteration of the application value of the system for clinicians and researchers.
