A fuel cell is an electrochemical device that converts the chemical energy of a fuel and an oxidant (pure oxygen or air) directly into electricity, eliminating the intermediate step of classical, chemical combustion used in the normal process of heat extraction from fuel [1], [2]. Since it is a direct single step energy conversion device, it contributes to high electrical efficiency. Moreover, the fuel cell uses pure hydrogen for the electrochemical reaction, giving water, heat and electricity as products, and so is a clean source of energy. These characteristic features [3] of the fuel cell, i.e., high efficiency, zero/low pollutant emission and fuel flexibility, make it an extremely desirable option for future power generation. Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), alternatively referred to as polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, fall under the category of low-temperature fuel cells. During the reaction, the hydrogen at the anode gets oxidized to protons through the release of electrons. The protons move from the anode to the cathode through the proton conducting electrolyte, while the electrons move through the external circuit to reach the cathode. At the cathode, oxygen combines with the protons emanating from the membrane as well as the electrons from the external load circuit to produce water and heat according to reactions (1), (2), (3).(1)Attheanode:2H2→4H++4e−(2)Atthecathode:O2+4H++4e−→2H2O(3)Overallreaction:2H2+O2→2H2O+Electricity+Heat
Fuel cells that take up oxygen by passive means from ambient air for the reaction at the cathode are known as air-breathing fuel cells (ABFC) [4], [5], [6]. In ABFCs, oxygen is supplied to the cathode through free convection air flow and hydrogen is supplied to the anode from compressed gas cylinders. Free convection oxygen delivery at the cathodes of ABFCs eliminates the need for an auxiliary fan or compressor (air circulating device) as in forced convection fuel cells. The considerable reduction in weight and volume of the overall system makes it more viable for commercialization, especially in portable electronic devices like laptops. Also, to mitigate the inflammable nature of hydrogen, air is preferred over oxygen. Under normal operation, a single ABFC typically produces 0.5 V–0.7 V. Several ABFCs are connected in series to form an ABFC stack.
Besides the ABFC, other significant system components are the power conditioning unit (PCU) and their controllers. Switched mode power supplies (SMPSs) play a vital role for processing power in modern gadgets because of their high efficiency and compactness. They call for wide conversion ratios, for example 1 V, 1.5 V, 3.3 V and 12 V power supplies. Existing buck converters are unable to support such conversions as their switches demand minimum ON time [7]. Moreover, a cascade connection achieves wider conversion ratios, although it may compromise the overall efficiency owing to switching losses in the metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFETs). This paper proposes the quadratic buck converter (QBC), an advanced dc-dc converter as a viable ABFC stack PCU [8]. The converter circuit when applied to laptop computer voltage regulator module reduces the dc voltage of 19 V obtained from the fuel stack to 1 V. The paper will shed light on the behaviour of the ABFC by comparing the characteristics obtained through PSIM simulation [9] with the experimental results of a commercial fuel cell module.
