In the field of optical testing and metrology, computer-generated holograms (CGH) can generate arbitrary wavefront shape based on diffraction theory, which can realize high precision measurement of aspheric surface by the interferometric null test. Especially in the testing of large freeform surface, it has unmatched advantage [1,2]. Since the testing accuracy of CGH is mainly affected by the manufacturing uncertainty of its diffraction microstructure, it is important to correctly evaluate the fabrication errors for improving the performance of CGH.
Based on scalar diffraction theory, Zhou et al. [3,4] have proposed a linear grating model to analyze the fabrication errors of CGH, and have deduced the influence functions of local position distortion, etching depth bias and etching surface roughness on the diffraction wavefront at all levels. Peterhänsel et al. [5] have discussed the limitations of scalar diffraction theory in the application of CGH with sub-micron period, and have utilized the rigorous coupled wave theory to analyze the sensitivity of the wavefront phase to manufacturing errors. Cai et al. [6,7] have set up an experimental device, the diffractive optics calibrator (DOC), for measuring duty cycle and etching depth information of CGH. The DOC device is capable of measuring etching variations that cause 1 nm peak-to-valley (PV) phase errors. In the case that CGH is composed of straight fringes, Murphy et al. [8] have proposed an interferometric method for measuring CGH pattern distortion. That is, the Young's interference fringes generated by the ideal point source interfere with the etched fringes of CGH, thus to obtain pattern distortion according to the interference fringe.
From the related reports, other manufacturing errors have relatively well-established evaluation methods, except for pattern distortion. For the characterization of CGH pattern distortion, the method proposed in literature [8] is merely applicable to CGH composed of straight fringes. However, as the surface profile of optical components tends to be complex, the designed CGH patterns are mostly composed of irregular fringe contours. For the CGH patterns with irregular fringe contours, there is no well-established method for evaluating pattern distortion. In the quality inspection process, the CGH pattern error can only be indirectly estimated based on the accuracy of the processing equipment itself. Since the information of CGH fringes cannot be obtained, this assessment result is not accurate enough. Based on the above problems, this paper proposes a method to evaluate the influence of pattern distortion on wavefront accuracy, which can be applied to CGH fringes with complex curvature changes.
