With the rapid development of social economy and manufacturing innovation, the amount of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) has been growing quickly. As a result, copious amounts of waste EEE (WEEE) are disposed into the waste stream. The global generation of WEEE was 44.7 million tons in 2016 (Baldé et al., 2017). The plastic fraction taking up 30 wt% of the total WEEE contains large potential secondary resources, valued at approximately $13.3 billion (Baldé et al., 2017). The increasing of production plastic has brought out various challenges including disposal and wasted energy. Therefore, “Waste-to-Energy” has been considered as an alternative to solve the energy crisis and offset the increasing energy consumption (Shen et al., 2016; Tabasová et al., 2012). However, regarding the WEEE plastics, numerous additives are used to reinforce the plastic properties, making it difficult for them to be recovered as alternative fuels or chemical feedstocks (Ma et al., 2016a; Yang et al., 2013). For example, Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA), polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD), are brominated flame retardants (BFRs) commonly used in plastic manufacturing to increase their fire resistance. Typical plastics containing BFRs include polystyrene foams, high impact polystyrene (HIPS), acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) and ABS/PC inbuilding materials, etc. (Freegard et al., 2006; Pivnenko et al., 2017). It was estimated that the BFRs containing HIPS and ABS plastics accounted for nearly 25 wt% and 30 wt% of the total WEEE plastics, respectively (Freegard et al., 2006). All these BFRs in plastics are persistent pollutants and bioaccumulative. Improper treatment of WEEE plastics could produce various kinds of hazardous byproducts, such as dioxin and NOx, which can pose serious threats to the environment and human health (Shi et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018).
Pyrolysis, as a promising technique for WEEE plastics treatment, has been widely investigated with the aim of recovering valuable chemicals and fuels from the polymeric materials (Ma et al., 2016a, 2015; Wu and Williams, 2013; Zhang et al., 2013). Depending on the operating conditions, the pyrolysis process can be classified as conventional pyrolysis, fast pyrolysis and slow pyrolysis, respectively (Wu and Williams, 2013). During pyrolysis, the degradation of brominated plastics (BFR-plastics) could generate substantial amounts of brominated compounds in the oil, limiting their application. For instance, Bhaskar et al. (2003) used a fixed bed reactor to investigate the conventional pyrolysis of Br-ABS and revealed that most of the bromine was present in the liquid and carbon residues. Jung et al. (2012) conducted the fast pyrolysis of Br-ABS using a fluidized bed reactor and showed that an effective mass and heat transfer of the fluidized bed was beneficial for the polymer degradation, resulting in greater amounts of oil. Furthermore, the slow pyrolysis of Br-ABS was conducted in a 1.55 m tube reactor and indicated that the light oil fractions contained a low amount of contaminants (bromine and antimony), while most bromine and antimony were transferred into heavy oils (Miskolczi et al., 2008).
Catalytic pyrolysis of WEEE plastics has been extensively conducted to obtain high-quality and bromine-free pyrolysis products (Hall and Williams, 2008; Ma et al., 2017a, 2016b). However, the deactivation caused by coke and large amounts of Br in plastics can hinder the efficiency of the catalyst (Kim et al., 2017; López et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2016). It is known that the degradation of BFR-plastics proceeds in two main steps: an initial decomposition of the flame retardant additives, followed by the decomposition of polymer matrix at higher temperatures (Bhaskar et al., 2003; Jakab et al., 2003; Ma et al., 2016a). Therefore, the two-stage pyrolysis process has been proposed to produce Br rich and deficient oil separately (López et al., 2012; Ma et al., 2017b). Instead of the decomposition of each unit in the plastic at different temperature stage, complex interactions could occur between the flame retardant additives and the polymer matrix. Currently, most researches are focused on the pyrolysis of pure polymers for clean chemical feedstocks, which can be comparatively more easily obtained. Regarding the WEEE plastics, the polymer matrix materials and BFR additives were intimately mixed, which makes the pyrolysis of WEEE plastics more complex and unclear. Therefore, it is significant to extensively understand the pyrolysis characteristics of brominated plastics for green recycling of valuable materials from WEEE, more especially the Br-containing compounds. In addition, further investigations are necessary to adequately elucidate the interactions between BFR additives and each plastic matrix, particularly the migration and transformation of heteroatoms in plastics.
Therefore, in this work, the pyrolysis behavior and kinetics of waste computer casing plastics from real WEEE streams were investigated. The single and two-step pyrolysis processes were conducted to investigate the pyrolysis behavior of BFR additives and plastic matrix with respect to different temperatures and heating programs using a fixed-bed reactor. The migration of Br- and N-containing compounds during pyrolysis was investigated for the purpose of obtaining high-quality pyrolysis oils and understanding the possible interaction mechanisms between polymer matrix materials and BFR additives.
