Solvents and membranes have a wide range of applications in many chemical and related industries. Solvents can be used in a multipurpose role (e.g. reaction medium, extraction solvent) in different processing steps, such as chemical reaction and separation. For example, a reaction step usually carried out in one solvent and the separation step of product recovery requires another solvent or membrane (Papadakis et al., 2016). Therefore, it is advantageous to investigate hybrid schemes that allow solvent or membrane-based processing units operating at their highest efficiencies to perform one or more process tasks.
Separation operations to obtain pure products is found in almost all processing routes producing a chemical product, where, the processes involved, like distillation, account for 10–15% of the world's energy consumption. More energy efficient methods to purify chemicals could greatly reduce carbon dioxide emissions as well as energy cost (Sholl and Lively, 2016). As an important separation technique in chemical process industry, distillation is energy intensive and has the least thermal efficiency (Pellegrino et al., 2004). Nevertheless, nearly 80% of all vapor-liquid separations are performed by distillation. Its efficiency could significantly contribute to the overall energy consumption in chemical process industries and therefore intensified separation designs that allow energy efficient operation are attractive (Lutze et al., 2010, Babi et al., 2015). One such option is to use hybrid separation schemes, which combine one or more separation techniques operating at their highest energy efficiencies such that a target separation can be achieved at significantly lower energy consumption (Tula et al., 2016).
Bio-reactions, which involve the use of enzymes or living microorganisms for the production of chemical and biochemical substances, may often be carried out under mild conditions, they are highly specific, and involve high reaction rates, therefore, can act as possible alternatives for conventional synthesis routes. However, limitations of biocatalysts mostly related with product and/or substrate inhibition result in low productivity and highly diluted product, which leads in difficult downstream separations (woodley et al., 2008, Van Hecke et al., 2014, Woodley, 2017). In each case, the product needs to be removed as soon as it is formed in order to overcome these constraints and hence increase the product yields of the bio-catalytic process. Generally, recovery and purification stages in bioprocesses require numerous steps, associated with high chemicals and energy consumption, and usually represent 20–60% of the total cost, and even in some protein synthesis biological process this value may reach 90% (Martínez-Aragón et al., 2009). For these bioprocesses, hybrid schemes that involve the intensification of the reaction and separation processes are able to lower energy consumption, improve reaction performance as well as reduce the complexity (Chen et al., 2018).
Together with organic chemicals, ionic liquids (ILs) are being considered as solvents for use in hybrid schemes replacing energy intensive processes. IL-based separation processes are generally energy efficient because of their non-volatility and therefore low energy consuming solvent recovery operations (Seiler et al., 2004, Lei et al., 2014b). For the same reason, membrane-based separations are also promising alternatives for the energy intensive processes (Drioli et al., 2011). However, both IL-based and membrane-based separations are limited to low flux operations due to their operational and economic constraints (e.g. high viscosity or low flux rate, high cost). To overcome such limitations, hybrid schemes are promising innovative and sustainable processing options since processing units (e.g. reactor, column, membrane) are operating at their highest efficiencies in hybrid schemes. For example, reactive distillation (e.g. production of methyl acetate) integrates reaction and separation in a single operating unit resulting in reduced equipment sizes and lower operating cost. Distillation with membrane separation (e.g. n-butane from isobutane) is another example of combining unit operations to achieve lower energy consumption and improve quality of distillation cuts.
Although hybrid schemes have significant potential to contribute the development of the process industries, a main question is when such hybrid schemes can be applied, what characteristics the process problem should have, what the process specification should be and how much improvement can be expected. To find truly innovative and more sustainable solutions, Babi et al. (2015) proposed a computer-aided, multi-level, multi-scale method, where different hybrid schemes can be generated to test if any of them match the desired targets while also satisfying the process specifications. So far, hybrid schemes involving membrane-based separation with distillation (e.g. Fig. 2) have been proposed for several separation processes, such as separation of azeotropic mixtures (Rautenbach and Albrecht, 1985; Goldblatt and Gooding, 1988), recovery of olefins (Davis et al., 1993, Moganti et al., 1994, Stephan et al., 1995, Pettersen et al., 1996, Caballero et al., 2009), and the separation of a mixture of alkanes (Tula et al., 2016). In contrast, studies regarding the hybrid process design using ILs as solvents are still scarce.
To achieve the full potential of the hybrid process schemes, the selection of optimal solvents or membranes is of great importance due to fact that different solvents or membranes are usually present with very distinct properties and separation performances, especially for ILs that combine diverse cations, anions and substituents (Holbrey and Seddon, 1999). Currently, ILs are usually selected based on experiments which can be time consuming and cost-intensive since many thousands of ILs may be considered as potential solvents. Therefore, in order to find suitable ILs for specific tasks confidently and rapidly, systematic solvent screening method like computer-aided ionic liquid design (CAILD) is attractive (Karunanithi and Mehrkesh, 2013). To date, studies on CAILD are mainly focusing on the separation of azeotropic mixtures (e.g. ethanol-water, acetone-methanol) and the CO2 capture process, (Valencia-Marquez et al., 2011, Roughton et al., 2012, Karunanithi and Mehrkesh, 2013, Chong et al., 2015, Chong et al., 2016Farahipour et al., 2016, Chen et al., 2019a). Most recently, CAILD method has been extended to the extractive desulfurization system (EDS) for fuel oils (Song et al., 2018).
Hybrid schemes have potential to contribute significantly to the sustainability of the process industry through the use of CAILD for the optimal design of ILs. This work presents a hybrid process design method combing CAILD with process design-simulation to identify the optimal IL and its corresponding hybrid process specifications. As proof of concept, results from two case studies, i.e. separation of aqueous solutions using hybrid distillation schemes and bio-oxidation of alcohols using hybrid reaction-separation schemes, are presented.
