In prosthodontics, fabricating dental restorations using conventional techniques has been considered the gold standard technique for several decades. High-quality restorations can be achieved by experienced dental technicians in a series of precision conventional lost wax and casting manufacturing processes. Recently, more and more digital technologies, such as the dental computer-aided design and computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) system (subtractive manufacturing)1,2 or the surgical planning system,3,4 have been developed to assist clinicians to complete treatments effectively. In these digital systems, the dental CAD/CAM systems are generally used to improve the effectiveness of prosthesis fabrications. These new systems were also gradually developed as alternatives to the conventional lost wax and casting method to produce more effective and standardized dental prostheses. The feature of dental prosthesis using digital methods are high accuracy, detailed resolution, good surface quality, and excellent mechanical properties.5
In digital manufacturing procedures, dental restorations are commonly fabricated using the CAD/CAM system in a dental laboratory. By using dental model information from an intra/extra oral scanner, dental technicians can design corresponding prostheses in a digital environment according to the aesthetics and occlusal function. The finished restoration model is then exported into a stereolithography (STL) file format and fabricated using a dental CAM machine. Moreover, complicated materials, such as ceramic-metal materials, are commonly used in fixed dental prosthesis (FDP).5 Compared with manual production, the complicated materials in restorations can be more effectively employed through the CAD/CAM system. Other than the CAD/CAM system, 3D printing technology (additive manufacturing) is also popular in many clinical applications. Recently, 3D printing technologies, such as the selective laser sintering (SLS) system, has been applied to dental restoration fabrications. A key feature of the SLS system is that dental restorations can be fabricated layer by layer under a high-temperature laser beam to substantively structure a metal powder environment.6 Unlike the CAM system, 3D printing technology uses the additive manufacturing method. Advantages of 3D printing include reducing the amount of material used and obtaining high restoration accuracy during production. The 3D printing method is convenient for crown fabrication, especially for complicated profiles. Thus, the direct metal laser sintering method is a currently used technique for fabricating dental prostheses in clinical practice.
The precision of dental restorations is always emphasized in clinical treatment. A favorable adaptation between a crown restoration and an abutment tooth not only ensures good mechanical behavior, but also prevents bacterial infiltration. Numerous requirements must be considered for the proper function and durability of a crown restoration in the oral cavity to achieve an ideal dental restoration. Studies have indicated that the major reason for dental restoration failure is inappropriate gaps.7,8 Thus, the gap between a crown restoration and an abutment tooth is a pertinent factor in dental prostheses.8, 9, 10, 11 Marginal and internal gaps are mostly evaluated using 2D or 3D optical technologies to verify the adaptation of dental restorations.12 Using optical technologies, clinicians can mathematically understand internal gaps in different phases of restoration and can adjust errors to obtain restorations in clinical settings. Although ideal restorations are commonly obtained using manual manufacturing processes in current dentistry treatments, dental restorations made using different digital systems have gradually become popular in prosthodontics.
Investigating the marginal gap between a crown restoration and an abutment tooth has always a pertinent concern in clinical practice. However, research on its clinical utility through comparing digital systems with conventional methods is still limited. The purpose of this study was to measure the marginal gaps of crown restorations using a 3D optical mapping technique to compare three types of cobalt-chromium-molybdenum (CoCrMo) metal crowns fabricated using the conventional lost wax and casting method, CAD/CAM method, and SLS method.
