Theta rhythms are low frequency (4–12 Hz) sinusoidal oscillations that are observed in the brain of many mammalian species (see Colgin (2013) for a review). The theta rhythm has been extensively studied in the hippocampus, where a combination of cellular properties, local network interactions, and inputs from other brain regions act together to form in vivo oscillations. The theta rhythm occurs in all hippocampal subregions during active exploration and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, however, the greatest expression of it is observed in the CA1 field (Buzsáki, 2002, Colgin, 2013, Colgin, 2016, Vanderwolf, 1969).
In our work we develop a computer model of the theta rhythm in the CA1 field that is able to show biologically plausible theta oscillations with phase relations observed in vivo. The model is based on the following experimental data:
1. Although nearly all pyramidal cells are involved in theta oscillations, the membrane potentials of about 97% of pyramidal cells oscillate below the threshold, so only a small number of these cells can generate a spike during a period of the theta cycle (Csicsvari et al., 1998, Harvey et al., 2009). Note that lateral connections between pyramidal neurons in the CA1 are too weak to synchronize their activity (Le Duigou, Simonnet, Teleñczuk, Fricker, & Miles, 2014).
2. It is commonly accepted that theta oscillations in the CA1 appear due to rhythmic input signals coming from other brain areas. The medial septum (MS), which sends projections to all hippocampal regions and the entorhinal cortex (EC) (Unal, Joshi, Viney, Kis, & Somogyi, 2015), is assumed to be a pacemaker of the theta rhythm (Buzsáki, 2002, Colgin, 2013, Vinogradova, 1995). Following this assumption, we consider the MS as a global source of the theta rhythm. The theta rhythm observed in the CA1 is a result of the interaction between the hippocampal fields and the EC in processing the signals from the MS (Buzsáki, 2002, Colgin, 2013).
3. In the CA1 field, the theta rhythm mostly affects the activity of pyramidal, PV+ basket, and OLM cells. Pyramidal and OLM cells fire during the trough of the theta wave, while PV+ basket cells fire during the descending phase of the theta wave (Royer et al., 2012, Somogyi and Klausberger, 2005, Varga et al., 2012). Other types of interneurons (neurogliaform, ivy, bistratified and CCK+ basket cells) also show locking to the phase of the theta wave (Somogyi, Katona, Klausberger, Lasztóczi, & Viney, 2014), however, in our model we restrict our consideration by PV+ basket cells and OLM cells. The reasons for this are as follows. First, these interneurons constitute the main and physiologically most important part of the interneuron populations (Somogyi et al., 2014, Somogyi and Klausberger, 2005). Second, the firing of these interneurons has been accurately studied in the context of the theta rhythm (in particular, in optogenetic experiments), therefore our modeling results can be properly verified (Amilhon et al., 2015, Royer et al., 2012, Stark et al., 2013).
4. Schaffer collaterals from the CA3 field excite basket cells and the proximal part of apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons in the CA1 (Szirmai, Buzsáki, & Kamondi, 2012). The perforant path from the EC excites distal ends of apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons (Doller & Weight, 1982). GABAergic neurons of the MS selectively inhibit interneurons of the CA1 field including basket and OLM cells (Hangya et al., 2009, Varga et al., 2008). Basket cells inhibit perisomatic regions of pyramidal neurons, while OLM cells inhibit apical dendrites of these neurons (Freund and Buzsáki, 1996, Somogyi and Klausberger, 2005).
Experimental evidence on the neural interaction in the CA1 is often inconsistent and contradictory. For example, in the paper (Wulff et al., 2009) it is stated that the inhibition of pyramidal neurons by PV+ interneurons is important for the theta rhythm production, however the paper (Royer et al., 2012) demonstrates an opposite effect. It seems that these contradictions are caused by different experimental techniques. Wulff et al. (2009) worked with genetically modified mice with impaired expression of the Δγ2 subunit of the GABAA-receptors in PV+ interneurons, while Royer et al. (2012) used optogenetic methods for the inhibition of PV+ interneurons. In our research we mostly based on the data obtained by optogenetic methods, because we consider them as more reliable (Amilhon et al., 2015, Royer et al., 2012, Stark et al., 2013).
In contrast to other models, which explain phase locking of neural populations in the CA1 by lateral interactions (Bezaire et al., 2016, Ferguson et al., 2017, Orbán et al., 2006, Rotstein et al., 2005), we focus on external inputs to the CA1 assuming that these inputs play a major role in the formation of phase relations observed in experiments. We also prefer not to take into account the evidence obtained in experiments in vitro under strong excitatory agents such as carbacholine (Konopacki et al., 1987, Williams and Kauer, 1997) or agonists of glutamatergic receptors (Cobb et al., 2003, Figenschou et al., 1996, Kazmierska and Konopacki, 2013) since, as we suppose, these results are due to non-physiological (epileptiform) synchronization (see more details in Section 4.4).
The local field potential (LFP) in the hippocampus appears as a result of electric currents between the layers of basal and apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons (Einevoll, Kayser, Logothetis, & Panzeri, 2013). The form of the LFP is determined by the balance between excitation and inhibition of apical dendrites and perisomatic regions of pyramidal neurons (Fig. 1). The inputs to CA1 pyramidal cells from local interneurons, Schaffer collaterals, and perforant pathway differently affect this balance, thus determining the form of the LFP.
The generation of theta activity in the MS is beyond the scope of this work. The models related to this subject were considered in our previous publication (Mysin, Kitchigina, & Kazanovich, 2015) as well as in the papers of other authors (Borisyuk and Hoppensteadt, 1999, Ujfalussy and Kiss, 2006, Wang, 2002). Here we concentrate on the study of the role of the inputs to the CA1 field for the formation of phase relations between the activities of different CA1 neural populations and the theta wave in vivo. We found that Schaffer collaterals play a key role in this process. Our conclusion is based on the following reasoning.Download : Download high-res image (199KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Formation of the local field potential in the hippocampal network. φ(t) is the LFP in the pyramidal layer. Rhythmic inputs to the soma and dendrites of the pyramidal neurons generate extracellular currents, which are registered as LFP signal. The left part of the figure shows the formation of the descending phase of the theta wave, the right part of the figure shows the formation of the ascending part of the theta wave.
The LFP registered in the cell layer of CA1 oscillates in anti-phase to the potential of the soma of pyramidal neurons. This fact follows from the theoretical analysis (Einevoll et al., 2013) and it is in agreement with experimental evidence (Ylinen, Soltész, Bragin, Penttonen, Sik, & Buzsáki, 1995). Thus, the descending phase of the theta wave coincides with the synchronous depolarization of the soma of pyramidal neurons. Basket cells fire during the descending phase of the theta wave (Royer et al., 2012, Somogyi and Klausberger, 2005). However, basket cells inhibit perisomatic regions of pyramidal neurons (Freund and Buzsáki, 1996, Somogyi and Klausberger, 2005), therefore they would have to be discharged in the ascending phase of the theta wave, i.e. at the moment of hyperpolarization of the soma of pyramidal neurons. Thus, basket cells cannot be a source of depolarization of the soma of pyramidal neurons; there should be another input to the soma of pyramidal neurons for its depolarization. We suggest that the excitation from Schaffer collaterals may help, but it should be stronger than the inhibition from basket cells. Schaffer collaterals excite not only pyramidal neurons but also basket cells, therefore the latter actively fire during the depolarization of pyramidal neurons.
Our results do not confirm the idea that the theta rhythm in the CA1 field is completely formed by inhibitory inputs from interneurons of the MS (Buzsáki et al., 1983, Somogyi and Klausberger, 2005, Stewart and Fox, 1990, Varga et al., 2012). At the same time, we share the opinion that excitatory inputs to the CA1 can play a major role in the formation of the theta rhythm, which is supported by many researchers (Buzsáki, 2002, Colgin, 2016). In our work we have shown that interneurons can form the theta rhythm, but in this case phase relations are different from those registered in vivo experiments.
Focusing on phase relations between the activity of neural populations in the CA1 we should not lose sight of the theta rhythm itself. In our computer experiments we constantly check that stable theta oscillations are kept in the CA1 for different conditions of external stimulation. For this purpose we compute the power of the theta rhythm and compare the changes in the theta rhythm with experimental data. It is important to note that theta oscillations survive in the CA1 when any one of the external inputs is switched off, but phase relations in this situation significantly differ from the normal case.
The mathematical formalism of the model is described in the next Section with more details presented in Appendix A. In Section 3 we investigate the influence of different inputs on theta rhythm oscillations and phase coupling. Here we also present the results of simulation experiments under variation of the parameters of connections between CA1 neurons. The correspondence of the results to experimental evidences is the subject of Section 4.
