Thyroid cancer is one of the fastest growing cancers in the world. In the US, it has become the most rapidly increasing cancer in the past three decades (Sencha et al., 2011). Much of this rise in detection appears to be the result of the increased use of thyroid ultrasound, which can detect small thyroid nodules that might not otherwise have been found in the past. A study predicted that thyroid cancer would become the third most common cancer in women in the United States by 2019 (Haugen et al., 2016). National Cancer Institute in the US stated that prevalence of thyroid cancer occurred in women with a comparison to men was three to one (N.C. Institute). These made the thyroid cancer one of the women diseases to be prevented. Currently, in Indonesia, thyroid cancer is ranked in the ninth place of all cancer that happened to men and women, while in the USA it is ranked in the eleventh position (NC Institute, xxx, K.K.R. Indonesia, 2015). Thyroid cancer can occur in any group of age, but it commonly occurs after the age of thirty and it increases significantly in older people (NC Institute, xxx, K.K.R. Indonesia, 2015, A. C. Society, 2017).
Thyroid nodule is located in a thyroid gland. The thyroid gland is not palpable in normal condition. The nodule itself is frequently present without any symptom depending on the malignancy of the nodule, but it is still possible to manifest symptoms such as hoarseness (due to voice nerve destruction), breathing difficulty (due to underlying wind pipe obstruction by the gland), swallowing discomfort (due to the size of the nodule) or an upper neck swelling (due to spread of the nodule to the neck lymph glands). Fig. 1 shows the picture of thyroid gland, ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) and ultrasound finding of thyroid cystic lesion.Download : Download high-res image (292KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Thyroid ultrasound imaging.
Several examinations are conducted for thyroid nodules such as MRI, CT scan, ultrasonography, and so forth. However, ultrasound images are the most widely used to examine thyroid nodules which are usually followed by FNAB to support the diagnosis. MRI and CT scan are mostly used to monitor and examine the metastasis of the lesion (Kim et al., 2002).
Thyroid ultrasound images are analyzed based on the thyroid image reporting and data system (TIRADS). TIRADS consists of several characteristics to determine whether the nodule is benign or malignant. These characteristics are shape, margin, orientation, composition or content, echogenicity, calcification and vascularisation as an additional characteristic (Grant et al., 2017). The shape characteristic can be round to oval or irregular. The margin characteristic can be smooth or well defined. Orientation characteristic includes parallel and non-parallel orientation. Moreover, content characteristic consists of solid, cystic and complex. Echogenicity characteristic is divided into anechoic, hyperechoic, isoechoic, hypoechoic and markedly hypoechoic. The calcification characteristic has macro-calcification and micro-calcification, whilst vascularisation characteristic consists of avascular, peripheral and central (Shin et al., 2016, Russ, 2016).
In contrast to breast cancer computer-aided diagnosis, there are only a few studies of computer-aided diagnosis for thyroid cancer. One study about thyroid cancer CAD was conducted using thyroid smear as the result of FNA examination to be classified as malignant, non-malignant and suspicious (Delibasis et al., 2009). However, thyroid smear is not the main examination of thyroid cancer. It is an ultrasound image combining with TIRADS which is used as a standard to examine thyroid cancer (Grant et al., 2017).
In the ultrasound modality, a computer-aided diagnosis is presented by focusing on benign-malignant classification using multiple-instance learning (MIL) of global and local features without any characteristic description such as shape, margin or others (Ding et al., 2014). In (Savelonas et al., 2008), a CAD was developed by utilizing boundary descriptors using k-NN to classify medium-risk and high-risk nodules. With the same modality, (Liu et al., 2017) extracted the features based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to classify benign-malignant thyroid ultrasound images. In previous studies, classification of benign-malignant nodules was conducted without using characteristic description. Nevertheless, it is important to present each characteristic feature of the ultrasound image on the CAD together with the final diagnosis result indicating benign or malignant as presented in this study.
Previous studies have been carried out to support the development of this thyroid cancer computer aided diagnosis including classification for shape characteristic into ‘round to oval’ and irregular classes (Zulfanahri et al., 2017). An accuracy of 92.36% was achieved in classifying margin characteristic into ‘smooth’ and irregular margin classes (Nugroho et al., 2017a). Both these aforementioned studies are used to create CAD for external thyroid cancer analysis in this study with an additional orientation characteristic. Echogenicity is classified into four classes, i.e. anechoic, isoechoic, hypoechoic and markedly hypoechoic which account the accuracy of 93.36% (Nugroho et al., 2017b). Echogenicity is used to create CAD for internal thyroid cancer analysis in this study, along with content characteristic.
This study aims to develop a CAD for both internal and external characteristics based on digital image processing method starting from image enhancement, segmentation, multi feature extraction including geometric and texture features, followed by classifying each characteristic using MLP and SVM with the final result of benign or malignant. This paper is written as follows. Section 1 describes the introduction and related works while Section 2 presents the method and material used. The results and discussion are presented in Section 3 followed by the conclusion in Section 4.
