Many researches have been conducted with respect to enhancement of cooling efficiency [1], [2], thermal management [3] and increasing a heat sink performance [4], [5], [6], [7] with approach to various method such as geometry optimization [8] and application of different types of coolant such as air [1], fluids [9], nanofluids [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19] and PCMs [20]. Lopes and Costa [21] conducted numerical research for optimizing the fin of radial plate heat sink. Through CFD simulation, the fin length, thickness, and number were investigated. However, this method required a large amount of computational time and cost. The suitable value for thermal performance was obtained by changing the dimensions and repeating the simulation process. An analysis of single-plate fin shape by considering a constant mass has also been conducted in [22]. Straightforward and simple analytical formulas for optimizing fin shapes have been studied for natural and forced convection when the heat generation is constant. Various cross-sections, including a rectangular shape, were studied in [23]. Karvinen and Lindstedt provided an analytical solution for heatsinks while the heat generation or maximum temperature is constant. Their research results help characterize the minimum fin mass [24]. Studying a fin array is more challenging than designing a single fin. A fin array involves more problems, many of them with opposite effects, including number, location and geometry of fins, and the position of heat generator devices or chips. Manufacturing materials for fan performance as a coolant system can also influence the result. According to these problems, an elaborate analytical solution may be useful, but such multiobjective optimization problems can always be solved numerically [25], [26]. In the heat sink’s cooling process, the convective resistance provides the greatest portion of the total thermal resistance. Many significant efforts (including changing the boundary layers, the turbulence, and the thermal conductivity of the coolant) have been made to increase the heat transfer rate from the heat source to the heat sink surface and then to the ambient by decreasing the convective resistance [27]. Ahmed E. Ahmed [28] conducted numerical research that focused on the optimization of plate-fin heat sinks (PFHS) to investigate the effect of ribs. This research investigated increasing the ribs number and decreasing the fins, and it investigated reducing pumping power and increasing the ribs number at the same time. The results depicted that ribbed-plate-fin heat sinks (RPFHS) obtained a thermal efficiency 1.55 times greater than PFHS under similar circumstances. In addition, the conclusion depicted a 69.65% reduction in pumping power for RPFHS compared with PFHS. Shaeri and Yaghoobi [29] investigated numerical research on the rectangular-fin heat sink that focused on conduction-convection heat transfer in a 3D simulation. By applying the RNG and Navier-Stocks equations in their simulation model, their result agreed with the previous experimental one. The results depicted that their perforated fins model had a lower weight and higher rate of heat transfer compared with solid fins. Kwon and Joo [8] studied the plate heat sinks with a horizontal radial shape for thermal optimization under natural convection both experimentally and analytically. With respect to the asymptotic method, they developed a new relation for heat transfer coefficient. The results were validated via experimental data. Considering the new correlation, they studied the fin number, length, and thickness for PFHS optimization. Lee and Yu [30] studied radial plate heat sinks to develop a relation for the Nusselt number. It should be mentioned that the availability of a Nusselt number correlation leads to fewer computational loads [31]. Their investigation results depicted that the large fin length reduced the thermal performance because a large flow resistance overbalanced the regional length enhancement. Li and Baik [32] studied radial fin heat sinks (chimney-based) under natural convection experimentally and numerically. Their research investigated the difference in heat sink performance with and without a chimney. The heat sink thermal performance was carried out with respect to changes in angle orientation, fin number, and the distance between the chimney and the base plate. Their results depicted that radial fin heat sinks (chimney-based) improve thermal performance up to 20% compared to the absence of a chimney. The results also demonstrated that the heat sink with an angle between 0° and 45° was more efficient than ones with 135° and 180°, whilst the worst result was obtained when the angle was 90°. Park [33] carried out a numerical study on the radial fin heat sink’s thermal performance under natural convection. The results depicted that increasing the cylindrical chimney height enhanced the heat sink’s thermal performance. This study shows that a cylindrical chimney improves the heat sink’s thermal performance up to 43%. S. Huang and J. Zhao numerically investigated microchannel heat sinks concentrating on heat transfer and flow behavior through microchannels. With the aim of increasing cooling performance, they studied geometry optimization [34]. B. Li and C. Byon numerically and experimentally investigated heat sinks while focusing on the number and shape of fins, including circular and rectangular shapes. Their study on the geometry of heat sinks led them to discover that the number of fins and their length are outstandingly important while the height of fins is less important [35]. Park and Jang numerically and experimentally studied a heat sink under free convection, focusing on its optimization. The heat generator of the heat sink was a high-temperature LED. Through this research, they found that numerical and experimental results agreed, and they developed the numerical model for various fin shapes [36]. M. Afrand and M. Zadhoush numerically and analytically investigated a plate cooling via free convection with the aim of geometric optimization through constructal theory. By considering the fins’ height, the numerical and analytical results agreed [37]. Byan and Li experimentally and numerically studied the natural convection heat transfer from a specific heat sink with a chimney-based. The heat sink thermal performance was investigated with and without the chimney. Their results depicted that the chimney enhanced the heat sink’s thermal performance up to 20% compared with no chimney [32]. Zhang and Tang have experimentally and numerically studied a heat sink with a vapor chamber by considering the thermal efficiency of LEDs. Their results depicted that the junction temperature negatively affects radiant efficiency. Their results also depicted that the high-power light emitting diodes yield a desirable efficiency using the heat sink with a vapor chamber [38]. Kim and Kwon experimentally and analytically studied a specific horizontally oriented radial heat sink with plate fins under natural convection. They concentrated on the fin length, fin number, and fin thickness, and their experimental and analytical results agreed [8].
These analyses of heat sink manufacturing were many years ago, but heat sink efficiency enhancement and the heat transfer convection loss recently drawn manufacturers and researchers attention who aim to manufacture joinery ones. Comparing a large amount of past research with the current study, this paper is distinguished because of its investigation on thermal stress, especially in 3D simulation because most research focused on 2D models. Two major goals of this research are reducing the maintenance and manufacturing costs due to high levels of thermal deformation and thermal stress that lead to geometry failure and efficiency enhancement. Most research in this area used two-dimensional simulations while this study was carried out in three dimensions to obtain more accurate results.
In the present study, to reduce computational costs, the equations for evaluation of heat sink temperatures with respect to different environmental and design conditions were calculated in MATLAB software. Then, the temperature of the heat sink is used to evaluate thermal deformation and thermal stress of the heat sink geometry through Ansys Workbench 16 software.
In the present research, the numerical convection heat transfer between the and the coolant was investigated. This research concentrated on heat generated by the central processing unit of a personal computer. The effect of fin height, fin number, heat sink material, air flow velocity, heat transfer coefficient, temperature distribution, and thermal deformation and thermal stress were investigated. To study the effects of various parameters, the focus was on temperature distribution.
