The high prevalence rate of oral cancer in the Asian countries has become a big concern, as it appears to be a socioeconomic burden for patients [1]. Oral cancer is one of the most prevalent cancers in Indian population [2], and it is increasing day by day due to excessive use of tobacco products and alcohol consumption [3]. OSCC is the main subtype of oral cancer which represents 90% cases of oral cancer [4]. The early stage diagnosis is important for better prognosis, treatment, and survival of patient. In practice, clinicians rely on the microscopic image evaluation of oral histological tissue samples, and it is regarded as gold standard for OSCC diagnosis and its staging [5]. This manual evaluation is generally based on different histological parameters such as variations over cellular and nucleus morphology, chromatin pattern, atypical cell counts etc. Among them, the characterization of nucleus happens to be the most important criterion for cancer staging from histological images. Various alterations in the nucleus such as size, shape, number of appearances, nuclear membrane/margin, chromatin pattern, nucleoli, and organization of nuclear chromatin, have routinely been observed as clinically relevant image features for OSCC diagnosis [6]. In conventional practice, pathologist examines histopathological sample to find out nuclear morphological changes under 400× lens magnification. This whole manual evaluation process suffers from two major drawbacks; it is time-consuming and very sensitive to both intra and inter observer variability. Therefore, it may introduce error in the decision making of OSCC diagnosis, which may thereby impact on treatment process. In the modern diagnostic era, computer-aided tool for pathological image analysis shows significant contribution towards the betterment of healthcare services. It certainly reduces the load of manual inspection of slides and assists pathologists for fast decision making with improved accuracy. The segmentation of nuclei from the oral histological tissue sample images is a mandatory step towards quantifying/studying various relevant features of nuclear morphometry and chromatin pattern. This helps clinicians to determine the potential of malignancy. In present-day diagnosis, a clear picture of histological image findings (quantified relevant image features) is necessary for the patient-specific treatment planning. So, for computer-assisted screening of OSCC, first, we need to delineate the nucleus from histological images correctly. In this paper, we propose a two stage computational methodology for efficient automatic detection and segmentation of nucleus from histological images to assist clinicians in diagnosis of OSCC.
The remaining of this paper is structured as follows. The existing literatures are discussed in Section 2. Section 3 describes the materials and methods including data collection, microscopic imaging, proposed methodology for nucleus detection and segmentation, and performance evaluation metrics. Section 4 shows the experimental results for nucleus detection and segmentation. Section 5 discusses elaborately over the proposed method and its comparison with existing state-of-the-arts, and finally, the conclusive remarks have been drawn in Section 6.
