Computer experiments often use computer models to simulate the behavior of a complex system under consideration. Often they include a set of additional uncertain model parameters, called calibration parameters, that do not exist in the complex system. For instance, they can be tunable coefficients, switches indicating different competing sub-models, uncertain inputs, etc. In such cases, computer models are calibrated in the light of limited data to better simulate the complex system. An important goal of model calibration is to discover optimal values for the calibration parameters such that the output of the computer model using these optimal values can approximate the output of the complex system adequately enough.
Kennedy and O’Hagan (2001a) proposed an effective Bayesian computer model calibration to address such cases. Briefly, the experimental observations are represented as a sum of three functional terms: the computer model output, a systematic discrepancy, and an observational error. These functional terms are modeled as Gaussian processes O’Hagan and Kingman (1978), Rasmussen and Williams (2005), when the computer models are computationally expensive, and available training data are limited. Literature includes several variations of model calibration able to handle different issues; e.g. discontinuity/non-stationarity in the outputs (Konomi et al., 2017), discrete inputs (Storlie et al., 2014), calibration in the frequentist context (Wong et al., 2014), high-dimensional outputs (Higdon et al., 2008), dynamic discrepancy (Bhat et al., 2014), large number of inputs and outputs (Higdon et al., 2013), etc. These developments assume that the optimal values of the model parameters are invariant to the inputs; however such an assumption can be too restrictive and give misleading results. In many real world problems, computer models consist of several complex parametrizations which are sensitive to the model inputs, such that their optimal settings may depend on the input values. In such cases, it is preferable for the calibration procedure to allow the discovery of different optimal values for the calibration parameters at different input values.
In many problems, computer models require the selection of a sub-model (often called ‘best’ sub-model) from a set of competing ones. In principle, Bayesian calibration framework can address such problems by treating the distinct sub-models as levels of a categorical calibration parameter. Often, different sub-models are based on different theories (or physics) which may be suitable for different input sub-regions. In such cases, the selection of the ‘best’ sub-model may be different at different input sub-regions. Along those lines, interest may lie in finding the sub-regions of the input values that each sub-model is the ‘best’ choice. Often the number and boundaries of these sub-regions are unknown. Standard model calibration implementations, e.g., (Storlie et al., 2014), cannot address such questions, because they select a single best sub-model for the whole input space, and hence ignore that the ‘best’ sub-model may change with the input values. As a result, there is need to develop a calibration procedure able to discover different ‘best’ sub-models at different input sub-regions as well as identify such sub-regions.
The motivation for addressing the aforesaid problem arisesfrom the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) regional climate model (Skamarock et al., 2008). WRF allows for different parametrization suits, physics schemes, or resolutions, which in principle can constitute different sub-models. Here the available sub-models consist of different radiation schemes, (i.e., Rapid Radiative Transfer Model for General Circulation Models (Pincus et al., 2003), and Community Atmosphere Model 3.0 (Collins et al., 2004)) that describe different physics. It is uncertain which radiation scheme leads to more accurate simulations. WRF is employed with the Kain–Fritsch (KF) convective parametrization scheme (CPS) (Kain, 2004). For climate models, it is important to better understand and constrain the convective parametrization, and hence interest lies in quantifying and reducing the uncertainties regarding of those parameters. Yan et al. (2014) discuss that the choice of the radiation scheme (sub-model) and values of the CPS parameter (other tunable model parameters) may depend on the geographical regions (input values), however a quantitative analysis of this important scientific question has not been performed due to the lack of suitable statistical tools. To address such questions, we develop a Bayesian method that can be used to identify such input sub-regions, choose the ‘best’ radiation scheme, and discover optimal values for CPS at each of these sub-regions.
In this article, we propose the input dependent Bayesian model calibration (IDBC) procedure, a fully Bayesian methodology that flexibly models input dependent optimal values for calibration parameters, and performs Bayesian inference on them. In problems with competing sub-models, a highlight of the proposed method is that it allows the selection of different ‘best’ sub-models at different sub-regions of the input, as well as the identification of such sub-regions. Due to its Bayesian nature, the proposed method is able to characterize the uncertainties about the unknown ‘best’ sub-models and optimal parameter values through posterior distributions conditional to the inputs. The method, relies on representing the uncertain calibration parameters, and sub-model labels, as step functions whose input domain is partitioned according to a binary tree partition. We present two variations of the method: the joint partition scheme (IDBC-JPS) assuming that calibration parameters share the same partition, and the separate partition scheme (IDBC-SPS) allowing them to have different partitions. To account for the unknown structure of the function we specify a suitable Bayesian hierarchical model that utilizes a recursive partitioning based on binary treed process priors. We design a RJ-MCMC algorithm to facilitate the challenging Bayesian computations of the proposed method. In particular, we propose grow and prune RJ operations utilizing birth & death and split & merge dimension matching type of proposals. The proposed method also produces an emulator for the real system. If different sub-models are available, the resulting emulator is able to combine different sub-models and therefore aggregate different physics associated with them.
The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly present a standard Bayesian model calibration framework. In Section 3, we present the proposed method IDBC-JPS. In Section 4, we explain how the method can be used in problems involving sub-models. In Section 5, we assess the performance of the method on a benchmark example, and a pollution computer model. We also use the method on a real world climate modeling application that involves the WRF. In Section 6, we conclude. In Appendix, we include the IDBC-SPS.
