Crime directed to network infrastructures and network protocols is increasing [1]. The economic and societal consequences of such attacks are reaching front pages in the news leading society to question their trust in the Internet [2], [3], [4]. Not surprisingly, an entire industry emerged to create an ecosystem of tools and devices that are marketed to prevent, stop, or to mitigate the negative effects of such malicious behaviour. We can install off the shelf Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) to identify the existence of attacks and we can deploy specialised firewalls to prevent malicious traffic from entering a specific network domain.
A major development in the networking landscape of the past years is the emergence of Software Defined Networks (SDNs). SDNs allow computer networks to be controlled from one or more software controllers using a common interface. These controllers have the ability to monitor and dynamically reconfigure the network, redirect traffic flows and adapt the network to the situation on demand. The question that then arises naturally is whether SDNs can provide novel methods to counteract attacks.
Another emerging technology in computer networking is Network Function Virtualisation (NFV). NFV allows the instantiation and placement of Virtual Network Functions (VNF) in the network on the fly [5]. On demand placement of VNFs at the right place in the network and using the SDN to redirect the traffic through the placed VNFs can save resources and their costs. It is immediately clear that NFV has a great potential for network security, especially if we consider that firewalls, IDS, traffic scrubbing facilities can all be deployed flexibly where most needed.
We are convinced that SDNs and VNFs are suitable for attack response mechanisms. In case of attacks on network infrastructure, SDNs and VNFs bring three benefits; (1) detection and countermeasure placement are not tied to the network ingress/egress points but can be anywhere in the network; (2) unused network capacity can dynamically be assigned to handle attack traffic for short amounts of time; (3) deploying countermeasures based on demand brings a reduction of resources that can be assigned to other processes, reducing overall cost.
In this paper we will use our architecture for Secure Autonomous Response Networks (SARNET) [6]. We will show how SDN-based countermeasures can be adopted for protection of networks and ultimately for guaranteed delivery of services. We argue that the most useful element of our, or for that matter any other SDN-based network solution, is a proper characterisation of the countermeasures efficiency. In this article we will, therefore, lay the foundation for a generic manner to define and measure the efficiency of SDN-based mitigations against computer infrastructures. The impact and efficiency metrics presented in this paper can be used as features in Artificial Intelligence (AI) approaches to improve autonomous response against attacks and to coordinate the actions of VNFs and SDNs, ultimately without external intervention.
The rest of this article is organised as follows: Section 2 presents the conceptual operation in a SARNET and Section 3 discusses the impact and efficiency metrics. Section 4 describes the software prototype that implements a SARNET and Section 5 lists the scenarios in which we have tested its performance. Sections 6, 7, and 8 present and discuss the experimental setup and the results of our evaluation. Finally, we frame our efforts in the context of existing work in Section 9 and summarise in Section 10 the current status and future steps towards SARNET adoption in real-life networks.
