In a world where the economy is every day becoming more globalized and competitive, improving quality in processes and products are some of the main strategies adopted by companies. Regarding products, we can easily find that one of the main requirements for their success is their quality, as shown by Porter [1]: he considered that a product differentiated for its quality and design ensures buyer loyalty, while another that is poorly differentiated will allow substitutions of equal or low cost. In the case of processes, their quality is linked with aspects such as accuracy, conformance to specification, and reliability which, in the end, have a huge impact on the production of a quality products [2].
A Quality Management System (QMS) which assures the required quality level is essential for companies to have the opportunity of competing in the market. One of the most common ways to improve companies’ quality is ensuring the compliance with the quality standards established by ISO's certifications, as they serve as a liable guide to enhance quality. This not only enhances the quality, but also the corporate image and reputation as a brand of recognized prestige thus favoring commercial relations with users and increasing productivity [3]. As shown in [4], the adoption of Management System Certification (MSC) have a fairly positive relationship in economic and financial results or in stakeholders’ benefits.
We can observe two different types of organizations when analyzing the purpose of certifications in business: non-developmental companies, which decide to implement a QMS just to get the certificate, and developmental companies, which implements a QMS because they believe in its benefits for the company [5].
1576,538 certificates were issued just in 2017 according to the ISO survey [6]. The results of the survey showed that most of the certificates are linked to ISO 9001 (68% of the certifications), and ISO 14,001 (23% of the certifications) as shown in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (133KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Distribution of ISO certificates issued in 2017 [4].
One of the main reasons for the difference in the acceptance of ISO 9001 regarding other certifications is that companies can maximize their benefits when achieving it. The companies’ motivations are sometimes internal [7] apart from the tangible benefits on finances and stakeholders as mentioned above [4]. The ISO 9001 certification is an internationally recognized standard, which sets the quality management requirements of the business to guarantee their correct behavior and its adaptation to continuous improvement. Any company, regardless of its nature, can adopt it as an internal process. Moreover, the growth of business concern about sustainable development has promoted the use of reference standards for the certification of environmental management models such as ISO 14,001, increasing a 4.74% in 2017 over 2016 figures [6]. This standard allows the implementation of Environmental Management Systems (EMS) with the corresponding both internal and external benefits [8].
Another important factor for this increment is the use of the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in companies boosting changes in business paradigms, helping to standardize, improve and automatize prior manual processes or new ones. Even more, ICT has helped in the improvement on the quality of the products and the processes as one of the main strategies adopted by companies [9] mainly through resource optimization and cost reduction improving their competitiveness [10]. Moreover, ICT can also be used as a source of knowledge management, being a good complement for document management and reducing the risk of losing the know-how [11]. Therefore, ICT has an essential importance in the implementation of efficient maintenance management structures [12] leading to quality improvement which is our goal. So, a good way for promoting this quality improvement effort is implementing a support software system.
The purpose of the work described here is designing a system to help companies to achieve a competitive quality of their maintenance's tasks, giving them the opportunity to create their own Maintenance Management System combining both QMS and EMS based on ISO standards. The objective was to create the basis of a system which could be implanted in different companies, regardless of its size. In order to validate it, the system has been applied in two real cases with different company size: the first one was a University Computer Science Department, which related with its size can be categorized as SME, while the second was the Spanish branch of the ENVAC enterprise, called ENVAC Iberia S.A., that can be categorized as big company. The obtained results show an improvement in the internal processes of the companies, due to the definition of indicators which show their evolution being possible to define corrective actions allowing to remove the non-conformities. Besides, the loss of knowledge derived from personal changes, either for reasons attributable to the company or of the own worker, has been reduced.
Authors have followed a design science research methodology (DSRM) which aims at developing an evolutionary prototype that will be modified to adapt to the needs of the project. It is important to organize and categorize the information in a clear way along with the design phase, to be able to develop a software. The design will allow developing a functional interface which fulfills the user requirements [13]. We need a Conceptual Schema (CS), which can be converted into the corresponding Software Representation [14]. This type of schemas allows an accurate representation of the most relevant concepts of the analyzed domain [15].
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines the background. Section 3 shows the research methodology with the analysis of the problem, the determination of objectives. The development of a conceptual model of the solution and the design of the architecture of the system are shown in Section 4. The next section presents the results of the development, followed by a discussion section where the system is validated. Finally, Section 7 presents the conclusion and future lines of action.
