Crystallization is a ubiquitous, key phenomenon in human lives, science, and technology. Accurate measurements, calculations or simulations of the crystal nucleation mechanism and kinetics are necessary to understand and control numerous natural and industrial processes, such as ice and mineral formation, pharmaceutical drug degradation, metal solidification, crystallization of organic, metallic, semiconducting and inorganic substances, vitrification, and glass-ceramic development [1], [2], [3], [4]. The kinetics of homogeneous crystal nucleation in supercooled liquids has frequently been (semi-quantitatively) described by the Classical Nucleation Theory, CNT. However, there has been a growing number of conflicting reports (especially on experimental versus computer simulation research) regarding its validity [5]. These conflicting views happen because it is extremely difficult to experimentally determine certain fundamental quantities, such as the (nanometric) critical nucleus, the interfacial free energy, and the diffusion coefficients in multicomponent supercooled liquids.
Recently, in a comprehensive paper [6], spontaneous crystallization of supercooled Ni50Ti50 alloy – a widely used shape memory material [7] – was investigated by molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. The authors obtained the nucleation time, homogeneous nucleation rate, the critical nucleus size, crystal growth rate, viscosity and diffusivity in the 700–825 K range, as well as the heat of melting Δhm, and the equilibrium melting point Tm. However, their work focused on crystal growth rates and diffusion; they did not analyze the nucleation kinetics. Thus, their dataset provides a rare, valuable opportunity to test theories and complement their results on crystallization of this supercooled liquid alloy. Therefore, in this article, we use the MD data of Ref. [6] to analyze the crystal nucleation kinetics in the framework of the Classical Nucleation Theory. Our main objective is to test the validity of the CNT further to describe crystal nucleation rates in supercooled liquids.
