Nowadays, we hear the term “Go Green” more and more frequently. We notice flyers all over the streets that encourage us to “Go Green”, and we can see advertisements on the television and on websites that push to “Go Green”. This is because there is a dire need to “Go Green” in order to save the environment and eventually in order to save ourselves. According to statistics that were conducted by the National Academy of Science, there are 14 billion pounds of garbage that are dumped into the ocean every year [1]. Moreover, according to a Pure Earth report, pollution kills 8.9 million people a year and almost 200 million people are exposed to lead, mercury, and pesticides which make them suffer from severe health problems like brain damage [2]. All this is the result of pollution; all these facts pushed the global community to “Go Green”. When it comes to the environment, going green includes practicing procedures that diminish the harm that we are causing to planet Earth. In fact, diminishing the damage people cause to the environment is the only hope that is left to save Earth and save the coming generation. “Going Green” includes all the aspects that can enhance the way we are living in order to protect the environment. However, there is a fact that is not widely known around the world, “Going Green” is not a phrase that is used to emphasize the protection of the environment only. The term is meant to define the concept of renewable, sustainable and eco-friendly procedures, products and energy. Today, there is a great necessity to “Go Green” in many aspects in our life by reducing the consumption of energy and having more eco-friendly products in order to reduce the crisis that we might face in the future.
It is important to “Go Green” in the products that we are using in order to save energy. One of the products that is being widely used all over the world, and is becoming one of the essentials for any person is the computing device. According to the statistics that were conducted by Gartner Inc. in 2013, 2.4 billion computing devices were produced in 2013, which is a 9% increase from the year 2012 [3]. In fact, the production of computing devices is expected to grow reaching more than 2.9 billion devices in 2017 [4]. All these facts allow us to understand the importance of “Go Green” when it comes to computing devices. The term “Green Computing” stands for the process of “Go Green” with computing devices. More precisely, green computing is defined as environmental responsible use of computing devices and all their resources. Almost everyone holds a mobile phone. On average a person uses his/her mobile phone for three hours and sixteen minutes per day [5]. The advantages of the mobile phone tempt people to get one in order to ease their life. Perhaps mobiles are the most common denominator between all people from a socio-economic point of view. It is more commonly used by people from all walks of life irrespective of their socio-economic status. So Go Green is not restricted to only one group of people or one area on planet Earth. The duty is to save the environment of all harm. To reach all people is only possible when we have tailor made campaigns that address each group based on their background (education, wealth, position, etc.). As the development of mobile applications is growing more and more, the mobile phone is not limited to phone calls anymore; there are almost a hundred other features that make the smartphone a significant tool. In this respect perhaps the extra applications to the smart phones are an added value to the less educated and less sophisticated people. Nonetheless, this group still owns a smart phone. According to the journal of Emergency Medicine, a study showed that out of 100,000 patients, 137 more lives were saved when emergency services were called from a mobile phone in case of accidents compared to calling from a landline phone [6]. Here is when the use of a mobile is not restricted to any group.
Over the past ten to fifteen years, community advocacy groups have grown, among others, increasingly concerned with the environmental implications that impact the needs of future generations. Bearing this in mind, it becomes empirical for educational institutions to start at an early stage to investigate the importance of saving the environment. The educational curriculum could include such programs as awareness campaigns under the umbrella of citizenship, civic duty or morals. With technology advancing at such a fast pace, it should be coupled with information on the advantages and disadvantages that it could introduce into our lives. Educators should focus on the importance of not only being technically oriented, but emphasize that being top notch could encompass the values of being a responsible person. The youth should be taught to care about themselves, their families, their neighbors, their community and their country. We should instill in them that present environmental problems would be solved through – the future generations – them, the students; encouraging them to find solutions to the problem of the environment. We should engage them in educational activities (of course after making sure that the students are well-informed about the impact of technology on the environment). Our educational curriculum should be divided into stages, just like any other academic course, each age group with a specific learning outcome. It involves developing the combination of knowledge, skills, values and motivation to make the difference. These activities enrich their lives.
Perhaps, unintentionally technology has paved the path earlier in terms of preserving the trees by introducing the “paperless” office. It is true that we have saved a lot of trees, but this was a by-product of technology – not the core. The more advanced we have become technologically, the more space and fields we can invest in that would lead to a sustainable environment. We are now aware of the dangers that humanity is facing environmentally; it is our duty to safeguard and protect it. We possess the tools. What is needed is the blueprint of twining technology and environment.
Our aim is to show that it is feasible to be innovative technologically and at the same time be environmentally aware of the gains that will ensure as a consequence. Nowadays, more than ever, the “Go Green” slogan has been highlighted and emphasized because of the foreseen dangers that can result if not enough effort is exerted to curb them. As educators, one of the teaching outcomes we should engrave in the minds of the youth is how to couple the education they are getting with innovative methods of serving the environment.
In this work, we propose to “Go Green” in mobile computing. This will be achieved by defining metrics for a green mobile application. In the suggested model, we explore how to deploy a green mobile application that consumes less power, is economic, has a good performance, and decreases the utilization of the device component. A decrease in the utilization will help in protecting the CPU, RAMs, and all of the mobile device's hardware; thus, there will be a decrease in the number of toxic wastes since the mobile device will have a longer lifetime. Our defined green mobile application will not only benefit the environment and protect it, but also it allows the consumers to have a better more satisfied experience with their mobile phones. A green mobile application will save the battery of the mobile phone while enabling the user to benefit from the great features and good performance. In summary, the important contributions of this work are as follows:
•Provide awareness to the youth on the importance of green computing.•Defining metrics to analyze an application's behavior and decide whether it is green or not.•Propose a calculation method for each of these metrics that can be adjusted according to the user's preference.•Implementing a mobile application that follows the proposed metric in order to show that designing a green application is better than a regular one.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related works. Section 3 announces the data and method. Section 4 presents the results and ensues with a discussion, and section 5 concludes the paper.
