There has been increasing evidence to suggest that impairments in visual coding within the reading network may uniquely influence the development of good reading skills. Growing evidence suggests that a deficit in the dorsal stream, specifically the visual pathway responsible for visuo-spatial attention, may be one of the areas most closely linked with reading development and reading delay (e.g., Facoetti et al., 2000, Facoetti et al., 2001; Vidyasagar and Pammer, 2010). The proposition that a dorsal/magnocellular deficit may be associated with reading difficulties, is supported by a large amount of converging behavioural and neuroimaging evidence (e.g., Boets et al., 2006; Casco and Prunetti, 1996; Cornelissen et al., 1998; Demb et al., 1998; Eden et al., 1996; Gori et al., 2014a, Gori et al., 2014b, Gori et al., 2016; Kevan and Pammer, 2008; Livingstone et al., 1991; Lovegrove et al., 1980; Talcott et al., 2000; Yamamoto et al., 2013) (although refer to Ramus, 2001 for counter arguments). In terms of visuo-spatial coding, the visual system is required to track words along a line of text, isolate and identify individual words within text, different letters within words, and different features within words. This all happens extremely quickly, within the space of a fixation, which can be as fast as a few hundred milliseconds (Rayner, 1998). Emulating these fast visual signals, it has been demonstrated that reading skills are associated with many other, well-controlled visual task such as coherent motion (for a meta-analysis see Benassi et al., 2010), visual frequency doubling (Buchholz and McKone, 2004, Kevan and Pammer, 2008, Pammer and Wheatley, 2001), visual search (Casco and Prunetti, 1996, Casco et al., 1998, Iles et al., 2000, Sireteanu et al., 2008, Vidyasagar and Pammer, 1999), temporal order judgement (for review, see Farmer and Klein, 1995), and change detection (Rutkowski et al., 2003).
Historically, the behavioural experiments investigating dorsal stream performance have generally occurred within a laboratory setting, where the visuo–spatial factors are as tightly controlled as possible. For example, in a typical vision experiment, the participant is placed in a room that is quiet and free from distraction. The lighting is typically controlled, with some experiments also providing time for dark adaptation. Usually seating position and viewing distance from the screen are controlled, often with the addition of a chin rest. The screen itself will be meticulously measured for luminance, and this will be maintained for consistency between participants unless an element is purposely modified as required by the experimental design. This control of stimulus parameters occurs because the dorsal and ventral visual pathways are highly sensitive to very specific types if visual information, such as motion and spatial coding (Merigan and Maunsell, 1993). Thus in order to be certain that a study was in fact isolating the dorsal/magnocellular pathway, it is important to control the visual factors that would illustrate this. However, over three decades later, and with significant advances in technology, a more practical question emerges. Can tablet computer systems using game-like programs, predict reading ability? And can this technology be successfully implemented in school based settings where reading is most likely to occur? This is important because gamifying these tasks would obviate the need for tightly constrained visual parameters and settings, and open up the possibility of in-class, in-house games that can be carefully designed to achieve the same objectives as the original psychophysical research but with far more attention, and engagement from the child. Moreover, this would synchronise nicely with recent research on reading remediation demonstrating that visuo-spatial computer games can facilitate reading skill. Franceschini and colleagues have provided convincing evidence that dynamic visuo-spatial computer (wii) games can improve reading in children, in both English (Franceschini et al., 2017), and Italian (Franceschini et al., 2013). Moreover, the benefits appear to extend beyond reading to other reading-related cognitive functions, such as phonological coding, short-term memory and visuo-spatial attentional shifting. If specially designed games can help identify and remediate reading impairment, then this demonstrates a vital step forward in addressing reading disorders in children.
During the reading process the visual system is required to identify and extract a target – a word – within a cluttered array. This is analogous to a visual search task, where a target must be found within a cluttered scene. The difference between natural search, and reading, is that in reading, the search mechanism is a trained movement, such that the search mechanism must work in a sequential and linear way across the page (see Rayner, 1998 for a review). This differs from natural search, which typically occurs by scanning the environment in a non-fixed fashion until a target is located amongst a range of distractors (Horowitz and Wolfe, 1998). Thus effective reading requires training the visual system to search in a specific way, and such training probably occurs as part of the development of the reading process itself (Vidyasagar, 1999). However such training can occur and be separate to the reading process, and facilitate reading acquisition. Franceschini et al. (2012) conducted a three-year longitudinal study that demonstrated that pre – reading attentional orienting (as assessed by visual search) predicted future reading skills in grades 1 and 2. Thus, a visual search task administered prior to the onset of learning to read would be useful in detecting visual attention deficits during early development.
There are two types of visual search (Treisman and Gelade, 1980); a feature search is described as a parallel process whereby the target and distractors are differentiated by a single element (such as colour) which automatically ‘pop out’, and are quickly identified in the scene, such as finding a red circle within an array of blue triangles (or in ‘real-world’ terms, finding an orange in a fruit bowl of apples). Speed of search within this domain is not thought to be impacted by number of distractors (Treisman, 1982). This is contrasted with a conjunction search, where the target shares more than one element (colour, shape, orientation, size) with the distractors and thus takes longer to find due to the decreased discriminability between items. An example of this might be finding a ‘red circle’ target within an array of red triangles and blue circles (or finding a green apple amongst red apples and green limes). It is also influenced by the number of distractors in the scene. Feature searches are thought to occur automatically, whereas conjunction searches place higher demands on the visual system due to serial scanning and thus requires focussed attention (Treisman and Sato, 1990). When engaging in search, the visual system utilises a ‘spotlight of attention’. This is similar to shining a torch in a dark room, or hitting the zoom function on a camera. Objects that fall within the spotlight of attention can be detected or identified more quickly than objects outside of this spotlight, and area of the spotlight can increase, but at a cost to reaction time. This spotlight of attention can be guided through a cluttered array to detect a sought after target (Eriksen and James, 1986). Each time the spotlight of attention is moved, it determines the next most likely position of the target based on pre attentive information (Wolfe et al., 1989). In the case of reading, it is thought that the attentional spotlight is used as a way to selectively attend to the letters and words on a page. That is, the visuo-attentional system scans, using a spotlight of attention in a sequential order along the letters of a word during fixation, and also provides a spatial navigation mechanism for reading to occur. Without a trained spotlight of attention moving skilfully from left to right across the page, fluent reading would be unlikely to occur (Vidyasagar, 1999).
A second visuo-spatial search task is change detection. Change detection refers to the ability to notice change between two images, or in a single image which slowly changes over time. When two complex images are presented one after the other, the viewer can sometimes fail to recognise the change. This can occur even though the viewer is specifically looking for a change, is provided with a long preview (eight seconds) of the image, the change is repeatedly shown, and the viewer would normally recognise the change if the flicker between images was not present (Rensink et al., 2000). Change detection ability is important because it helps us to notice differences in the world around us (Rensink, 2002), and is considered to be analogous to visual search in the real world because of the requirement to search two items or scenes for similarities and differences (Hyun et al., 2009). Given the requirement to visually focus attention on a scene to detect a target or change (Rensink, 2002), change detection is also suggested to draw upon the dorsal spotlight of attention to successfully detect a target (Rutkowski et al., 2003). Consistent with this, Rutkowski et al. used change detection as an index of dorsal processing to discriminate between dyslexic and non-dyslexic readers. For example, a change detection task was utilised with a group of dyslexic children to determine if, like visual search, change detection is also impaired in poor readers. Children were asked to view a set of four letters, followed by a fixation cross, then another set of four letters. They were then required to indicate if the scene was the same or different, and if so, which letter was different. The authors found that children with developmental dyslexia were equally as accurate in detecting change, however took significantly longer to detect this change, when compared to their normally reading age matched peers. Given the similarities between visual search tasks, and reading skill, the range of studies linking visual search performance and reading ability (Moores et al., 2011, Casco et al., 1998, Sireteanu et al., 2008), and the relative simplicity of the tasks (finding a target or a change in a cluttered scene), visual search tasks are likely to be sufficiently robust to make the transition out of the laboratory and into the classroom, and still be able to predict reading ability over good and poor readers.
Researchers have begun to explore the computerised gamification of traditional psychology experiments within a controlled setting. For example, Berger et al. (2000) designed a series of game - like computer tasks to measure attention properties such as executive control, alertness and orienting, for use with child populations (see also Dunbar et al., 2001 – “The Frog Game” to measure switching attention abilities; Metcalfe et al., 2009 – “Dragon Master” to provide motivation for correct responses; for more examples of standard psychological experiments modified into game like formats). This modification to classic psychology experiments can be considered a type of ‘gamification’. According to Huotari and Hamari (2012), “gamification” is defined as “enhancing a service with (motivational) affordances for game - like experiences in order to support the users overall value creation” (p19). They assert that in order for gamification to be successful, the program must invoke the same psychological experiences that games can create. At present, it appears that overall the highest incidences of gamification are occurring in the education sector, and whilst more research is needed, the effects of gamifying academic learning have been mostly positive (Hamari et al., 2014). In relation to reading research, exploration of gamification of visuo – spatial tasks has commenced, most notably by Gaggi et al. (2012), who have proposed a series of games based on dorsal stream tasks. For example, their ‘paths’ game involves engaging visual search skills to define a path through crowded open C shapes to reach an identified target. They propose that providing these game – like visual tasks to pre readers may assist in identifying poor readers, as well as provide training opportunities for early intervention.
In agreement for the need to explore the value of game like dorsal stream tests, the aim of the present experiment was to create portable and gamified visual search and change detection tasks to determine if dorsal stream deficits are still indicative of reading ability, even when the environment is ‘messy’, and thus representative of school and home settings. Of the known tasks that are thought to access the dorsal stream, it was hypothesised that ‘spot the difference’ (change detection) and ‘find the object’ (visual search) type activities may be more appealing to the demographic being tested for the present study based on their game like qualities. If the dorsal/magnocellular pathway is robust to variants in visual presentation, then like in the laboratory, dorsal/magno’games’ here should predict reading ability. If this is the case, then this would have enormous implications for developing magnocellular-driven computer games to engage children for subsequent research and reading remediation.
