Fish is a vital source of food and rich source of animal protein for people around the world. 30% of the animal protein requirement in developing country has been fulfilled by fish. Consumption of fish as a food is increasing day by day due to awareness about its health benefits. Their consumption reduces many chronic non-communicable diseases [25]). However, many natural and anthropogenic activities are contaminating our waterbodies with various pollutants such as heavy metals [9]). Heavy metal contamination in aquatic ecosystem has become a global concern and a challenging environmental issue due to their adverse effects on human health [23].
Ubiquitous distribution and non-biodegradable nature of mercury (Hg) make it as one of the most hazardous pollutant that pose a serious threat to the living system [18]. Mercury contamination results primarily from various industrial activities including the mining, an alloy of mercury used for dental filling, various paints, consumer batteries and skin lightning creams [5,10,13]. The discharge of these persistent pollutants into water bodies results in the progressive and irreversible accumulation into the tissues of various aquatic species even if present at low concentration [17]. Transfer of these toxic metals in human through food chain is very common.
Several previous studies showed that contaminated fishes are the significant sources of mercury poisoning in humans [25,19]. In humans, various symptoms like anxiety, insomnia, memory impairment, and other nervous system related problems such as peripheral neuropathy, loss of peripheral vision, tremors in coordination, and depression are due to the mercury toxicity [13,2,6,28].
The use of computer vision techniques to impart fast and cost-effective solutions to real-time scenarios has become need of the hour and is also prevalent these days. Computer vision techniques have been employed to design a framework capable enough of assessing the quality of fish samples during the post harvesting phase. This solution may help consumers in identifying the freshness and classifying it into classes, such as fresh, moderately fresh and stale, depending on the number of days post harvestation [7,8]. Image processing methods have also been employed to assess the fish quality after exposure to pesticides, such as cypermethrin, which can be easily found in water sources [7,8].
Many researchers have worked in the domain of biomarker identification which can be used to assess relevant information from test sources. A protocol has been laid for identification of biomarkers to assess fish health in coastal areas and marine ecosystems [16]. Pathologies in liver and gills of the fishes have been detected and supported with the help of biochemical and genetic damages. These signs have been used as biomarkers to evaluate the potential effects of pollutants on aquatic life [26]. A similar study was performed on African catfish by analysing the effects of two different metabolic enzymes on its liver and gills. Some remarkable changes were observed in the selected organs of the sample fishes [22].
The main contribution of the proposed work lies in the identification of a potential visual feature which can be used to differentiate between a healthy and safe fish (channa punctatus) and a heavy metal (mercury) exposed one. Heavy metal exposure is responsible for the oxidative stress in fish. Several studies in higher vertebrates [11,21]; reviewed in Ref. [20] indicate that melanin synthesis is negatively affected by oxidative stress. In present study, heavy metal induced oxidative stress affects the melanin production which is more visible around the eye due to its thinness. This change may act as biomarker for the heavy metal toxicity in fish. This potential visual change near eye region, is converted to a mathematical parameter and represented as an angle subtended by an arc at the centre of a circle. This transformation seems appropriate and suits the algorithm as discrimination in values of both classes are observed.
Another significant contribution of the proposed work is its ability to correctly detect the eye region and its boundary even in the presence of reflections which gets introduced during the acquisition process. Post-harvesting, fish body secretes mucus, which prevents it from deterioration. This mucus accumulates on the scales of fish body and becomes a major cause of the reflection when light is thrown at it. Such reflections appear as bright dots on the surface of fish body which can hamper the accuracy of eye segmentation. With the help of statistical features, Circular Hough Transform, Intensity threshold and convex hull, the effect of such noises is reduced, and the algorithm becomes robust and correctly segments the eye from fish images.
One more significant contribution of the proposed work is its computational efficacy. The imaging techniques used in proposed work are computationally efficient. This makes the algorithm fast and capable of detecting the changes introduced in samples due to exposure to heavy metal. The transformation and representation of these discriminatory changes are presented using a very low computation parameter, i.e. angle subtended by an arc at the centre of a circle, makes the process suitable for real time applications.
