With the continuous increase in human and machine communication requirements, emotion recognition has attracted more and more interest. Emotion recognition [1] is intended to detect and model human emotions during human-computer interfacing. Many signals can be used to indicate emotional states, including facial expressions [2], vocal expressions [3] and some physiological signals [4]. Among these signals, electroencephalogram (EEG) signals are an effective tool for reflecting emotional states with high temporal resolution [5].
Recently, emotion recognition based on EEG signals has been a topic of great research. The conventional method for EEG-based emotion recognition is to collect a substantial amount of calibration data from a new subject and then train a subject-specific model [6], [7]. However, calibration data collection is a time-consuming task that seriously hinders the application of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) in practice [8]. Developing an effective BCI after a short calibration has become an important trend.
Some researchers have attempted to explore the data from other existing subjects to reduce the requirement for calibration data from a new subject. Since EEG signals have individual differences, the distributions of data from different subjects greatly vary. Therefore, directly using the data from a certain subject to expand the training set of a new subject leads to poor performance for this new subject. To address the above problem, one promising method is domain adaptation (DA) [9], which can minimize the distribution discrepancy between the source domain (source subject) and the target domain (target subject) and thus improve the performance for the target subject. In this study, we design a novel DA method, which is aimed at reducing the time cost for calibration data collection and performing well on subsequent unlabelled target data.
In previous studies, many traditional DA methods were applied in the BCI field. Zheng [10] used four algorithms, transductive component analysis (TCA) [11], kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) [12], transductive support vector machine (TSVM) [13], and transductive parameter transfer (TPT) [14], on the EEG-based emotional SEED dataset [15] to construct a general model for a new target subject. Additionally, Chai [16] proposed adaptive subspace feature matching (ASFM), in which a linear transformation function was developed that matched the marginal distributions of the source and target subspaces. These methods are relatively shallow, and few studies have taken advantage of deep networks to solve the DA problem in the BCI field.
Recently, a series of methods based on Riemannian geometry has been dedicated to solving transfer learning problems [17], [18], [19], [20]. In these works, the symmetric and positive definite (SPD) matrix was computed as a feature, and the geometric properties of the SPD matrix on the Riemannian manifold was used to solve the DA problems. The minimum distance to mean (MDM) Riemannian classifier combined with the SPD matrix has already achieved considerable improvements in the BCI field [21]. Recently, Zanini [18] applied a congruence invariance transformation to recentre all the data points on the identity matrices. Yair [19] proposed a parallel transport on the SPD manifold, which was a mathematical recasting of the affine transformation proposed in [18]. Rodrigues [20] not only recentred matrices but also equalized the dispersions on each domain and rotated them around the geometric mean. The Riemannian metric for the SPD matrix has proven to be a valid measurement for measuring distances between samples in the BCI field [17].
Inspired by these Riemannian-based methods, we propose a domain adaptation SPD matrix network (daSPDnet). Our daSPDnet can extract an intrinsic emotional representation shared between different subjects while maintaining the SPD structure. We combine prototype learning with the Riemannian metric and design a new prototype loss, which aims to calculate the geometric mean of the SPD matrix set in the low-dimensional representation layer. The geometric means can be regarded as prototypes, which can be used not only to classify different emotional states but also to align the semantic information from different subjects at the same time. We attempt to imitate the geometry-aware DA algorithms in our deep learning framework and consider the knowledge transfer at both the feature level and sample level. At the feature level, our method can reduce the marginal distribution divergence between two domains in the high-layer representation space, which can be seen as a more effective operation to replace affine transformation. At the sample level, we match the conditional distribution for each category with the help of prototypes to achieve recentring operations similar to geometry-aware algorithms. All these components are trained jointly and in an end-to-end manner. In summary, this paper mainly contributes three innovations:
•Our work is the first attempt to use the SPD matrix as a feature in EEG emotion recognition. Compared with Riemannian-based methods, our model takes full advantage of deep learning to solve the DA problem of the SPD matrix.•Our work novelly combines prototype learning with the Riemannian metric. Using the prototype loss we propose, it is easy to calculate the geometric mean in the low-dimensional layer of the neural network.•Our work transfers knowledge from two levels to match two probability distributions. At the feature level, we confuse the marginal distributions from the source and target domains. At the sample level, we adapt the conditional distributions with alignment of prototypes in each category.
The performance of our model is validated on two EEG-based emotion recognition datasets: DREAMER [22] and DEAP [23]. The results show that our method can effectively reduce the calibration time and provide a significant improvement in the EEG emotion DA problem.
