Even though at present there is a close relationship between computer science and virtual reality (and therefore it would seem impossible to understand and achieve the latter without the former), as a theoretical conceptualization, it is possible to establish an early origin of virtual reality rather much before the beginning of computer science. This fact shows how ancient the desire of the human being to create and experience realities alternative to the physical reality is (Artaud, 1938–1958; Heilig, 1962; Kavanagh et al., 2017).
This brief curiosity shows that virtual reality is not another technological advance that someday will fall into disuse, but rather it certainly is the greater technological revolution of our generation. It actually responds to a human desire that goes beyond computer environments and artificially created graphics (Hockley, 1997; Dombrowski and Dombrowski, 2017). It implies the fact of living an experience beyond the physical reality itself and being capable of making everything that can be imagined to come true: historical events, places of fantasy, imagined events, etc (Costa-Román, 2016; Sánchez-Cabrero et al., 2018a,b). Therefore, human beings expand the boundaries of their creations, experiences and learnings to everything that can be represented into a virtual environment. This, in fact, has many fewer restrictions and is closer to the real experience than any other device has designed until now (Steuer, 1992; Cohen-Hatton and Honey, 2015; Gadelha, 2018).
The scientific field cannot stand aside of this technological revolution. It must lead the advances and show the possibilities of this technology in the different fields of interaction between technology and human beings (Vivanco and Gorostiaga, 2017). This is the context that frames this research. It is based on a first approach by the authors to the practical use of virtual reality in primary classrooms in Spain (Costa-Roman, 2016) and the exploration of the existing possibilities in terms of applications and software for the different current commercial viewers (Sanchez-Cabrero et al., 2018a,b). A great interest of learners towards the use of this technology was clearly observed, presenting a great intrinsic motivation in its use. It was verified that, not only the virtual reality offers great possibilities for teaching at many levels, but it also is a relatively unexplored area in its beginnings that urgently needs to deepen its application in the classroom. There is a whole new generation of students and learners who will naturally learn and interact within the digital environment. Furthermore, their communicative style needs tools and applications adapted to their learning style (Wu and Kuo, 2017). For this reason, it is especially important to lay the foundations of both (1) the state of play and (2) the interest that this technology arouses in its own users as a learning tool (Pan and Hamilton, 2018).
Taking as a reference the definition of virtual reality found at the Encyclopaedia Britannica, created by Lowood (2015), virtual reality is understood as the immersion of an individual in an artificial environment, generally created using computer means, which simulates a complete reality for the users and enables them to interact with this environment to a certain degree. The ‘being there’ feeling is a sine qua non condition to achieve a virtual reality experience. This definition sets the limit of what virtual reality is; vis-a-vis what it intends to be but without becoming it. Virtual reality requires that the users feel the immersion in a reality, other than the physical one, where they may have a certain degree of interaction. When the feeling of ‘journey’ towards another reality is not experienced, there is no virtual reality at all; thus, a 3D video experience is not virtual reality because the user does not feel that needed dissociation between mind and body. The use of video games is not considered virtual reality either, even though several studies from the 90s referred to it with experiences that did not fulfil minimum requirements (Rizzo and Koenig, 2017).
From the beginning of the computer science maturity, the possibility of simulating artificial reality environments created with computer means started to be envisaged. However, none of them could properly reflect an actual artificial reality due to lack of technological means in each period (Brooks, 1999; Zyda, 2005). In order to make an individual feel that he/she is inside another reality, virtual reality requires the use of perceptive devices similar to the human senses. Currently, these human senses are still more complex than the technology designed until now (Sanchez-Cabrero et al., 2018a,b).
It is in this decade when the minimum requirements to make it possible have started to be glimpsed (Menzies et al., 2016). Until then, every experience had simulated three-dimensional environments rather complex, but they had not achieved a minimal immersion of the user in an artificial reality (Wu et al., 2015). Due to the limitations of technology itself, the participant did not perceive dissociation between mind and body in the artificially designed experiences. This dissociation is necessary to get the sensation of ‘being there’ proper to immersion in an artificial reality alternative to the physical one, and therefore, the desired virtual reality was not achieved.
Oculus' project (Oculus VR, 2012) could be considered as the pioneer in the development of virtual reality experiences with minimum requirements. It started with a Kickstarter project in 2012 and then in 2013 marketed its first development kit, establishing the first patent in the United States in 2014 (Luckey et al., 2014). From then, virtual reality has been seen as something possible but required some highly demanding specifications for current technology (Menzies et al., 2016; Domingo and Gates Bradley, 2017).
Current innovations in technology, computer science and optics have achieved that this idea, which other generations could only dream about, becomes now a reality, although within the limitations that exploring a completely new and until now undiscovered field means (Wu et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2017).
Before publishing its first commercial version in 2016, the VR Oculus project presented two virtual reality development kits in 2012 and 2014 that were among the first viewers with a real capacity to present an artificial reality that guaranteed minimal immersion. Other important projects were added later to that commercial version the same year, such as the HTC Vive or the PlayStation VR by Sony. The following year, other commercial viewers started to be marketed, such as those sponsored by Microsoft under the acronym WMR (Windows Mixed Reality), thus increasing the virtual reality commercial offer that was available for the average user. Therefore, the period that has elapsed between the first virtual reality viewers that guaranteed an actual virtual reality and the current period has been rather brief. Within this brief period of less than two years, users of virtual reality have been able to try this new technology and have acquired knowledge regarding its real application, which is essential in order to determine the practical and daily use of this technology.
Due to the fact that commercial virtual reality viewers have been on the market for less than two years, this technology is still far from settling into the general population. Therefore, it is difficult to know what society will ask of this technology when it becomes mainstream, as observed by Mütterlein and Hess (2017). The interests shown by early adopters offer us the keys to glimpse that moment and estimate the extent of their demands. We will be able to advance the development of the necessary applications or to take the necessary measures to meet them, in the same way that the so-called 'beta testers' do with computer software and videogames (Stavova et al., 2018).
The results offered by this study would therefore be a first step towards a better understanding of the relationship between human beings and virtual reality. As Pan and Hamilton (2018) state, VR currently still raises many questions, especially from the point of view of a learning tool. Subsequent scientific research may focus on adapting its interventions and experience design to the observations of this study, optimizing the effectiveness and appropriateness of its intervention.
There are previous studies that support research in relation to the acceptance and attitudes generated by virtual reality in society today. For example, Disztinger et al. (2017) and Tussyadiah et al. (2018) explored the acceptance of virtual reality for tourist use. They conclude that knowing and promoting different tourist sites was seen in an optimistic and highly valued way. In a completely different field, Dockx et al. (2017) showed that even elder population could develop positive attitudes and high satisfaction with the practical use of virtual reality.
One of the most important potential use of VR, among others, is found in the educational field. The potential of a learning tool foreseen by a student when he/she is exposed to a factual experience of an almost real learning content, might suppose a much more solid, fast and effective learning than other more traditional learning situation. For instance, Fernández-Robles (2016) shows the way current primary students have a high motivation to learn using alternative reality elements, such as augmented reality, which reflects a very positive attitude from part of students to the inclusion of the VR in classrooms. Greenwald et al. (2017), on the other hand, lists the possibilities of VR for the development of collaborative learning. Bacos and Carroll (2018) show how the sense of presence influences the development of learning through virtual reality. However, there are also current studies against the fact of virtual reality's representing a significant improvement over poorer means of presentation. Leder et al. (2019) showed similar results and significantly lower costs using slide presentations, so it would be necessary to determine in further research the circumstances in which virtual reality can truly mark an improvement in learning.
Many educational situations could be enriched, accelerated or deepened through virtual reality, for instance, understanding a historical event by recreating its entire world from within, making the learner a part of it; recreating extinct species or environments and perceiving their real dimensions in contrast to today's world; travelling through unreachable places such as the universe or the deep sea; or even putting the learner in someone else's place to know how they feel. All these situations can contribute to the development of empathy and education in values, among others. These facts suggest that pedagogy should not be excluded from this technological revolution (Fowler, 2015; Kavanagh et al., 2017; Gadelha, 2018; Parong and Mayer, 2018).
Early adopters of the first commercial viewers of virtual reality could perform a first approach to the potential use as a learning tool, because they offer real information about their use, their interests and their possibilities (Buń et al., 2017; Moro et al., 2017; Nissim and Weissblueth, 2017; Lin et al., 2017; Yildirim, 2017; Yildirim et al., 2018). Usually, early adopters are a proven source of information for the settling of new technologies. However, in virtual reality, their participation is essential, since the possibilities for teaching and learning this technology cannot be observed from the outside and only those who cross the threshold of virtual reality are able to perceive all its possibilities. Moreover, virtual reality viewers are in their early stages in the commercialization in the market. This fact gives a great scientific and practical value to this study, as the data obtained have not been previously consulted and could easily serve to glimpse the future of the relationship between virtual reality and the educational field.
The present study aims to collect this information through the administration of a questionnaire designed to assess and value the experiences lived by the early adopters of virtual reality in Spain with viewers that guarantee a sufficient immersion, such as those described before. It is intended to assess the interest of use of this technology as a learning tool in a near future, reflecting the early adopters' interests and privileged points of view.
With the purpose of finding answers and confirmations to the mentioned questions, this research sets out two objectives: (1) To describe the social and demographic profile of early adopters of virtual reality viewers in Spain and (2) to assess the interest that these users may have in its use as a learning tool in order to be able to evaluate its possible future inclusion within the formal educational setting.
