Production activities of the shellfish industry (shrimp, crabs, etc.), are related to generation of huge amounts of solid wastes that pollutes the environment. Crustacean shells residues have an estimated annual world production of 1.2 Mt; this means that there is an important potential to take advantage of these residues in order to decrease environmental impacts derived from its inadequate disposal. This situation represents an ongoing issue for coastal cities (and regions) that generates unpleasant odors, waste accumulation and other environmental problems (Kalaivani et al., 2018). Nowadays, there are technological alternatives for the use of these wastes and their conversion into useful products such as chitin and chitosan. Chitin is obtained from crustacean shell wastes derived from aquaculture production (lobster, crab and shrimp). In this sense, there is an increasing interest to use this biomaterial (and its derivatives) due to this substance is renewable, non-toxic and non-allergenic source; in addition, antimicrobial and biodegradable (Rinaudo, 2006). On the other hand, chitosan is found naturally in the cell walls of different fungi species, in small concentrations. The main source of chitosan production is chitin, which is formed via hydrolysis reaction under high temperature and highly concentrated alkaline medium (usually sodium or potassium hydroxide are used for this purpose) (Zhang et al., 2017). Chitosan is widely used in the textile industry, due to its adsorption properties that allow the fibers can properly adsorb pigments. In addition, the cosmetic industry takes advantage of the cationic nature of chitosan (in aqueous solution) for hair and skin treatment. Thus, this compound is commonly found in liquid soaps, shampoos, skin creams, and other products. Food and agriculture industries use chitosan for fruits and vegetables preservation (Nakamatsu, 2012). The described features indicate that chitosan has a great potential to be used as bio-adsorbent for water treatment purposes (Antonino et al., 2017). On the other hand, titanium dioxide (TiO2) is commonly used as photocatalyst for water treatment system purposes. Moreover, TiO2 nanoparticles properties depend on the particle size, its structure, and the effective surface area (Haider et al., 2017). The effectiveness of titanium dioxide as photocatalyst in the degradation of organic pollutants in air and water has been studied for more than 30 years (Li et al., 2019). This material has been widely used for solar and environmental energy applications, mixed in materials such as tiles, concrete, paints and glass due to its interesting properties that include chemical stability, good optical transparency, high refractive index, low cost and no toxicity (Askari et al., 2017). Therefore, it is attractive to synthesize a novel material with both absorption and degradation capacity for pollutants removal in order to improve water treatment technologies. Furthermore, if an application to industrial development of these materials is extended, there is a great potential to take advantage of marine residues for the biotechnological production of adsorbents modified with nanoparticles.
There are reported in literature a variety of analysis methodologies to asses processes considering sustainability parameters. Methodologies such as: Techno-economic and sensitivity analysis (Perez et al., 2016), energy analysis, inherent safety assessment (Rathnayaka et al., 2014), environmental impact assessment (Papong et al., 2017), Green Scope approach (Smith et al., 2015), among other, are applied to diagnose and screen emerging or existing technologies. In this sense, environmental assessment is an important tool widely applied in process analysis and design due to allows identification of improvement opportunities from environmental point of view, serving as an instrument for making decision. This method quantifies potential environment impacts (PEI) due to a random discharge of the substances (e.g. raw material, chemicals, products or wastes) to the environment (Herrera et al., 2017). In the literature there are several studies addressing environmental impact assessment as a criterion to evaluate process sustainability. Azapagic and Clift (1999) proposed the application of life cycle assessment (LCA) to process optimization and as an instrument to identify potential improvement opportunities from environmental viewpoint. Moncada et al. (2014) developed a techno-economic and environmental analysis of two biorefineries based on sugarcane. Hernández et al. (2014) used environmental analysis to compare two different biorefinery configuration for sustainable production of a variety of products from olive stone. Environmental assessment methodologies also have been applied as a decision-making tool for selection of more suitable alternatives considering environmental performance. Moreno-Sader et al. (2019) applied environmental (and exergy analysis) to evaluate process alternative for production bio-oil from lignocellulosic and algal biomass. Alonso-Fariñas et al. (2018) used environmental impact assessment to compare thermo-chemical, bio-chemical and fossil-based processes for ethylene production. Also, environmental assessment has been implemented as a decision support framework to evaluation the sustainable performance of water treatment systems (Ramírez et al., 2019).
On the other hand, exergy analysis is a useful tool to overcome the limitations of the first law of thermodynamics allowing identification of main sources of energy losses along with the diagnosis of process thermal/energy efficiency (Bait, 2019). In a simple way, exergy is defined as the maximum amount of work that can be produced/generated by a system under equilibrium with environment (Mehdizadeh-Fard and Pourfayaz, 2019). The development of exergy analysis allows quantification of important parameters such as irreversibilities, exergy flow by residues, exergy of utilities, among other, which are utilized to screen and evaluate process alternatives for sustainable production. Several studies applied exergy analysis to chemical process are reported in the bibliography, in this sense; Yang et al. (2019) evaluated a combined cooling, heating, and power (CCHP) system using exergy and exergy-economic analyze. Martínez González et al. (2019) developed an exergy and energy analysis to a production process of syngas from oil sludge thought gasification with the aim of verify the potential use of this design for power generation systems. Also, exergy analysis was applied to identify process units or stage with the highest energy inefficiencies. Bahadori and Nalband Oshnuie (2019) evaluated different alternatives for dimethyl ether production using exergy analysis on order to identify energy losses and inefficiencies. Due to exergy analyses requires the knowledge of thermodynamics properties and process flows that the use of computer-aided process engineering (CAPE) tools (as process simulation software) allow applying this methodology to chemical processes in conceptual design stages, in this sense; Ojeda et al. (2011) applied CAPE and exergy analysis to evaluate alternatives for biofuel production from lignocellulosic biomass. The methodologies applied on this study were useful in order to determine that the process requires the development of process improvements strategies in order to improve energy performance. Taking into account related literature, it is apparent that studies addressing environmental and exergy analysis based on computer-aided tools (process simulation) applied to biotechnology large-scale production processes are largely absent. Contributions about the application of environmental and exergy analysis to evaluate physical-chemical processes are summarized in Table 1.Table 1. Related studies about environmental and exergy assessments applied to physical-chemical processes.ProcessEnvironmental AnalysisExergy AnalysisReferenceBoron production✓Azapagic and Clift (1999)Sugarcane biorefinery✓Moncada et al. (2014)Olive stone biorefinery✓Hernández et al. (2014)Bio-oil production✓✓Moreno-Sader et al. (2019)Ethylene production✓Alonso-Fariñas et al. (2018)Water treatment systems✓Ramírez et al. (2019)CCHP system✓Yang et al. (2019)Syngas production✓Martínez González et al. (2019)Dimethyl ether production✓Bahadori and Nalband Oshnuie (2019)Biofuels from lignocellulosic biomass✓Ojeda et al. (2011)Chitosan-TiO2 microbeads production✓✓This study
In this paper, a large-scale production of chitosan microbeads modified with TiO2 nanoparticles is presented and evaluated using the Waste Reduction Algorithm and the exergy analysis. These methodologies show information about exergy flows, irreversibilities, efficiency of units, potential environmental impacts (divided into toxicological and atmospheric), among others, which provide insights about global process performance, and allow identification of improvement opportunities from environmental and exergy/energy viewpoints. In order to perform both analyses, an industrial scaling of chitosan microbeads production process was developed using CAPE along with information obtained from lab-scale synthesis of the bio-adsorbents. The extended mass and energy balances obtained from process simulation were employed to calculate contributions of impact categories to environmental performance and global exergy efficiency.
