Photo-identification (photo-ID) of single individuals is a non-invasive technique generally applied to investigate spatio-temporal distributions and population dynamics of wild species (Hammond et al., 1990). It is based on the general hypothesis that each individual is unique because of several specific physical characteristics and natural marks suitable for its unequivocal discrimination (Hammond, 2010). This technique has been successfully applied in a great array of studies addressing invertebrates (Caci et al., 2013; Frisch and Hobbs, 2007) amphibians (Caorsi et al., 2012; Moya et al., 2015), sharks and rays (Marshall and Pierce, 2012), as well as terrestrial and marine mammals (Anderson et al., 2010;Falcone et al., 2009; Hastings et al., 2008; Ingram and Rogan, 2002; Mizroch et al., 1990), resulting in a promising tool when applied to understand migrations and residency patterns of dolphins and whales (Falcone et al., 2009; Hastings et al., 2008; Ingram and Rogan, 2002; Mizroch et al., 1990). Starting from these considerations, results of a research investigation, carried out by means of photo-ID technique, are reported in this study as providing evidence of applicability and information on one of the least-known cetacean species on a global and Mediterranean scale: the Risso's dolphin Grampus griseus (Cuvier, 1812). In the Mediterranean Sea it is categorised as Data Deficient by IUCN Red List (Gaspari and Natoli, 2012). To this day, the knowledge about the presence and distribution of G. griseus in the Mediterranean Sea is mainly referred to its westernmost regions (Azzellino et al., 2008; Canadas et al., 2002; 2005; Gannier, 2005) and to the Greek area (Azzolin et al., 2010; Frantzis et al., 2003; Frantzis and Herzing, 2002), thus resulting in heterogeneous knowledge and lacking in large areas of the Central-eastern basin, where information is limited to stranding data retrieved from the MEDACES database (http://medaces.uv.es/) and the Italian Stranding Network (http://mammiferimarini.unipv.it/) (Bearzi et al., 2011).
Thus, the need of a more comprehensive understanding of its habitat use and spatial-temporal distribution is crucial, especially when considering the requirements under the UE Habitat Directive, Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) and Maritime Spatial Planning Directive (MSPD). The Risso's dolphin is well known for its typical long-lasting identifiable natural marks, which include patterns of scarring, distinctive nicks and variations in dorsal fin shape (Bearzi et al., 2011; de Boer et al., 2013; Mariani et al., 2016). In fact, the body of an adult individual has a base color of grey with white scars, which increase with age, to the point that oldest individuals can appear almost completely white (Bearzi et al., 2011; de Boer et al., 2013). These unique characteristics that allow the individual recognition of Risso's dolphins, could make photo-ID studies strategic for the acquisition of new knowledge on its distribution, habitat use and site fidelity.
Currently, several computer-assisted matching programs are available to support researchers performing photo-ID of cetaceans and analyse Risso's dolphin images. Among them, the most notable are DARWIN (Stanley, 1995) and Finscan (Hillman et al., 2003), which can assist users working with image catalogues and help them to minimise subjectivity in the matching process. In particular, DARWIN uses a semi-automated process to create an approximation of the fin outline of a new dolphin. With the cursor, researcher must trace a general outline of the leading and trailing edges of the dorsal fin. The fin outline is then repositioned by using an active contour and it is matched with a database of previously identified dolphin fins. The program provides researchers with a ranked list of the possible matches for a comparison with the new fin image, with confidence limits for the nearest match to assist with the decision. Unfortunately, none of the existing algorithms takes into account the large amount of information contained in the patterns of scars on the fin of the Risso's dolphins. Moreover, these tools present several limits: they are able to analyse only one image per time; substantial human expertise is required to discriminate an individual; the photo-ID process is time consuming, limiting the amount of images they can analyse. This study aims to develop a new software system, automatically performing the Risso's dolphin photo-ID process and dealing with the main difficulties of this task: 1) the background of the images can be very noisy due to splashes and water, 2) the targets (dolphins) are constantly moving and 3) the image quality can be very poor depending on the atmospheric conditions. The software system consists in two main modules. The first one targets the computation and selection of distinctive feature descriptors that characterise the patterns of scars on the fin. The second one, focused on matching the feature descriptors between the new fin image and a collection of labeled dolphin individuals (models), provides us with the identity of the unknown dolphin.
In particular we apply two different methods for features detection and description: Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) (Lowe, 2004) and Speeded Up Robust Features (SURF) (Bay et al., 2008). It is common knowledge that the SIFT is invariant to rotation, scale changes and affine transformation, however, it is slow and slightly sensitive to changing lighting conditions. The SURF is fast and performs as well as SIFT, but it is not stable to rotation and illumination changes (Juan and Gwun, 2009; Panchal et al., 2013). This study highlights those fin-image features most suitable to perform reliable Risso's dolphin photo-ID with a comparative analysis of both approaches, as well as a comparison with the state-of-the-art software DARWIN. The proposed photo-ID software system has been tested on a data collection of Risso's dolphin images, acquired in the Gulf of Taranto during the period 2013–2017. This data set has been collected thanks to the Citizen Science activities performed on board of a 40 ft catamaran in the area of interest while involving citizens, tourists, students and decision makers in the research activities (see http://www.joniandolphin.it).
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 details about the study area, data collection and methodology are provided while in section 3 is the description of the experiments, and results are discussed. Finally, section 4 concludes the paper.
