Currently, all navigation of surface vessels in ice-infested waters is done largely as a manual task that requires much training and experience from sailing in icy waters. The latter includes consideration of ice among other factors such as topography, currents, metrology, etc., that are described in [1] and schematically shown in Fig. 1. To determine the safest route, the captain must consider ice types and overall ice conditions.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. An example of a human decision process when transiting in ice, adapted from Snider [1]; p. 88–89 with some modifications to highlight (in green) the importance of ice identification when transiting in ice.
The World Meteorological Organization [2] developed well-established nomenclature for classifying sea ice. A trained ice navigator is required to identify various shapes and forms of ice, to reliably recognize ice and, when possible, to avoid the most dangerous forms of sea ice (e.g., massive ice features such as ice ridges). Distinguishing between first-year, second-year, and multi-year ice may be challenging in good weather [3]. In fog, snow, and darkness, this task becomes even more difficult. The age of the ice may be determined by using its color, thickness, freeboard, floe shape, size, ponding/drainage, hummocking, etc., and the details can be found in the information that is reported in [3]. New ice is grey, and water can be seen through the ice. Light blue colored ice indicates stronger ice (multi-year ice); and contact with this ice should be avoided. It is also recommended to avoid ice that is covered by snow since it causes additional friction on the hull. Flat and even ice cover is preferable over hummocks.
The number of vessels in ice-covered waters grows faster than the number of trained professionals that can safely and efficiently navigate through the ice. Computer-aided understanding of the ice conditions in front of a surface vessel becomes important for pilot assistance systems, as the understanding of severity of ice conditions is essential for a successful ice navigation. The surface ice features need to be correctly detected, classified, and accurately segmented, and the path needs to be carefully planned to avoid excessive ice loads on the ship hull or the ship besetting in ice.
Although considerable research has been devoted to autonomous shipping technology for aspects such as navigation support, equipment monitoring, and safety improvements, less attention has been paid to computer-aided scene assessment from ships that are travelling in ice. Examples of relevant works are given in Muramoto et al. [4]; Hall et al. [5]; Lu and Li [6]; Ji et al. [7]; Zhang and Skjetne [8]; Lu et al. [9]; Heyn et al. [10]; and Kjerstad et al. [11]. These papers describe techniques and sensor systems for analysis of ice concentrations, floe-size distributions, and drift speeds using shipborne images from optical cameras and/or marine radars. Despite recent progress in machine learning, the methods and standards for processing and analyzing sea ice imagery remain underdeveloped. There is a need for robust and efficient methods enabling the automated classification of sea ice imagery to aid in the derivation of useful characteristics of sea ice cover, and efforts have been made to address this. While most of the methods use low-to high-resolution satellite imagery or airborne imagery [8], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], none of these techniques capitalize on deep learning architecture for optical imagery classification that is essential for navigation in ice. To the best of our knowledge, none of the currently available models can discriminate between ice types using optical images from a surface vessel. This issue must be addressed to enable automated image processing and the use of close-range imagery to support ice navigation tasks (i.e., interpretation of ice conditions and finding weak ice).
Motivated by the progress in deep-learning-based algorithms, the aim of this work is to study whether the state-of-the-art machine learning models can correctly identify ice surface features from close-range imagery (i.e., optical images predominantly taken from onboard the vessels).
This paper lays foundation for the automated identification of ice for surface vessels, and it provides a model for multilabel ice object classification that builds on state-of-the-art open source libraries and machine learning platforms. It then demonstrates the ability of this model to classify ice surface features from close-range optical imagery gathered online and during a research cruise to the Fram Strait on the RV Lance in March 2012. Different algorithms were tested on the collected ice imagery. The results were compared against randomly selected test cases representing different ice classes with varying degrees of distortion. In doing so, the effectiveness of the classification of different classes is evaluated and different levels of information presented for the classification are compared.
