A large number of buildings have gradually approached their design life expectancy; therefore, it is necessary to check the integrity of the structure. At the same time, with the aging of the population and the increasing of labor costs, how to continuously and automatically monitor the structure with the least amount of manpower has become an important research direction [[1], [2], [3]]. In the past, the results relying on manpower inspection were susceptible, not only the results were unreliable, but also time consuming. Moreover, when detecting bridges or tunnels, it is necessary to close them, which not only affects the normal operation of the traffic, but also does not guarantee the safety of the inspectors. In serious cases, dangerous accidents may occur. Therefore, many research groups have proposed structural health monitoring (SHM) technology [[4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]]. In order to establish an SHM system, a vibration-based structural system identification method using numerical transformation method has been used. For example, Chatzi et al. proposed a method for detecting the location of defects in a structure using the XFEM-GA algorithm [6], and applied a general elliptical approximation with the smallest measurement error of the sensor to indicate its position. However, due to various uncertainties and uneven environmental impacts, this approach still faces several challenges in monitoring large-scale civil engineering infrastructure [7]. Although there are several SHMs capable of large-scale structural detection [8,9], they require a large number of instruments, such as installing a large number of sensors, integrating data from distributed sources, and compensating for environmental impacts. In addition, from the information of SMH system it is not easy to confirm whether the collected data clearly indicates structural damage, or sensor system failure, noise signal, or a combination of the above.
Therefore, a large number of image processing techniques (IPT) based damage detection methods have been proposed. A significant advantage of IPT is that almost all surface defects can be identifiable. Yeum and Dyke carried out a study using IPT combined with sliding window technology to detect cracks [12]. This research is a good demonstration of the potential of IPT. Although their test examples have many crack-like features, these unnecessary features are effectively removed, and significant cracks are extracted using Frangi filters [13] and Hessian matrix-based edge detectors [14]. However, edge detection is an ill-posed problem [15]. The results are susceptible to noise, which is mainly caused by light and distortion. An effective way to overcome these problems is to implement denoising techniques. Total variation denoising is a well-known technique that reduces the noise of image data and enhances the edge detectability of the image [16]. However, the applications of processing images using prior knowledge are limited because the image data captured in the real world varies greatly. IPT needs to design a reasonable feature extraction algorithm for specific data, but it is very difficult to extract high-level features (i.e. semantic information such as the location and width of cracks) from photos. In addition, it is necessary to design a suitable classifier algorithm for output which is a very difficult task for the programmers [17].
Deep learning technique is a data-driven method that does not require rules designed manually. The process of building a model only needs to select a suitable network structure (i.e., a series of nested simple mappings), a function to evaluate the model output (i.e., loss function) and a reasonable optimization algorithm. Many researchers have tried to apply deep learning methods in civil engineering, such as, road damage [18] and structure damage [19,20]. These researches of using deep learning to detect damages have performed well on their corresponding tasks. There are two main approaches for the detection of concrete cracks using deep learning technology.
The first approach is based on the method of object detection [21,22]. Object detection is an important task in computer vision and its major task is to find all the objects of interest in the image and determine their position. Typical examples of these methods are NB-CNN proposed by Chen et al. [23] and DDLNet proposed by Li et al. [24]. However, the object detection technology uses a rectangular frame to locate the object, while the crack distribution and shape of the concrete surface are irregular; therefore, the recognition accuracy of these methods is limited.
The second approach is image classification based on region division. That is, selecting a small area of an image each time, and judging whether a crack exists in the selected area. Image classification is also an important task in computer vision. It distinguishes different types of images according to the semantic information. Using image classification technology to classify each small part of the concrete image, and combining the sliding window technology to form the detection of the whole image can achieve good results. One typical method was proposed by Cha et al. (Cha's CNN) [25,26]. Cha's CNN uses a convolutional neural network to classify images and scan the images using different window sliding strategies to complete the detection of the entire image, which can effectively find cracks in the image, but can hardly provide pixel-level concrete crack detections. This is a defect that can hardly be avoided by this type of method, because the accuracy of the detection depends on the fineness of the area division. To achieve higher precision, the area needs to be more finely divided. However, if the region is more finely divided, the information contained therein may not be sufficient to judge whether the crack exists, the classification error will increase, and the accuracy of the detection is reduced.
In order to improve the accuracy, the task of concrete crack detection is treated as a semantic segmentation task. Semantic segmentation is also an important task in computer vision. Its goal is to classify each pixel in the image. If the images semantic segmentation can be quickly achieved, many problems can be solved. For example, the concrete crack detection divides the crack and non-crack regions into two categories to generate pixel-level detection results, which will greatly improve the accuracy of detection. FCN as a deep learning network structure proposed for image semantic segmentation tasks is an ideal way to do the image semantic segmentation. It is called FCN because it replaces the fully connected layer of CNN with a convolution operation.
Recently, Yang et al. [27] applied FCN to do the detection of the concrete crack, where >800 (224 × 224) images were used to conduct fivefold cross-validation that 80% were used to feed the model and 20% for validation. The precision, recall and F1 score are 81.73%, 78.97% and 79.95%, respectively at epoch 14th, then, overfitting occurs. Dung & Anh [28] trained a FCN model with 500 images of 227 × 227 pixels and obtained a max F1 of 89.6% in the validation set. However, large training sets in FCN by Yang et al. [27] and Dung & Anh [28] require a lot of manpower work before applying the trained model. Therefore it is meaningful to find a method with much smaller training set but with good accuracy.
A network structure U-Net based on FCN is selected as the main component of the method in the present research, firstly created by Ronneberger et al. and applied to biomedical image segmentation [29]. U-Net is a network of encoder-decoder structures, and the encoder extracts features by convolution, pooling, etc., which gradually reduce the input dimension. According to the information provided by the encoder, the decoder repairs the detailed features by multi-scale feature fusion, up-sampling, etc., and obtains higher precision. The success of U-Net in biomedical images segmentation with less training images and more accurate result than CNN motivates the authors to examine the performance of U-Net in crack detection. Compared to cell detection, the extensively varying real-world situations such as lighting and shadow changes bring much difficulty for crack detection. I should be the first publication applying U-Net to detect concrete cracks to the authors' best knowledge.
A schematic of the U-Net in this study is shown in Fig. 1. In the following sections, the structure of U-Net, model evaluation, and model optimization method will be introduced. The method adjusting the hyperparameters according to the performance on the model validation will be also presented. The comparison of the performance of the method implemented in this paper with that of Cha's CNN on the same test image is carried out as well. In addition, some fundamental performances such as the size of training set and precisions in the FCNs by Yang et al. [27] and Dung & Anh [28] are compared with the present U-Net.Download : Download high-res image (233KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A schematic of U-Net trained for concrete crack detection.
