Worldwide breast cancer is the leading type of cancer in women [1]. However, 99 percent of women whose breast cancer was detected early (stage 1 or 0) survive beyond five years after diagnosis [2]. Indeed, when detected in good time, its treatment allows women to have a good prognosis reducing the rate of mortality and the incidence of surgery, radiation therapy and oncologic treatments [3]. Mammography is the most widely used technique in screening programs to detect breast cancer at a very early stage [4], [5], but it is not a perfect procedure. It is estimated that 11 percent of women undergoing annual mammogram testing to screen for breast cancer are unnecessarily called back for further testing; this high rate of false-positive exams may lead to added anxiety, unnecessary biopsies for the patient, and consequent excessive treatments such as surgical excision. Moreover, there is also an estimated rate of false negatives of about 13 percent, i.e. cases of breast cancer that radiologists fail to detect [6].
Among the main early indirect signs of breast cancer visible on mammograms are the microcalcifications, tiny spots of calcium deposits, whose diameter range from  to 1 mm. They can be localized or broadly diffused along the breast ducts, scattered or clustered throughout the breast tissue [7]. Specifically, a microcalcification cluster reveals the presence of a breast cancer, so its detection is of higher clinical importance than the detection of isolated microcalcifications. Nevertheless, the identification of microcalcifications is a challenging task, not only because of the large variety of breast composition and highly textured breast anatomy, but also because of the inherent low contrast of mammograms and, in some cases, the impalpable size of microcalcifications. Also different types of breast structures (such as curvilinear structures) may appear along with the microcalcifications making their identification more difficult. In addition, the diagnostic capabilities of mammography decrease in breasts characterized by a high percentage of radiographically dense fibroglandular tissue, leading to increased follow-up studies, including biopsies [8], [9].
In addition to errors attributable to the perceptual difficulty of the task, a significant proportion of missed detection can be attributed to errors in perception (search failures), or alternatively to errors in interpretation. The low prevalence in mammography becomes an even more common source of error for inexperienced radiologists when they must face enormous numbers of mammograms generated in widespread screening. Indeed, in many cases, a disease detected in a current exam can also be seen in retrospect on the previous exam. These retrospectively visible or actionable cancers could have been detected in that previous exam with an expert reading [10], [11].
The early signs of breast cancer are often ambiguous or difficult to see, especially with regard to particular lesions such as microcalcifications.
For these reasons, it could be helpful to have an automatic tool able to support the clinicians in making more accurate detection, and consequently, diagnosis of breast pathologies. This is a field of research that has been active for several decades and various studies confirmed the benefits that the use of Computer Aided Detection (CAD) systems can bring to clinician work [12]. Indeed, in 2017, IBM Research co-organized a coalition of oncology and technology partners to pose this challenge to the science community and to find out if machine learning technologies could be used to increase the accuracy of mammography screening [13].
Due to their particular nature and structure, the detection of microcalcifications requires a dedicated automatic tool and not one of generalized detection on the various possible lesions of the breast. Different techniques were used to solve this task by means of image analysis algorithms [14] stochastic modelling methods [15], methods for multiscale decomposition [16], [17] or more advanced techniques of machine learning [18], [19], [20], [21].
Nevertheless, most of the works presented in the literature lack an automatic localization of the suspicious regions, indeed they make use of manually selected regions. Other systems, whose scheme includes an automatic extraction of regions of interest, require a sizeable set of training data to learn a model able to efficiently detect clusters of microcalcifications. Here, we proposed a fully automated CAD system able to detect clusters of microcalcifications in full-field digital mammograms. Indeed, with respect to most of the state-of-art systems, the novelty of the present work is that it can detect regions containing clusters of microcalcifications, without any human intervention and without the need to carry out a laborious training phase that could require many labeled data.
The proposed method includes three main phases: an image pre-processing step followed by microcalcifications detection and cluster identification. As a first step, a set of image analysis algorithms are used in order to make potentially interesting breast structures more evident. Successively, a combination of a threshold-based method and Hough transform is used to detect the single microcalcifications. Finally, the single microcalcifications are automatically grouped into clusters in order to obtain the regions containing the lesions of interest. The proposed approach was tested on 364 full-field digital mammograms selected from the public database BCDR [22], [23] (Breast Cancer Digital Repository) obtaining results comparable with the state-of-art systems.
As development of a previously published work [24], an extensive experimental cross-validation evaluation was performed with the aim of assessing the optimal combination of the thresholds employed in the step of single microcalcification detection. Moreover, a more sophisticated automated procedure for the identification of microcalcification clusters was developed: it is based on classification algorithms aimed at reducing the false positive rate.
