To the heart of the controversies in metadiscourse studies is what to consider and what not to consider as being metadiscursive. In part, the debate has revolved around the propositional versus non propositional aspect of certain linguistic structures (Hyland, 2005, Ädel, 2010, Mauranen, 1993, Flowerdew, 2015). The term propositional is borrowed from Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL) where it meets the ideational meta-function, or how language users share experiences, ideas, feelings etc. Non-propositional material is about the interpersonal and the textual functions of languages. The interpersonal meta-function is about the relationship between writers and readers or speakers and hearers while the textual one is about aspects of texture, cohesion and information flow in texts. In line with this debate, if an expression is thought to carry ideational material (Halliday and Matthiessen, 2014, Hyland, 2005, Vande Kopple, 1985) it would not be classified as metadiscursive. Conversely, when expressions help in organising texts or in guiding readers they would be categorised as metadiscourse.
Yet, it has been argued that deciding for the metadiscursive aspect of some stretches of language based on the propositional versus non-propositional meaning is not convenient (e.g., Flowerdew, 2015, Ifantidou, 2005, Ädel, 2006, Ädel and Mauranen, 2010). Flowerdew (2015: 18), for instance, argues that “[w]hile this distinction is helpful in highlighting two dimensions of meaning within metadiscourse, it nevertheless disguises the holistic nature of meaning and the fact that any stretch of text will carry with it simultaneously all three levels”. Relying on such a distinction for the identification or the definition of metadiscourse would result in discarding forms of language use that carry part of the content, idea, claim or argument on the sole ground that they have a propositional side. Yet, these very forms would still fit as metadiscursive because they help readers in grasping the specific meanings intended by authors or they help with the overall flow of information in the text. In addition, Ädel (2006: 182) suggests that theories of metadiscourse should cut clear with its definitional aspect as being non-propositional and stresses the need to deal with “its micro-level functions in actual texts”.
These two perspectives in the classification of metadiscourse features do not explicitly recognise definitions as metadiscursive. Definitions are pointed to when they are construed as discourse labels (Ädel, 2006) or as forms of code glosses (Hyland, 2005, Hyland, 2007) but they are not fully recognized as a separate category consciously deployed in academic and scientific writing. Accordingly, the main objective of this paper is to show how the discourse function of definition can contribute to the ideational side of academic texts and at the same time can have the textual and interpersonal characteristics that mark metadiscursive units. This would involve an investigation of the structures and sub-functions of definitions, of how and why definitional units are used in academic writing across disciplines.
Based on the analysis of definitions in a corpus of academic writing, this paper will cover the following issues related to the analysis of definitions. The first argument stipulates that definitions are metadiscursive because they have interpersonal and textual functions and because they establish equivalence relations between defined and defining units. The second argument suggests that definitions are not homogeneous and that there are broad variations in their structures, in the types of sub-functions they serve and in who is defining, which in turn could be constrained by disciplinary practices. The last argument has a methodological dimension and suggests that it is more appropriate to identify definitions in texts via a close and deep reading of those texts rather than relying on a list of search items. Search items could be helpful in identifying transparent discourse functions like exemplification but they cannot fully capture context sensitive functions like definitions.
