Parkinson's Disease (PD) is a clinical syndrome first described by James Parkinson in 1817. Years later, it has been discovered that patients with PD lose cells in the substantia nigra and have lower concentrations of dopamine (i.e., neurotransmitter), which plays an essential role in communication among cells. Jankovic [14] mentions the four cardinal features of Parkinson's Disease: tremor at rest, rigidity, akinesia (or bradykinesia), and postural instability, which figure among the motor impairments. However, PD is also characterized by non-motor dysfunctions, which include autonomic dysfunction, cognitive/neurobehavioral disorders, and sensory and sleep abnormalities. Bhat et al. [4] also state that anxiety, depression, fatigue, and sleep disorders are observed prior to the diagnosis of PD.
Although considered as a non-lethal disease, PD shortens the life expectancy of the patients. The diagnose is usually performed using a clinical exam and by a neurologist with expertise in movement analysis. Many works focused on the studies of the motor signs (e.g., freezing of gait, posture analysis, or tremor) to aid the early diagnoses, which are collected by sensors worn by the patient. Ornelas-Vences et al. [18] proposed a fuzzy inference model based on the examiners knowledge for turning rate based on four biomechanical features extracted from sensors worn on the lower limbs. Samá et al. [25] proposed to detect and rate bradykinetic gait through a waist-worn sensor, and MashhadiMalek et al. [17] evaluated the inter-relation of tremor and rigidity in Parkinson's disease.
Tremor is considered as the most common disorder in PD patients and has been one of the most explored characteristics in the literature due to the challenge in capturing subtle tremor features manually. Among the many applications, one can find the work proposed by Rigas et al. [24], which assesses both action and resting tremors based on data collected from accelerometers. The authors employ two parallel Hidden Markov Models to quantify the severity, body posture, and action. Abdulhay et al. [2] explored tremor and gait features acquired during deep brain stimulation. The data is obtained from sensors placed underneath the patient's feet and at the forefinger. Further, they feed machine learning techniques to the automatic PD diagnosis. Deep learning techniques have also been considered in the context of PD diagnosis. The work proposed by Kim et al. [15] differentiate the severity of symptoms using convolutional neural networks.
Visual features were also studied by a few works that used data collected from handwriting exams. Pereira et al. [21,22] applied a handwriting exam comprised of tasks supposed to be nontrivial for PD patients, where they were asked to draw spirals and meanders over a guideline. The drawings were compared against templates, and the differences between them (i.e., the tremors) provide information to feed machine learning techniques to distinguish the individual as either healthy or PD patient. In a later work, Pereira et al. [20,23] drove their studies to a signal-based approach, which used data collected by sensors during a handwriting exam. A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was employed to learn features from image representations of the signals. The images are computed using visual rhythms and generated in different resolutions. The approach outperformed the image-based ones proposed in earlier works [21,22], despite the losses during the mapping from signal to image. Later on, Afonso et al. [3] extended the work proposed by Pereira et al. [23] by mapping the signals into images using recurrence plot technique to further feed a CNN.
A complementary approach to this task consists in exploring raw signals obtained from exams through Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). These formulations were designed to explore time dependencies, which are a characteristic inherent to the problem. Therefore, they turn out to be able to learn robust patterns for PD identification. Despite the good results obtained previously, CNNs explore spatial features for classification, whereas RNNs are designed towards leveraging temporal aspects.
Gallicchio et al. [10] employed Deep Echo State Networks for PD identification based on raw signals. Further, other works exploring RNNs for automatic PD identification consider different kinds of data. Che et al. [5], for instance, proposed a deep-RNN model that directly learns patient similarity based on their previous records, and Zhang et al. [29] applied a Long-Short Term Memory-based neural network on clinical records to represent each patient as a multi-dimensional time series for subtype identification.
Despite the recent advances achieved by computer-aided detection and diagnosis systems, there is still room to improve research in automatic PD identification. Moreover, any advance is relevant to early diagnosis. In this work, we study the temporal dependence on signal data by proposing a new model based on Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Units (BiGRUs) along with an attention mechanism to learn temporal information. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that proposes the application of such mechanisms in the context of Parkinson's disease identification. Additionally, we also introduce the concept of “Bag of Samplings” (BoS), in which multiple compact representations are generated from a signal, significantly improving our results. Despite being used for PD identification, this approach can be extended to any time-series-based problem.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical background, and Section 3 explains the proposed model. Sections 4 Methodology, 5 Results and discussion discuss the methodology and experiments, respectively. Finally, Section 6 states conclusions and future works.1
