In recent times, unwanted commercial bulk emails called spam has become a huge problem on the internet. The person sending the spam messages is referred to as the spammer. Such a person gathers email addresses from different websites, chatrooms, and viruses [1]. Spam prevents the user from making full and good use of time, storage capacity and network bandwidth. The huge volume of spam mails flowing through the computer networks have destructive effects on the memory space of email servers, communication bandwidth, CPU power and user time [2]. The menace of spam email is on the increase on yearly basis and is responsible for over 77% of the whole global email traffic [3]. Users who receive spam emails that they did not request find it very irritating. It is also resulted to untold financial loss to many users who have fallen victim of internet scams and other fraudulent practices of spammers who send emails pretending to be from reputable companies with the intention to persuade individuals to disclose sensitive personal information like passwords, Bank Verification Number (BVN) and credit card numbers.
According to report from Kaspersky lab, in 2015, the volume of spam emails being sent reduced to a 12-year low. Spam email volume fell below 50% for the first time since 2003. In June 2015, the volume of spam emails went down to 49.7% and in July 2015 the figures was further reduced to 46.4% according to anti-virus software developer Symantec. This decline was attributed to reduction in the number of major botnets responsible for sending spam emails in billions. Malicious spam email volume was reported to be constant in 2015. The figure of spam mails detected by Kaspersky Lab in 2015 was between 3 million and 6 million. Conversely, as the year was about to end, spam email volume escalated. Further report from Kaspersky Lab indicated that spam email messages having pernicious attachments such as malware, ransomware, malicious macros, and JavaScript started to increase in December 2015. That drift was sustained in 2016 and by March of that year spam email volume had quadrupled with respect to that witnessed in 2015. In March 2016, the volume of spam emails discovered by Kaspersky Lab is 22,890,956. By that time the volume of spam emails had skyrocketed to an average of 56.92% for the first quarter of 2016. Latest statistics shows that spam messages accounted for 56.87% of e-mail traffic worldwide and the most familiar types of spam emails were healthcare and dating spam. Spam results into unproductive use of resources on Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) servers since they have to process a substantial volume of unsolicited emails [127]. The volume of spam emails containing malware and other malicious codes between the fourth quarter of 2016 and first quarter of 2018 is depicted in Fig. 1 below.Download : Download high-res image (248KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The volume of spam emails 4th quarter 2016 to 1st quarter 2018.
To effectively handle the threat posed by email spams, leading email providers such as Gmail, Yahoo mail and Outlook have employed the combination of different machine learning (ML) techniques such as Neural Networks in its spam filters. These ML techniques have the capacity to learn and identify spam mails and phishing messages by analyzing loads of such messages throughout a vast collection of computers. Since machine learning have the capacity to adapt to varying conditions, Gmail and Yahoo mail spam filters do more than just checking junk emails using pre-existing rules. They generate new rules themselves based on what they have learnt as they continue in their spam filtering operation. The machine learning model used by Google have now advanced to the point that it can detect and filter out spam and phishing emails with about 99.9 percent accuracy. The implication of this is that one out of a thousand messages succeed in evading their email spam filter. Statistics from Google revealed that between 50-70 percent of emails that Gmail receives are unsolicited mail. Google's detection models have also incorporated tools called Google Safe Browsing for identifying websites that have malicious URLs. The phishing-detection performance of Google have been enhanced by introduction of a system that delay the delivery of some Gmail messages for a while to carry out additional comprehensive scrutiny of the phishing messages since they are easier to detect when they are analyzed collectively. The purpose of delaying the delivery of some of these suspicious emails is to conduct a deeper examination while more messages arrives in due course of time and the algorithms are updated in real time. Only about 0.05 percent of emails are affected by this deliberate delay.
Though there are several email spam filtering methods in existence, the state-of-the-art approaches are discussed in this paper. We explained below the different categories of spam filtering techniques that have been widely applied to overcome the problem of email spam.
•Content Based Filtering Technique: Content based filtering is usually used to create automatic filtering rules and to classify emails using machine learning approaches, such as Naïve Bayesian classification, Support Vector Machine, K Nearest Neighbor, Neural Networks. This method normally analyses words, the occurrence, and distributions of words and phrases in the content of emails and used then use generated rules to filter the incoming email spams [28].•Case Base Spam Filtering Method: Case base or sample base filtering is one of the popular spam filtering methods. Firstly, all emails both non-spam and spam emails are extracted from each user's email using collection model. Subsequently, pre-processing steps are carried out to transform the email using client interface, feature extraction, and selection, grouping of email data, and evaluating the process. The data is then classified into two vector sets. Lastly, the machine learning algorithm is used to train datasets and test them to decide whether the incoming mails are spam or non-spam [28].•Heuristic or Rule Based Spam Filtering Technique: This approach uses already created rules or heuristics to assess a huge number of patterns which are usually regular expressions against a chosen message. Several similar patterns increase the score of a message. In contrast, it deducts from the score if any of the patterns did not correspond. Any message's score that surpasses a specific threshold is filtered as spam; else it is counted as valid. While some ranking rules do not change over time, other rules require constant updating to be able to cope effectively with the menace of spammers who continuously introduce new spam messages that can easily escape without been noticed from email filters [28]. A good example of a rule based spam filter is SpamAssassin [35].•Previous Likeness Based Spam Filtering Technique: This approach uses memory-based, or instance-based, machine learning methods to classify incoming emails based to their resemblance to stored examples (e.g. training emails). The attributes of the email are used to create a multi-dimensional space vector, which is used to plot new instances as points. The new instances are afterward allocated to the most popular class of its K-closest training instances [33]. This approach uses the k-nearest neighbor (kNN) for filtering spam emails.•Adaptive Spam Filtering Technique: The method detects and filters spam by grouping them into different classes. It divides an email corpus into various groups, each group has an emblematic text. A comparison is made between each incoming email and each group, and a percentage of similarity is produced to decide the probable group the email belongs to [137].
Many researchers and academicians have proposed different email spam classification techniques which have been successfully used to classify data into groups. These methods include probabilistic, decision tree, artificial immune system [4], support vector machine (SVM) [5], artificial neural networks (ANN) [6], and case-based technique [7]. It have been shown in literature that it is possible to use these classification methods for spam mail filtering by using content-based filtering technique that will identify certain features (normally keywords frequently utilised in spam emails). The rate at which these features appear in emails ascertain the probabilities for each characteristic in the email, after which it is measured against the threshold value. Email messages that exceed the threshold value are classified as spam [8]. ANN is a non-linear model that seeks to imitate the functions of biological neural networks. It is made up of simple processing components named neurons and carries out its computational operations by processing information [9,10]. Several research work have employed neural network to classify unwanted emails as spam by applying content-based filtering. These techniques decide the properties by either computing the rate of occurrence of keywords or patterns in the email messages. Literatures show that Neural Network algorithms that are utilised in email filtering attain moderate classification performance. Some of the most popular spam email classification algorithms are Multilayer Perceptron Neural Networks (MLPNNs) and Radial Base Function Neural Networks (RBFNN). Researchers used MLPNN as a classifier for spam filtering but not many of them used RBFNN for classification.
Support Vector Machines (SVM) has proved over the years to be one of the most powerful and efficient state-of-the-art classification techniques for solving the email spam problem [78]. They are supervised learning models that analyze data and identify patterns used for categorisation and exploring the relationship between variables of interest. SVM algorithms are very potent for the identification of patterns and classifying them into a specific class or group. They can be easily trained and according to some researchers, they outperform many of the popular email spam classification methods [130,131]. This is because during training, SVM use data from email corpus. However, for high dimension data, the strength and efficacy of SVM diminish over time due to computational complexities of the processed data [132,133]. According to [134], SVM is a good classifier due to its sparse data format and satisfactory recall and precision value. SVM has high classification accuracy. Moreover, SVM is considered a notable example of “kernel methods”, which is one of the central areas of machine learning. Decision tree is another machine learning algorithm that has been successfully applied to email spam filtering. Decision trees (DT) need comparatively minute effort from users during training of datasets. DT completely perform variable analysis or feature selection of the email corpus data training. The performance of a tree does not depend on the relationships among parameters. A great benefit of decision tree is its capacity to assign unambiguous values to problems, decisions, and results of every decision [135]. This decreases vagueness in decision-making. Another huge advantage of the decision tree compared to other machine learning techniques is the fact that it makes open all the likely options and follows each option to its end in one view, giving room for straightforward evaluation among the different nodes of the tree. Despite the numerous advantages of Decision tree, it still has some drawbacks which are: unless there is appropriate pruning, controlling tree growth can be very difficult. Decision trees are a nonparametric machine learning algorithm that is incredibly adaptable and vulnerable to overfitting of training data [135]. This makes them to some extent poor classifiers and limit their classification accuracy. The different types of Decision trees that have been applied to email spam filtering are NBTree Classifier [80], C4.5/J48 Decision Tree Algorithm [81] and Logistic Model Tree Induction (LMT) [80]. Naïve Bayes is another wonderful machine learning algorithm that has been applied in email spam filtering. A Naive Bayes (NB) classifier simply apply Bayes' theorem on the context classification of each email, with a strong assumption that the words included in the email are independent of each other [38]. NB is desirable for email spam filtering because of its simplicity, ease of implementation and quick convergence compared to conditional models such as logistic regression [136]. It needs fewer training data. It is very scalable. No bottleneck is created by increase in the number of predictors and discrete unit of information [136]. NB can be used to solve both classification problems involving two or more classes. It can be used to make forecasting that is subject to or involving probability variation. They can effectively manage continuous and discrete data. NB algorithms are not susceptible to irrelevant features. Naıve Bayes algorithm is predominantly famous in business-related and open-source spam filters [51]. This is because apart from the advantages listed above, NB needs little training time or speedy assessment to detect and filter email spam. NB filters need training that can be offered by the earlier set of non-spam and spam messages [136]. It keeps the record of the changes that take place in each word that occurs in legitimate, illegitimate messages, and in both. NB can be applied to spam messages in diverse datasets having different features and attribute [136].
Stochastic optimization techniques such as evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have also been applied to spam filtering. This is because they do not have any sophisticated mathematical computation. Also, they can handle the solutions generated, they seek to recognise individuals that have the optimal solutions for the problem [11]. Several earlier works exist that integrated Genetic Algorithms with Neural Networks [12] to enhance the performance of neural network algorithms. A related approach of evolutionary computation methods such as Genetic Algorithms (GAs) is Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), which is a technique that can be used for optimizing many continuous nonlinear functions and classification techniques. PSO is inspired by the social behaviour of animals such as flocks of bird and shoal of fishes. It has been applied in many areas of human endeavour such as neural network, swarm robotics, telecommunications, signal processing, data mining, and several other applications [129]. PSO algorithm operates on a population (swarm) of particles, with the characteristic of no crossover and mutation calculation as found in genetic algorithm. Every particle have a position and velocity. Each of the particle is a potential solution in the swarm. This makes it easy to implement [13]. What appears to be the most efficient spam filtering approach now is the automatic email filtering which have successfully been used for frustrating the malicious intentions of spammers. Some years back, the largest part of the spam email can be efficiently addressed by stopping emails originating from specified addresses or remove messages with specific subject lines. More deceitful and sophisticated techniques such as utilising arbitrary sender addresses and/or inserting haphazard characters to the beginning or the end of the message subject line are now been used by spammers to surmount the hurdle posed by the filtering methods [9]. Owing to the fact that a good number of real-world filters make use of the amalgamation of ML and application-specific knowledge in the form of hand-coded rules, comprehending the revolutionising attributes of spam is also germane, and many studies have been done on this subject [14,15]. However, in spite of the increasing research efforts on spam filtering, the growth of spam emails is still on alarming rate. This is evident with spammers devising more sophisticated methods for dodging detection, a very good example are emails with stego images (i.e. images with information hidden inside).
The two common approaches used for filtering spam mails are knowledge engineering and machine learning. Emails are classified as either spam or ham using a set of rules in knowledge engineering. The person using the filter, or the software company that stipulates a specific rule-based spam-filtering tool must create a set of rules. Using this method does not guarantee efficient result since there is need to continually update the rules. This can lead to time wastage and it is not suitable especially for naive users. Machine learning approach have proved to be more efficient than knowledge engineering approach. No rule is required to be specified, rather a set of training samples which are pre-classified email messages are provided. A particular machine learning algorithm is then used to learn the classification rules from these email messages [16]. Several studies have been carried out on machine learning techniques and many of these algorithms are being applied in the field of email spam filtering. Examples of such algorithms include Deep Learning, Naïve Bayes, Support Vector Machines, Neural Networks, K-Nearest Neighbour, Rough sets, and Random Forests. The contributions of this work are given as follows:
a.We did a comprehensive evolutionary survey of the most important features of email spam, the evolution and developments. Through this, we highlighted some interesting research gaps and research directions.b.We discussed the architectures of spam filters and the application of ML techniques to spam filtering process of Gmail, Yahoo mail and Outlook mail. The different components of the email spam filter were vividly discussed.c.We presented an elaborate study of several techniques applied to email spam filtering and presented a phenomenal review of literatures on spam email filtering over the period (2004–2018).d.We exposed researchers to some powerful machine learning algorithms that are not yet explored in spam filtering.e.We stated in clear terms our findings on some open research problems in relation to spam filtering and recommended proactive steps for the development of machine learning techniques to curb future evolving of new variants of spam that might find it easy to evade filters.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a succinct account of previous reviews, Section 3 is the background discussion, Section 4 describes the performance measures for evaluating the effectiveness of spam filters, Section 5 explains the machine learning algorithms that have found application in spam filtering, Section 6 is the comparative studies of existing machine learning techniques used in spam filtering, Section 7 unveils open research problems in machine learning for spam filtering and future direction before concluding in Section 8.
To increase the readability of the manuscript and also enhance the understanding of the readers, the structure of this paper is depicted in Fig. 2 below:Download : Download high-res image (641KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Pictorial Representation of the Structure of this paper.
