Today, the additive manufacturing industry is enjoying a boom and the potential impact of AM in the coming years is enormous. The direct market for AM is expected to be $20 billion by 2020 (McKinsey) [[1]]. By 2025 the overall economic impact created by AM is expected to be much higher; reaching $100 billion to $250 billion if the industrial implementation continues at the current rate. However, one of the bottlenecks in the adoption of AM is the lack of good tools for design and simulation that address AM directly.
AM is a true born child of digitalization that combines aspects of mathematics, material science, computational sciences and process planning. The ISO/ASTM 5290 [[2]] standard defines additive manufacturing (AM) as a process of joining material to make parts from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer, as opposed to subtractive manufacturing and formative manufacturing technologies.
The mathematical and computational communities have until recent years paid little attention to AM, and consequently AM technology and research have been addressed mainly from the perspectives of manufacturing and material research. A consequence of this is that the mathematical approaches of Computer Aided Geometric Design (CAGD) from the 1980s still dominate AM, as described in Section 2. In Section 3 we recap univariate B-splines space and tensor product B-splines and use this in Section 4 to address spline spaces spanned by collections of tensor product B-splines. Then (Truncated) Hierarchical B-splines, T-splines and LR B-splines are compared in Section 5. In Section 6 we consider how these novel spline representations can be used in ISO 10303 STEP. The applicability of IGA for analysis based design is discussed in Section 7, and an example of block structured and trimmed IGA provided. How to detrim these models for quadrature is addressed in Section 8. In Section 9 we address why the approaches outlined in the other sections are not sufficient for the representation of lattice structures.
