In medicine, improving the quality of healthcare can be better defined by the driving forces that affect it, including healthcare data; in other words, in any patient-centered quality improvement program, the data are counted as the center of that program [1]. Extracting knowledge from the data associated with medical records by using the data mining process can lead to the identification of the laws governing the creation, growth, and acceleration of illnesses, and provide valuable information to identify the causes of disease diagnosis and treatment according to the environmental factors prevailing in healthcare.
Data mining methods can be used for identifying disease in discovering the knowledge process. Hence, data mining can discover hidden relationships, trends, and patterns among data, leading to the enhancement of the accurate identification of the disease [2]. The concept of Knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) is a basis including theories and methods used to extract knowledge from data. KDD includes a five step process (selection, preprocessing, transformation, data mining, and interpretation/evaluation) as demonstrated in Fig. 1 [3].Download : Download high-res image (182KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The five steps of KDD [3].
Since the case study of this paper is a diagnosis of liver disease, we explain as follows. The liver is the second most significant internal organ in the human body, playing a significant role in metabolism and serving several vital functions, e.g. decomposition of red blood cells [4]. Usually, more than 75% or three-quarters of liver tissue needs to be affected before a decrease in function occurs. Between 1999 and 2016, fatalities from cirrhosis incremented by 65% to 34174 in the United States, while deaths from hepatocellular carcinoma doubled to more than 11073, according to findings published in the British Medical Journal [5]. Only a segment of Asia-Pacific Islanders observed a recuperation in the annual death rate from hepatocellular carcinoma per year. An increment in the fatality rate from cirrhosis was more significant for Native Americans. Young people (25–34 years old) experienced the highest average annual increase in cirrhosis-related deaths, which was driven by alcohol-related liver disease. The United States in the South and West exhibited a sudden increase in annual deaths from cirrhosis [5]. There are specific factors for the emergence of liver disease, the most significant of which are a family history of liver disease, smoking, alcohol consumption, obesity, and diabetes [6]. Predictive and descriptive models are applied to medical data mining as data mining techniques [7].
Medical imaging is used to diagnose liver disease, such a Sonography, CT scan, and MRI. These tools are associated with some harmful effects and high costs. Hence, researchers have proposed methods to replace imaging devices in the diagnosis of disease, the most discussed of which is data mining.
The purpose of this study is based on the proposed data mining process called extraction, loading, transformation and analysis (ELTA) to compare multiple prediction models for liver disease incidence. In this study, five widely-used data mining classification models: Random Forest, MLP-Neural Network, Bayesian network, SVM and PSO-SVM, along with a 10-fold cross-validation method, were compared. Accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, (ROC, receiver operating characteristic) namely (AUC, the area under the curve), F-measure, FPR, and precision were used to evaluate them. Since the primary purpose of this study is to select the significant features of liver disease, the authors compared different models regarding the selection of features.
The remaining portions of the paper are organized as follows: The present study expresses the required background information in Section 2. Related works discussed in Section 3. The proposed methodology is presented in Section 4. In Section 5, the performance of the models is evaluated and analyzed. Section 6 represents the results of the experiment. Finally, Sections 7 Results and discussion, 8 Conclusion and future works present findings of the research and the conclusions, namely “Results and Discussionˮ and “Conclusion and Future worksˮ, respectively.
