The growth of blended wines is currently being observed in traditional wine-producing countries. From the data [1], the actual sales figures for this category of wines indicate a significant coverage of the wine market. To improve quality and achieve the desired sensory perception, many researchers are experimenting with blending different base wines in certain proportions [2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
The labour intensity of blending is due to the great number of possible variations of base wines proportions; mathematically, their number cannot be measured by a finite number; there are infinite variations. However, sensory wine qualities are the result of the influence of numerous compounds with different perception thresholds that determine how their consumer properties interact with each other [7]. Currently, many winemakers use mathematical and statistical methods, including those implemented in application packages, to compose blends with the best sensory qualities.
Hopfer H. et al. [2] produced 11 mixtures of two wines and four mixtures of three wines to study the changes in their sensory perception using descriptive analysis of three varietal wines (Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Cabernet Frank). In addition, they carried out chemical analyses to assess the possible correspondence of sensory perception of wine mixtures to the measured chemical parameters. Using canonical discriminant analysis (CDA), multi-dimensional and one-dimensional variance analysis (MANOVA and ANOVA), and correlation analysis for each type of wine and the mixture components, they analysed the taste, olfactory and visual indicators, sampling assessments and chemical analysis results. The comparison of all datasets showed that the overall results of sensory and chemical analyses were in satisfactory agreement, but the most representative were the results obtained using descriptive analysis. Vismara P. et al. [3] described a decision support system to create a wine blend by mixing base wines while optimizing the content of the chemical compounds that influence the sensory characteristics of wine. The optimization model was based on disjunctive constraints that can be constructed by Boolean variables. Dooley L. et al. [5] used experiment planning, namely, the analysis of mixtures making up blending wines (Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Zinfandel), to optimize the wine composition to satisfy consumers' tastes. A linear model of simplex-centroid plans for mixtures designs was used. The main correlations were revealed between compositional and colour data in comparison with sensory or consumer assessments. Dooley L. et al., in another publication [6], used the mixture designs and triangular surfaces method to create a blend of Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Zinfandel wines. After 12 months of blending storage, colour, chemical composition and anthocyanin content were examined. The sensory assessment showed that blending light wine with saturated wine positively influenced its perception by the consumer. Ghanem E. et al. [8] examined 15 wine mixtures based on Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Cabernet Frank to create a sensory assessment prediction model for two- and three-component mixtures using discriminant, correlation and regression analyses. The results of the sensory evaluation and the content of tannins in the test samples were chosen as the criteria for blend quality. Cross-checking the results allowed a quantitative prognostic model of red wine composition to be proposed. Applying various methods of making blends based on three varietal wines — Muscat Bailey A, Gerbongand and Campbell — using the method of numerical and graphical optimization, the authors [4] suggested that the composition of 11.1% Gerbong, 48.9% Campbell and 40.0% Muscat Bailey A had the best sensory result. Wine quality criteria in this work were taste preferences, colour and total content of polyphenols.
Numerous aspects determine the quality of wines, such as their sensory properties or micro-element compositions, which makes them difficult to objectively assess. Therefore, work devoted to the use of probability and statistical models implemented in statistical packages to assess the quality of wine products [9, 10, 11, 12, 13] are typical. Zoecklein B.W. et al. [9] assessed the ability of two electron nose systems (conductive polymer and surface acoustic wave) to differentiate the volatile substances of Cabernet Frank and Merlot wines after spraying the vineyard with a 5% aqueous solution of ethanol using CDA, ANOVA and principal component analysis (PCA). Hopfer H. et al. [10] presented data on the chemical and sensory analysis of 27 different samples of Californian Cabernet Sauvignon wine of different quality categories based on the relationships between wine characteristics and their sensory assessment, analysed using ANOVA and PCA. Cadota Y. et al. [11] performed a comparative analysis of the sensory assessment of 24 Cabernet Frank wine samples using two groups of taster, one group for those who did not work in the wine industry and the other for wine specialists, using a wide range of statistical procedures (quantitative descriptive analysis, ANOVA, PCA and correlation analysis).
In other studies [12, 13, 14, 15, 16], various mathematical optimization methods, such as experimental planning, regression, nonlinear models realized through neural networks and linear programming models, were applied to study blending procedures. From some papers [17, 18], we studied different approaches to evaluate wine quality using statistical methods implemented in the STATISTICA package [19]. A wide-range of methods included in this package were considered: multiple regression, CDA, the general linear model, item analysis, table cross tabulation, correspondence analysis, cluster analysis and logit regression. All things considered, the modern methods of statistical data analysis are highly effective in creating blended wines with the best qualities.
This research considers the mixture design and triangular surfaces method implemented with the STATISTICA package to formulate the Zvezda Kubani blended wine produced from the varietal wines grown in the Kuban region using their sensory properties as quality criterion.
