The spatial resolution of the multichannel electroencephalogram (EEG) is low due to the volume conduction [1]. In other words, each EEG electrode records the mixture of signals coming from different parts of the head. Nunez et al [2] showed by a simulation study that only half of the signal recorded by an electrode is related to the sources within its 3 cm radius. This problem is more important in the motor imagery-based brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), because the sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) is weak, and there are some powerful activities in the same frequency band, such as visual activities and movement artefacts [3].
Many efforts have been made to overcome this problem, and one of the most successful and widely used approaches is the surface Laplacian. In the surface Laplacian method, the second spatial derivative of the scalp potentials is calculated for each electrode. Therefore, the surface Laplacian is a high-pass spatial filter that emphasizes the local activities [4] and reduces the effects of volume conduction [5,2].
The surface Laplacian originated from works of Hjorth [6], and several research groups improved it in terms of theory and mathematics. It is a popular preprocessing method that shows a significant improvement in the performance of the motor imagery-based BCI systems [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]].
Hjorth [6] proposed the finite difference method to approximate the surface Laplacian of the scalp potentials. In this method, the EEG signal of the desired electrode is referenced to the mean potentials of four orthogonal surrounding electrodes. The finite difference method is widely used due to its good performance and ease of implementation. It can be calculated in two ways, using the nearest-neighbour electrodes (small Laplacian) or the next-nearest-neighbour electrodes (large Laplacian) [4].
Finite difference Laplacian is based on two main assumptions: EEG electrodes are equidistant, and the surface of the scalp around each electrode is almost flat. These assumptions restrict its usage in some electrode configurations; therefore, some techniques have been developed to break free from these restrictions, and the spherical spline is one of the most popular approaches [15,16]. However, it has more theoretical and computational complexity than the finite difference.
The common average referencing (CAR) is another method that reduces the undesirable components of the EEG. In the CAR, each electrode is referenced to the average potential of all electrodes. It reduces the noise and artefact components and improves the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [17], thereby enhancing the BCI performance.
The present paper introduces a new technique, namely the local activities estimation (LAE). In the LAE method, the local potential of an EEG electrode is defined as the potential created by sources close to that electrode, and the potential recorded by an EEG electrode is approximated by a weighted summation of all electrodes' local values. In this method, we estimate the local values by using known EEG recorded values. The LAE emphasizes the local activities and reduces the undesirable EEG components. Therefore, it improves the spatial resolution of the EEG and as a result, improves the performance of the BCI system.
The goal of this study is to propose a feasible and reliable preprocessing method that improves the performance of the motor imagery-based BCI system to a level better than that of the well-known surface Laplacian methods, as well as lacking the disadvantages of the finite difference Laplacian and spherical spline Laplacian.
In the finite difference method, it is not so clear whether the use of the small Laplacian is better or the large Laplacian, for a particular subject. In addition, small Laplacian in an EEG configuration may be equal to large Laplacian in another configuration. Furthermore, the selecting of the neighbour electrodes that are involved in the finite difference estimation must be done by visual inspection, and there exist different formulas for central and border electrodes.
The spline Laplacian method removes some restrictions of finite difference Laplacian. However, it has its own drawbacks. In contrast to the finite difference Laplacian, spline Laplacian involves complicated mathematics. Therefore, it is less accessible in terms of required mathematical skills.
The performance of the spline Laplacian is highly affected by two parameters m and λ. Nevertheless, there is no specific method for choosing the best m in a BCI system. Although, λ can be selected by using the generalized cross-validation function (GCV), but it may not be the best choice in a motor imagery-based BCI.
In this paper, we have shown that our proposed method does not have such drawbacks. We compared the performance of the LAE with the finite difference Laplacian (small Laplacian and large Laplacian), the spherical spline Laplacian, and the CAR, using the 32-channel and 59-channel motor imagery data from the publicly available BCI competition datasets. Our results confirm the superiority of LAE over the other methods.
