Plant diseases are one of the most primary reasons for plant destruction. The precise detection of diseases in plants could help to recommend an early treatment strategy and substantially prevent the spread of diseases, which is of great significance to the reduction of economic losses. Recently, automatic plant disease diagnosis and severity estimation based on visible range images play an important role in agriculture, which have received considerable attention in the past two decades.
Computer Vision and Image Processing (CVIP) has previously been used in a wide variety of diagnosis applications in agriculture such as plant species classification, leaf disease recognition, and plant disease severity estimation. Husin et al. (2012) proposed a number of techniques based on image processing for the early detection of plant chili disease and recognition of plant healthiness. Support Vector Machine (SVM), as a supervised learning method, has also been successfully applied to classification problem for weeds and corps (Ahmed et al., 2012, Tellaeche et al., 2011). Mónica et al. (2014) proposed an approach for segmenting and classifying scanned legume leaves based only on the study of veins. Munisami et al. (2015) identified plants by using shape features and color histogram with K-nearest Neighbour (KNN) Classifiers.
Deep Learning (DL) has brought significant breakthroughs in bioinformatics, machine vision detection, automatic speech recognition, medical image analysis, etc. Nowadays, the plant classification problem that addressed by traditional machine vision may benefit from the development of deep learning approaches. A wide variety of approaches such as the plant classification and retrieval have been continually proposed by using primitive image descriptors, including leaf shape (Agarwal et al., 2006, Camargo Neto et al., 2006, Du et al., 2007, Chaki and Parekh, 2012, Im et al., 1998, Solé-Casals et al., 2008), leaf color (Horgan et al., 1998, Perez et al., 2000) and leaf texture (Golzarian and Frick, 2011, Bama et al., 2011).
Due to complexity and phytopathological problems in plant disease diagnoses, deep learning, as a novel approach, was widely applied. Amanda et al. (2017) have achieved considerable success in addressing cassava disease diagnoses using deep learning. Lu et al. (2007) proposed a technique to enhance the identification ability of CNNs, which can effectively classify 10 rice diseases through deep convolution neural networks. A similar approach was also developed by Ferentinos (2018) to recognize and diagnose plant diseases based on simple leave images of healthy and diseased crops. Fuentes et al. (2017) introduced a practical and applicable solution based on a robust CNNs-based detector for real-time recognition of diseases and pests of tomato plants.
Although the existing techniques for the detection and diagnosis of plant diseases are valid, they are not useful when dealing with the estimation in plant disease severity. Wang et al., 2017a, Wang et al., 2017b annotated the apple healthy and black rot images in the public Plant Village dataset (2014) with severity labels. However, they only identified the degree of disease in a single species. Therefore, these methods are not suitable for simultaneous disease diagnosis and severity estimation of plant.
To the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of any work that focuses on the development of the multi-function diagnosis system with capabilities of plant species recognition, disease classification, and disease severity estimation. To remove these research gaps a new methodology for multi-function computer-aided diagnosis system of plant leaf diseases has been proposed. Particularly, a superior architecture, automatic image-based Plant Disease Diagnosis and Severity Estimation Network (PD2SE-Net), combined with residual structures (He et al., 2016) and shuffle units (Ma et al., 2018a, Ma et al., 2018b) was established. The proposed approach has three major contributions compared to the existing methods as follows.
(1)It is a network-based end-to-end trainable multi-function classification diagnosis system, whereas most of the existing techniques focus on single diagnosis task.(2)The network structures of Shuffle-Net-v2 are used to reduce the computational complexity.(3)The channel shuffle-v2 operation is employed in every residual block to enable information communicate among channels.
