Wherever two poorly miscible liquids must be mixed intensively in a first step and separated from each other in a second step, the question to be answered is: “Which equipment is appropriate?”. However, since the selection of equipment is generally based on and justified by specific operation characteristics, the detailed understanding of the fluid dynamic plays a major role in research. A special kind of apparatus with several challenges in clarifying the operation characteristic is the Annular Centrifugal Contactor/Extractor (ACC/E). The ACC/E enables an intensive mixing and subsequent separation of two liquids by a centrifugal force field in one device due to a very complex interaction of internal flow pattern. Computed tomography as a non-invasive measurement technique is commonly used for phase distribution visualization in process equipment like structured packings (Hoffmann and Kögl, 2017, Schug and Arlt, 2017), fluidized beds (Koeninger et al., 2018) and packed liquid–liquid-extraction columns (Kögl and Arlt, 2017). Therefor 3D computed tomography is a promising approach to gain more information about the internal flow patterns inside an ACC/E.
The initial Centrifugal Contactor/Extractor (CC/E) was developed by the Savannah River Laboratory (SRL) and published in a research and development paper (Webster et al., 1962). In additional work, researchers from the Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) evolved the SRL CC/E to its present coaxial cylindrical design — the Annular CC/E (Bernstein et al., 1978).
Clarifying the geometric design and its complex operation functionality, a design scheme of the ANL ACC/E is given in Fig. 1. Furthermore, the state of the art regarding experimental and simulation work is presented to rank the impact of this contribution.Download : Download high-res image (647KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Scheme of the ANL ACC/E design (Leonard, 1982) (colored for this work); square detail (d0) shows the radial positions of the light phase (LP) and the heavy phase (HP), the weir radius rHP, the radius of the interfaces gas/LP rLP* and gas/HP rHP* as well as the phase boundary LP/HP rPB*, further the rotor radius (dark gray) and stator radius (light gray) are visualized; circled details show the inlet and outlet flows (d1 and d2), the gap between mixing and separating zone (d3) as well as the transition flow between housing and rotor (d4 and d5), HP is colored in red, LP in blue and dispersion in green; supplementary, the positions of the X-ray source and the line detector of the CT are shown for two different time steps. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
1.1. Operation of Annular Centrifugal Contactor/Extractor (ACC/E)The ACC/E is split in three major zones, Fig. 1. The mixing zone is subdivided in the inlet region, the annular region and the bottom region. Further, the settling zone includes the inlet region, the settling region and the weir region and finally, the separation zone which consists of the collector region and the outlet region. The liquid–liquid system is shown by red colored heavy phase (HP) and blue colored light phase (LP), the dispersion is colored in green.Since the ACC/E is a non-self-priming equipment, both liquids are pumped into the mixing region by separate inlets (arrows in Fig. 1). In the shown ACC/E design, a free liquid flow towards atmospheric pressure and gas exchange (detail d1 in Fig. 1) is possible by vented pipes. Furthermore, an internal gas exchange between the mixing and separation zone (detail d3 in Fig. 1) is also possible. After both liquids flow inside the annular gap between the coaxially arranged rotor and stator, the dispersion process takes place. Due to the rotation and relative motion of the rotor as well as based on chemo-physical properties, energy is dissipated into the liquid and consequently the liquids are mixed. After mixing, the dispersion flows into the bottom region of the mixing zone. To transport the dispersion against the centrifugal field into the rotor of the ACC/E, an impeller structure is placed within the bottom. Within the rotor inlet region, a fixed baffle and a diverter disk with a centric hole are located. Both are necessary for a fast acceleration of the dispersed inlet flow. Thus, the liquids are hurled outward by centrifugal force. The liquid flow from the mixing into the settling zone is decoupled and a hole in the center of the diverter disk enables gas exchange (detail d4 in Fig. 1).After acceleration, the dispersion flows over the diverter disk into the settling region where the phase separation takes place. At the top of the rotor zone, the weir region (detail d0 in Fig. 1) enables the separation of both liquids by a syphon principle. Finally, the liquids are propelled outwards and are collected by the collector ring (detail d5 in Fig. 1) from where they flow through the outlets (detail d2 in Fig. 1).
1.2. Experimental and simulation workThe state of the art in research and design of ACC/E can be split into an experimental and a simulation part. While the experimental part is focused on empirical correlations, the simulation part deals with detailed and complex Computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations. Despite all efforts, the operating ACC/E was not visually accessible and thus, the validation of flow simulations was not possible until date. While visual access into the mixing zone is partially possible by using transparent housing, the rotor zone remained a black box system because direct visual access is not possible.Investigations regarding the performance of different lab scale and technical scale ACC/E and their design rules focus on the fluid dynamic behavior by phase entrainment experiments Leonard, 1982, Leonard, 1987, Birdwell and Anderson, 2001, Birdwell et al., 2006, Meikrantz et al., 2002, Duan et al., 2005, Klasson et al., 2005, Meikrantz et al., 2005, Meikrantz et al., 2007b, Meikrantz et al., 2007a, He, 2008, Duan et al., 2009, Cao et al., 2013, Kumar and Mudali, 2013, Xu et al., 2013; Svn Ayyappa et al., 2014; Mandal et al., 2015, Duan et al., 2018). A further experimental method applied for ACC/E operation characterization is the so-called Liquid-(Fast)-Separation Method. This method is based on a (simultaneous) switch-off and rotor lift-up, followed by volumetric measurement of both phases (Schuur et al., 2012, Duan and Cao, 2015). From those investigations, various empirical correlations using geometric ACC/E parameters and chemo-physical liquid properties were derived. Further the Sauter mean diameter of the disperse phase within the mixing zone are measured by phase doppler particle analyzer (PDPA) or laser fluorescence (LF) (Leonard, 1982, Leonard, 1987, Arafat et al., 2002, Kadam et al., 2008, Kadam et al., 2009, Tamhane et al., 2012b, Wyatt et al., 2013). Furthermore, the so-called dimensionless “Dispersion Number” was developed, correlating the centrifugal acceleration to the necessary residence time for settling, and thus predicting the separation capacity of the rotor zone (Leonard et al., 1981). Additionally, this correlation was modified by including ACC/E geometric parameters (Kadam et al., 2008, Kadam et al., 2009). Since the interfacial position of separated liquids within the rotor is defined by pressure balance and thus by the centrifugal force, it acts quite sensitive when the flow over the weir varies. Thus, an empirical correlation was considered to take the overflow height into account (Fumoto and Kiyose, 1980, Leonard et al., 1980). A comprehensive summary of the fundamental state of the art of ACC/E is given within a review paper (Vedantam and Joshi, 2006). The article focuses mainly on the fundamental basics within the single-phase filled annular gap.A first simulation approach that focused on the impact of rotation speed and volume flow on the flow pattern within a rotor system shows no classic settling behavior, nor the generation of a dispersion wedge or dispersion band (Padial-Collins et al., 2006). CFD simulation studies of ACC/E started with single-liquid flow inside the mixing zone. Particle tracking methods (PIV) and laser doppler velocimetry (LDV), were used for optical validation (Wardle et al., 2006, Deshmukh et al., 2007). A chemical reaction method for the determination was also used for liquid/liquid-interface prediction (Schuur et al., 2008). Additionally, the free gas/liquid surface flow was focused on and LDV was used for validation of velocity data by vector measurements (Wardle et al., 2008, Wang et al., 2013). The effect of impeller design on the liquid flow within the mixing region was also analyzed by single-phase simulation (Wardle et al., 2009a, Wardle et al., 2009b). Based on these simulations, a hybrid multiphase liquid/liquid/gas flow CFD study was performed and presented (Wardle, 2013b). With that simulation, the prediction of droplet distribution was possible (Wardle and Weller, 2013). For more detailed validation of CFD simulation the electrical resistance tomography (ERT) method was developed and implemented within the mixing zone (Wardle, 2011b, Wardle, 2013a, Wardle, 2013c, Wardle, 2015). Furthermore, CFD simulations were used as a tool for the investigation of geometric variations and for operation optimization, e.g. radial and helical baffles which inhibit the back-mixing effect within the annular gap were investigated (Deshmukh et al., 2008, Deshmukh et al., 2009, Tamhane et al., 2012a, Tamhane et al., 2014).Another gas/liquid multiphase simulation focused on the coupled liquid flow between mixing and rotor region. Non-validated CFD results for the liquid jet into the rotor zone, and a geometric variation of the upper weir were given (Wardle et al., 2009c, Wardle, 2011a, Gandhir and Wardle, 2012). For more detailed information an extended summary of CFD work is given in literature (Vedantam et al., 2012). Based on the simulation results, experiential investigation of the inlet pressure into the rotor zone were performed to understand operational performance in more detail (Wardle et al., 2009b). Furthermore, the influence of open and sealed inlets was investigated (Li et al., 2012). Qualitative three-dimensional flow simulations for single-phase operation, visualizing streamlines within the rotor, axial and tangential velocity profiles and radial pressure profiles were shown (Patra et al., 2013). Based on this simulation, a detection of the flow field within the rotor was realized by PIV (Xu et al., 2015). A detailed work focusing on the impact of centrifugal acceleration on separation kinetic was given by batch settling experiments. Therefore, a stirred centrifugal batch settling cell was developed (Eggert et al., 2016, Eggert et al., 2017).Based on the work that is presented in literature so far, it is evident that there is no detailed understanding of the complete ACC/E operation performance. Nevertheless, one major aspect that was concluded in most of the CFD work is the lack of useful 3D resolved phase distribution data for detailed model validation. While many publications deal with the mixing zone and detailed CFD simulations, the rotor zone remains a black box. Driven by the lack of data on the rotor zone, this work contributes to the understanding of the mixing and the rotor zone and especially their interaction by resolving the three-dimensional liquid distribution.
