The advances in computational design and digital fabrication occurred in the last years as well as the increasing theoretical framework of Parametric Architecture [1] introduce a new perspective for prefab architecture. Concepts such as Smart Manufacturing [2], Virtual Prototyping [3], Design [4] and Building Automation [5] are rapidly reshaping the relationship between architecture and industrial production allowing the designer to radically rethink the notion of the manufactured house beyond the conventional methodology followed by designers of mass housing in the last century [6].
New methods of collaboration and process development—i.e., Computational Design [7], Parametric Design [8] and Building Information Modeling (BIM) [9]—are supporting the file-to-factory process with an environment that involves interdisciplinary collaborations and higher levels of integration in the construction of personalized architecture [10]. The capability to automate both design and manufacturing process by using algorithms and the possibility to handle a heterogeneous and significant amount of information to optimize these processes highlight the potential of a conscious integration of Information Technology in the Building Industry, especially in the emerging context of Industry 4.0 [11].
Within a wider research program developed by the Automatic Drawing Lab at the University of Perugia in the field of generative [12,13] and digital wood design [14], the project presented in this paper is the result of a research agreement with the Italian start-up Abitare+ involved in wood construction. As an innovation strategy, the company was interested in enriching its personalization proposal through cutting-edge technologies such as parametric design and digital fabrication. The research proposes an integrated design and production process based on mass-customization developing a web-based user interface directed mainly to technicians and specialists in the field of wood construction but also useful as a dissemination tool for students and researchers.
The concept of mass customization has emerged in recent years as a mainstream research topic [15]. It is combining the highly controversial objectives of individualization and cost-efficient production and allows maximum flexibility producing products with a reasonable cost structure [16]. Given the high amount of customized work content in the Building Industry, mass-customization emerges as an effective alternative to current prefabrication and standardization strategies. However, unlike other Industries, that after the 1970s have emulated the automotive industry by gradually adopting lean production and moving toward mass customization, the building industry has been slow in adopting this new paradigm [17].
With the aim of using this model in the housing market, several projects have proposed processes to provide mass-customized housing based on computer-aided design and production systems. In this field, Japan is taking the lead as the most advanced and industrialized fabrication system in the world [18]. While in the US, where only 28% of the houses have direct involvement with an architect or licensed design professional [19], several research projects have been developed, focusing mainly on shape grammar and computational design. In this context, of particular interest is the work developed by J. Duarte for Alvaro Siza's Quinta da Malagueira housing estate [20], or for Manuel Gausa's ABC design system [21]. Another example is the Housing Agency System (HAS) developed at the University of California - Berkley [22], with a similar intent to provide an integrated system for mass-customized housing. What is common in this projects is the use of automated design systems, performance-based optimization processes [23], and user interfaces as decision support systems.
Parametric design combines perfectly with the concept of mass-customization, by enabling the creative exploration of design space by varying parameters and their relationship [24]. Indeed, with the windward of digital representation, the algorithm becomes a tool to configure, rather than a statical morphology, a generative model characterized by diversity and thus by adaptive behavior. The “algorithm of the line” [25] which is at the base of canonical representation, in the digital realm is replaced by an algorithm that, in principle, can construct “any conceivable network of relations between a given set of element attribute” [26].
If the digital revolution shifted the attention from models to visualization, then parametric design allows regaining possession of the infinite potential and heuristic dynamic of the model [27,28]. “Generative design systems have the capability of maintaining stylistic coherence and design identity while generating different designs” [29]. What is shown is a set of forms that are “intelligible because its members show a common order arising from the operation of the same generative principles”[30]. The extrapolation of logical connections in the construction of the form is based on the individuation of relations and dependencies [31], reflecting the cognitive mechanism underlying the creative process, which works by establishing interrelations rather than adding information [32]. In this context, the representation through node-based diagrams changes the approach to the project. The parameters and their relationships become the code for a new architecture language [33], and since the logical path represents the essential core of the model, this cannot be considered a simple connection between algorithms or software, as architecture is not the simple overlap of materials.
Computers give the possibility to express parameters and their relations through a set of (self-correcting) routines. This design approach opens to optimization and form-finding strategies used to explore different design solutions and find optimal ones. In this context, multi-objective optimization (MOO) has been demonstrated to adequately account for designer needs and guide them toward high performing solutions early in the design process. In architectural design, it is useful to consider a variety of design objectives, including structural efficiency, total energy usage, and aesthetic expression [34]. In this sense, through tools such as evolutionary algorithms, it is possible to exploit the computational capability of digital tools, working not only on one parameter at the time, with the goal of improving a single aspect of a building, but on multiple parameters simultaneously. For this reason, the development of evolutionary strategies for construction issues becomes the expression of the use of Artificial Intelligence in the digital representation introducing a new design paradigm.
Currently, there is a lack of easy-to-use and efficient tools that might help architects to explore design alternatives. However, the combination of data visualization and catalog presentation has become an effective way to enhance the decision-making process in architectural design [35]. Furthermore, design space catalogs, which present a collection of different options for selection by a human designer, have become commonplace in architecture [36]. Significant examples are the catalog built by Heinz Isler for his concrete shells [37] or the design space created by Greg Lynn for his Embryological house [38]. The need of representing processes and high dimensional design spaces emerged with parametric modeling, and multi-objective optimization triggered multidisciplinary research concerned with Big Data analysis and visualization.
This approach to design is made possible only by a new industrial model based on modern Computer Aided Manufacturing techniques. Indeed while generative systems allow the designer to visualize thousands of design options, the assembly line allows creating thousands of variations of the same product [39]. Developing a direct link between what can be designed, and what can be built, it is possible to go beyond the limitations imposed by mass-production, reaching, like in the automobile and the aeronautics industries, a design-driven manufacture process that provides the designer with a high degree of freedom [40].
The new paradigm of digital tectonics [41] is developing the coincidence between geometric representations of structuring and the program to modulate them [42] and since “fabrication is not a modeling technique, but a revolution in the making of architecture” [43] we are living in a cultural revolution. Beyond the Digital Era that started during the 1980s with information, and communication technology (ICT), personal computers and the internet, we are currently experiencing what is considered the fourth industrial revolution [44], namely Industry 4.0. After 2011, when this term was coined by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, European countries announced their Industry 4.0 strategy; which is leading to the development of technology roadmaps and research agendas [45]. This industrial era is characterized by emerging technology such as robotics, artificial intelligence, Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing and biotechnology, it is based on advances in communication and connectivity between people, machines and data, fostering interoperability and collaboration to optimize costs and performances.
The Building Industry can greatly improve its efficiency by embracing Industry 4.0. Indeed, in the field of wood construction, characterized by a strong component of innovation with regard to manufacturing, there is a low degree of collaboration between designers and production companies. Therefore, usually, the optimization process begins only once the design has been conceived, and the main features of a building have been defined. Contra, in the early stage of design, the use of information related to construction cost and energy management can guide the decision-making process and result in considerable savings. In this sense, this paper moves toward a data-driven approach proposing a research and development method that combines generative principles and digital fabrication.
Looking forward to an integrated process that considers all the phases of a project from design to construction and management, the research aims to define a collaborative strategy between designers, manufacturing and construction companies. This can be done through the construction of models able to synthesize and simplify the complexity of a process that involves a multitude of figures and disciplines, fastened together by an organic system of relations which can be clarified through algorithm-aided design and parametric thinking. In defining this design approach, representation techniques have a central role as a mean to codify a common language between disciplines.
