With a collective knowledge gained over many years, comprised of considerable education, training and casework experience, we have witnessed extensive and profound change within the forensic science profession. Much of this has been beneficial to our field, however some of these same changes have had unintended consequences. Certain advances technologically have allowed casework scientists the ability to obtain information to a level previously unobtainable. The advent of modern day DNA technology, as an example, can in most respects be considered a boon for our profession. Other advancements in chemical instrumentation and analytical techniques allow us to obtain levels of evidentiary information not dreamed of just a few decades ago. We have often said that we have been extremely lucky to have come of “forensic age” during this explosion in technology.
Much has been learned by observing the introduction of DNA analysis stumble through many of its early iterations and attempts as a casework testing procedure. Unfortunately the passage of time dims memory, and many newer criminalists may not be aware of cases such as the Castro case [1]. In this instance the court DID NOT allow the associative DNA results obtained by what was then Lifecodes Corporation, in as evidence. Judge J. Scheindlin, in a Bronx, NY courtroom, rather than making a perfunctory decision about admission or exclusion, he wisely brought together opposing experts to come to a consensus on the scientific validity of the evidence. The experts concluded that there was insufficient supporting data, as well as a lack of appropriate testing controls, to establish the technique as reliable enough to associate a defendant as the source of the material. Judge Scheindlin did allow for analytical results that exculpated a source. He thus avoided a situation where testing results obtained from a poorly defined methodology could falsely incriminate an individual. In the realm of error types (Type I false inclusion and Type II false exclusion) and their classifications, this would prevent a “Type 1” error from occurring; an instance where an innocent individual is implicated for something he/she did not do. It was only after enduring these kinds of growing pains that this particular methodology did attain such widespread general acceptance, now being considered by some to be the “gold standard” of forensic evidence. It is unfortunate that the practice of bringing experts together to reach a consensus with respect to the reliability and relevance of forensic evidence is not seen as a general model to be emulated within the adversary system. This consensus cited in the Castro case above demonstrated its superior effectiveness at providing the courts with the best evidence in an adversary system. This case has also served as the impetus for the implementation of sound and validated lab procedures. Inexplicably, it has not contributed toward the desired scientific consensus seeking approach toward evidence interpretation and reporting.
