The security of systems and data, and their protection from attacks and other compromise, has been an issue for as long as IT systems have existed. However, thanks to the growth of the Internet and surrounding technologies, cybersecurity has gained increasing recognition as a key topic in the context of IT, as well as a critical requirement for businesses and other organisations. It is consequently supported by a rich landscape of professional certifications, and an increasing range of academic qualifications specialising in the area.
In parallel with this, we are now seeing a maturation of cybersecurity as a profession – with the emergence of the Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (Newhouse et al., 2017) in the United States and the Chartered Institute of Information Security1 in the UK being two specific indicators of the seriousness with which it is taken. In terms of the breadth of the profession it is worth recognising that cybersecurity covers a broad spectrum of skills, spanning both technical and non-technical elements (e.g. from network security and forensics through to policy and organisational security culture). Qualifications and certifications can be found that represent the both broad and narrow perspectives within this, but it is important to recognise that a holistic overall approach requires skills across the spectrum (Furnell and Bishop, 2020). It is also worth acknowledging that contributions to cybersecurity can be made from a multidisciplinary perspective, with clear links and relevant input to be drawn from areas as diverse as business, education, law, and psychology. At the same time, however, it is recognised that the primary discipline base of the topic resides within the related disciplines of information technology and information systems, and it is consequently this perspective that forms the basis of the current paper.
Looking at the related demand, there is no sector that does not need cybersecurity, and by association no area that does not have at least an indirect reliance upon related skills. However, there are two resultant challenges here. Firstly, the skills themselves are in short supply, and secondly the diversity of the cybersecurity domain can complicate the task of identifying the qualifications or certifications that can help to signify the skills relevant to a particular situation.
The key message of this briefing paper is that we must not only recognise the need for skills in cybersecurity, but must also understand what skills we need in order to ensure that the issue is tackled effectively.
