Adolescence is a period often marked by onset and escalation of risky behavior. Alcohol and marijuana use are prevalent among adolescents (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2019), as are sex risk behaviors and sexually transmitted infections (Forhan et al., 2009; Kann et al., 2018).
Recent years have seen growing adoption of substance use screening and brief intervention (BI) services across various healthcare settings. A number of studies have documented BI effects on substance use and/or its consequences (D’Amico et al., 2018; Dembo et al., 2016; Tanner-Smith and Lipsey, 2015; Winters et al., 2012, 2014; Winters and Leitten, 2007). This includes studies supporting technology-assisted BI approaches (Cunningham et al., 2012, 2009; Doumas and Esp, 2019; Harris et al., 2012; Kypri et al., 2004, 2014; Walton et al., 2013, 2010). Moreover, there is emerging evidence that broadly implementing BI for adolescents can alter healthcare utilization and development of comorbidities over the longer term (Sterling et al., 2019).
Nevertheless, gaps in the evidence base have led to some inconsistency in clinical recommendations. The US Preventive Services Task Force (2020) concluded that there is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against screening and behavioral counseling for alcohol or unhealthy drug use among adolescents in primary care (O’Connor et al., 2018, 2020; Patnode et al., 2014, 2020). In contrast, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends routine screening and BI (Levy et al., 2016). Inconsistent findings across studies could be due to a number of factors, including subtle differences in methods, sample selection, setting, substances targeted, intervention content, delivery format, and BI duration/frequency. Most studies of BI for adolescents focus on alcohol and/or marijuana because these are the most common substances used by adolescents, and among those who do use other drugs, alcohol or marijuana involvement often precedes initiation of other drug use (Miech et al., 2020; SAMHSA, 2019).
The USPSTF recommends behavioral counseling to prevent sexually transmitted infections for sexually active adults and adolescents (USPSTF, 2020). This is a higher level of evidence for adolescents than alcohol or drug use, and a number of the existing studies included interventions of short duration (Henderson et al., 2020). Technology-assisted BIs for sex risks have also been examined. For example, a study of a web-based intervention for adolescent girls found that the intervention was effective in increasing knowledge, safe sex attitudes, and self-efficacy regarding condom use (Widman et al., 2018). On the other hand, a study examining computerized BI for sex risk behaviors among young people ages 14–24 found non-significant differences between intervention and control arms in sex risk behavior outcomes (Shafii et al., 2019a).
As noted above, different approaches to delivering BI for risk behaviors have been considered, including clinician- and computer-delivered BI. There are pros and cons to each approach. Potential advantages of computerized approaches include familiarity with technology among youth, perceived privacy, and avoiding stigma/social desirability concerns when disclosing sensitive behaviors to a clinician. Notably, research has found high acceptability among medical providers towards computerized approaches to addressing sex risk behaviors among adolescents (Shafii et al., 2019b).
School-based health centers (SBHCs) are health clinics embedded in schools. Increasingly, this service delivery model goes well beyond the traditional role of the school nurse’s office. SBHCs offer an array of primary care and other services, frequently to such a degree that they meet key criteria for medical homes (O’Leary et al., 2014). SBHCs have become an important model for ensuring access to healthcare for adolescents, particularly in disadvantaged communities (Knopf et al., 2016; Love et al., 2019; O’Leary et al., 2014). Over 2,500 SBHCs operate throughout the US, serving 6.3 million students (Love et al., 2018). Because they operate within schools, SBHCs have a distinct opportunity to address adolescents’ health concerns via confidential visits in a highly accessible, medically-oriented service delivery environment. Thus, SBHCs could be ideal settings for delivering BI for substance use and sex risk behaviors as a health service. However, little is known about the relative effectiveness of different BI approaches in SBHCs.
