A network is a graph-based interaction between nodes. A graph is defined by G=(V,E), in which V and E respectively denote the set of vertices and edges in graph theory. In networks, however, we use the terminologies links (L) and nodes (N) instead of edges and vertices, where L(Ni,Nj) represents a link between node Ni and Nj. In a directed network, L(Ni,Nj) means there is a directed link from Ni to Nj. Whereas, in an undirected network, a link between nodes is unordered. Examples of network types include biological, bibliographic, social, technological and political election networks. The adjacency matrix is a convenient way to represent the network. An adjacency matrix A has |n|×|n| elements, where |n| is the number of nodes in the network. Aij indicates whether there is a link between nodes i and j. Aij=1 if i and j are connected, and 0 otherwise.
Real-world networks, such as those from social networks, are generally complex networks because of their high clustering coefficient, six degree of separation analogy, and their scale-free nature. The degree distribution in real world networks follows some power law. In complex networks, interactions between nodes are not artificial or random, as they have some order and organization. If the structure and properties of the network are known, then it is possible to uncover beneficial structural information and knowledge of how complex system behaves. Several studies have been devoted in the past two decades for the analysis of complex networks. While studying the structure of the complex network, finding sub-networks or communities is an area of ongoing research. A community in a graph is defined as nodes having dense link inside its community and sparse links to other communities [1]. Community detection has many applications in the real world, such as information diffusion, detection of fraudulent actions in telecommunication networks, investigation of terrorist’s group actions in social networks, recommender system, and link prediction in a complex network. Mainly overlapping and disjoint communities are found in a network. In overlapping communities, a node is a part of multiple communities whereas in disjoint communities, a node fits a single community. There are different algorithms for both types of communities, such as density-based link clustering algorithm [2], density peaks algorithm [3], and local spectral clustering [4] for overlapping communities.
Our research is focused on disjoint communities detection in complex network. Community detection is an optimization problem and is a topic of ongoing interest in the past two decades. A number of researchers have proposed several optimization algorithms, such as ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm, genetic algorithm (GA), cuckoo search optimization (CSO) algorithm, PSO, evolutionary strategy, label propagation, and simulated annealing (SA). Mu et al. [5], for example, presented intelligent ACO (IACO-Net) for community detection. This is a modified version of ACO, designed to reduce computational time by preventing unnecessary computations. Ben et al. [6] focused on high spatial complexity and unbalanced sizes in their proposed approach to detect communities in directed social networks. Guerrero et al. [7] attempted to improved GA’s search strategy by introducing a new generational GA, which allows adaptive analysis of complex network to detect communities. Similarly, in their attempt to improve the efficiency and accuracy of GA, Said et al. [8] introduced a new initialization and mutation method named as Clustering Coefficient based GA (CC-GA). Deng et al. [9] presented a label propagation and fuzzy C-means (LPA-FCM) algorithm to uncover the communities structure. Zhang et al. [10] applied the label propagation algorithm for weighted networks. Bilal et al. [11] worked on real-world networks to detect disjoint communities based on the similarity between nodes using an evolutionary algorithm. Meng and Liu et al. [12] proposed algorithms that use a quantum-inspired evolutionary algorithm (QIEA), which do not need the input number of communities beforehand. However, these approaches optimize only single objective. Hence, there are some limitations in such approaches. For example, optimizing single objective confines the solution to particular community structure property. In other words, such an approach is inadequate to uncover the multiple structure in hierarchical networks, is limited by the selection of objective function, and may fail when an inadequate objective function is selected. Resolution limit problem existing in modularity has been discussed in [13]. Optimizing modularity may fail to identify the clusters smaller than a scale even when clusters are unambiguously defined. Moreover, single-objective optimization can be easily trapped into local optimal solution. Therefore, it is preferable to optimize multi-objective function for community detection. Unlike the single objective, multi-objective returns a set of solutions.
To facilitate efficient community detection in a complex network, we propose the multi-layer ant colony optimization(MLACO) algorithm. The concept of Pareto dominance is adopted for solving multi-objective optimization, and we consider both RC and KKM as an objective function.
We will now explain the layout of this paper. Section 2 discusses the related literature. The proposed algorithm is presented in Section 4. Section 5 describes our experimental setup. Specifically, we evaluate the performance of MLACO using experiments performed on four popular real-world networks to evaluate the performance. A comparative summary is also presented. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper.
