Migraine is a common neurological disorder characterized by recurrent headaches. Migraine attacks usually last for 4-72 h and involve moderate or severe intensity headaches which typically are worsened by routine physical activity, are of a pulsating nature, and are associated with nausea, vomiting, photophobia or phonophobia [1]. In clinical terms, migraine can be classified into two types according to the frequency of pain: episodic migraine (less frequent headaches) and chronic migraine. Chronic migraine is defined as a headache occurring on 15 or more days per month for more than 3 months, and which has the features of a migraine headache on at least 8 days per month [1]. Globally, approximately 2% of the population experiences chronic migraine [2]. In addition to the increased use of analgesic medication, visits to doctors, and visits to the emergency services, chronic migraine has a high socioeconomic cost, with higher direct and indirect costs. Furthermore, chronic migraine sufferers are more prone to anxiety, depression, other chronic diseases (respiratory, heart or circulatory) and more chronic pain, all of this associated with significant personal, societal, and economic burdens [3], [4].
The pharmacological treatment of chronic migraine is based on two pillars: abortive treatment of acute migraine attacks (that taken only in the acute pain phase) and preventive therapy. The latter is used to diminish the severity, frequency or duration of attacks. Preventive therapy includes additional benefits such as reduction of disability and enhancement of response to acute treatments [5]. It may also result in a reduction in health care costs [6].
Many classes of medication are used for migraine prevention: antiepileptic drugs, antidepressants, betablockers, calcium channel antagonists, serotonin antagonists, and botulinum neurotoxins, among others. In the case of chronic migraine, although all preventive treatments for migraine may be useful, only topiramate (a type of antiepileptic) and OnabotulinumtoxinA (BoNT-A) [7] have solid proven evidence for their use [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. BoNT-A has been an extended use treatment for chronic migraine since its approval in 2010 by the Food and Drug Administration in the United States (FDA), having also shown a more sustained effect and better tolerability than topiramate in the few comparative studies performed [14], [15]. BoNT-A can be injected under the skin (subcutaneous) or inside the muscles (intramuscular) in accordance with the so-called The Phase III REsearch Evaluating Migraine Prophylaxis Therapy (PREEMPT) paradigm. This injection method consists of using both fixed and follow-the-pain sites, with additional specific follow-the-pain sites considered depending on individual symptoms. This procedure should be carried out in repeated patterns after several months. Following the results of the initial clinical trials and subsequent published studies in real-life settings [16], [17], [18], [19], today it is known that 70-80% of patients with chronic migraine show an improvement with this treatment (improvement defined as a reduction in migraine attack frequency or days with attacks by at least 50% within 3 months, leading to a significantly improved functioning of the patients and their overall quality of life). Moreover, there is evidence that patients with chronic migraine who do not show the desired treatment response after the first cycle of BoNT-A treatment may indeed experience clinical improvement after one or two additional treatment cycles [20].
However, in clinical practice, about 20-30% of chronic migraineurs do not respond to BoNT-A. One of the most debated aspects in recent years has been the possible relationship between the clinical phenotype of migraine attacks and the response to BoNT-A. As has been mentioned in certain publications [21], it is very important to predict if the BoNT-A treatment will be effective in a patient. Knowing the phenotype-response relationship may help in the development of new treatments for the 20-30% of patients that do not respond to the treatment. Besides the cost, it would avoid the patients suffering the pain associated with the treatment.
In a real scenario of electronic medical records of migraineurs, we present a methodology for predicting whether or not the BoNT-A treatment will be efficient. Starting from the raw database provided by doctors, we preprocess it, identify the most promising feature to predict and then run several algorithms in order to get the prediction. Results show that it is possible to get an accuracy higher than 91% when employing the HIT6 [22] metric and 85% when this metric is missing. Moreover, our results show that some of the features leading to these accuracies are actually coherent with respect to the medical literature.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the work related with some techniques applied to migraine and other illnesses. In Section 3, our methodology for predicting treatment results is explained. Section 4 describes the experiments and comparisons between different algorithms and our solution. Finally, our conclusions and future lines of work are presented in Section 5.
