Research shows that tactile exploration is an important component of early science learning (Hatwell, Streri, Gentaz, 2003, Minogue, Jones, 2006, Piaget). Classrooms are equipped with a myriad of physical resources to increase engagement with and understanding of various science topics (e.g., ramps and blocks to teach motion and friction; plants, animals, and rocks to teach about the environment). As children explore their world through these objects, they learn to talk about and engage in scientific practices, such as observing, measuring, and making comparisons. Learning to collect and analyze data and engage in arguments from evidence are key components of the U.S.-based kindergarten science curriculum established in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) (NGSS Lead States, 2013). As of 2016, NGSS has been adopted by 18 states and the District of Columbia (National Science Teachers Association, 2016).
To assist with these early science learning goals, educators often introduce science journaling tools, both paper-based (Brenneman, Louro, 2008, Gelman, Brenneman, Macdonald, Romn, 2009) and mobile (e.g., Boyce, Mishra, Halverson, Thomas, 2014, Cahill, Kuhn, Schmoll, Lo, McNally, Quintana, 2011). Prior to the introduction of mobile-based science journals, other forms of digital journaling were used in science activities and exercises, such as via desktop applications (e.g., The Progress Portfolio; for a description of the application see Loh, Radinsky, Reiser, Gomez, Edelson, Russell, 1997, Loh, Radinsky, Russell, Gomez, Reiser, Edelson, 1999) and individual handheld computer devices (e.g., the Sketchy application which is utilized in the studies described by Curtis, Luchini, Bobrowsky, Quintana, Soloway, 2002, Tatar, Roschelle, Vahey, Penuel, 2003). These tools can help capture students’ emergent science talk, which has long been described by learning scientists as a key part of building conceptual understanding (Pea, 1993, Rivard, Straw, 2000). While mobile devices, such as today’s smartphones and tablet computers, seem well-suited for supporting science journaling practices, tactile sensory information is not present when learners explore their world through these platforms.
This paper describes the design and evaluation of Haptic Explorers, an application of surface haptic technology for science learning within the context of an ecology summer camp. Recent advances in variable friction surface haptics (e.g., the TPaD (Winfield et al., 2007)) make it possible to provide the sensation of rich textures and bumps on a flat glass display such as a tablet or smartphone. The Haptic Explorers application runs on the TPaD Phone (Mullenbach, 2015), which is an Android mobile phone equipped with custom hardware to provide tactile feedback directly on the glass display surface. While haptic feedback can be presented to users in a variety of ways, such as through vibrotactile motors (Rantala, Salminen, Raisamo, Surakka, 2013, Wang, Millet, Smith, 2016) or resistive joysticks (Zhu et al., 2011), here we use the terms haptic and tactile feedback interchangeably to refer to the sensation of variable friction applied directly to the fingertip as a user moves across the flat glass display of a mobile device. The Haptic Explorers application enables children to capture images from their environment using the phone’s camera and annotate the images with audio recordings and haptic textures. We address the following questions through the design and evaluation of this application:
•How might mobile haptic feedback displays support early science learning practices?•Which types of science learning activities allow for meaningful integration of haptic feedback?•Does the availability of haptic feedback affect the ways in which learners engage in science talk?
We evaluated the Haptic Explorers application through four sessions of an ecology summer camp involving 35 children aged 5–7. In this study, we focus on the impact of haptic feedback on children’s science talk. Our findings reveal differences in the nature of science talk depending on the learning activity and suggest that the presence of haptic feedback, particularly when reflecting on the contents of one’s journal, may encourage tactile descriptors in children’s science talk.
