Brain disease is one of the most fatal disease for human [1], such as Alzheimer’s disease, glioma and so on [2]. Early detection of brain disease can improve the patients’ life quality and prolong their life. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) belongs to an imaging modality, which gives better resolution on soft tissues without radiation. Therefore, it is often a preferred choice for brain imaging. Computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems are designed to help doctors and physicians in clinical diagnosis. CAD systems can generate diagnosis results based on medical images, which provide an advisory opinion for doctors. With the development of artificial intelligence and machine learning, CAD systems works more and more efficiently [[3], [4], [5], [6]]. The basic steps of a CAD system can be summarized as: preprocessing, feature extraction and reduction, classifier training, and classifier test [7,8].
Over the last ten years, various CAD systems have been proposed for pathological brain detection. Chaplot [9] extracted wavelet coefficients from brain MRI and employed self-organizing map (SOM) and support vector machine (SVM) to classify the samples as pathological or normal. Maitra and Chatterjee [10] improved discrete wavelet transform (DWT) and put forward Slantlet transform to extract feature from brain MRIs. Then, a neural network was trained to identify normal brain from Alzheimer’s disease. El-Dahshan [11] combined DWT and principle component analysis (PCA) for feature extraction and reduction. They trained back propagation neural network and k nearest neighbor (KNN) for comparison. Wu [12] trained a feedforward neural network using scaled conjugate gradient for pathological brain detection. In literature [13], the authors extracted features using DWT. Then, the dimension of feature space was reduced by PCA. Finally, an artificial neural network (ANN) was trained with scaled chaotic artificial bee colony (SCABC) for classification. Their method achieved 100% accuracy on 66 brain MRI samples. Kalbkhani [14] used generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) to model the detailed sub-bands after performing DWT on brain MRIs. Thereafter, they employed PCA and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) to remove excessive features. SVM and KNN were selected to identify the labels of the input. Saritha [15] extracted entropy from approximation components of DWT, and constructed spider web plot as feature. Probabilistic neural network was chosen as the classifier. As Ripplet transform is effective in analyze the geometric information in digital image, Sudeb [16] utilized it for MRI feature extraction. They trained a least square-SVM (LS-SVM) to determine the types of the images. Ji [17] proposed to employed particle swarm optimization (PSO) to find the best parameters in kernel SVM (KSVM). The trained model was used for identification of brain MRIs. El-Dahshan [18] put forward a scheme to detect brain tumor in MRI. Firstly, a feedback pulse-coupled neural network was trained to segment the images. Then, DWT served as feature extractor. Thereafter, PCA was harnessed to reduce the feature volume. Finally, back propagation neural network was selected as the classifier. Yang [19] proposed to use wavelet energy as image feature and employed biogeography-based optimization (BBO) to train the weights of KSVM. Zhang [20] proposed a method to detect Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. They performed 3D DWT on the brain MRIs and utilized PCA for feature reduction. A KSVM trained by advanced PSO served as classifier. Phillips [21] tried to use 3D brain MRI for automatic diagnosis. They proposed a feature called 3D eigenbrain, which maps the original input into feature space. They compared feedforward neural network and KSVM in experiment, and found out KSVM with polynomial kernel performed better. Lu [22] extracted wavelet entropy from 2D brain MRIs as the feature, and employed extreme learning machine (ELM) as the classifier. The ELM was trained using bat algorithm, which is a smart swarm optimization method. Hou [23] used leaky rectified linear unit and early stopping to detect cerebral microbleed based on voxels. Zhang [24] proposed a novel pseudo Zernike moment as image feature, and used SVM for identification. Cheng [25] proposed an algorithm for multiple sclerosis diagnosis based on brain MRI. They extracted fractional Fourier entropy to form the feature vector and employed multilayer perceptron as the classifier. The multilayer perceptron was trained by an improved Jaya algorithm.
From the above literature, we can discover the following two keys to their success: 1) DWT based feature extraction was effective in pathological brain detection. 2) ANN and SVM was the most used classifiers, and many improved classification algorithms were developed based on them. However, the feature extraction methods may only be effective in certain datasets, because the datasets in these literature are different. Another problem is that the classification performance can be improved with advanced classifiers.
Recently, deep learning is attracting more and more attention, especially the conventional neural network (CNN). CNN is a kind of deep learning structure that designed for digital image classification. CNN can extract image feature automatically by tuning the parameters in convolutional layers and pooling layers. Manual feature extraction is a tedious task, researchers often need to carry out a lot of tests to find out whether a certain feature is suitable for the classification. Another advantage of CNN is that it can learn from big datasets. The training set of conventional machine learning algorithms usually consist of hundreds of samples. When the training sets get larger, these algorithms converge much slower, or even cannot converge. Therefore, CNN is now widely applied in image classification problems.
In this study, we proposed a novel pathological brain detection method using AlexNet and transfer learning. AlexNet belongs to a deep CNN structure, which was proposed by Krizhevsky [26], which first appeared in the ImageNet LSVRC-2010 contest and achieved astonishing results. In order to apply AlexNet in pathological brain detection, we employed transfer learning. As there are 60 million parameters in AlexNet, to re-train the whole structure requires much time and effort. Moreover, there is no need to tune every parameter in AlexNet for pathological brain detection. Inspired by transfer learning, we proposed to train a modified AlexNet with most of its parameters as initial values. Our method achieved better classification result than state-of-the-art methods in terms of accuracy, and it can be easily applied to other datasets, either big or small.
The rest of this manuscript is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the brain MRI materials used in this paper. Section 3 provides the method: the basic theory of AlexNet and transfer learning. Section 4 is about experiment and analysis. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section 5.
