Current isotopic datasets are published either in peer-reviewed journals or in the grey literature that is often unavailable for general use. As each of those dispersed datasets on isotopes and related knowledge provides specific and unique information, it makes sense to unify and link them to create a strong centralised repository of food-related isotopic knowledge. To achieve this, however, several obstacles need to be overcome. For instance, each dataset uses its own classification and indexing system. Consequently, the data from different datasets is scattered and unharmonised, which makes its use by humans and its incorporation in information systems difficult.
To reuse the isotopic data and corresponding knowledge classified and indexed, the data must be organized following the Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability (FAIR) principles for scientific data management and stewardship (Wilkinson et al., 2016). This also comes from the fact that there is a high demand for enabling the research within the domain of isotopes for Food science as a digital research enterprise, to facilitate knowledge discovery and support new knowledge, and to maximize community engagement. To make this possible, there is a requirement for interoperability, which means the ability of data and tools from heterogeneous sources to integrate or work together with a minimal effort. One way to achieve this is by making each dataset accessible in a machine-readable format, which can be realised by enriching the isotopic data with metadata and data on its provenance describing its semantics. The purpose of so-called semantic data is to allow machines (i.e. computers) to understand and extract the information without the help of a human user. It describes technologies and methods that convey the meaning of the information. For example, the Resource Description Framework (RDF) is a globally accepted framework for data and knowledge representation that is readable and interpretable by machines. To enrich isotopic data by semantics, an ontology (i.e., a semantic data model) that describes the isotopic domain is required. This would enable harmonization between researchers and laboratories as well as allowing users to store ontology-based data. However, having an ontology that describes isotopic data is a challenging task because it must consist of the relevant metadata and provenance data that would enable alignment of isotopic data from diverse research areas, and allow data to be traced back to the actual analytical laboratories to facilitate independent control reviews.
Applications requiring stable isotope ratio measurements of light elements (hydrogen (H), carbon (C), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), sulfur (S)) have had a major impact on geology, environmental sciences, crime and sport (forensics), health, quality of life, climate change, food authenticity and regulation (West, Bowen, Dawson, & Tu, 2010). Lately, heavy isotopes such as Sr, Pb, Hg, Nd are being used in these types of studies. Though the present paper deals only with light isotopes so-called bio elements, the approach can be easily extended to non-traditional isotopes. Stable isotopes commonly fractionate during physical, chemical, and biological processes, giving rise to variations in isotopic composition. Although isotopic composition does vary within a very limited range, which is usually detected routinely, it can be regarded as constant and, therefore provides an “isotopic fingerprint”. In all these applications, enormous significance is placed on the small variations in the isotope ratios. Moreover, in most cases consistency of results between countries (laboratories) and across long periods of time is vital.
In Food research, the use of stable isotope signatures is well established for determining the authenticity and origin of food (Danezis, Tsagkaris, Camin, Brusic, & Georgiou, 2016). As a first approximation, natural abundance measurements provide information on plant 'type' or diet (C and N isotopes) and geographical origin (H and O isotopes) and can even be used to differentiate between production practice (organic, conventional). The main factor that influences the distribution of H and O isotopes of plant water is the source of plant-available water, usually groundwater (resulting from precipitation). This combination of climatic, geographic and topographic conditions results in a distinct isotopic pattern of meteoric waters (Rožanski, Araguas, & Gonfianti, 1993). A detailed discussion of the mechanisms behind such stable isotope signatures is provided by Bowen (2010). As regards an animals’ body water, the stable isotopes of H and O in water mainly records the isotopic composition of drinking water and water intake from fresh forage (Camin, Bontempo, Perini, & Piasentier, 2016). Factors such as temperature, water availability, relative humidity, CO2 concentration, salinity, light intensity, and photorespiration also impact the stable isotope composition of C in plants and their products (Ferrio, Voltas, & Araus, 2003). However, the main factor influencing stable C isotopes of plants and their products are linked to the processes of photosynthetic atmospheric CO2 fixation, namely, Calvin (C3), Hatch-Slack (C4) and the Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) (O’Leary, 1988, O’Leary, 1995). Alternatively, the N isotopic composition of plants reflects the soil conditions and thus agricultural practices of the area as well as botanical origin (Bateman, Kelly, & Woolfe, 2007), while S isotopes are affected by geology, volcanism, distance from the sea, and certain anthropogenic effects (Drivelos and Georgiou, 2012). The multi-element composition of animal tissues also reflects to some extent that of the vegetation that they eat (Camin et al., 2016).
Stable isotopes of bio-elements have been also recognized as official methods for detecting illegal additions (adulteration) such as water or sugar syrup made from maize or sugar cane in wine, honey, fruit juice, or maple syrup. Other examples of isotopic ratio applications include the discrimination of natural vs. synthetic aromas and discrimination of champagne CO2 produced naturally by adding sugar to bottles from the direct injection of industrial CO2.
One of the most recent significant advances in analytical chemistry has been the development of compound-specific stable isotope analysis CSIA of organic compounds, which has been used to uniquely identify relevant biomarkers in food traceability (van Leeuwen, Prenzler, Danielle Ryan, & Camin, 2014). Furthermore, the isotopic fingerprinting can be combined with other methods such as elemental analysis, NMR and GC to improve the determination of the origin of a variety of food products.
A common theme of food authentication and traceability studies is the requirement for a database of authentic samples of known origin for comparison (Kelly, Heaton, & Hoogewerff, 2005). The same database can further be used for geographical origin determination. To date, only a few databases covering a wide regional distribution of isotopic signatures exist, among which the European wine database is currently the most developed. Other main commodities of interest, where stable isotope techniques were included comprise food of animal origin (Camin et al., 2016), beverages (juices, coffee, tea; Carter et al., 2015, Bizjak Bat et al., 2016, Cengiz et al., 2017) and cereal crops (rice, wheat; Podio et al., 2013, Li et al., 2014, Longobardi et al., 2015).
In this paper, we propose a new ontology within the domain of isotopes for food science. The paper covers (Section 2) the basic properties of ontologies, describes several ontology learning techniques, and provides an overview of existing food- and isotope-related ontologies. This is followed (Section 3) by a presentation of a newly created ISO-FOOD ontology together with a case study of isotopic data from Slovenian food samples (milk and vegetable products). Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 4.
