Railways are considered as a lifeline for the public, millions of people use railways for travel and transportation on a daily basis. In order to maintain safety and security of public and goods, frequent inspection of tracks are essential. According to railways accidental statistics, and major derailments happens due to human failure or infrequent and improper monitoring systems. Traditionally railway track inspection is carried out using human inspector or through an automated vehicle that is infrequent and a complex process. Due to advancement in technology and demand of effective and better track monitoring has increased the use of computer vision based monitoring system in railways [1]. Various researchers have proposed prototypes of vision based inspection systems that use cameras mounted on carts and trains for capturing data for analysis. This automation has helped achieve cost effective solutions with a higher level of performance which is often times unattainable through human inspection.
The rail track geometry is based on a mathematical model that defines the path of the track. The inspection of track involves investigation of various types of rail components and their characteristics [2]. It contains some visually noticeable defects such as missing fasteners, clips and defect in switches and some less visual ones such as deviation from gauge. The main reason of such defects are due to stress experienced from a heavy load, aging, and contraction and expansion due to various weather conditions [3].
Existing systems use various approaches such as electromagnetic inspection, eddy current testing, ultrasonic techniques and optical methods such as laser and camera mounted on moving carts to perform various inspection operations on tracks [4].
In recent years, researchers have used computer vision for railroad component analysis in order to improve efficiency, objectivity, and accuracy in the inspection systems. Maneesha Singh et al. [5] used automated video analysis for finding missing clips and blue clips that were recently replaced by damaged clips. Mehmet Karakose et al. [4] placed the camera on the roof of a train for image acquisition and further feature extraction was applied on these images to determine the rails. Achieving fully automated railroad component analysis is still a challenging task. A comprehensive work was carried out by Xavier Gibert et al. [6] in which the performance was improved by combining multiple detectors within a learning framework. Another work carried out by Esther Resendiz et al. [7] for automated inspection of the track uses signal processing and spectral estimation that provides robust detection of periodically occurring track component. A vision based turnout detection is carried out by Ralph Ross [8] using a mono-focal video camera to improve better localization using a recursive estimation method.
The various methods discussed above are complex in nature for frequent analysis of track condition. Hence, railway track analysis through drones is studied. Drones provide flexibility to operate at various heights and in adverse terrains where regular inspection methods cannot be applied. Therefore, aerial images from drones provide useful information for analysis [9]. Drone data contains various challenges such as rectification, referencing and ground sampling, that requires various preprocessing task [10]. Despite this, monitoring through drones has several advantages such as it does not require separate tracks for data acquisition, thereby not hindering the schedule of trains. Further it is easy to implement in ground reality and is accurate and cost effective. Thus, it can be frequently used for monitoring any situation. The drone has some limitation such as limited flight capacity due to battery constraint, trained person to operate it. Mosaicing and rectification is necessary to inspect large area under consideration also, lateral side defect of railway track is difficult to find with help of drone.
This paper proposes a novel approach for computing gauge measurement using drone imagery. The health of the track is determined by applying computer vision techniques on drone data.
