New pharmaceutical treatments for chronic hepatitis C evidenced to offer curative potential are having dramatic impacts. These new pharmaceuticals – known as direct-acting antiviral (DAA) treatments – are posited as offering near 100% cure of hepatitis C infection with near zero side-effects (Dore & Feld, 2015; Falade-Nwulia et al., 2017). It is for this reason, in combination with the rapid pace of their development into ‘real world’ delivery, that they have been presented as ground-breaking and revolutionary (Banerjee & Reddy, 2016; Gane, 2014). The promise afforded by this ‘new world’ of hepatitis C cure is accentuated by the marked differences of DAAs to the previous era of interferon-based treatments linked to dubious levels of effectiveness with extremely difficult to manage side-effects (Dore & Feld, 2015; Hopwood & Treloar, 2005). DAAs enact a rupture in the constitution of hepatitis C treatment. Not only do they afford the promise of cure at the level of the individual, but they make possible the promise of a future without hepatitis C. Treatments promising cure of infection potentiate, for the first time without vaccination, elimination of an infectious disease as a public health threat. This idea – of viral elimination and the end of hepatitis C – has been enacted into global health strategy by the World Health Organization (WHO) among other actors. The WHO has promoted a number of targets to mobilise global efforts towards the elimination of hepatitis C as a public health threat by 2030 (World Health Organization, 2016b, 2016b). These targets, made possible by the promise of DAAs, shape the field of hepatitis C treatment in relation to a viral elimination future (Lancaster, Rhodes, & Rance, 2019).
Yet, there has been some controversy concerning the curative potential of new treatments for hepatitis C (Rhodes, Lancaster, Harris, & Treloar, 2019). This partly relates to a review of the Cochrane Collaboration (Jakobsen et al., 2017), also published by the British Medical Journal (Jakobsen, Nielsen, Koretz, & Gluud, 2018), to which there have been multiple responses (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2017; World Hepatitis Alliance, 2017; European Liver Patients’ Association (ELPA), 2017; Gastroenterological Society of Australia (GESA), 2017; Hepatitis C Coalition, 2017; Powderly, Naggie, & Kim, 2017; Foster, Agarwal, & Cramp, 2018; Cooke, Barclay, & Barnes, 2018; Barclay, Bramley, & Dillon, 2018; Koretz, Jakobsen, & View, 2018; Koretz, Jakobsen, & View, 2018; Koretz, Jakobsen, & View, 2018; Koretz, Jakobsen, & Gluud, 2018). The Cochrane review casts doubt on tacitly accepted knowledge in the clinical practice of hepatitis C treatment: that DAA treatments can cure individuals of their hepatitis C infection, and that such viral cure confers health benefit (Cheung et al., 2016; Simmons, Saleem, Heath, Cooke, & Hill, 2015). Based on its review of 138 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of the clinical effects of DAAs, the Cochrane review states that there is “no evidence” to judge if DAAs reduce mortality or other liver complications from chronic hepatitis C (Jakobsen et al., 2018). This work questions the routine use of Sustained Virological Response (SVR) – the absence or near absence of virus in the blood – as a surrogate indicating clinical benefits resulting from viral cure. It is also noted that DAAs have “high costs” that are “unaffordable globally”, and that international guidelines recommend early treatment for all with chronic hepatitis C (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2018). Against the momentum of highly profiled promise afforded by the scaling-up of DAAs to eliminate hepatitis C as a public health threat globally (World Health Organization, 2016b, 2016b), the authors of the Cochrane Collaboration use their evidence to call upon clinicians and practitioners to highlight the “uncertain clinical benefit” as well as “risks and costs” of DAAs (Jakobsen et al., 2018). They call for greater care in distinguishing between the cure of infection (indicated by surrogate markers) and the cure of disease (indicated clinically).
We do not want to take issue with the strength or otherwise of evidence produced by the Cochrane review. Others have done this (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2017; World Hepatitis Alliance, 2017; European Liver Patients’ Association (ELPA), 2017; Gastroenterological Society of Australia (GESA), 2017; Hepatitis C Coalition, 2017; Powderly et al., 2017; Foster et al., 2018; Cooke et al., 2018; Barclay et al., 2018; Koretz et al., 2018a, 2018b, 2018c, 2018d). What we want to do is different. We want to offer a perspective from critical social science which helps think differently, and more carefully, about evidence related to public health intervention effects. We want to consider this moment of controversy as more than a matter of methods regarding the most optimal ways of evidencing interventions. We want to push this debate beyond matters of epistemology – how best to know intervention effects – to matters of ontology – how knowledge brings interventions and effects into being.
In the field of public health, we are much more used to thinking epistemologically. The field of evidence-based intervention is dominated by questions of method in relation to how science best knows an intervention and its effects (Sackett et al., 1996, 2000). This is an established performance with a familiar narrative, in which the RCT (and reviews of these) constitute the optimum way of knowing. The RCT is the standard against which being ‘evidence-based’ is measured (Timmermans and Berg, 2003). The Cochrane Collaboration, which produces a library of systematic and meta-analysis reviews in the field of health care, is a defining benchmark in the standardisation of evidence-based medicine (Levin, 2001; See also: www.cochrane.org). However, we wish to think with evidence in a way which extends beyond matters of method and epistemology. Following a tradition in the field of science and technology studies (STS), we want to consider evidencing as performative. We want to draw attention to the performative work that evidence-making practices are doing. In contrast to evidence-based intervention approaches, we describe this as an ‘evidence-making intervention’ approach (Rhodes & Lancaster, 2019a; Rhodes, Closson, Guise, Paparini, & Strathdee, 2016). Here, we are interested in how evidence controversies – concerning the curative potential of DAAs – can be navigated. How are patients and clinicians and practitioners and scientists and policy-makers to make sense of evidence controversy? How can we generate an approach which enables dialogue across different constitutions of evidence and intervention? How can we enable an approach to evidencing which offers a more careful way of knowing?
