Scientific research is an increasingly collaborative activity with researchers often spread globally. For instance, a researcher in Asia or Africa may collect data on crop yields from local farms. Another researcher in Europe may develop a model for predicting crop yields based on trends in climatic variables such as rainfall and temperate. A different researcher in North America may process satellite sensor data to extract the necessary climate variables for the region of interest. A typical workflow may then involve the use of the model in conjunction with the climate data to predict crop yields and compare against the actual ground data to improve the model or effect changes to the harvest schedule. It is evident that seamless access to the data, tools and simulation resources across all locations can greatly simplify this workflow, enabling the researchers to focus on the scientific research rather than dealing with data transfers, software and computational environment replication. Such considerations have led to the increasing adoption of science gateways to provide a web interface to data, tools and computational resources.
Science gateways have an associated cost of operation including the hosting of data storage, the webserver and compute resources as well as the cost of maintaining the gateway’s software framework. While grant funding typically supports such expenses, the gateways may become unsustainable beyond the funded project’s completion. However, funding is often cyclic in nature with new funding available after a short lull. If a gateway can be sustained during this lull, the new project can utilize the gateway, avoiding the need to start from scratch while also freeing up researchers from the task of archiving their data and tools in the interim. This short-term sustainability problem is just as important as the long-term sustainability question for research projects. A natural approach to reducing the burden of sustaining a standalone gateway is to share the gateway between several research projects. Moreover, if the projects originate from the same science domain, they can often share data management and processing capabilities. The central contribution of our paper is a shared-hosting sustainability model for the HUBzero [1] science gateway framework that leverages these observations in its design. This model has been applied in practice in the development of a HUBzero science gateway, MyGeoHub [2], that hosts four major research projects from the hydrology, climate and agricultural economics domains. We describe the sustainability model in the context of MyGeoHub and its broader impacts; in particular:

1.The needs of the sustainability model drove general-purpose enhancements to the HUBzero framework that supportloosely-coupled, fully customizable content groups.2.The hosted research projects all work with geospatial data. The shared need to manage, visualize and process such data motivated the design and development of general-purpose software modules that implement these capabilities. This in turn necessitated new general-purpose HUBzero extensions for configurable data management providers, gateway interoperability and data service endpoints that now find use in non-geospatial science gateways as well.3.HUBzero in conjunction with our sustainability model combines the best features of other science gateway frameworks as we will illustrate in our survey of related work.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we start by providing some background on the HUBzero cyberinfrastructure framework and the HUBzero hosting service to establish the context for our sustainability model, next we describe the four research projects that motivated the MyGeoHub sustainability model, followed by the design of MyGeoHub, our sustainability model and the associated services that support the four hosted projects, next we describe the common geospatial data management and analysis infrastructure MyGeoHub provides to the hosted projects and finally we conclude with related work and our vision for the scalability and dissemination of MyGeoHub for broader adoption.
