Profit for sheep producers has a direct relationship between the commercial value of the flock and the cost to grow the sheep. The commercial value of a sheep in Australia depends mainly on its meat weight, also known as carcass weight (MLA, 2017). A study (Rowe and Atkins, 2006) showed that only 80% of the total flock contribute to the farm’s productivity and profitability. Therefore, optimising the remaining 20% of the flock could significantly improve profits.
Farmers typically do not have the means to pre-emptively estimate the productivity of their flock as carcass weight is only determined after the sheep are released and slaughtered at the abattoir. Farmers currently use live weight, obtained through automatic drafting of their flocks, to estimate when to release sheep. In a drafting session, sheep get weighed and are segregated into groups based on their live weight. However, studies (Kirton et al., 1984, Hopkins, 1991) have shown that many other factors affect meat yield. For example, live weight includes gut fill, wool weight, and bone frame. Gut fill was found to have a significant impact on meat yield prediction (Kirton et al., 1984). Weights of sheep dropped 2 kg between being weighed off pasture and again after an overnight fast. Because of these differences, (Kirton et al., 1984) provided two separate meat yield prediction models for sheep with different gut fills. A general estimation of the gut fill of the flock can be made by estimating the time from their last feed (MLA, 2017). Another factor that influences meat yield estimation is wool weight (Kirton et al., 1984, MLA, 2017). A number of studies have defined prediction models for wool growth with fairly high accuracy (Hong et al., 2000, Finlayson et al., 1995). For example, Hong et al. (2000) modelled the 12-month pattern of wool growth rate as a function of live weight, breed, age, and rump status. The model predicted the rate of growth of wool that ranged between 6 and 16 g/day with 2.86 g/day average root mean square error. Moreover, different breeds have different meat yields. Identifying optimum timing to release each breed would be beneficial. Kirton et al. (1984) performed a study on 2207 sheep to investigate factors that affect meat yield. They compared the meat production of shorn sheep of similar live weights sired by twelve different breeds. They found that the meat production was similar for sheep of the same breed but different from one breed to another. For example, Merino cross sheep were found to have meat yield 0.7 kg less than Southdown cross sheep of the same live weight. This small variation of meat yield between individual sheep can translate into significant losses for enterprises comprising thousands of sheep. The three discussed factors: gut fill, wool weight and breed can provide farmers with valuable insights about the productivity of their flock. Gut fill and wool weight prediction models already exist in the literature. However, there are no models for automatic sheep breed identification that currently exist. Therefore, this paper will focus specifically on automatic sheep breed identification during the drafting process.
Different breeds of sheep are in many cases phenotypically diverse. Several studies (Carneiro et al., 2010, Asamoah Boaheng et al., 2016, Searle et al., 1989) have used body measurements to identify sheep breeds. Carneiro et al. (2010) successfully identified eleven breeds using only three body measurements, namely: shoulder height, head width and length. Similarly, Asamoah Boaheng et al. (2016) used a mathematical model to classify three African sheep breeds using six body measurements and achieved 86.2% classification accuracy. Body appearance was also used by Searle et al. (1989) where it was found that, at any given live weight, one of the breeds had longer legs and smaller shoulders than the other. As different breeds have subtle differences in appearance, computer vision (CV) and machine learning (ML) based approaches could offer benefits to the industry.
One of the most powerful ML techniques is deep learning. Deep learning uses a cascade of many layers of processing units for feature extraction and transformation. Convolutional neural network (CNN) is one of the most popular algorithms for deep learning that is commonly applied to analyse and classify visual imagery (Zeiler and Fergus, 2013). CNN employs deep neural network architectures to automatically learn discriminating features from an input image without the need for feature engineering (Hinton et al., 2006). This independence from prior knowledge and human effort in feature design is a major advantage. With its complex architecture, CNN has the capacity to learn from very large training sets in a magnitude exceeding tens of thousands of objects (Krizhevsky et al., 2017). This capacity allows it to learn objects in realistic settings including objects which exhibit considerable variability in appearance (Krizhevsky et al., 2017). Because of CNNs, deep learning based image classification is now performing better than human vision in many tasks (Devikar, 2018).
A large and growing body of literature has investigated the use of CV to classify and manage livestock based on body condition, cleanliness, lameness, and pain level (Spoliansky et al., 2016, RMIT, 2017, Van Hertem et al., 2014, Lu et al., 2017). However, very few of these applications were designed for sheep farms because of the challenges associated with: 1) segmenting individual sheep from a flock with uniform colour, 2) predicting a naturally de-formable body shape and 3) extracting body features in the presence of wool (Sarwar et al., 2018, Kassler, 2001, Burke et al., 2004). CV classification applications in the agricultural field typically use classifiers such as: support vector machines (SVM) (Lu et al., 2017), CNN (Kumar et al., 2018, RMIT, 2017) or clustered polynomial regression model (Spoliansky et al., 2016). It can be noted that CNN achieved good accuracy levels in cleanliness (RMIT, 2017) and cattle classification (Kumar et al., 2018) at 80% and 76% respectively. Although the polynomial regression model (Spoliansky et al., 2016) achieved higher accuracy (91%), it is only effective when the output has a continuous range and there is a small number of discriminating features between classes (Armstrong, 2012). SVMs are traditional ML techniques that analyse data for classification and regression. They are based on the idea of finding a hyperplane that best segregates the data points of the two different classes (Manning et al., 2009, Nasiriany et al., 2018).
Although there is a large amount of literature on identifying different breeds of animals such as dogs, cats and birds (Parkhi et al., 2012, Liu et al., 2012, Devikar, 2018, Atanbori et al., 2016), few studies were found about automatic classification of sheep breeds. CNN achieved a very high accuracy of 96% in classifying a large group of dog breeds, but this was only possible with the use of a considerable amount of data (100,000) (Devikar, 2018). Unlike other classifiers, CNN can learn from much larger datasets.
Training a deep CNN from scratch requires a very large labelled dataset of images (in the order of tens of thousands or more) (Krizhevsky et al., 2017). However, this number of images is not always available in practice. Therefore, it is common to use a limited amount of training data to re-train an existing model in a process called transfer learning (Oquab et al., 2014). In transfer learning, a CNN model that is pre-trained using a very large dataset of images is reused or fine tuned for a relevant classification task (Yosinski et al., 2014, Oquab et al., 2014).
The VGG-16 model (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014) is a 16-layer CNN developed by the Visual Geometry Group at the University of Oxford. The model was trained on 1.2 million images belonging to 1000 categories from the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009). Because of the model’s ability to capture features from images distributed over large and diverse classes, VGG-16 has been shown to be very useful for solving cross domain image recognition and classification problems (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014). For example, applying transfer learning on VGG-16 has been explored in bird species classification (Molchanov et al., 2016), pollen-bearing bees recognition (Rodriguez et al., 2018), semantic segmentation (Long et al., 2015), pavement distress detection (Gopalakrishnan et al., 2017) and cell nuclei classification (Bayramoglu et al., 2016). The model brings an improvement on the prior-art architectures by increasing the depth and using very small convolution filters (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014). While there are much more sophisticated models which outperform VGG-16 in ImageNet challenge (Russakovsky et al., 2015), the model is remarkable for its simplicity. As a comparison, the authors of GoogLeNet model emphasised that their model places notable consideration on memory and power usage because of its complexity (Szegedy et al., 2015). Similarly, Microsoft’ s ResNet model which was the winner of 2015 ImageNet challenge has 152 layers (He et al., 2016).
The architecture of the VGG-16 model comprises 138 million parameters and consists of 41 layers (16 of which are with learn-able weights) (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014):
•thirteen convolutional layers with very small receptive field of size 3 × 3,•five max-pooling layers of size 2 × 2 to carry out spatial pooling,•rectification non-linearity (ReLu) layers following all hidden layers, and•three fully-connected layers, with the final layer being the soft-max layer.
Since there appears to be no automatic sheep breed classification system present in the reviewed literature, this paper aims to differentiate sheep breeds using computer vision and machine learning on farm.
