Much effort in science and technology has been focused on the study of information theory [1] and network science [2], [3], two seemingly independent realms. In information theory, probabilities are assigned to symbols and used to derive important results, such as minimum bandwidth and minimal sampling rates. On the other hand, in network science [2], focus is given to understanding the intricate topology of complex networks, and its interaction with various types of dynamics. Interestingly, these two different perspectives – broadly related to time series compaction and studies of topology/dynamics complexity – can be shown to ultimately be closely interrelated. For instance, information theory has been used to define causal relationships between nodes [4], [5], characterize networks according to their compressibility [6], define topological similarity [7], map time-series to networks [8], reveal community structure [9] quantify the diversity of ecological networks [10], and characterize network dynamics [11].
Because of the fundamental importance of information science in the development of a large number of fields – including communications [12], computing [13] and even neurosciences [14] – any extension of the concepts in that area has the potential for significant theoretical and applied impact. This is the main motivation and general objective of the present work, which is developed with special attention given to including the systems generating the time series commonly studied in information theory into a more complete and integrated framework. More specifically, we represent the generating systems as complex networks, which immediately implies the critical question regarding how the topology of these generating networks influences the compaction of the produced time series. To study and better understand this interrelationship provides the main specific objective of the present work. The basic idea, illustrated in Fig. 1, is to understand sequences of symbols or time series as projections of an original network, e.g., obtained by some sampling dynamics (such as random walks), transmitted, and then reconstructed to some accuracy.
Underlying such an approach is the hypothesis that every time series or sequence of symbols is produced by some discrete system, which can be represented as a complex network. So, these generated series and sequences inherit, to a great extent, the properties of the generating networks. The second underlying hypothesis is that the interaction between such complex network systems takes place through communication channels, which necessarily have limited bandwidth. So, it becomes important to use methods for more effective/robust transmission of the networks, such as by using compression. At the same time, these sequences are a byproduct of the interaction between the topology of the original networks and the unfolding dynamics. Therefore, the proposed approach reinstates information theory from looking only at the time series to the network level.Download : Download high-res image (260KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Integrating network science and information theory. A network (a) is sampled by a given dynamics D and a respective sequence of symbols (b) is obtained and transmitted. The receiver can then try to recover the original network (c).
Several important problems can be naturally conceptualized and represented according to the proposed framework. These include: the transformation from thoughts into language, encompassing the whole of literature in the process, arts, routing in transportation and computing systems, distributed computing, teaching and planning of syllabuses, economics and financial indices, genes and proteins, scientific modeling, and even WWW surfing and the flow of consciousness. An interesting aspect shared by all such cases is that the linearization of a higher dimensional structure (a network) derives from imposed constraints such as finite bandwidth channel, storage systems, etc. By the way, intermediate representations with dimensions higher than one (time series) are also possible and naturally incorporated in the proposed theory. In addition, the efficiency of coding by projections and respective transmission are related to the complexity of the original network, therefore emphasizing another critical issue shared by information theory and network science.Download : Download high-res image (259KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The integration of network science and information theory can be used to address systems involving several interactions of the type represented in Fig. 1, with applications in ares such as opinion spreading.
The basic construction in Fig. 1 can be immediately used to model more complex systems, such as opinion dynamics, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Here, each of the large nodes in Fig. 2 correspond to an agent transmitting its beliefs, originally represented by the networks inside the nodes, through time series along a network with a particular topology.
Optimization of transmission can be achieved by compacting the time-series. In information theory, this is typically achieved by using the frequency of symbols as a means to derive optimal code words. For instance, Huffman coding [15] provides a means to achieve lossless, optimal symbol-by-symbol coding of time series, considering the probability of each symbol. In the herein proposed framework, optimization involves accurate prediction of symbols by considering the topology of the network and the probing dynamics, instead of only the sequence of symbols. For instance, in the case of symbols taken individually from an undirected graph by using a traditional random walk, it is known that the frequency of each symbol can be fully predicted from the respective node degrees [16]. The precision of such a prediction can be expressed in terms of the Pearson correlation coefficient between the frequency of visits and degrees (or other topological property). Because of its ability to characterize how much the dynamics is affected by the topological features of the network, such a measurement is henceforth called steering coefficient S of the topology over the dynamics. All in all, the coding efficiency, given a specific network and dynamics, will probably depend on the value of the steering coefficient, which can vary among different network topologies and dynamics.
The present work illustrates and explores the potential of the proposed framework with respect to synthetic networks, allowing the consideration of several topologies and different sampling dynamics. So, we can investigate interesting questions such as: (i) how does the symbol prediction from graphs impact the transmission?; (ii) how do the topological features of different graph models affect the performance?; (iii) how do the performances of the considered types of dynamics compare one another?
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the proposed framework. Section 3 presents the obtained results and discussions. Finally, Section 4 provides the conclusions and perspectives for future studies.
