The Milky Way is a complex ecosystem where a cyclical transformation process brings diffuse baryonic matter into dense unstable condensations to form stars. These condensations produce radiant energy for billions of years before releasing chemically enriched material back into the InterStellar Medium in their final stages of evolution. Although considerable progress has been made in the last two decades in the understanding of the evolution of isolated dense molecular clumps, toward the onset of gravitational collapse and the formation of stars and planetary systems, a lot remains still hidden.
The aim of the European FP7 VIALACTEA project was to exploit the combination of all new-generation surveys of the Galactic Plane to build and deliver a galaxy scale predictive model for star formation of the Milky Way. This model will be used as a template for external galaxies and studies of star formation across the cosmic time. Usually the essential steps necessary to unveil the inner workings of the galaxy as a star formation engine (such as the extraction of dust compact condensations or robust reconstruction of the spectral energy distribution of objects in star-forming regions) are often carried out manually by the astronomers, and necessarily, over a limited number of galactic sources or very restricted regions. Therefore, scientists required new technological solutions able to deal with the growing data size and quantity coming from new-generation surveys (from Infrared to Radio wavelength).
The extraction of the meaningful information contained in the available data required an entirely new approach (the new paradigm of “data-driven scientific discovery”) which resulted in a novel framework [1] based on: advanced visual analytic techniques [2], data mining methodologies [3], machine learning paradigms [4] and Virtual Observatory (VO) based data representation and retrieval standards [5]. All the underlying pipelines required by this framework (e.g. knowledge base catalog creation or maps making for visual analytic) are available through the VIALACTEA Science Gateway (VLSG).
The gateway (described in Section 3) is based on the WS-PGRADE/gUSE [6] portal framework that provides several ready-to-use functionalities off-the-shelf. It allows development of scientific workflows composed of “nodes”, corresponding to almost any kind of application, in a convenient graphical user interface. Workflows can be executed in parallel in a wide set of Distributed Computing Infrastructures such as grids, clusters, supercomputers, and clouds. It enables sharing, importing and exporting workflows and managing credentials (and robot certificates), or gathering workflow execution statistics. Beyond these features, the portal is extensible, in fact, WS-PGRADE/gUSE offers a number of interfaces to add new applications and portlets to its base capabilities.
This paper presents the latest developments on the VLSG including the workflows designed for the community and the resource monitoring system (preliminary results are presented in [7]). The workflows (see Section 5) are mainly focused on performing CPU and data-intensive computations: map making, i.e., the formation of sky images from the instruments data; data mining to obtain band-merged catalogs relating sources with associated counterparts at different wavelengths; filamentary structure detection and extraction from images.
Due to the diverse variety of software and computing capabilities required by the workflows, a novel monitoring system has been developed within the gateway to supervise the status of the whole system. Monitoring covers different levels of tests (see Section 3.6), checking gateway interoperability with the computing infrastructures and workflow submission and execution processes. These tests are performed periodically and the resulting reports are published on the gateway so end-users are also aware of any potential failure of the system avoiding waste of time in debugging their work. Furthermore e-mail alerts are sent on any errors to infrastructure administrators to promptly fix the problems.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews the requirements and the developed technological architecture. Section 3 introduces the VLSG. Section 4 presents the federated network of science gateways (STARnet) of the astronomical and astrophysical community. Section 5 demonstrates four applications developed using the science gateway that perform various calculations used to analyze the star forming regions of the Milky Way. Section 6 overviews the related work; finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.
