The use of information technology (IT) has increased significantly in widely diverse areas over recent years. The use of devices, such as computers, causes significant expenditure of electricity and contributes to the emission of greenhouse gases; therefore, there exists a growing demand for the application of Green IT concepts (Murugesan, 2008). Mingay (2007) defines Green IT as the optimal utilization of information and communication technology for managing the environmental sustainability of an enterprise as regards its products, operations, resources, supply chain, and services.
Sustainability is a challenge faced by society at large, including the private sector, government, and universities. Sustainability within universities is a concern for policymakers due to the impact of certain activities on the environment. Campuses are increasingly pressured towards analysis of processes and operations to mitigate their deleterious effects on the environment. As such, institutions are increasingly promoting practices considered environmentally responsible (Alshuwaikhat and Abubakar, 2008).
A sustainable university is defined as a higher education institution that addresses, involves, and promotes—at both the regional and global level—the reduction or complete elimination of harmful environmental, economic, social, and health impacts. Analyses of daily resource usage may influence the development of sustainable behaviors in a given society (Velazquez et al., 2006). As such, authors like Xiong et al. (2013) emphasize the importance of sustainable actions on the part of universities.
Green IT can be integrated into sustainable universities for the realization of administration, teaching, research, and outreach activities. Universities invariably utilize IT, which entails considerable expenditures on electricity while generating technological waste. The production of electricity for consumption also causes emission of greenhouse gases. The following research question logically ensues: How was the framework designed, applicable to universities, that integrates sustainable actions and Green IT? Based on research by Herrick and Ritschard, 2009, Kroth et al., 2016, and Yoshida et al. (2017), it is proposed that concepts and activities related to Green IT can be successfully applied within universities to reduce environmental impacts.
The main objective is to propose a framework to assist universities in adopting Green IT-related actions. This entails an environmental impact evaluation that measures total consumption of electricity, total energy cost, and CO2 emissions. Computer simulation is also incorporated into this proposed framework due to research by such authors as Mercure et al. (2018) and Newman et al. (2002) that encourages the use of simulation to test scenarios involving environmental evaluation.
Computer simulation creates a computer model that represents an actual or hypothetical system. Thus, by means of digital experimentation under a defined set of conditions, a better understanding of both simple and complex system operations can be reached (Kelton et al., 2001). Therefore, simulation is proposed as a supplementary technique for the evaluation of scenarios to facilitate the analysis of a given situation and to generate proposals for more refined sustainable actions. Furthermore, simulation can facilitate the continuity of future assessments and thereby promote the maintenance of the evaluation of sustainable measures implemented at the university.
