Social Media Influencers (SMIs) play a key role in affecting the way users interact on social media, and organizations have learnt to leverage on this group when they prepare their communication and public relations plans (Freberg et al., 2011; Moreno et al., 2015; Li, 2016; Ge and Gretzel, 2018; Ong and Ito, 2019). SMIs represent “a new type of independent third party endorser who shape audience attitudes through blogs, tweets, and the use of other social media” (Freberg et al., 2011).
With their audience looking up at them as credible sources of information, SMIs can provide valuable support to organizations, while equally being a potential menace (Li, 2016; Ramadan, 2018; Ong and Ito, 2019). Influencers can promote a brand, enhancing an organization's popularity and becoming, in this way, part of the enterprise's social media strategy (Booth and Matic, 2011; Ge and Gretzel, 2018). A number of companies already promote their brand through blogs posted by famous bloggers or artists who mention a particular product or label on social media, often in connection with experiences in their daily life. On the flip side, influencers can also represent a hazard for organizations, when they point out bad results or negative situations involving the enterprise or, even worse, when they pass on false information, which can often originate from fake social media accounts, or when they actually write bogus material themselves (Freberg, 2012; Wan et al., 2015; Jahnke and Kroll, 2018).
It follows that organizations must engage proactively with social media influencers and plan specific communication strategies around them. In the available studies, an influencer is defined as someone who has been empowered by their network, is extremely active on social media and so makes a significant impact (Li, 2016). These studies, however, have not been concerned with classifying SMIs or examining how they connect with the personal relations strategies set in place within organizations. This implies that the overarching term of SMI brings together users who exert several kinds of influence. Influencers are, in some cases, those with very many followers, other times, they have a high number of connections or they may be extremely prolific bloggers (Himelboim et al., 2014; De Veirman et al., 2017; Djafarova and Rushworth, 2017). If influencers are taken as a single category of social media users, companies will find it difficult to set in place a public relations strategy customized to the kind of influence being exerted.
This study addresses the problem of how to evaluate SMIs, by focusing on the kind of influence that the SMIs hold. The following research questions are addressed in the paper:
•What are the indicators for qualifying and quantifying Social Media Influencers (SMIs)?•What is the methodological approach for applying these measures?•How can SMIs be classified and what are the associated public relations strategies?
Theoretically, the development of indicators for the quantification of SMIs is grounded in Social Network Analysis (Wasserman and Faust, 1994), which recognises a different level of importance for nodes inside a network. Empirically, the indicators identified and related methodological approach were applied through an action research project conducted at the Teatro alla Scala, one of the major opera houses in Europe (and here also referred to as La Scala). Operationally, the authors conducted an empirical analysis of a Twitter-based dataset consisting of tweets posted about the Teatro Alla Scala in 2016, alongside interviews and meetings held with the opera house's marketing and communication offices.
As the main outcome of our study, we found that there are different types of SMIs, depending on the kind of influence they exert. This led us to come up with a precisely focused classification of SMIs into writers, authorities and spreaders. The activity and interaction of these influencers were captured and monitored through a set of indicators that have been tested at a technical and management level through the action research project.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First, the literature background consists of reviewing extant studies on influencers, with particular reference to the available measures for detecting SMIs. The research methodology will then be presented, followed by the results, where the first part covers the proposed indicators and the network-building methodology, and the second part deals with how these measures can be applied empirically to the Teatro alla Scala Twitter dataset. The final section contains the discussion and conclusions, expanding on the potential uses of these measures in management studies.
