Thyroid nodule is one of the most common diseases (Frannita et al., 2018) and its incidence increasing gradually in many countries (Paschou et al., 2017). In clinical application, serological testing, radioisotope scanning, ultrasound diagnosis, fine needle aspiration cytology and so on (Cortese, Aranda, Buttafava, Contini, Dalla Mora, de Fraguier, Dehghani, Garcia, Gomis, Hanzu, Krischak, Lo Presti, Mora, Pifferi, Renna, Rosinski, Konugolu Venkata Sekar, Squarcia, Taroni, Tosi, Weigel, Wojtkiewicz, Zolda, Durduran, 2018, Bushberg, Seibert, Leidholdt, Boone, Goldschmidt, 2003) are often utilized to diagnose thyroid nodules. As one of the most widely used radiological technologies, ultrasound diagnosis is utilized in analyzing thyroid disease due to its non-invasive nature, low cost, painless and rapid to perform (Hegedüs et al., 2003). However, ultrasound diagnosis can only provide indirect information to determine whether the thyroid nodules are benign or malignant. This means that ultrasound diagnosis is limited in the analysis of benign and malignant thyroid nodules. Therefore, many people have tried to combine ultrasound diagnosis with some methods to realize computer aided diagnosis. Among them, machine learning is a method that is often considered to realize computer aided diagnosis (Shan et al., 2016). Since the computer aided diagnosis of medical images is usually complicated and difficult to be achieved, traditional machine learning cannot be effectively applied to this fields (Brattain et al., 2018). Nevertheless, it is deep learning, a widely used machine learning, that makes computer aided diagnosis possible.
With the rapid development of deep learning, it has been applied to more and more fields. Also, deep learning is applied to medical imaging to realize computer aided diagnosis, so as to provide auxiliary diagnosis advice in clinic. Deep learning has demonstrated effective results in computer aided diagnosis, such as disease classification, brain segmentation and so on. For instance, GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2015); (Szegedy et al., 2016) is often utilized in medical image classification and U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) is often utilized in medical image segmentation. Meanwhile, there have been many studies on the computer aided diagnosis of thyroid nodule ultrasound images to classify benign and malignant thyroid nodules. As shown in Ma et al. (2017), the authors adopted cascade convolutional neural networks to detect thyroid nodules. In (Moussa et al., 2020), the authors classified thyroid nodule by using fine-tuning ResNet-50. And in Chi et al. (2017), the authors classified thyroid nodule by utilizing the features extracted from a fine-tuning GoogLeNet model for training a Cost-sensitive Random Forest classifier. Also, in Vanithamani and Dhivya (2018), the authors utilized the Gray Level Co-occurrence Matrix features obtained from segmented thyroid nodules to train Support Vector Machine for getting diagnostic results. In (Liu et al., 2017), the authors proposed a method based on transfer learning and hybrid features to deal with thyroid nodule images based on small dataset. As the above papers, a variety of deep learning networks, training methods and feature extraction methods were used to diagnose thyroid nodule. In general, there have been many papers on the application of deep learning to achieve computer aided diagnosis of thyroid nodule, but only few on handling the problem brought about by small dataset.
To achieve reliable computer aided diagnosis, large datasets are often required for training (Zhang, Yang, Chen, Li, Du, Cai, Wang, Zhang, 2017). Consequently, most of the combined methods are proposed based on sufficient samples. Nevertheless, in medicine, obtaining medical ultrasound images is heavily dependent on the work of doctors, resulting in small datasets. If only a small dataset is utilized for training the deep learning model, overfitting will be caused easily, resulting in poor classification effect. This will make the generalization ability of the trained model poor, causing the model is difficult to be applied in clinic.
In addition, in the clinical application of computer aided diagnosis, continuous scanning is often encountered. During the continuous scanning, owing to the different scanning angle and scanning position, the object regions may translate and their shape may also change. This will lead to the intra-class variation, resulting in the differences between the images from the same category. It is well known that slight differences in images can affect the classification results. Thus, even if the images from the same object are classified, the different classification results can be obtained from the same trained model. This leads that the practical application of deep learning is limited.
When realizing the computer aided diagnosis of thyroid nodule ultrasound images, the deep learning model need to be trained based on the small datasets. However, if only a small dataset is used in training, the trained deep learning model will overfit. The overfitting will lead to poor generalization ability of the model, so that the model cannot be utilized in clinic. In addition, as mentioned in the previous paragraph, the negative effect caused by the intra-class variation will be encountered. Afterwards, if only insufficient original thyroid nodule ultrasound samples are utilized to train deep learning model, the generalization ability of the model will be worse, exacerbating the negative effect. Hence, the implement of the computer aided diagnosis of thyroid nodules based on the small datasets is difficult to provide great classification results. Especially in the case of insufficient data, when classifying the sequence thyroid nodule ultrasound images extracted from a segment of video, the classification results may change all the time.
In this paper, we focus on dealing with the negative effect caused by small dataset to boost the accuracy of thyroid nodule ultrasound images. The proposed method, a multi-view ensemble learning, can not only achieve accurate diagnosis results, but also has a good effect on dealing with sequence images. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the detailed methods involved in the proposed method. Afterwards, Section 3 introduces the experimental process of the proposed method, and Section 4 analyses all the results. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section 5.
