Radiation processing of different objects across a wide range of doses and dose rates is required by many experimental research tasks. The irradiation center at the IPCE RAS is based on the use of an 6–10 MeV, 10 kW electron accelerator, an UELV-10-10-S-70, which is installed in a radiation-safe bunker and designed to perform electron beam irradiation. The installation is used for scientific and applied research on the radiation-chemical transformations of materials and on the development of radiation technologies (Metreveli et al., 2018; Pavlov et al., 2017). One of the areas of research noted in this study is the radiation resistance of polymers across a wide range of radiation doses with different beam characteristics.
The radiation-technological installation consists of an accelerator with a beam scanning system and a conveyer, which moves objects before the output window of accelerator. The installation is used for different research, technological and commercial applications. The problem to be solved is to increase the range of dose rates for research needs, without disturbing other uses of the installation. Nominally, the installation provides irradiation at a dose rate near 3 kGy per second, which does not meet the demands of many research problems. The problem is to obtain uniform doses of less than 3 kGy, which could not be achieved by irradiating when using the conveyer. Attaining high doses (more than 1 GGy) at given dose rates encounters the problem of overheating the irradiated material.
New methods of irradiation and techniques were developed to achieve smaller doses and lower dose rates. A method has been developed which assumes irradiating objects with a scattered electron beam that has passed through a 5-m layer of air, by irradiating the objects at the bunker wall far from the accelerator output. A scattered beam is also used to attain high doses, but avoiding overheating, using long-term irradiation instead of short passes on the conveyer. The dose rate in this method is low enough, so that the thermal energy developed in the object due to irradiation can be easily removed using an air fan. These new methods of irradiation require study to find out their limitations. Experiments and calculations were so conducted in this research.
Planning of the experiments to use with the accelerator is carried out by preliminary simulation of the experimental conditions using the computer code “BEAM SCANNING”. Simulation shows the dose distribution in the irradiated objects and helps to propose the optimal method of irradiation.
