Innovations in industry and technology constantly call for the development of novel, increasingly powerful materials. The field of materials science is concerned with finding materials that meet predefined property specifications which vary with the intended use of the material. In general, a material has a certain set of properties that are subject to a number of influencing factors. As an example, the chemical composition, i.e. the individual elements the material consists of, plays an important role for the distinct characteristics the resulting material has. But also the sequence of different treatments a material undergoes has substantial impact on the final material’s properties. Each processing step may change the structure of a material such that it develops different properties depending on the material itself and the parameterization of the treatment. Multiple processes conducted subsequently in a process chain then produce the final set of properties the material will have. However, some of the processing steps may cancel out the results of previous steps, therefore finding the right process chain is crucial in producing the desired material.
The emerging field of materials informatics combines domain knowledge from the material sciences with computational and representational means of computer science. However, despite remarkable progress in both analytical and data-driven approaches towards material design, the discovery and engineering of new materials is still a time, cost, and labor-intensive process.
One obvious reason for this is the intractably huge exploration space, which originates from the number of qualitative and quantitative process parameters of different material treatments. For example, considering the number of different possible processes (e.g. thermal, mechanical or chemical treatments) with their respective parameterizations (e.g. temperatures, processing times) as well as the proportions of the composition yield an unimaginably large number of possible combinations. From a computational point of view, this process of exploring new materials suffers from what is commonly referred to as the “curse of dimensionality”, the exponential growth of a search space in the number of its dimensions. In addition, the empirical evaluation of a new material compound is time and labor intensive as it involves the manufacturing and processing of sufficiently large samples of a material, as well as the investigation and measurement of its properties.
Recently, Ellendt and Mädler [8] have proposed a novel approach towards material design, called Farbige Zustände (colored states), which aims at the investigation of materials and processes on microscopic-size samples that can be produced with innovative high-throughput methods at low cost. However, these micro samples are often too small in size to directly measure properties like the fatigue strength against. Instead, a set of descriptive features of micro samples is used to predict the material properties from microscopic to macroscopic samples. Finding mappings between these features in the microscopic level and corresponding properties in the macroscopic level plays a central role in this development process because it allows to experimentally explore material groups while overcoming resource limitations at the same time.
The experimental setup within the approach is designed for the systematic analysis of a selection of well-known metal alloys such that the results can be compared to findings from literature. The relations can later be transferred to less thoroughly investigated materials.
In this paper, we present our conception and prototypical implementation of MatCALO, an intelligent, assistive system that is capable of supporting materials scientists in their work by generating hypotheses on how to process certain materials to obtain desired properties. The overarching vision behind this system is the idea that a material scientist approaches the system with a set of desired properties a material should meet. The researcher queries the system with these requirements and gets back a confidence-rated set of hypotheses about which material compositions and processing steps are likely to yield the respective results. A high-level overview of this framework is shown in Fig. 1. To this end, the system maintains a large database of experimental data which will be used to generate a set of candidate answers. In a later state the system will additionally use semantic knowledge to complement the trained model in refining its results, presenting alternative answers and generating final hypotheses. This implies the requirement of finding a suitable and machine-understandable representation of semantic knowledge.Download : Download high-res image (349KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. High-level overview of the framework: the query entered by the user first triggers a search for candidate hypotheses. The hypotheses generation then uses additional semantic knowledge to refine the results.
The scientific contributions of this paper are therefore.
•the investigation of materials science control structures and their processing in terms of an intelligent system that allows to query different aspects in order to find undiscovered relations•the introduction of an approach to generate process plans for the targeted construction of novel materials•an open-source prototypical implementation of the software MatCALO which combines this knowledge and provides access to it
An overview of research in the field of materials informatics is presented in Sec. 2. Sec. 3 covers the conceptual description of the research question we are tackling. We will therefore delineate terms introduced in the scope of this work and define the domain we restrict ourselves to. Sec. 4 details the research question by formalizing the conceptual description before Sec. 5 presents the hypothesis generation by means of a representative example. The semantic representation of knowledge is addressed in Sec. 6. The current state of the prototypical implementation of MatCALO as well as information the interpretation of various visualizations is demonstrated in Sec. 7. A proof-of-concept evaluation along with the discussion of the results and an outlook to future developments can be found in Sec. 8 Experiments, 9 Results and discussion.
