The number of mobile users has increased rapidly due to their portability, smaller size and support of a wide range of applications. Using mobile devices for online payments, buying and financial activities have made attackers to target mobile users. The attacker attempts to trick the mobile users to disclose information such as credit card, bank account details etc. which is used for his financial benefit. Due to lack of awareness, mobile users become victims of social engineering attacks. Mobile phishing can be performed through SMS, webpages, E-mails and mobile applications. Many users install applications from third-party app stores and attacker takes this as an advantage to perform an attack.
According to Riskified, an eCommerce fraud-prevention company and IntSigns [1], there was a 297% increase in the number of fake retail websites designed to obtain customer credentials from July to September 2017 to that of 2018. As per Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG) Q1 (2018) report [2], 263,538 phishing websites were detected out of which 1/3r
d of them were hosted on HTTPS infrastructure. It was also observed that most of these HTTPS phishes were hosted on domains owned by the attackers. The mid-year threat report [3] (2018) by Webroot says that the number of phishing attempts increased by more than 60% in June compared to that of January, 2018. Online transactions and fraud are increasing in mobile devices. In the first quarter of 2018, RSA [4] reported that 55% of the total online transactions were through mobile devices and 65% of fraud transactions used mobile browsers. Hence, there is a need for a light-weight phishing detection technique in mobile devices to reduce the financial loss incurred through cyber frauds.
Mobile webpages differ from their desktop versions in terms of content, layout, and functionality. Due to the small screen size of mobile devices, the visibility of URL, page layout, content in the browser is limited whereas the users can have a relatively larger view in desktop browsers. The attackers create a phishing site which looks similar to that of legitimate site. Thus, it is difficult for any mobile user to distinguish between legitimate and fake website. For instance, websites may be blacklisted in desktop browsers but same websites may not be blacklisted in mobile web browsers. Most of the anti-phishing techniques were designed to detect malicious websites in desktop computers and they may not work for mobile webpages due to the hardware limitations, difference in screen size and layout.
Some of the existing techniques use either a blacklist or whitelist of URLs for the detection of phishing sites. These techniques fail when a URL falls out of the list. The non-blacklisted URLs are called as zero-day phishing attacks which are countered using heuristic feature-based techniques. The heuristic features are extracted from URL, source code, third-party services to detect the phishing sites. The use of third-party services such as WHOIS, search engine, page ranking delay the detection process. The use of source code-based features such as hyperlinks ratio, textual content, null links ratio, Document Object Model (DOM) might fail to detect image-based phishing sites [5]. Also, source code-based techniques might involve some delay in the feature extraction process and it is difficult to handle pages with iframes. There exist some semi-automated techniques which involve human intervention in preprocessing activities such as segmentation of logos, maintenance of a database of target legitimate sites etc. which limit their applicability in real-time systems. Thus there is a need for an automated mechanism for the detection of phishing sites.
Majority of the phishing URL detection techniques include lexical or bag-of-words features for training the model with traditional machine learning algorithms. The lexical features consist of hostname-based [6], [7], [8], full URL [7], [9], WHOIS and popularity features. The bag-of-words features [10], [11] check the presence of one or more keywords in the URL. Though these techniques showed significant results, they also suffer from several limitations. Firstly, the techniques based on bag-of-words fail to capture the sequence of words appearing in the URL. Secondly, feature engineering is required to select the relevant features by removing the noisy or redundant attributes. Finally, they might fail when unseen features such as presence of new phish hinted words [7], [11] or special symbols are not trained on the data but appear in the test data. Also, these techniques might use a large dictionary of unique words for training the model. To address the above issues, there is a need for URL-based model to detect phishing sites. Moreover, very little effort has been made to design mobile based anti-phishing techniques which motivated us to propose a light-weight model to mitigate such attacks using a multi-model ensemble of deep learning and machine learning algorithms.
Recent years have witnessed rapid growth in deep learning applications such as Health care, Image recognition, Automatic text generation, automatic coloring, prediction of natural calamities, traffic identification etc. Apart from these applications, deep learning has been widely used for text classification [12], [13], speech recognition [14] and image classification [15], [16]. Recently, deep learning has also been used in various techniques [17], [18] for the classification of malicious sites.
Many machine learning algorithms such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF) were used for the classification of suspicious sites. It is also observed that not many anti-phishing techniques used deep learning techniques for the detection of phishing sites in mobile devices. Hence, in our work, we chose an ensemble of both machine learning (SVM) and deep learning i.e. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) for the detection of phishing sites efficiently. The summary of contributions of our proposed model is given as follows.

1.We proposed a multi-model ensemble of LSTM and SVM to predict the legitimacy of the suspicious site and demonstrated its effectiveness as superior to other existing machine learning, deep learning techniques.2.We conducted experiments on various datasets of different size (10 K, 20 K, 30 K, 40 K and 331 K) to evaluate the behavior of the model with varying dataset.3.We implemented a real-time technique deployed as an android application named PhishDump to detect phishing sites in mobile devices.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no multi-model ensemble of machine learning and deep learning algorithms for the detection of phishing sites in the literature. The proposed multi-model ensemble has some advantages over existing works and are given as follows.

•Language independent: As our proposed model does not rely on the textual content of the website, the model detects the phishing sites independent of the language used in its content.•Third-party independent: The URL-based features are extracted without any dependency on third-party services.•Client-side adaptability: In our proposed model, the extracted features from URL are light-weight and hence, adaptable at client-side.•Target independent detection: Unlike image-based techniques [19], [20], [21], our technique does not depend on pre-stored database of target legitimate sites. This makes our technique capable of detecting phishing sites targeting any legitimate site.•Drive-by-download independent: As the feature extraction does not require visiting the website, the download of malicious software is avoided.
Rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 deals with a survey on existing anti-phishing techniques. The proposed work is discussed in Section 3. Experimental results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 deals with discussion of our model. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
