The concept of a Supercomputer is dynamic, and could be described as an instance of the most highly-performing computer available at a given time, and which changes as advances in computer science and technology are made (Infante, 1986). A Supercomputer is cutting-edge technology, based on large computing systems providing close to the best currently achievable sustained performance on demanding computational problems (Verschelde, 2012) based on simulations requiring high computing power (Resch, 2005). Supercomputing means running “large” projects or applications (using at least half of the available resources of a “large” system) which cannot be run on small or average sized systems (Jones & Nitzberg, 1999). The processing power of a large number of computers is distributed in the form of computer clusters and a large number of processors are used in close proximity to each other (Seagall, 2013).
The history of supercomputers dates back to the 1940s when the first High-Performance Computers (HPC) were introduced. In the 60s, there was a radical change in the way in which these infrastructures were understood, because of the highly complex simulations used in many projects and their introduction in industry, when the first parallel computers were built (González, Rosillo, Dávila, & Olivera, 2015). During recent decades, educational practice has faced a growing adoption of computer tools for the support of learning processes (Jonassen, 1999; Smeets, 2005). The fast introduction of Supercomputing technologies in education (Bote-Lorenzo et al., 2008) is a key challenge that provides a broader range of opportunities, mainly due to the possibility of managing a high volume of data and information, and has prompted educators and researchers to take a pedagogical view to promote, in the best possible way, teaching and using these infrastructures. All this creates new and critical tasks for the Higher Education System, which require extensive and complete training, using many tools for problem solving (Sung et al., 2003), in the same line of inquiry-based learning, for fostering students' curiosity and motivation (Specht, Bedek, Duval, & Held, 2013). Such infrastructures can help students, mainly senior undergraduate and postgraduate, to develop their ability, not only computing-competent users, but also non-competent users, contributing to the creation of a new generation of professionals, companies and organizations related to Science and Technology (Bethel et al., 2011). In fact, Supercomputing is considered one of the three pillars, along with theory and laboratory research, on which much of the progress of science and engineering is based. For this reason, students could employ HPC laboratories that have long developed and implemented strategies for making computational tools and analytical technologies available for use by all sectors of society (Bruce et al., 1997). In general, the use of Supercomputers extends into sectors such as Electronics, Telecommunications and Computer Science, Natural Sciences, Computer Science and Engineering, Medicine, Life Sciences, Mechanics, Economics, Social Sciences and Management. Investment in education related to the use of Supercomputers is important in many fields of knowledge, as seen in those described in the UNESCO classification: Engineering (Fabricius, Freundl, Köstler, & Rüde, 2005; Smith, 2014), Economy and Linguistics (Moses & Mariasingam, 2006) and Science (Farian, Anne, & Haas, 2008; Gaziza, Salima, Guldina, & Elena, 2012). Currently, adequate preparation of students is essential to drive innovation and support scientific research. Thus, training for a more highly skilled and knowledgeable workforce, capable of using Supercomputing technology (Coveney, McGuire, Parchment, Kenway, & Parsons, 2012) is much in demand.
The goal of the present paper is to create a visual map of how Supercomputing can improve results obtained by different users. In order to take advantage of Supercomputers, users must know how to adapt their problems to this programming paradigm. Consequently, they must first be taught how to rethink the problems and subsequently be able to try them on a Supercomputer to get better results. When we talk about students we are mainly considering, but not limited to, postgraduate students starting their research career with a Master Thesis or a PhD, as well as postdoc researchers. The study of HPC is an essential part of postgraduate programmes in Computational Science (Zarza, Lugones, Franco, & Luque, 2012). This fulfills the goals of higher education: prepare postgraduate level students for their careers both in academia and industry. This consideration means that Computational Science could be considered in the core area of many postgraduate disciplines where the use of HPC will be essential to solve complex data problems (Alexandrov & Alexandrov, 2015).
After a detailed search of the literature, no review in relation to this topic was found. This demonstrates a lack of attention paid to this field despite the importance these infrastructures have for training future researchers. In order to support the study, we consider that the classification of the results across a field, where the scope has not been described, categorized or evaluated (Hammick, 2005), helps researchers to understand the existing body of knowledge, providing a theoretical foundation for an empirical study, justifying a new contribution to the accumulated knowledge (Levy & Ellist, 2006), which is the essential condition for a field of knowledge to be classified as ‘‘scientific’’ (Hunter, Schmidt, & Jackson, 1982). With the purpose of appreciating the relevance of this study, we have to highlight the importance of the effective literature reviews for the advance of knowledge in general and for the understanding of the breadth of the research on a topic, the empirical evidence, the development of theories or the provision of a conceptual background for a subsequent research, identifying, finally, the topics or research domains that require a deeper analysis (Cooper, 1988) (Leedy & Ormrod, 2001). It is important to promote this study, with the aim of describing how the use of Supercomputers can support learners in the improvement of their specific skills. We also aim to enhance understanding of the core assessment concepts as they occur in this type of training. For the development of the research, a collaboration of a Group of Experts on Scientific Computing was established, charged with clarifying concepts to fulfill the goals established.
The findings will likely be of interest to students, researchers, administrators, and industry leaders as they make, more often, decisions based on computational modelization and intensive calculation. Currently the use of Supercomputers is becoming a key element in the improvement of certain disciplines of higher education. In fact, it is believed that scientists cannot be productive or efficient in terms of global research standards if they are not able to integrate Supercomputing into their research process as a required factor (Emmott & Rison, 2008). In sum, this review synthesizes the relevant literature through training in Supercomputing to provide a comprehensive analysis previously lacking in studies related to this issue. Specifically, the present study poses four research questions: (RQ1): Which are the factors considered as improvements to training in Supercomputing?; (RQ2): How can Supercomputing training improve the results of the students and/or researchers in a high education organization?; (RQ3): What is currently known about the limitations of Supercomputing training? and (RQ4): What are the solutions described for solving the limitations related to Supercomputing training?
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we present the research method for the review of literature, describing research questions, criteria used for inclusion/exclusion, sources of studies, search strategy, data extraction and synthesis of findings. In section 3, we present the results of the proposed systematic study. Finally, in section 4, we present conclusions, limitations and discussions of future research directions.
