Visual tracking is an important task in computer vision application [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. The goal of tracking is to estimate the locations and scales according to the initialized target, which is manually annotated with a bounding box in the initialized frame, throughout a video sequence. As research continues, the target of tracking can be any arbitrary object classes and is no longer confined to the human body. The arbitrariness of target extends the range of practical use in visual tracking and a great deal of applications appears in the real-world, such as intelligent robotics, human-computer interface, vision-based medical instruments, video surveillance, vehicle navigation, driver-less car, augmented reality, etc. Despite of the great progress made in recent years, visual object tracking remains a challenging problem and is far from the requirements for practical applications. As the target and the background may undergo unpredictable and drastic changes along the video sequences, the main problem of visual object tracking is how to obtain robust track in an efficient manner.
Most existing tracking methods, whether generative [6], [7], [8], [9] or discriminative [10], [11], [12], [13], utilize online update strategy to handle the failure tracking cases. Generative methods typically utilize an appearance model to represent the target and then use this model to search the optimal candidate samples as the tracking result. With the appearance model updated, the cumulative error makes the tracker prone to drift, especially when the target appearance has drastic deformation. Many theories, such as sparse representation [14], [15], subspace learning [16], [17], low-rank representation [18], [19], have been introduced to tackle the drifting problem of tracking, which can enhance the representation ability of the target appearance model. Ross et al. [20] presented an online tracking method, which incrementally learns a subspace model to handle the variation of the target appearance. Mei and Ling [21] first posed the tracking task as a sparse approximation problem under a particle filter framework, which utilizes the sparse representation to select the optimal appearance from the candidates by using ℓ1 minimization. Li et al. [22] further enhanced the ℓ1-tracker by using the orthogonal matching pursuit algorithm to handle the optimization problems efficiently. The target in tracking process may have different appearances and the low-rank representation [23] digs out the shared latent factors among them to make the tracker more efficient. Due to the target appearance, which is commonly acquired by using a bounding box, not only contains the target but also contains the background, many patch based methods have been proposed to make the tracker more robust. In [24], the local features are acquired by using overlapped patches and a global constraint is added to deal with the drifting problem. He et al. [25] used key patch sparse representation to alleviate the disturbance of unavoidable background information. Despite some demonstrated success of online generative tracking methods, but the weak discrimination ability make the tracker prone to drift especially when similar distracters appears, which may severely disturb the tracker and thus make the misjudgment.
Discriminative methods use the classifiers which are trained with both positive and negative samples to distinguish the target from its surrounding background. Avidan [26] trained a support vector machine(SVM) classifier to recognize the most optimum candidate as tracking target under the framework of optical flow. In consider of the target and background are not immutable during the tracking process, it is important for tracker to update online. Collins et al. [27] demonstrated that it is difficult to train an efficient classifier by using a fixed feature space, hence they proposed an online feature ranking algorithm which can adaptively select more discriminative features for tracking. Avidan [28] cast tracking task as a binary classification problem and combined an ensemble of weak classifiers online to separate the target from its surrounding background. In [29], an online semi-supervised boosting method have been proposed to alleviate the drifting issue which is introduced by the accumulated error during the update process. AS the training samples are extracted according to the previous tracking results which may not precise, the incorrect label of training samples may decrease the accuracy of the classifier and lead to the tracking failed. To address this issue, the multiple instance learning(MIL) algorithm is introduced into tracking task [30]. Different from the traditional supervised learning, MIL can reduce the dependency of tracker on labels and make the samples be trained more accurately such that a more robust tracking performance can be obtained.
In recent years, correlation filter based trackers brought the performance of tracking into a new level owing to its effective search strategy and decision mechanism. Bolme et al. [31] introduced the classical signal processing theory into visual tracking, which makes the training and decision process of tracking can be applied in Fourier domain and hence the running speeds of the tracker is promoted greatly. In [32], kernel functions are exploited to promote the robustness of CF tracking. The distance matrix are mapped into the kernel space to better construct the CF model. Danelljan et al. [33] presented a Discriminative Scale Space Tracking (DSST) method, the top tracker on VOT2014, to tackle the scale variations effectively under the CF framework. Although the CF based trackers achieves fast and accurate tracking in most cases, it is less effective for the cases with distracters due to their weak discrimination ability.
The lack of discrimination ability of CF trackers results from their model training mechanism. In the CF training task, the label map is generated as a Gaussian distribution centered in the center of the target. The above label map works well in the cases where the search window does not contain distracters. However, it may be less effective when distracters appear and is unaware of the distracters. The unawareness of the distracters weakens the discrimination ability to distinguish the target from the distracters, which can be seen in Fig. 1(a). The distracters can be regarded as the negative samples with high response and the information of negative samples is crucial for robust tracking.Download : Download high-res image (375KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The different label maps. (a) shows the conventional label map which is unaware to negative samples. (b) shows the distracter-aware label map.
Based on the above analysis, we propose a distracter-aware CF tracker. We first design a distracter detection mechanism to detect potential negative samples which has the same size as the target. The center position of the negative sample can be regarded as the distracter with high response score which is acquired according to the previous response map. With the positions of the distracters, we design a corresponding label map which assigns negative values for the distracters, which can be seen in Fig. 1(b). Then the proposed model is trained and updated with the designed label map. The decision model of CF based trackers are highly rely on the response value and many challenging factors such as fast motion, complicated background, occlusions, etc. may cause the response value become unreliable, these may lead the tracker falsely select the distracters as the tracking result. To enhance the robustness of the tracker, we design a re-detection scheme which uses positive and negative filters to refine the predicted results when the distracters appear. Then we have two response maps Spos and Sneg corresponding to the positive and negative filters. The center positions of the target can be acquired by searching the maximum response value of the difference response map, i.e., Sdiff=Spos−Sneg. We test our tracker on the OTB2013 [34] and OTB2015 [35] benchmarks and compare it with several state-of-the-art trackers. The comparable performance show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm and the contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
•We propose a distracter-aware label map as the regression target under CF framework. The proposed algorithm exploits the positions and response values of distracters to enhance the discriminability of the filter in training process.•We design a re-detection scheme which contains positive and negative filters to refine the tracking results. The proposed re-detection scheme utilize the information of the target and the distracters to make the tracker more robust in decision process.•Extensive experiments on the OTB2013 and OTB2015 are conducted. The comparison results on each standard benchmarks are given to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.
