1.1. Virtual realityVirtual reality (VR), also known as virtual environment, is a computer simulation system that can create and simulate virtual worlds. It provides an immersive experience to the users by generating various types of interactive activities related to visual, auditory, and tactile perceptions. The virtual environment can be a scenery conceived by a designer or a reproduction of the live scene. Professional equipment such as VR headsets and data gloves allow users to sense and control various virtual objects in real time, creating an experience that users cannot obtain in the real world and generating real response or feedback.VR has three distinct characteristics: interaction, immersion, and imagination. Interaction refers to the natural interaction between the user and the virtual scene. It provides the users with the same feeling as the real world through feedback. Immersion means that the users feel that they are part of the virtual world in the VR scene, as if they are immersed; Imagination refers to the use of multi-dimensional perception information provided by VR scenes to acquire the same feelings as the real world while acquiring the feelings that are not available in the real world.
1.2. Human-computer interactionHuman-computer interaction refers to the research in design, utilization, and implementation of computer systems by human. It is a technology to study about humans, computers, and the interaction between the two. With the development of computing devices and related technologies, the interaction between humans and computers has become a part of daily life including work, shopping, and communication[1]. The graphical user interface based on mouse and keyboard is the commonly used user interface; however, the user interface based on the Window, Icon, Menu, Pointer (WIMP) interface paradigm is limited to two-dimensional (2D) planar objects, which cannot interact with the objects in the three-dimensional (3D) space, reducing the naturalness of the interaction. The interaction between humans communicates through many different aspects including language expression, body movements, and emotional interactions. The new generation of human-computer interaction should have many characteristics such as human-centered, multimodal, and intelligent. Therefore, it is necessary to propose a new interface paradigm, establish a new user interface, and adopt a new interaction method.In real life, people use their hands to perform operations such as grasp, move, and rotate. In the process of communication, people spontaneously attract the attention of others by hand movements. Gesture is the way people express their will under the influence of consciousness. Therefore, gesture interaction has two functions: one is the movement of the hand, and the other is the specific meaning of the gesture. The study by Karam showed that compared with other parts of the body, the hand as a common communication device is most suitable for application of human-computer interaction[2]. Gesture interaction is intuitive, natural, and flexible. Therefore, it is also very important for some users with physical disabilities, such as visual impairment and hearing impairment, to interact through gestures.
1.3. Gesture interaction technology in virtual realityHuman-computer interaction, as an important supporting technology of VR, provides a variety of interactive modes based on different functions and purposes, enabling people to obtain immersive feelings in 3D virtual scenes. As an emerging technology, VR is a new interactive human-computer interaction interface. Therefore, a new generation interface paradigm Post-WIMP[3] and Non-WIMP[4] has been defined, and the interaction also extends from a mouse- and keyboard-based 2D graphical user interface to a natural user interface or supernatural user interface. Unlike traditional WIMP, in a natural user interface or a supernatural user interface scenario, the user interacts in a 3D environment simply by VR simulation or interactive scenario design, which eliminates waste of resources generated by repetitive manufacturing and controls production costs. With the continuous development of interactive technology, VR has been widely used in many fields such as game entertainment, medical care, and education. In the future, interaction could be like the movie “Player One” in that users could capture people’s movements through wearable devices, become avatars, and interact with other people in the virtual world. As an increasing number of companies and scholars invest in the research of gesture interaction technology and related applications, gesture interactions have engaged a large proportion of the field of natural interaction. To simulate daily life operations in a virtual environment, it is necessary to track and recognize the hand movements, to make the computer understand the true intention expressed by gestures, and to perform related tasks. At the same time, in order to make people have a natural interactive experience in the VR process, relevant feedback must be provided to the user.Gesture is a conscious or unconscious movement of the hand, arm, or limb. The gestures in the interaction process can be distinguished according to different spatiotemporal operation behaviors, different semantics, different interaction modes, and different interaction ranges. In the early interaction scenarios, the acquisition of gesture signals was mainly based on wearable sensor devices such as data gloves; with the development of mobile devices such as mobile phones and tablets, touch screens became popular; consequently, the acquisition of gesture signals has developed into visual signal acquisition from computer cameras. In recent years, information acquisition based on high-tech equipment such as electromyographic signal acquisition has gradually become a research focus. Owing to the variability and complexity of the gesture, how to use the existing technology to process the input signal collected by the device, how to determine the spatial position and posture of the hand, and how to obtain an accurate recognition result have great impact on the effect of subsequent gesture interactions. Gesture recognition technology is mainly categorized into gesture recognition based on wearable sensor devices, gesture recognition based on touch devices, and gesture recognition based on computer vision. With the development of gesture recognition technology, it has been applied to many aspects of VR. The following sections of this article will discuss the above content in detail.
