In today’s highly competitive environment, the goal of each organisation is to conquest competition and to win new customers. Individuals who are holders of knowledge represent a tool for the generation of innovations. Thanks to their personal creativity, knowledge, skills and abilities it is possible to generate new innovative ideas that will help organisations to achieve a competitive advantage. Business success in developed economies and markets depends on the technological progress and technological innovation resulting from this same process. The term “innovation” is widely accepted by industry and academic professionals as an essential competitive enabler for any enterprise seeking to sustain growth. Innovation is viewed as the main driver for companies to prosper, grow and sustain their profiles (Hungund & Kiran, 2015). The present study was developed at INESC TEC, The Portuguese Institute for Systems and Computer Engineering, Technology and Science, the host Institution where researchers carried out their investigation. Researchers decided to choose INESC TEĆs environment to study, as INESC TEC is a Research Centre well positioned when compared to similar national and international R&D Centers, has good resources (Human, Financial and Material) and has good image among society, researchers, collaborators and other stakeholders. Open Innovation demands, among others, qualification, talent, success, leadership, prestige and freedom to experiment, be creative and think out of the box. INESC TEC seems to gather all these assumptions.
The purpose of this paper is to examine settings for the Open Innovation arena, suited for the analysis and improvement of INESC TEC. More particularly, the paper looks at how a firm can generate the conditions required to benefit from outside performers' knowledge at the crossing point between the firm’s boundary and the outside world. This process requires creating a”place” which will encourage collaboration and allow the firm to use remotely accessible information in a compelling manner. Such “place” is translated into open Innovation arena, through physical locations (e.g., Chesbrough, 2003, Hungund and Kiran, 2015), community of practices (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991), sociotechnical practices (e.g., Henderson, 1999), arena (e.g., Elkjaer, 2004), sociomateriality practice (e.g., Orlikowski, 2007), cross-boundary teaming (e.g., Edmondson & Harvey, 2017), etc. The structure of this work is divided into five sections: Section 1 is introduction; Section 2 presents a literature review concerning the approaches to the open innovation arena; Section 3 deals with the methodology used in the development of this study and describes the work developed at INESC TEC; Section 4 presents the survey results and, finally, Section 5 presents the conclusion and suggestions for future research.
