Science articles are typically a juxtaposition of texts and diagrams. Scientific texts generally contain strings of scientific terminologies, dense information, and abstract semantics (Halliday & Martin, 1993; Nagy & Townsend, 2012). Scientific diagrams are mostly informative, and have different types, such as representational, explanatory, and organizational (Carney & Levin, 2002; Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996; Unsworth, 2001). For example, a cell structure diagram (representational) consists of several labels and illustrates spatial structures to represent an abstract description of a text. A scientific diagram (explanatory) is composed of numerous symbols, patterns, and names that convey particular semantic information of organism operation. A diagram (organizational) showing the series of steps involved in performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
The process of comprehending scientific texts and diagrams has been investigated from two perspectives: thinking aloud and eye tracker application. Thinking aloud requires readers to express their thoughts when reading a paper. Use of self-verbal reports to investigate text and diagram comprehension strategies (McTigue, 2009; Moore & Scevak, 1997) has generated numerous crucial conclusions. For example, Moore and Scevak (1997) reported that fifth-grade students focused on details when reading an article, whereas ninth-grade students focused on processing diagrams and associating textual and pictorial information. Another research paradigm uses eye-tracking technology to conduct a process-oriented study on text and diagram reading by recording the eye movements of readers and subsequently inferring their cognitive processes. Hyönä and Nurminen (2006) asserted that eye movements are a suitable basis for investigating the spontaneous use of reading strategies because readers inevitably move their eyes while reading. Furthermore, information on eye movement provides accurate records of time and space that can be used to elucidate the section of a paper being read, duration of fixation, time at which a gaze shifts, and direction of shift at a fixation point. Vigorous development in the use of an eye tracker to investigate cognitive learning of science article comprehension has been observed (Jian, 2017, 2019; Hegarty & Just, 1993; Huang & Chen, 2016; Sung, Wu, Chen, & Chang, 2015; Tsai, Wu, & Chen, 2019; Yang, Huang, & Tsai, 2016). These studies have emphasized the eye movements of adults when they are reading science articles over those of children (Jian, 2017; Jian & Ko, 2017; Hannus & Hyönä, 1999; Mason, Tornatora, & Pluchino, 2013; Tsai et al., 2019), particularly in school settings.
Individual difference of student is a topic of interest in education. The use of reading strategies is highly relevant to reading comprehension (Cain, Oakhill, Barnes, & Bryant, 2001). Thus, investigating how readers use reading strategies to read is critical in reading education. Although considerable research has employed cluster analysis to classify individual differences in strategies for reading plain texts among adult readers (Hyönä, Lorch, & Kaakinen, 2002; Hyönä & Nurminen, 2006; Mason et al., 2013), limited research has focused on young readers’ individual differences in reading strategies while comprehending illustrated texts (Mason et al., 2013). The sixth grade is an important stage for reading to learn (Chall, 1983). In many education systems, sixth-grade students prepare to enter junior high school, a phase during which they would need to focus on subject reading (e.g., scientific reading). Therefore, this study selected sixth-grade students as research participants.
1.1. Multimedia learning theoryMayer's (2009) cognitive theory of multimedia learning (CTML) is the predominant theory describing multimedia learning. CTML is based on the dual-channel assumption (Paivio, 1990), limited capacity of information processing assumption (Baddeley, 1986), and active processing assumption (Mayer, 2008). The dual-channel assumption proposes that textual and pictorial information is processed by two channels of the cognitive processing system in humans (Baddeley, 1986; Paivio, 1990). Limited capacity of information processing assumption proposes that individuals have limited capacity to process such information within a specified time frame (Baddeley, 1986). Therefore, individuals must first select information to process in their working memory; this occurs when an individual is attentive to a relevant text and diagram. Second, because reading constitutes the active processing of information (Mayer, 2008), individuals organize selected information by linking information within a text and constructing associations between components of a diagram to code representational information into internal representations. Finally, individuals combine the organized information with their prior knowledge to form a coherent mental representation in order to achieve the purpose of reading comprehension. This process involves stimulating long-term memory and transferring the stimulated memory into working memory. The aforementioned processes do not necessarily occur in a linear sequence or a reversal sequence. Readers must coordinate only actively and monitor themselves during the switching process to successfully comprehend a text.This theory clearly states that the reading process of an illustrated reading material progresses from selecting pieces of information from the text and/or diagram, to organizing the information into larger chunks of mental representations, and finally to constructing a mental model to comprehend the concept. However, the fine-grained processes of dealing with different representations of text and diagram remain unclear. Moreover, as the reading abilities of young and teenage readers are developing, it is reasonable to assume that their reading processes do not completely match the ideal situation indicated in CTML (Mayer, 2009). For example, young readers with poor reading ability are not good at decoding diagram information or they may ignore diagrams in science articles (Jian, 2017, 2019; Hannus & Hyönä, 1999). In this case, the process of selecting diagram information described in CTML may not be apparent in these young readers. Therefore, this study sought to identify differentiated patterns of fine-grained reading processes in young readers who are reading illustrated texts, ultimately to refine multimedia theory.
1.2. Eye movement research on science article comprehension for children and AdolescentsEye movement recordings are a method that collects process-oriented data (Rayner, 1998). The earliest study of the eye movements of children during the processing of scientific texts and diagrams was conducted by Hannus and Hyönä (1999), who investigated reading processes and strategies adopted by elementary school fourth-grade students with high and low abilities when reading science textbooks. The research results indicated that illustrations helped high-ability and low-ability children to remember textual details. However, the illustrations helped only high-ability children to comprehend biological principles. Based on the eye movement data of the students, although the difference in total reading duration between the groups was nonsignificant, the students spent different amounts of time on different segments of the text and illustrations, indicating a difference between their cognitive strategies. The high-ability students spent more time processing the information presented in the illustrations and text and exhibited frequent eye movement between illustrations and text; however, less transitions between text and illustration was observed among the low-ability students. This finding suggests that children require certain cognitive resources to compare and integrate illustrated textual information. Hannus and Hyönä (1999) found that although each text contained a substantial number of pictures, the high- and low-ability children spent approximately only 6% of their time studying illustrations, which was considerably less than that spent by adults, who spent approximately 20%–30% of their reading time on illustrations (Author et al., 2015; Schmidt-Weigand, Kohnert, & Glowalla, 2010).I and my colleagues (Jian, 2017; Jian & Ko, 2017) have conducted a series of eye movement studies in recent years to investigate the cognitive processes of elementary school students when processing scientific text and diagrams. Jian and Ko (2017) adopted the eye-tracking technique to examine differences among fourth-grade students with high and low reading comprehension skills while they were processing difficult or easy scientific texts and diagrams. In that study, students were asked to read moderately difficult and difficult biology materials and answer test questions. The results indicated that the low-ability students spent considerably more time on the moderately difficult materials than on the difficult materials, whereas the high-ability students spent more time and expended more effort reading the difficult materials. The two groups of readers spent the same amount of time on illustrations and texts (approximately 15% and 85%, respectively); however, their reading movements differed significantly. The sequential analysis of eye movements revealed that when the high-ability students read a difficult text and did not understand at the first attempt, they generally reread the first paragraph of the text. By contrast, the low-ability students continued reading the subsequent paragraph, thereby following a linear reading movement irrespective of their understanding of the reading material. This finding suggested that skilled readers continuously monitor their level of understanding. If such readers do not understand the previous paragraph, they generally reread it to obtain relevant information and refer to said information when reading the next paragraph. Unskilled readers lack comprehension and monitoring ability. Based on all transition probabilities, if eye movements and fixation points are included in calculation, the most significant difference between the reading movements of the two groups of readers is as follows: high-ability students exhibit two-way reading movements transitioning between paragraphs and between the two diagrams, whereas low-ability students exhibit a linear reading movement. However, both groups seldom refer to illustrations when reading text, and the ability of fourth-grade students to integrate texts and illustrations during reading is underdeveloped.Jian (2017) investigated sixth-grade students based on their postreading comprehension scores and examined the difference between their reading processes (eye movement patterns) and reading characteristics (reading comprehension skill, literacy, scientific terminology, reading self-efficacy, subjective perception of text difficulty, partiality for a scientific diagram, and self-assessed learning outcome). The results indicated that readers with good performance had better reading self-efficacy, were more attracted to the diagrams, and had higher self-evaluated learning levels than the readers with poor performance did. However, the standard comprehension test scores, scientific terminology, and subjective perception of text difficulty in both groups were not significantly different. Moreover, eye movement measurements indicated that students with satisfactory performance on the reading comprehension test spent more time reading texts and interpreting diagrams than did their counterparts, and they frequently transitioned between illustrations and text while reading. Students with satisfactory performance generally first view all diagrams after reading the title and then read the text. This reading pattern was not observed in the students with poor performance on the reading comprehension test.To our knowledge, eye movement studies have used text-only materials and employed college students as research participants to classify different reading types (Hyönä et al., 2002; Hyönä & Nurminen, 2006; Mason et al., 2013). Only one study has targeted young readers reading illustrated text. Mason et al. (2013) conducted an empirical study on picture and text comprehension among elementary school students; they recorded 49 fourth-grade students reading a scientific text and then classified the students’ eye movements. The eye movement indices for the cluster analysis included the following factors: duration of the first-pass total fixation on text, diagrams, and rereading the text; number of saccades between text and diagrams; and total fixation duration for reinspecting diagrams (the calculation and description of each indicator are provided in the subsequent section under Data Selection and Analysis). Mason et al. found that the fourth-grade students exhibited three processing strategies during the processing of scientific diagrams and text: high, intermediate, and low integrators. High integrators (47%) spent longer on first-pass fixation and reinspecting diagrams, and frequently shifted fixations on the illustration when rereading a text segment. Intermediate integrators (39%) exhibited a shorter fixation time on the illustration during the first encounter with it, viewed the picture after rereading a text segment, and exhibited a shorter fixation time on the text while reinspecting the picture. Low integrators (17%) fixated the illustration for the shortest time during the first inspection, made no refixations at all on the picture, and exhibited the shortest fixation time on the text. High integrators presented significantly superior performance in the immediate and delayed posttest than did low integrators. However, the previous knowledge and reading abilities of all three groups exhibited no significant differences.
1.3. The present studyThe present study had three research purposes: (1) to determine the differentiated patterns of reading strategies adopted by sixth-grade students in elementary school to comprehend scientific texts and diagrams, (2) to clarify whether readers with different reading patterns had different processes toward different types of science diagrams (representational and explanatory), and (3) to examine correlations of various reading characteristics (reflected by eye movement measurements) with performance in reading comprehension.This current study expanded on previous research (Mason et al., 2013) by adding different types of science diagrams, selecting participants with different ages, and including more indicators to analyze eye movement. Specifically, there were three differences between their research and the present study: a) Mason et al. (2013) used one representational diagram in the science text; this study used a representational diagram and an explanatory diagram contained in the reading material to investigate whether readers of different reading types had different processes for comprehending these diagrams; b) Mason et al. selected fourth-grade Italian students to read a science article in Italy; this study selected sixth-grade students who were native speakers of Chinese to read a science article in Chinese; and c) apart from the eye movement indicators also used in Mason et al., this study included the proportion of total fixation on text and diagram and mean fixation duration to demonstrate the fine-grained reading processes involved in reading illustrated texts for young readers, ultimately to refine multimedia theory.
