Music and dance are an important part of the human experience. Many people engage in these activities in a social and recreational capacity. Less known and less understood, however, is that dance can also be an effective form of exercise (Angioi et al., 2009; Domene et al., 2014; Flores, 1995). Regular exercise can improve physical and cognitive function and psychological well-being, and dance-related exercise can provide similarly positive effects on physical and mental health (Angioi et al., 2009).
Despite access to extensive knowledge and information to promote health and wellbeing, health problems are pervasive in society. A contributing factor to these health problems is the increasing prevalence of inactivity in the workplace and in recreational activities (Martin et al., 2015; Ng and Popkin, 2012; Vandewater et al., 2004). In efforts to address these problems and re-engage people with physical activity, an increasing number of self-service technologies (SSTs) have been developed. SSTs are services that the customer generates and interacts with in replacement of a traditional face-to-face service (Curran and Meuter, 2005). Popular SSTs for fitness include apps for mobile devices and wearable devices such as Fitbit, Garmin, Apple Watch, and Polar heart rate monitors. These apps and devices aim to encourage healthy behaviour by prompting physical activity and monitoring progress toward wellness goals.
Although the potential benefit of SSTs for fitness is large, they often fail to achieve their aims. The effectiveness of fitness trackers has been found to be dependent on the goals set by users and their motivation to engage with the device and associated website or application (Wang, 2014; Delgado, 2014). However, apps are a crowded market, many are not downloaded, and others are downloaded and abandoned after only a short period; according to a global study of more than 300 mobile apps and 300 million user profiles, only 25% of apps in all categories are used again after the first day and fewer than 10% continue use beyond seven days. Mobile gaming apps fare slightly better with nearly 40% used beyond the first day (Greenan, 2016). Given these circumstances, the purpose of this research was to investigate how dance as an engaging type of exercise can encourage the effective use of SSTs to help people achieve their fitness goals.
