The rapid growth of scientific publications makes it challenging for researchers to review and comprehend existing research. To mitigate this problem of increasing information load, a form of knowledge reduction is needed. In this regard, citations play a key role and constitute powerful tools for linking and disseminating research. Indeed, the content of citations in citing articles provides a plethora of latent information that can be exploited in many perspectives, e.g. sentiment, reason, topic, motivation, or citation importance. Connecting scientific publications utilizing these viewpoints has been successfully used for document clustering, bibliometrics, citation-based recommender systems, etc. A common approach shared by these applications is to use the content of citations ((henceforth, citation context (CC)) that contains all the text in a window of a fixed size. Window sizes used in the literature are the length of a citation sentence [1], one sentence on both sides of the citation sentence [2], or one hundred terms around the citation mention [3]. In these cases, a CC may contain terms that are not referenced by the target citation. The un-referenced terms of a citation are less important while not necessarily being relevant. In addition, processing the unneeded terms increases the complexity of the relevant applications.
In the past, the significance of limiting the CCs only to reference terms has been shown in [4]. Subsequent research of Abu-Jbara et al. [1] demonstrated a case in which CCs have multiple references and proposed methods to identify the terms relative to a particular citation. Nonetheless, studies focusing on automatically extracting reference terms are very limited. Essentially, automatic reference term extraction itself constitutes a hard problem, and there is hardly a technique to automatically extract ideal reference terms from CCs to the best of our knowledge. In particular, authors use various linguistic patterns for making citations, and in some cases, it is difficult for humans to determine reference terms. This is the reason that literature utilizing the CCs uses the text in a context window around the citation instance. Nonetheless, context window size detection is still a non-resolved problem, as determined by Alvarez [5].
Furthermore, in recent years, there is a rising interest in text-mining approaches to bibliometric studies [6]. Topic models offer a powerful way to discover a latent structure in a document. In the research line of citation analysis, researchers have recently started to utilize topic models in their research. For example, Liu et al. [7] used topic motivation links in citation-enhanced heterogeneous networks for citation recommendation tasks. Indeed, topics derived from a collection of CCs using topic modeling techniques demonstrate the main themes for which an article is cited. Along with global topics, each citation context has its own reference terms that are the basis of making the citation. In the case of frequent reference terms in the collection of CCs, we naturally expect that a topic is likely to be specific to reference terms. In contrast, fewer occurrences of reference terms will lead to a mismatch of the topic with the reference terms. However, existing literature does not provide evidence for this realization.
Regarding the reference term extraction problem, our research question is: Do the topics derived from a collection of CCs of a cited article accurately represent the relative reference terms appearing in different CCs? In other words, are the thematic assignments of CCs equivalent to their reference terms? The research we describe in this paper specifically addresses this question. We use a topic modeling method to emanate the topics from 9970 contexts of textual citations of 113 cited papers and compare the topic assignment of each CC with human annotated reference terms. To achieve this, we carefully analyzed complex CCs and those having multiple references other than the target reference. Specifically, we analyzed the association of topic to reference terms for CCs where reference terms are not explicitly mentioned or require a wide context. To check the accuracy of the topic assignment with ground truth, we used clustering evaluation measures. Our results show that in most of the cases, topics generated from CCs conform with their reference terms. Results of this task are likely to assist the replacement of reference terms with relevant topics, and thus may lead to improved retrieval, document clustering, recommendation of scientific articles, etc.
Different from previous works that mainly utilized topics from contexts of textual citations in different applications, our work makes the following contributions:
•To find out whether reference terms of a target citation can be represented as topics derived from its CCs.•To find out whether topic assignment is accurate relative to the target citation for cases where CCs have multiple references and where citations refer to complete statements.•To check the consistency of topics with reference terms for CCs where reference terms are not mentioned or require a wide context.
In the remainder of this article, we (a) summarize the related work; (b) present the approach; (c) demonstrate the results and evaluation; and (d) describe the findings and limitations of the study, followed by conclusions and future directions of our work.
