A Knowledge-Based Systems (KBS) [1] is an area of artificial intelligence that refers to the extraction and representation of the knowledge in engineering. The information extraction through optimization principles in computer vision lies at the heart of KBS. Most of the KBS problems applied to image analysis can be reduced into optimization processes. Under this methodology, information contained in the image is evaluated considering a knowledge base represented by a set of important quality characteristics. Then, by using a search strategy, the best image is detected. This image corresponds to the solution of the KBS problem.
Image enhancement (IE) is a computer vision task that can be approached as a KBS problem. It has attracted the attention of the computer vision community due to its multiple applications in areas such as medicine, security, transportation, etc [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. IE is the process of improving the visual information contained in an image, increasing the difference among features of its different objects. The main objective is to improve the interpretability of the information present in an image for human viewers or make the enhanced image more suitable for further processing steps in any automatic computer vision system [6], [7]. In general, IE methods modify pixel values through the histogram equalization, quadratic transformation, or fuzzy logic operation[2], [3], [4]. Among these techniques, histogram equalization (HE) [5], [7], [8], [9], [10] is the most used, simple and effective for image enhancement. HE considers the statistical features of pixels. In its operation, pixels relatively concentrated in positions of the histogram are redistributed over its whole scale. During this process, each existent intensity value A of the original image is mapped into another value B in the processed image without matter the number of pixels corresponding to A in the original image. Therefore, these schemes present an inadequate redistribution of the pixel data under the presence of noise or irrelevant small sets of pixels. As a consequence, these methods produce enhanced images with different problems such as the generation of undesirable artifacts and noise amplification [11], [12], [13].
In the last years, the problem of ICE has been approached through metaheuristic techniques as an alternative to design ICE schemes. Different from HE techniques, metaheuristic methods face the contrast enhancement problem from an optimization perspective. Therefore, under these methods, some aspects of the contrast enhancement process are related to an objective function whose optimal solution represents a good quality enhanced image. In general, contrast enhancement algorithms based in metaheuristic schemes have demonstrated to produce better results than those delivered by HE in terms of pixel intensity redistribution [3]. Some examples of these approaches include the use of Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) [14], Genetic Algorithms (GA) [12] and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [15], Social Spider Optimization (SSO) [11], [13], Cuckoo Search Algorithm (CS) [16], Firefly Algorithm (FFA) [17], Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA) [18], Differential Evolution (DE) [19], among others. Although these methods have produced interesting image enhancement results, they present several flaws such as premature convergence to local optima and inability to maintain population diversity. In these methods, the redistribution of pixel data is evaluated through objective functions [12] that consider mainly heterogeneity. The more different pixel intensities are contained in the enhanced image, the more quality is the distribution. Under such conditions, these schemes present a limited effect of contrast enhancement in the presence of noise and irrelevant small set of pixels. This effect cannot be improved unless irrelevant visual information could be removed before the redistribution. Recently, new hybrid approaches that combine metaheuristic techniques with other computational schemes have been introduced in the literature for image contrast enhancement proposes. The objective of such methods is to increase the capacities of the metaheuristic approach through the incorporation of specific computational elements that provide additional information on the contrast enhancement process. Some representative examples include the algorithm Gamma-PSO proposed in [20], where the optimal values of a Gamma correction are determined by the PSO technique in order to enhance the contrast of a previously transformed image with a wavelet transform. Another interesting work is the Fuzzy-IPSO method reported in [21], where it is introduced an approach that combines fuzzy logic and PSO for enhancing the contrast of an image. Under this method, information of the histogram is obtained by a fuzzy system. With these data, the histogram is adjusted by the use of some weights computed through an improved version of the PSO algorithm.
The Moth Swarm Algorithm (MSA) [22] is a metaheuristic scheme inspired by the orientation of moths towards the moonlight. Different from other metaheuristic schemes, MSA considers three specific sub-populations. Therefore, according to the sub-population, each individual is conducted by using a different evolutionary operation, which represents a particular behavior of the moth insect. The incorporation of these operators in the search strategy reduces critical problems present in several metaheuristic algorithms, such as improper exploration-exploitation balance and premature convergence. Due to its interesting characteristics, MSA has been extensively applied in many complex engineering problems such as image processing [23], power systems [22], energy conversion [24], etc.
The presence of noise and small sets of pixel intensities in images often refers to the existence of ineffective/useless characteristics that maintain important image details hidden. Such elements correspond to sets of pixels that are too small to represent objects or visible details in the image. This information contained in the image is not only adverse for human visualization, but also negatively influence the process of image enhancement. The elimination of this information represents a necessary method to improve the redistribution of the pixel data in the enhanced image. Therefore, relevant pixel intensities will be correctly highlighted in the redistribution since the space maintained for the eliminated pixel intensities can be reused. The Mean-shift algorithm [25] is a non-parametric technique commonly used to replace a characteristic x scarcely existent in the feature space by an element x∗ densely contained within its neighborhood (local maximum). Under this scheme, starting at point x, a new location is computed in the direction of the largest increase of the feature space until the local maximum x∗ has been reached. The simplicity and interesting properties of Mean-shift have extended its use in several domains such as regression [25] and clustering [26].
On the other hand, the Kullback–Leibler entropy (KL-entropy) [27], [28], introduced by Kullback and Leibler, allows objectively evaluating the divergence between two different probability distributions. In general terms, the KL-entropy is used to assess how one probability distribution is different from a second probability considered as a reference. Its minimal value represents the complete dissimilarity between both distributions, while its maximal value corresponds to its best resemblance. Applications of the KL-entropy include the evaluation of the randomness in continuous time-series, the characterization of the relative (Shannon) entropy in information systems and the measurement of contained information when comparing different statistical models of inference. Different from other entropy formulations, the KL-entropy allows us to obtain no only the best possible data distribution in terms of the information content but also the distribution with the best similitude with regard to the original image data. Under such conditions, the results delivered by the use of KL-entropy involve images with enhanced contrast, also improving their human visual appearance (without distortion regarding the original information).
In this paper, an Image Contrast Enhancement (ICE) algorithm for images is introduced. Different from other approaches, the proposed ICE method considers the previous elimination of irrelevant sets of pixel intensities. The objective of this elimination is to reduce the number of histogram features in order to use the whole histogram range in the redistribution produced by the enhancement process. During this elimination process, the Mean-shift method is employed to delete unimportant small sets of pixels through the replacement of sporadic intensities by abundant features. Once obtained, the reduced histogram, the contrast improvement process, is performed. In this process, the Moth Swarm Algorithm (MSA) is adopted to redistribute the pixel intensities of the reduced histogram in the complete range so that the value of the Kullback–Leibler Entropy (KL-entropy) between a candidate distribution and the original information has been maximized. This paper presents three important contributions: (I) The use of an elimination process to reduce the number of histogram features in order to improve the pixel intensity redistribution. Without consideration of this process, the level of contrast enhancement reached is very limited. According to our best knowledge, no comprehensive study has considered the elimination process of irrelevant information to improve the redistribution process within an ICE scheme. (II) The incorporation of the KL-entropy for the redistribution process. Though its inclusion, images with a better human visual appearance are produced. (III) The use of the Moth Swarm Algorithm (MSA) to find the best redistribution that represents the best-enhanced image. The search characteristics of this scheme allow exploring the solution space without presenting the associate problems of other metaheuristic schemes. The performance of the proposed scheme has been tested considering a number of representative datasets commonly found in the literature. Its results are also compared with those produced by other well-known similar techniques. Experimental results suggest that the proposed method has a better performance in comparison with other schemes in terms of several performance indexes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, a brief explanation of the Mean-shift algorithm is given; in Section 3, the main characteristics of the ICE problem are illustrated; in Section 4, the most important elements about the MSA are presented; in Section 5, the proposed approach is presented; Section 6 exhibits the experimental results; finally, in Section 7, conclusions are drawn.
