Galaxies are considered to be formed through various physical processes such as merging (e.g., Searle and Zinn, 1978, White and Rees, 1978), dynamical instability leading to the formation of bars and spiral arms (e.g., Sellwood and Carlberg, 1984, Athanassoula, 2003, Combes et al., 1990), star formation and various feedback effects from supernovae, active galactic nuclei, and dust (e.g., Larson, 1974, Dekel and Silk, 1986, Di Matteo et al., 2005, Springel et al., 2005, Bekki, 2013), tidal interaction (e.g., Noguchi, 1987, Byrd and Valtonen, 1990), hot and cold mode gaseous accretion (e.g., Keres et al., 2005, Dekel and Birnboim, 2006), environmental influences of groups and clusters (e.g., Gunn and Gott III, 1972, Dressler, 1980, Bekki and Couch, 2011), and initial stellar mass functions (e.g., Larson, 2005, Recchi and Kroupa, 2015). One of key questions in galactic astronomy is to understand the relative importance of these physical processes in galaxy formation. Observational and theoretical studies of galaxy formation and evolution have tried to reveal “fossil imprints” of these formation and evolution processes in the observed properties of galaxies.
Galactic morphologies have long been considered to have fossil information about the formation and evolution processes of galaxies. For example, lens-like shapes of S0 galaxies have been discussed in different formation mechanisms such as secular evolution and environmental effects (e.g., Kormendy and Bender, 2012), since S0s were hypothetically introduced as a transition type between late-type spirals and early-type elliptical galaxies by Hubble (1936). The elliptical shapes of Es and classic galactic bulges have long been considered to be a result of the past major merger events. Morphological types of galaxies are observed to correlate with environmental parameters such as the number density of galaxies (“morphology–density relation” e.g., Dressler, 1980) which suggests that morphological evolution of galaxies is controlled by some environment-driven evolution processes. Thus, classification of galactic morphologies is crucial in constraining the formation and evolution processes of galaxies and thus in understanding better the origin of galaxies.
Deep learning is just one component of machine learning, which is again just one component of artificial intelligence (AI). Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been fundamental elements in recent classification technique using deep learning. CNNs have been also applied to morphological classification of galaxies. Dieleman et al. (2015) demonstrated how AI can automate the classification of galaxy morphologies by training a CNN on the crowdsourced classifications of the Galaxy Zoo project. While their network reproduced the same accuracy as human volunteers, it also reproduced their various biases as well. Dominguez Sanchez et al. (2018, hereafter DS18) extended this line of work by training a CNN on a subset of Galaxy Zoo classifications with low uncertainty. By eliminating galaxies of uncertain classification from the training data, DS18 effectively improved the performance of their AI classifier relative to its human counterparts
DS18 also trained a separate CNN on the Nair and Abraham (2010) database of visual morphologies, which in contrast to Galaxy Zoo was not produced by a large team of amateur volunteers but by the impressive effort of a single expert astronomer who visually classified ∼14,000 individual galaxies. The CNN trained by DS18 was able to reproduce the morphological classification of Nair and Abraham (2010) with a scatter and offset that improves upon the results of previous machine learning techniques (e.g. Huertas-Company et al., 2011). DS18 subsequently applied their trained CNNs to a large database of ∼670,000 galaxy images, thus providing the astronomical community with a morphological database of unprecedented size.
In essence, these previous efforts demonstrate how AI can automate the mundane and time-intensive task of classifying galaxy images. This is particularly useful not only because ever larger datasets of galaxies can be quickly classified, but also because it enables the scientist to undertake more interesting work. However, the utility of AI in astronomy is not limited to this scope. In carrying out our project “AIverse”, we do not intend to simply train AI to replicate the abilities of human scientists, but rather our principal goal is to extend those abilities into new realms by addressing scientific problems which would otherwise lie beyond our reach.
Although these previous works on morphological classification of galaxies were quite successful in terms of accuracy of the classification, they have a very strong limitation: the labeling of galactic morphological types (e.g., Sa and Sb) is done for galaxies with known labels that were already classified by human eye. Accordingly, such a classification method cannot be simply applied to physical properties that do not have labels provided by human eye. Given that there are many physical properties of galaxies that can have fossil information about the formation and evolution processes of galaxies, it is quite important for us to extract some physical meaning (“labels”) of galaxy formation and evolution from the properties. Recent computer simulations can produce many synthesized images of galaxy properties, which can be used for training CNNs for a certain purpose. For example, the 2D images (maps) of stellar kinematics in disk galaxies that experienced minor merging can be used to train a CNN by the epoch of minor merging, if the epoch of minor merging (“label”) is given to each image (Stanley and Bekki, 2018).
CNNs and other AI-related algorithm can be used not only for classifying the observed images of galaxies but also for investigating consistency between theoretical predictions and observations. For example, the synthesized images of galaxies can be classified into categories in almost exactly the same way as the observed images of galaxies are classified. Accordingly time-consuming consistency tests between many observed images of galaxies and simulated ones can be automatically done in a convincing manner in a short time. For example, Ruzicka et al. (2010) and Guglielmo et al. (2014) compared the observed images of the Magellanic Stream and corresponding many of their simulated ones used an automated way for consistency tests and parameter search. This automated consistency tests can be used for automated simulations of a particular galaxy, which needs numerous consistency tests (Leung et al., 2018). Furthermore, animations from computer simulations can be fed into Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Networks (“LRCNs”: Donahue et al., 2017), which are a combination of CNNs and LSTM (Long short term memory) algorithm, so that the physical processes of galaxy formation (e.g., galaxy merging and ram pressure stripping) can be accurately classified and described in a sentence.
The three purposes of this paper are as follows. First is to outline the AIverse project consisting of three major components to understand the physical processes related to the formation and evolution of galaxies and star clusters. Second is to demonstrate that a large amount of data from numerical simulations of galaxies can be used for training CNNs to classify the formation and evolution processes of galaxies. Third is to discuss how to apply the trained CNNs to real observations of galaxies and star clusters. In the present study, we focus exclusively on the physical properties of galaxies, and the application of CNNs to star clusters will be described in our future papers. In the present study, we try to develop CNNs by which we can classify the formation processes of S0 galaxies − one of long-standing and remarkable problems in extragalactic astronomy. This classification of S0 formation process based on simulation data is just an example of the AIverse project: this new classification method can be applied to other physical processes of galaxy formation and evolution.
The plan of the paper is as follows. We outline the three components of the AIverse project in Section 2. We describe the models of S0 formation and the details of the methods to apply CNNs to simulation datasets in Section 3. We present the results on the accuracy of the new classification method that is applied to the data sets of numerical simulations of S0 galaxies in Section 4. We discuss (i) how to apply CNNs trained by simulation data to real observational data and (ii) possible problems associated with such application in Section 5. We summarize our conclusions in Section 6. We use the term “AI” in the title of this paper and this work just for convenience, though only three AI-related algorithm/methods, i.e., CNNs, reinforcement learning (RL), and Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Networks (LRCN) are used in the present study (see Fig. 1).
