In 21st century, learners are visually sophisticated and accustomed to digital media (Chunwijitra et al., 2013). Educational landscape is changing swiftly due to the heavy technology adoption among new generation of learners. Digital devices installed with various applications such as Facebook, chatting apps, YouTube, etc. have changed people's way of living, including communication and social affairs, as well as education methods (Tiyar and Khoshsima, 2015). The increasing tendency towards interactive video content creation and collaborative technologies seems to validate the beliefs that enhanced educational technologies and learning systems help engage learners in learning and improve learning productivity (Chunwijitra et al., 2013). “Higher education is emphasising more on higher order experiences and outcomes which requires a major transformation in knowledge and communication-based society” (Thomas, 2011). Thus, the conventional e-learning methods are no longer adequate to cater for the needs of upgraded learning processes especially in higher education.
The great demand for e-learning content especially multimedia element requires rapid storage growth and dynamic concurrency demands, which is not adequate to be handled by the conventional e-learning methods. The creation of multimedia e-learning content is expensive and takes time; hence, the advantage of reusability and shareability of the e-learning content is essential to enhance production of multimedia content. Besides that, learning content in conventional learning methods is inflexible to contribute to the highly distributed learning resources. Hence, the conventional methods are lacking of the ability in solving the challenges of optimizing the allocation of resources, handling the requirements for enormous storage growth of multimedia elements, and cost distribution.
The readiness of the state-of-the-art Internet and Cloud technologies inspire the envisioning of an e-learning framework employing Cloud technology to promote the flexibility of learning content and to address issues of conventional learning methods. Cloud computing has been adopted to support cooperative learning and remote e-learning based on Cloud computing environment and the transformation of computer fundamental curriculum in universities (Lin, 2011). An upgraded education domain that shares the Cloud characteristics of elasticity, flexibility, efficiency and reliability can be formed by embracing Cloud technology into e-learning (Gong et al., 2010). Students will be able to take courses online and perform learning activities at their own pace; whereas lecturers will be able to manage learning content, activities, and assessment anytime and anywhere via Cloud applications (Riahi, 2015). Another distinct advantage of Cloud technology is the ability to share, process, edit and store huge amount of learning content within educational environments (Abusfian Elgelany, 2017). Cloud computing also delivers a low-cost solution to higher learning institutions for their researchers, academicians and students, at the same time, improved learning performance (Al-Zoube et al., 2010; Riahi, 2015). Therefore, in this study, a Cloud e-learning framework that embraces most of the Cloud characteristics is proposed. Subsequently, a Cloud e-learning application is designed and developed according to the principles of the proposed framework.
The objective of this study is to propose and validate a theoretical model for predicting continuance intention to use Cloud e-Learning application among IT students in a private university in Malaysia. A comprehensive Cloud e-Learning application is designed and developed embracing a series of Cloud learning tools and Web 2.0 tools. Numerous literatures on technology acceptance (Abu-Al-Aish & Love, 2013; Briz-Ponce and García-Peñalvo, 2015; Calisir et al., 2014; Davis et al., 1992; Davis, 1989; Hamid et al., 2016; Hess et al., 2014; Mou, Shin and Cohen, 2017a, 2017b; Padilla-Meléndez et al., 2013)., continuance intention (Almaghrabi et al., 2011; Amoroso and Chen, 2017; Han et al., 2018; Susanto et al., 2016; Tella and Olasina, 2014; Tiyar and Khoshsima, 2015), usability standards (Bahn et al., 2007; Quesenbery, 2005; Traynor, 2011), etc. have been reviewed to identify the key usability factors. Four prominent models and theories relating to understanding user perceptions of information technology (IT) and user acceptance of information system (IS) have been identified, namely Technology Acceptance Model (Davis, 1989), Theory of Planned Behaviour (Ajzen, 1991), Social-Cognitive Theory (Bandura, 1986), and Motivational Model (Scott et al., 1988; Vallerand, 1997). The proposed theoretical model thus adopts five usability factors from the identified models: Computer Self Efficacy from Social-Cognitive Theory (Bandura, 1986); Enjoyment from Motivational Model (Scott et al., 1988; Vallerand, 1997); Perceived Ease of Use, and Perceived Usefulness from Technology Acceptance Model (Davis, 1989); and User Perception from Combined TAM-TPB (Taylor and Todd, 1995). This study focuses on the students' behavioural intention towards Cloud e-learning. The five factors are adopted into the proposed framework because these factors are able to directly assess the continuance intention of Cloud e-learning application from the perspective of user perception and usability. Perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, and user perception are chosen to comprehend students' perception and understanding towards Cloud e-learning which subsequently lead to continuance intention to use its application. Computer self-efficacy and enjoyment are chosen to comprehend students' subjective experiences such as being confidence and having enjoyments while learning via Cloud applications. All independent variables are hypothesized to be positively associated to Continuance Intention (CI) to use Cloud e-learning application.
Frameworks integrated IS theories and technology acceptance models allow researchers to comprehend user behavioural intention from different viewpoints (Gan and Balakrishnan, 2018). However, a proper technology acceptance framework for Cloud e-learning has yet to be discovered. Thus, findings obtained from this study can lead to new insights on Cloud e-learning acceptance in higher education.
