Anaerobic Digestion is a process wherein organic substrates, in the form of carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and complex compounds are converted into biogas, which is renewable energy, and anaerobic biomass, which can be used as natural fertilizer or soil conditioner. Biogas generally consists of 55–70% methane, 30–40% carbon dioxide, 1–2 % hydrogen sulphide, hydrogen, ammonia and traces of carbon monoxide, nitrogen and oxygen (Jørgensen, 2009). Biomass is rich in macro and micronutrients as it is the decomposed substrate. It is a flexible process, which can be used for large-scale digesters and can be used for individual homes or family owned, which is done in China, India, Nepal and Vietnam (Seadi et al., 2008). Another major reason why anaerobic digestion process is preferred is due to the global efforts to displace fossil fuels as energy resource and the need to find environmentally sustainable solution for waste management.
Although anaerobic digestion is a mature technology, failure of anaerobic wastewater treatment plants due to inadequate operational management and process control is commonplace. Modeling the anaerobic process helps not only for the purpose of design of wastewater plants and biogas power plants, but also aids in the study of the effect of operational parameters on the process, feasibility of new substrates, assessing of varied operational conditions etc. Moreover, it is advantageous to the construction of anaerobic treatment plants commercially and technically, if the process can be simulated during design stage.
For an understanding of the digestion process, mainly two approaches have been used: the experimental approach in which the parameters that influence the process are measured and the theoretical approach in which mathematical modeling of the process is performed. Due to improvement in research techniques and computational capacity, several models have been developed for anaerobic digestion and extensive description on the digestion process can be found in the literature (Appels et al., 2008; Bjornsson, 2000; Boe, 2006; Jha et al., 2013; Li et al., 2011; Metcalf and Eddy, 2003; Parawira et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2010).
1.1. From ADM1 to KSOMWith the aim of providing a very generic and usable model, Anaerobic Digestion Model No: 1 (ADM1) was developed in 2002 by the International Water Association Anaerobic Modeling Task Group. This has given a platform to apply the model in various anaerobic digestion systems. The model was structured with degeneration, hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis processes (Batstone et al., 2002). The model is based on chemical oxygen demand as a base unit for wastewater classification in a continuous-flow stirred tank reactor. The model uses state variables to illustrate the behaviour of soluble (S) and particulate (X) compounds. Soluble species easily pass through the microbial cell wall and includes sugars, amino acids, long chain fatty acids, volatile organic compounds, hydrogen, and methane. Particulates include active biomass and other particulate substances such as organics from microbial decay or from influent stream. Molar concentration terms are used for nitrogenous species and inorganic carbon (Parker, 2005).The conversion processes in anaerobic digestion are interlinked biochemical and physico-chemical reactions, which proceed in sequential and parallel steps, both spatially and temporally. The biochemical processes considered in the model are hydrolysis of complex compounds leading to sugars; amino acids and long chain fatty acids production; acidogenesis forming volatile fatty acids including acetic, butyric, propionic and valeric acids; acetogenesis leading to the formation of acetic acid and hydrogen; and lastly methanization. Out of this, the extracellular steps are disintegration and hydrolysis and the intracellular steps are the subsequent steps leading to methanogenesis.The important difference between ADM1 and other models is the implementation of disintegration step that is different from hydrolysis. Disintegration is mostly a non-biological step wherein the composite particulate substrates are degraded into inerts, particulate carbohydrates, proteins and lipids (Blumensaat and Keller, 2005). Physico-chemical processes involved in the model are chemical equilibria and pH measured by ion association/dissociation (liquid-liquid reactions) and gas-liquid transfer, playing a strong role in biodegradation but is not biologically mediated. Gaseous stripping of compounds such as hydrogen, methane, and carbon dioxide is included to characterize biogas production. The calculation of pH is using six additional physico-chemical processes that explain the acid/base equilibria of valeric acid/valerate, butyric acid/butyrate, propionic acid/propionate, acetic acid/acetate, NH4+/NH3 and CO2/HCO3-. The effect of positively and negatively charged ions on pH is also included through addition of dynamic states of cations and anions (Jha et al., 2013).Uptake of substrate is modelled by Monod-type kinetics. The uptake of inorganic nitrogen is expressed by secondary Monod kinetics and that of butyrate and valerate by single group of organisms. Biomass decay also follows first order kinetics and the dead biomass is considered as composite particulate matter in the system (Batstone et al., 2002). In ADM1, extremes of pH inhibit all microbially mediated substrate conversion, accumulation of molecular hydrogen inhibits anaerobic oxidation processes, and increase in free ammonia inhibits aceticlastic methanogenesis. Mass transfer relationships are used to describe liquid-gas transfer of methane, carbon dioxide and molecular hydrogen (Parker, 2005). The following processes have been excluded from ADM1 such as alternative glucose products like lactate and ethanol; sulphate reduction and sulphide inhibition, nitrate, long chain fatty acid inhibition, acetate oxidation, homoacetogenesis and solids precipitation (Batstone et al., 2002).Another major domain used for anaerobic digestion modeling is Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) (Holubar et al., 2002; Lauwers et al., 2013; Ozkaya et al., 2007) and fuzzy inference system (Kusiak and Wei, 2014; Pai et al., 2009). ANN models have a reputation of high accuracy but subject to limitations when there are missing or variable data. It thus requires extensive pre-processing of data to achieve completeness before it can be applied. Fuzzy inference systems show lack of learning capabilities, as it requires either expert knowledge while modeling or large data sets. Its performance is also highly dependent on the quality of the training data.Therefore, due to the complexity and uncertainty of measuring model parameters, Kohonen Self-Organising Map has been employed in this study for modeling the process. This is due to the aspects of KSOM in dealing with such uncertainty in a similar way of human thinking and its power of dealing with missing values. KSOM has been successfully used to model activated sludge wastewater treatment plant (Asadi et al., 2017; Begum et al., 2016; Liukkonen et al., 2013; Machón-González et al., 2017; Rustum and Adeloye, 2007; Rustum, 2009; Rustum and Adeloye, 2013a, Rustum and Adeloye, 2013b; Rustum et al., 2008; Rustum and Forrest, 2017; Szelag et al., 2017). Thus, this inspired the authors to try model the anaerobic system using the same approach.Compared to ADM1, KSOM map itself can be used to predict missing values and as it is not affected by such incomplete data, there is no need of pre-processing the records which is time saving, and most importantly, KSOM has the power to extract valuable information from noisy data. KSOM requires fewer number of process parameters than ADM1 while still yielding accurate results. Measuring the parameters and co-efficients of ADM1 is a difficult task specially while trying to optimize functioning anaerobic digestion plants through simulating process parameters at site. The complexity of models like ADM1 with its numerous input parameters and stochastic/kinetic equations is negated by the simpler KSOM model that provides ease in identification of parameters and subsequent manipulation.The main aim of this paper is to model anaerobic process using Kohonen self-organising maps that has the power to visualise the correlation between system parameters in a simple way that can be easily interpreted by operators who can adjust the operational parameters to obtain the desired output. Furthermore, KSOM model development and validation which will help to predict the system behaviour and also help in knowledge extraction of the process variables are other key objectives.
