In recent years, with the continuous reduction in the price of various smart sensor devices and the development of natural human-computer interaction technology, virtual reality (VR) technology has developed rapidly. The basic features of VR can be summarized with three “Is”, i.e., immersion, interaction and imagination (Bowman, 2004). Immersion refers to the user being immersed in a computer-generated virtual space and being able to obtain perceptions that are identical or similar to those of the real world thereby experiencing “presence” or “telepresence”. Interaction refers to human-computer interaction that enables the user to interact with a multidimensional virtual information space with gesture recognition, speech recognition, eye-tracking, brain-computer interface, and other natural interaction technology through hardware and software, which gradually approximate real world interactions. Imagination refers to users’ ability to imagine future progress in a virtual world through various thinking processes, such as logical thinking, reasoning, and associating, based on acquired information as well as their behaviors in the system. In recent years, VR technology has recently attracted worldwide attention and has been successfully applied to many fields such as education, emergency exercise, real estate development, industrial design, aerospace development, medicine, games, and entertainment.
In addition to these applications, VR technology has been used in the field of journalism, where the concept of immersive VR news has been proposed (Peña, 2010; Shin, 2018a; Shin, 2018b). So-called immersive VR news refers to a news product that enables viewers to experience certain events and specific circumstances of the news reports from a first-person perspective. The basic idea is to allow viewers to enter a virtually reproduced scenario of a news story as a digital avatar to experience the story. As opposed to traditional 2D video news, immersive VR systems (e.g., head-mounted displays and online VR) provide the audience with unprecedented, rich and diverse experiences that enhance their multichannel perceptions (visual, auditory, tactile, and even olfactory and gustatory perceptions). Such immersive storytelling is conducive to heightening the emotional participation of the audience in the current news event and is thus a form of deep immersive news (Peña, 2010).
However, despite the fanfare, strong response, and sensational effect at its advent, immersive VR news nonetheless remains a novel journalist paradigm. As the research on its narrative framework deepens in academia and industry, the following issues regarding immersive VR news have gradually emerged:
(1)Due to the interactive nature of VR technology, users are no longer passive recipients of content; rather, to a certain extent, they have autonomy and can actively explore news content to a certain extent. Users’ perception and intent can significantly impact their experience of immersive VR news (Shin et al., 2018b). Traditional video news is conducive to mostly one-way information communication whereas immersive VR news is characterized by two-way human-computer interaction. Thus, the two news experiences may conflict with each other.(2)Compared with traditional 2D video news, due to the fading of the physical barriers of information transmission, immersive VR news exposes users to a virtual environment. Users may thus become obsessed with the element of “experience” as they are immersed in the news, and they may consequently ignore important pieces of information that the news event is designed to convey. Therefore, the question of how to coordinate the relationship between the “output information” of news and the “immersion” of VR is one of the difficulties facing immersive VR news.(3)When using immersive VR technology to reproduce a news site, the fairness and credibility of the news itself can be affected by various factors, such as the inappropriate screening and collecting of information and biased perspectives or emotional tendencies in reconstructing the news scene. For example, in an ultra-real “mimetic environment”, users tend to confuse the virtual world with reality and believe that “seeing is believing.” If the content producer has clear subjective intent, users’ cognition tends to lose objectivity and the ability to comprehend the information presented.
In summary, many issues regarding the application process of immersive VR news remain unresolved. Some scholars (Riva et al., 2007; Hardee, 2016; Sirkkunen et al., 2016; Vázquez-Herrero et al., 2017; Hardee et al., 2017; Laws 2017; Tse et al., 2017; Sundar et al., 2017; Seo, 2019) believe that immersive VR news has the advantage of providing an unprecedented multisensory experience for audiences, which helps strengthen their emotional involvement in news events. However, other scholars (Nolan, 2003; Kent, 2015; Kool, 2016; Wang et al., 2018) have argued that the virtual reproduction of news has negative impacts on the fairness, authenticity, and comprehensiveness of the presented content.
To address the above problems, we conducted an empirical study to examine users’ experience (e.g., immersion and empathy) and media effects regarding the accuracy, credibility, and emotion of audiences’ acquired information through immersive VR news, an emerging method of news reporting, in the context of new media.
In this paper, we first review related work and introduce the objectives of this study and then present our experimental process and results in detail. Next, we analyze the results and generate design guidelines for immersive VR news. Finally, we summarize the limitations of this study and suggest directions for future studies.
