The number of robotics platforms for educational purposes continues to grow at a rapid pace. Educational integration of robots has expanded as well. Limited classroom robotics materials lead to group robotics projects to accommodate sharing resources among the students (Taylor & Baek, 2017). The use of collaborative group work is increasing in the classroom setting for reasons other than limited materials and can be used intentionally in various content areas, including robotics and engineering. Student group work can provide a supportive structure for the completion of larger real-world projects and offers peer support (Chambers et al., 2007, Eguchi, 2012, Robinson, 2005). Stump, Hilpert, Husman, Chung, and Kim (2011) highlight the need for collaborative groups specifically in engineering programs to prepare students to engage in the collaborative partnerships of real-world practicing engineers and develop innovative engineers for the future. In addition, the active learning taking place in collaborative group projects moves students beyond passive and compartmentalized learning and demonstrates the potential for positive impacts on student achievement and attitudes (Barker and Ansorge, 2007, Blanchard et al., 2010, Chambers et al., 2007, Hwang and Wu, 2014; Papert, 1993; Stump et al., 2011).
The purpose or goal for collaborative groups may vary between content areas and educators (Stump et al., 2011). No matter the instructional goal, students groups can be difficult to facilitate in the classroom setting. The focus for this study was to optimize student benefits of collaborative robotics projects by identifying strategies and supports to allow all group members to participate equally, support each other's academic achievement on the project, and improve attitudes towards collaborative work. Since group dynamics and structure can impact student benefits and outcomes in collaborative groups, roles within these groups may provide necessary structure to create student benefits (Chambers et al., 2007). Yuen et al. (2014) also emphasize the importance for groups to have purpose and structure for group activities. Roles may be a guide for providing needed structure. Most of us have experiences group work at one time or another. Group work can be challenging even when groups have a purpose or common goal and a structure to follow for the collaborative process. Students working in groups can struggle with sharing ideas and dividing the workload equally when working on group projects, which seems to limit the potential for positive benefits for all students. Identifying supports to minimize negative experiences and support beneficial student collaboration is important to support teachers and students in collaborative projects.
Previous studies have indicated positive impacts of having group roles to support collaborative group work (Chambers et al., 2007, Taylor and Baek, 2017), but do not necessarily provide specifics for how to structure groups to promote benefits for all students.
Engaging all learners in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) like robotics can also be a challenging prospect. Females are underrepresented and at times unwelcomed in STEM education and career areas (Stump et al., 2011). In order to make STEM education a more hospitable option for females, strategies that promote positive student achievement and attitudes may make strides towards bridging the gap in the number of males and females in STEM. This study seeks to further examine the use of roles and group gender composition to determine if these two aspects in collaborative robotics project impacts student robotics performance, computational thinking skills, and learning motivation towards computer programming.
