If countries are to adapt to the impacts of climate change, it’s critical they possess the scientific capacity needed to produce knowledge on a relevant scale and to translate it into policies to inform local decision-making (Ho-Lem et al., 2011). Such thinking sits at the heart of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) efforts to synthesise climate science to inform policies under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Yet not all countries are able to produce scientific climate information, or to the same extent. Studies have shown that rich, high emissions countries publish the bulk of climate research (e.g. Haunschild et al., 2016; Pasgaard and Strange, 2013). This ‘geographical imbalance’ (Pasgaard et al., 2015) makes it challenging to inform policies equally if peer-reviewed publications are favoured. As a result, ‘who’ produces climate science, and even ‘where’ climate science is produced, can have far reaching effects for the commitment to UNFCCC agreements (Corbera et al., 2015; Hulme and Mahony, 2010) as well as the commitment to local adaptation efforts too (Blicharska et al., 2017; Miguel, 2017; Lahsen, 2007).
To understand these geographies of climate science, it’s crucial to examine why differences in the publication of climate science have emerged and what differences exist over countries’ capacity to customise global climate science. A major challenge here is how to compare countries with different characteristics (e.g. size, wealth, education, stability). Measuring scientific outputs by peer-reviewed publications has proved a reliable method for highlighting the volume and geographic distribution of climate research (Haunschild et al., 2016; Pasgaard et al., 2015; Karlsson et al., 2007). But interpreting such metrics as capacity to customise climate science entails the assumptions that all countries have similar interests in publishing climate science, as well as similar capacities to contribute research (cf. Dike et al., 2018). An alternative approach is to compare the ability of countries when using and producing (adaptation-relevant) climate science where the objective is the same for all involved. Any deviation from common reporting requirements – either going above and beyond or failing to meet set standards – would provide an indication of different scientific capacities between countries, including those with few peer-reviewed publications.
To do this, our paper presents a global comparison of climate projections’ characteristics reported in UNFCCC National Communications, as a proxy of a country’s capacity to produce nationally relevant, adaptation-focused scientific climate information. Section 2 summarises the literature on the geographies of climate science. Section 3 explains how we collected the data and how we classify countries according to their competence in publishing climate science. Section 4 explores differences in reporting climate projections and countries’ compliance with UNFCCC requirements. Section 5 identifies similarities and variances in the modelling characteristics, and contrasts these with countries’ publication competence. Section 6 details how the reported climate futures1 are similar, regardless of countries’ quantity and quality of publications. Sections 7 and 8 offer a discussion about the emergence of a new, and mostly hidden, geographical imbalance in the way countries are supported to customise climate science for national decision-making.
