In more and more areas of life decisions are the result of interactions between humans and machines. We encounter automated systems no longer only in a supportive capacity but, more frequently, as systems taking actions on their own. Computer-assisted cars drive autonomously on roads.1 Surgical systems conduct surgeries independently.2 We stand no longer on the precipice of a technological change; we are right in the middle of that change. To an average person this becomes easily visible in the area of self-driving cars. The large research investments by car manufacturers as well as tech companies in the last years are only one clear signal for the rapid development of automated system technologies. In 2015 Toyota built a new research institute in Silicon Valley for $1 billion.3 In 2017 Intel performed its second largest acquisition in the companies history by spending $15.3 billion to buy a company producing camera systems to detect speed limits and potential collisions.4 In the same year, Ford put $1 billion on the table to acquire Argo AI, an artificial intelligence start up.5 In 2018, Honda invested $2.75 billion to take a stake in GM Cruise, General Motor’s self-driving company.6 In addition, the jurisdiction is taking an interest in the development of autonomous vehicles. The number of states in the U.S. giving the nod to test self-driving cars on the roads in constantly increasing.7 In Germany, the government has passed legislation to allow the deployment of automated driving systems in traffic in 2017.8 Even if the technology has not reached market maturity yet, the top 11 global car manufacturers expect self-driving cars on the highway by 2020 and in urban areas by 2030.9 A recent report by Navigant Research, a market research institute, forecasts that from 2020 to 2035 around 129 million autonomous vehicles will be sold.10 Another study on the autonomous vehicle market by Allied Market Research concludes that in 2019 the global market for autonomous vehicles will be worth $54.23 billion and increase by a factor of 10 up to $556.67 billion by 2026.11
The next step towards fully autonomous-capable vehicles will be the launch of partly automated driving systems, i.e. cars where the driver hands over the steering or acceleration functions to the vehicle occasionally but can still take control over the vehicle. In all these environments humans find themselves confronted with a new situation: they share decisions with a machine. We call such a situation a hybrid decision situation.12
In this paper, we investigate human decision-making in a hybrid decision situation. More specifically, we investigate whether sharing a decision with a computer instead of with another human influences the perception of the situation, thus affecting human decisions. Human decision-making in groups with other humans has been researched extensively. Fischer et al. (2011) show in their meta-study on the so-called bystander effect that the perceived personal responsibility is lower when others are around.13 Theoretical work from Battigalli and Dufwenberg (2007) and Rothenhäusler et al. (2015) also suggests that people feel less guilty for an outcome when a decision is shared. Furthermore, a meta-study by Engel (2011), including 255 experimental papers on behavior in Dictator Games14 shows that people behave more selfishly if a decision is shared. So far, however, the literature has only focused on decisions shared between humans. Here we ask whether humans also perceive themselves to be less responsible and guilty and behave more selfishly when the decision is shared with a computer.
As a workhorse, we use a binary Dictator Game. We compare three treatments: a Dictator Game with a single human dictator, a Dictator Game with two human dictators, and a Dictator Game with one human dictator and a computer.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a literature review focusing on experimental evidence from economics and social psychological research. We especially discuss the literature on individual behavior in groups as well as findings from research on human-computer interactions. In Section 3 we present our experimental design and explain our treatments in more detail. Section 4 relates the experiment to the theoretical background and derives behavioral predictions. Results are presented in Section 5. The last section offers a discussion and some concluding remarks.
