In recent years, we have witnessed the emergence of major advancements in new technologies that have disruptive characteristics, such as information technology, nanotechnology, biotechnology, and new material technology. The emergence and development of these new technologies not only changed the global competitive structure, but also created new industries, changed the lives of people, and changed the socio-economic production mode (Rifkin, 2011). Identifying the future trends of these new technologies as early as possible is crucial for governments' and enterprises' research and development (R&D) strategic planning to gain a first-mover advantage in future global competition. Many decision makers are aware of the significance of understanding of the emergence path, and identifying the future development trends of these new technologies for an organization's competitiveness and sustainable development when facing the wave of revolutionary technological changes (Li et al., 2015). Therefore, it becomes a strategic concern for public sectors and enterprises to identify and grasp the opportunity to develop their new technologies, which will ultimately contribute to their international competitiveness and sustainable development. This strategic issue raises one question: How can one detect and forecast the future development trend of these emerging technologies given the better understanding of their emergence? In response to this question, this paper develops a framework for detecting and forecasting the future development trend of these emerging technologies, based on an understanding of their existing evolution path and the identification of the gaps between science and technology.
A technology trend is considered as a continuously growing technology area with a certain pattern, and the pattern as a trend should have existed for a certain period of time (Ena et al., 2016). Many methods have been developed to identify and forecast the pattern. The traditional method to identify and forecast technology trends is usually based on the experience of experts, along with a long and costly procedure affected by subjective factors (Wang et al., 2015b). However, with the advancements in information and computer technology, the body of public technical literature including scientific papers and patents has grown, and researchers have begun to use this information to analyze and study technology trends. Thus, scientific papers (Daim et al., 2006; Dotsika and Watkins, 2017; Jaewoo and Woonsun, 2014; Kajikawa et al., 2008; Kostoff and Schaller, 2001; Rezaeian et al., 2017; Tsai, 2012) and patents (Chen et al., 2017; Golembiewski et al., 2015; Noh et al., 2016; Yoon and Kim, 2012) are applied as data resources for technology trends analysis. The amount of this technical information makes it more difficult to forecast technology trends solely based on expert knowledge (Kostoff, 1998). Therefore, based on public technical literature, technology trends forecasting activities usually use quantitative approaches to explore trends and provide early indications of potential changes and developments for anticipatory policy and strategy making. These approaches include bibliometric analysis (Daim et al., 2012; Dereli and Durmusoglu, 2009; Kajikawa et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2010), and text mining method (Chen et al., 2017; Choi and Hwang, 2014; Hao et al., 2014; Kostoff et al., 2008; Yoon and Kim, 2012). These quantitative methods can process massive raw data, reduce the size of data for further manual process, and mining the intelligence information of technology from technical literature. While experts' knowledge can provide powerful creditability to take responsibility for analyzing the intelligence information when we forecasting technology trends, so integrating the quantitative methods with experts' knowledge to study the development trends of technology and the potential changes of technology has gradually become a focus of researchers' attention.
The relationships between science and technology have long been debated in academia. Much of the empirical evidence since the mid-1980s supports the idea that science and technology co-evolve and interact in complex ways, and has replaced the old linear model in which the progress of science was essentially exogenous and technological advances were the outcomes of applied R&D efforts (Breschi and Catalini, 2010). Many researchers have noted in different empirical studies that the interdependencies and interactions between science and technology have been increasing. Despite this interdependence, gaps also exist between them (Wang et al., 2015a). Through the analysis and comparison of scientific papers and patents can be used to determine the gaps and identify technological opportunities (Shibata et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2015a). Many empirical studies have shown that an enormous amount of scientific information is organized and codified in patents, which shows that the development of an increasing number of technologies depends on science (Breschi and Catalini, 2010; McMillan et al., 2000; Narin and Noma, 1985; Tijssen, 2001). In knowledge-intensive science technology, basic research in science provides a fundamental basis for technology development, and the science is considered as seeds of technology and innovation in the linear innovation model (Shibata et al., 2010). Much information of technological development can be obtained from analysis of the development of science. Scientific papers and patents record modern and advanced knowledge in scientific discovery and technological development (Wang et al., 2015a). Therefore, how to discover the gaps between them through the mining of technical information contained in scientific papers and patents, and to combine experts' knowledge to predict the future development trend of technology is an important issue that scholars need to pay attention to. Some previous studies exploring technology trends are based on scientific papers or patents alone, whereas few scholars have combined information from both scientific papers and patents to study technology trends. Some scholars noted that different types of information sources provide diverse knowledge about the evolution path of technological development, and integrated use of the data sources will certainly give a more complete picture of the technology trends (Ena et al., 2016). Thus, the analysis of only scientific papers or patents is not sufficient to fully understand the evolution path of technological development and forecast technology trends.
To avoid the weakness of using only scientific papers or patents to study the development trends of emerging technologies, therefore, this paper proposes a framework that integrates scientific papers and patents as data resources. In the framework, topics-based text mining and experts' knowledge approaches are applied to mining the technical knowledge and information contained in scientific papers and patents respectively, and to identify the technology evolution path, and a gaps analysis between science and technology is used to forecast the technology future development trend within the short term. It takes the perovskite solar cell technology as a case study against the background of the rapid development of the photovoltaic technology field.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly presents the literature review. Section 3 provides the proposed methodology. Section 4 analyzes the case study of perovskite solar cell technology. Section 5 discusses the paper, and Section 6 concludes the paper.
