A brain-computer interface (BCI) is a type of communication system that can directly translate brain signals into digital commands for the control of external devices without the involvement of the peripheral nerves and muscles. BCI systems show great promise for providing communication access to both people with severe motor disabilities and typically developed individuals alike  (Chaudhary et al., 2016, Li et al., 2016, Wolpaw et al., 2002). Due to its relative portability and low cost, electroencephalography (EEG) remains the most widely investigated sensing modality in BCI research due in part to its excellent temporal resolution (Chen, Wang, Nakanishi et al., 2015, Wu et al., 2016). To date, several types of EEG signals have been used to design and operate BCIs, e.g. ERP (Jin et al., 2011, Townsend and Platsko, 2016, Xu et al., 2018), sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) (Feng et al., 2018, Jiao et al., 2019, Wu et al., 2015, Yu et al., 2018), steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) (Maye et al., 2017, Oikonomou et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2012), and motion-onset visual evoked potentials (Guo et al., 2008, Ma et al., 2017). In addition, some researchers have begun to explore hybrid BCI approaches using multiple signals and modalities (Edelman et al., 2018, Li et al., 2010, Xu et al., 2013, Yin, Zeyl et al., 2015). In recent years, an increasing number of researchers have focused on SSVEP-based BCIs because of their high information transfer rate (ITR) and minimal user training requirements  (Chen et al., 2014, Jiang et al., 2018, Jiao et al., 2017, Yin, Zhou et al., 2015, Zhang, Guo, Li et al., 2018).
For SSVEP-based BCIs, an effective frequency detection algorithm plays an important role in overall system performance  (Chen, Wang, Nakanishi et al., 2015). In literature, various techniques for SSVEP feature extraction and classification have been developed (Friman et al., 2007, Zerafa et al., 2018). Among them, the most popular are based on multivariate statistical algorithms, such as canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Chen, Wang, Gao et al., 2015, Lin et al., 2007), and multivariate synchronization index (MSI) (Zhang, Guo, Xu et al., 2016, Zhang et al., 2014), which are easy to implement without complex optimization procedures. Recently, we proposed a novel frequency recognition method, termed CORRCA (Zhang et al., 2018), based on the correlated component analysis (COCA) which is also a multivariate statistical algorithm (Cohen and Parra, 2016, Dmochowski et al., 2014, Dmochowski et al., 2012). The CORRCA method significantly outperforms the state-of-art CCA method (Zhang et al., 2018). As we know, CCA is a multivariate statistical method that measures the correlation between two sets of signals (Hotelling, 1936). It requires that the canonical projection vectors be orthogonal and it generates two different projection vectors for the two signals. In contrast, COCA aims to maximize the Pearson Product Moment Correlation coefficient and does not necessitate orthogonality between the projection vectors. Furthermore, it generates only one projection vectors for the two signals this simplifying subsequent analysis (Pearson, 1896). For EEG signal analysis, the COCA method may be more efficient and practical in real-world applications (Dmochowski et al., 2012, Zhang et al., 2018).
Although standard CCA and CORRCA algorithms have been applied in literature with satisfactory results, the performance of these systems could be further improved by applying sophisticated signal processing technologies. One such approach is the filter bank analysis method (Chen, Wang, Gao et al., 2015), which employs several bandpass filters to generate multiple subband components of the input signals. This filter bank based approach first carries out a frequency recognition method to obtain features on each subband component, then integrates all the features in classification using a weighted combination. In fact, we can consider the filter bank technique as a form feature fusion in frequency domain. This fusion strategy is just one way to explore the discriminating information implicit in the original signals. Here we term it a frequency domain fusion (FD fusion). In a recent motor imagery based BCI study, it was determined that weighting and regularizing common spatial pattern (CSP) features preclude the need for feature selection thus avoiding the loss of valuable information, and enhancing the performance of CSP (Mishuhina & Jiang, 2018). We can consider this type of feature weighted method as a feature fusion strategy in the spatial domain. Analogously, we term it the spatial domain fusion (SD fusion). Both the standard CCA method and CORRCA method provide multiple correlation coefficients to measure the correlation between two multi-dimensional signals. It is worth noting that traditionally only the largest coefficient is selected as feature while all others are ignored (Chen, Wang, Gao et al., 2015, Lin et al., 2007, Nakanishi et al., 2015, Zhang et al., 2018). This inevitably results in the loss of the discriminative information. We posit that merging these two fusion strategies will result in a more robust target detection framework for SSVEP-based BCIs. To the best of our knowledge, a framework including both SD and FD fusions has never been introduced in SSVEP-based BCI to date.
Motivated by previous studies, here we propose a hierarchical feature fusion framework for SSVEP target detection by implementing both SD and FD fusions. In order to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed framework, we utilized the CORRCA method as a representative frequency recognition algorithm to investigate if the proposed framework can affect its performance. Furthermore, we conducted extensive experimental evaluation on a benchmark dataset of thirty-five subjects.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the proposed framework as well as its implementation and application techniques; Section 3 describes the dataset and performance evaluation; Section 4 presents the experimental results; and the last two sections discuss and conclude this study.
