Target selection is a topic of significant interest in the human-computer interaction (HCI) community. It has been widely used in various continuous interaction spaces, such as the motion trajectories of virtual characters under users’ control, and the selection of stationary and moving targets in AR or VR environment. Selection of targets by crossing a boundary “goal” instead of pointing inside a perimeter can, in some cases, achieve a higher efficiency compared with conventional interactive techniques. For example, crossing-based selection results in lower error rates and a higher interactive speed for a continuous crossing task with direction constraint. However, most research on target selection focuses on the analysis of interaction results—the endpoints of a trajectory. Only a few researchers in the HCI community have focused on the analysis of the trajectories themselves. A good understanding of the trajectories of target selection is important as it can provide insight and guidance on the effects of practice on performance, rational decision-making, and layout design in these user interfaces[1]. An ideal model for the entire target-selection motion process may help computer designers make predictions about interaction results during the process of target selection rather than at the end of the process.
It is a much more challenging job to model the trajectory for crossing-based selection than the interaction results. Users tend to keep a comfortable angle, through which they can see the target they want to select during the process of approaching the targets[2]. Due to the elongated-rectangle target, users prefer to cross the target on its longer side, with the main impact on trajectory being the bending of the path[3]. Control theory is commonly used to model trajectories for target selection tasks. However, the existing trajectory prediction model is not able to model the trajectory for crossing-based selection well due to the lack of consideration of the shape of the target. Moreover, control theory and dynamic models are usually used to simulate a reaching movement. Both models quantify the location and velocity at each instant according to the control signal being dynamically adjusted by the position and velocity feedback.
While referring to the same core ideas as existing trajectory models and correlation theories for dynamic models, our work contributes a new model for crossing-based interaction techniques. We find that our model achieved satisfactory simulation results on trajectory similarity, endpoints, and time fitting.
