Occupancy detection plays a significant role in different applications ranging from controlling energy consumption and space utilization to building security surveillance systems. Automatic occupancy detection is used to automatically control lighting and air conditioning systems based on the occupancy state. Accordingly, the world energy resources can be saved from depletion [1]. Occupancy detection is also used in risk assessment applications in cases of environmental disasters, criminal operations, or indoor pollution [2]. Security surveillance systems are another important occupancy detection application [3]. Occupancy detection is a classification problem concerned with detecting whether a certain place is occupied or not. This classification problem can be binary or multi-class. In binary classification, occupancy detection result is either the place is occupied or not, 1 or 0. On the other hand, the multi-class occupancy detection detects the number of occupants.
Occupancy detection relies on one of two different types of information sources: cameras and environmental sensors. There are many different sensors data types that have been used for occupancy detection such as, temperature, humidity, relative humidity ratio, light, Passive InfraRed (PIR) motion detectors, and CO2. The advantage of sensor-based occupancy detection over a camera-based one is maintaining the individual's privacy. Moreover, processing sensors data requires less storage and lower processing capabilities.
In spite of the advantages of using environmental sensors for occupancy detection, sensors data suffers from uncertainty and unreliability due to acquisition errors or incomplete knowledge. As a result, the accuracy of detection is affected. Most of the contemporary researches deal with occupancy classification methods such as Hidden Markov Models (HMM) [4, 5], Neural Network (NN) [6, 7], and Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [8, 9]. Nevertheless, handling data uncertainty and unreliability is not given much concern. Hence, this paper suggests a new multi-sensor data fusion method for binary occupancy detection based on neutrosophic sets. Using neutrosophic sets handles the data uncertainty, whereas fusing more than one neutrosophic sensor feature increases the reliability. Therefore, the suggested method provides better accuracy range for occupancy classification. In addition, it is computationally efficient due to using one fused feature instead of many features for training and testing. The suggested method is tested using public occupancy detection data set [3].
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2, related work, mentions recent researches on sensor-based occupancy detection. Section 3 explains the suggested method and how beneficial it is to occupancy detection. Section 4 discusses the results of using neutrosophic sets with two types of fusion, features-to-decision and features-to-feature fusions, compared to using the original data. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 5.
