Alcohol is the most commonly used and abused substance in the United States and accounts for 1 in 10 deaths among adults between 20 and 64 years old (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, 2016). Individuals with alcohol use problems are more likely to seek emergency department (ED) care than are non-users (Cherpitel and Ye, 2008; Fuda and Immekus, 2006; Vitale and van de Mheen et al., 2006), and as many as one in seven ED patients report heavy drinking (Roche et al., 2006). Between 2006 and 2014, the number of ED visits related to alcohol use increased 61.6% in the United States to approximately 5 million alcohol-related visits in 2014 at a cost of $15.3 billion (White et al., 2018).
The ED is an important portal for entry into the medical care system for those with Alcohol Use Disorders (AUD), and thus delivery of efficacious interventions for alcohol use problems that minimize demands on ED staff time and resources are of considerable interest to clinicians and researchers. Brief interventions (BIs) are a time-limited approach for providing advice, counseling, motivational enhancement, and/or behavioral skills to reduce substance use and its consequences (Babor et al., 2008). A sizable body of literature has accumulated evaluating the efficacy and effectiveness of alcohol BIs in EDs (Havard et al., 2008; Kohler and Hofmann, 2015; Landy et al., 2016; Platt et al., 2016; Schmidt et al., 2016; Woolard et al., 2011). There is general agreement that BIs in the ED result in statistically small, but clinically meaningful, effects on alcohol consumption and/or alcohol-related harm when compared to minimal-contact control conditions. When compared to other active treatment conditions, no particular advantages of BI content, modality, booster sessions, and other tailoring are evident (Moyer et al., 2002; Platt et al., 2016; Schmidt et al., 2016; Simioni et al., 2015). This suggests that low-intensity and even computer-delivered BIs are viable alternatives to in-person approaches in the ED (Schmidt et al., 2016).
Despite the inherently ‘brief’ nature of BIs, many real-world ED settings lack the infrastructure to adequately deliver, monitor, or sustain the implementation of BIs over time, particularly those delivered in-person which require ongoing training, supervision, and fidelity monitoring (Lang et al., 2007). Thus, computer-delivered BIs are of great interest because they require minimal personnel time. In addition, computer-guided, therapist-delivered interventions are appealing because they increase standardization and fidelity. Across settings, computer-delivered alcohol interventions can result in reductions in alcohol use relative to control conditions, and effect sizes are largely commensurate with in-person interventions when direct comparisons could be made (Carey et al., 2009; Donoghue et al., 2014; Rooke et al., 2010; Sundström et al., 2017). These computer-delivered interventions can be used as a stand-alone approach or as a clinician support tool to guide a therapist delivering an intervention (Blow et al., 2006; Duroy et al., 2016; Kypri et al., 2008; Maio et al., 2005; Neumann et al., 2006; Walton et al., 2010). The efficacy of computer-based and computer-guided BIs in adult ED populations is not firmly established (Schmidt et al., 2016), as the majority of computer-delivered alcohol intervention trials were conducted among young college student samples (Carey et al., 2012). Given the large number of efficacy trials of purely therapist-delivered BIs in the ED, a critical next step is to evaluate alternative BI modalities and moderators of treatment effects to determine which modalities (i.e., computer-delivered or therapist-delivered with computer guidance) work best and for whom.
1.1. Moderators of brief interventionsExamining the role of alcohol use severity as a moderator for BIs of different modalities is needed. Clinical guidelines suggest BIs are most appropriate for those with low/moderate alcohol use problems (Babor et al., 2008; Heather, 1995). As a result, individuals with very heavy alcohol use or dependence are frequently excluded from BI studies (Saitz, 2010). Therefore, it is notable that many BI trials in hospital settings demonstrate that those with higher alcohol use severity, and even alcohol dependence, respond better to in-person BIs than those with lower alcohol use severity (Academic ED SBIRT Research Collaborative, 2010; Barnett et al., 2010; Blow et al., 2009; Field and Caetano, 2010; Spirito et al., 2004). One study suggests that alcohol use severity and intervention modality interact such that individuals with mild AUD symptom severity respond better to low intensity interventions without therapist contact, while patients with more severe symptoms respond better to more intensive therapist-guided interventions (Baumann et al., 2018). Thus, additional research is needed.Gender is frequently evaluated as a moderator of intervention response in BI research because AUD prevalence and severity is known to vary between men and women (Grant et al., 2015). Differences in treatment response may be expected based on higher perceived stigma related to alcohol use among women coupled with lower likelihood of treatment seeking among men in the general population (Green, 2006; Tuchman, 2010). However, gender differences in BI response are often null, inconsistent, or conflicting. Two past trials indicate women may respond better to in-person BI relative to minimal-contact or computer BIs (Blow et al., 2006; Carey et al., 2011), while others did not find any gender differences (Barnett et al., 2010; Becker et al., 2016), and still others found men benefit most from BIs (Choo et al., 2013; Woodruff et al., 2013).Unlike gender, age is often overlooked in BI moderation analyses. Age may be related to treatment response for a number of reasons. Young adults are less likely to seek treatment for alcohol problems and often view heavy drinking as ‘normal’ (Grella et al., 2009). We are aware of only one BI study in the ED that evaluated age as a moderator among adults. This study found that younger women who received a BI that included a booklet and in-person brief advice reduced their heavy episodic drinking relative to older women and men (Blow et al., 2006). Furthermore, age may moderate the effect of technology-based BIs due to differences in computer literacy and comfort across the lifespan (Jensen et al., 2010; Tennant et al., 2015).
1.2. Aims of the current studyThe primary aim of this randomized controlled trial (RCT) is to test a standardized alcohol BI evaluating the efficacy of two delivery modalities, therapist-delivered with computer guidance (Therapist BI-CG) and computer-delivered (Computer BI), compared to a control condition of enhanced usual care (EUC) among adults with heavy or problematic alcohol use presenting to an ED. The two modalities represent different options for future intervention delivery. The secondary aim of this RCT is to examine the influence of potential moderators (alcohol use severity, gender, and age) on alcohol use quantity and frequency. This study addresses several key questions raised in the previously published literature.
