A key component for realizing sustainability is to incorporate circular thinking, the essence of the Circular Economy (CE), into a product's life-cycle, which is well manifested in the definition of Circular Supply Chain Management (CSCM) by ([1],p. 884). While the integration of CE principles in supply chains are proposed as an effective means to contribute to sustainability, they also produce a new complex decision area for process managers, for example, in green procurement, product design, production, logistics, sales, product use and information management [1,2]. A major issue for firms is searching reliable CE partners that can supply or consume material and waste flows in matching quality and quantity to form a circular network [3]. Now data are produced at a rapid pace that enables firms to analyze the effectiveness of potential CE relationships between firms, we are motivated to study how information systems can also facilitate circular decision making. In particular, as these enabling information technologies play a crucial role in driving sustainable development [4]. The key problem is that many of today's circular supply chain activities are reliant on multiple industry actors recognizing the value of ecosystem convergence [5], that is, combining the knowledge, technologies, and markets of multiple industries to identify unique value propositions requiring many of the actors in the supply chain [6]. In particular, since there is a lack of tools that enable multiple actors to explore circular business opportunities in supply chains.
The value of information visualisation is immense to these problems, as humans are used to visual thinking for solving problems [7]. For example, Park et al. [8] show that spatial and visual representations together with intuitive interaction techniques can amplify the ease of decision-making processes. In addition, Speier [9] points to the importance of the structural representation format of information as support for decision making. We, therefore, propose to utilize the promising aspects of visual data exploration techniques for exploring the circular business opportunities in supply chains.
Motivated by the use of existing visualisation techniques to address exploration in recommender systems, we designed an interactive visualisation to enable transparent exploration of recommendations for CSCM. We demonstrate an interactive visualisation tool named the IS Identification App that offers industrial operation managers an exploration interface that provides suggestions of the potential industrial symbiosis opportunities. Its key contribution is demonstrating how visualisation can support exploration in the upcoming and promising data-oriented area of CSCM. The paper's theoretical contribution is to demonstrate the potential usefulness of set visualisation (visualizing sets and set-typed data [[8]) as a means to yield data insights that facilitate unique value propositions in CSCM.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the relevant conceptual background. Section 3 explains the research method. 4.1 Data collection, 4.2 Design, 4.3 Prototype demonstration, 4.4 Evaluation present the case study results, consisting of the data collection (Section 4.1), artefact design (Section 4.2), an implemented prototype, i.e., the IS Identification App (Section 4.3) and an expert-panel evaluation (Section 4.4). Section 5 discusses all results followed by conclusions in Section 6.
