Throughout Australia there is a chronic shortage of appropriately qualified science and mathematics teachers (Hobbs, 2012); a problem that is especially severe in disadvantaged or isolated communities (McKenzie, Santiage, Sliwka & Hiroyuki, 2005; Weldon, 2016). Teachers in these contexts tend to be less experienced than their metropolitan counterparts and face difficulties in accessing professional learning and mentoring by more experienced and expert colleagues (Beswick and Jones, 2011). These issues are not unique to Australia: for example, an international symposium on rural education held in Australia (Lyons, Choi, & McPhan, 2009) featured presentations about issues related to teacher isolation and professional learning in rural, isolated and often socioeconomically disadvantaged school communities in the United States, Canada, and South Korea. Others have described similar challenges in British and Scandinavian contexts (e.g., Sigsworth & Solstad, 2008).
Increasing the availability of quality resources in the form of instructional materials that are fit for purpose and aligned with the curriculum, to teachers in schools in rural and disadvantaged communities has been posited as a way forward (Sullivan, Perry, & McConney, 2013). For the past decade there has been a focus in Australia on the development of digital curriculum resources for teachers as this has the potential to expose teachers to “innovative curricula, stimulating applets and simulations, and other hands-on resources” (Hanson & Carlson, 2005, Foreword). In recent years there have also been several Australian Government initiatives focussed on developing resources that enable holistic curriculum planning for primary science (see Primary Connections, https://primaryconnections.org.au/), secondary science (Science by Doing, https://www.sciencebydoing.edu.au/), and mathematics (Maths by Inquiry, https://www.science.org.au/learning/schools/resolve) which are seen to be of particular use to less experienced teachers or those teaching out-of-field.1 Resources for schools that provide inspiring applications of science and mathematics have been developed, but there is often a gap between these resources and teachers' understanding of where to locate them, confidence in using them, and the adequacy of their discipline knowledge. The time required to select a resource and uncertainty about the choices to be made, may limit the uptake of excellent resources or result in lower quality resources being used. Access to people with relevant expertise and experience to assist is sometimes the most needed yet least readily available resource.
Digital libraries bring scattered resources together into a coherent and accessible space, but such sites often include an overwhelming volume of resources which makes finding the ‘right’ resource a daunting task, while access itself can be problematic for rural and remote teachers where internet connections are not always available or reliable. Hanson and Carlson (2005) highlighted the additional challenge of teacher reliance on digital resources and the challenge of finding the time to integrate or adapt them for a particular context. A lack of collegial support and appropriate professional learning opportunities (Handel, Watson, Petcock & Maher, 2013; Hobbs, 2013; Luft, Dubois, Nixon, & Campbell, 2015; Lyons, Cooksey, Panizzon, Parnell, & Pegg, 2006), which might assist teachers to make quality decisions about resources can exacerbate these problems. Teachers who are teaching out-of-field, or who have little confidence to teach science and mathematics, place additional strain on lead teachers and school administrators because they require ongoing professional learning and mentoring (Taylor, 2000). For such teachers the lack of resources may not be the issue, rather it is their capability to select and use confidently those that are suitable to their context and student cohort.
There is a need for strategies that make explicit the pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) and pedagogical reasoning of experienced and expert teachers, when they make choices about the use of resources in their teaching. To this end, this paper describes the process and outcome of the Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Critical Appraisal for Teachers (STEMCrAfT) project (funded by the Australian Maths Science Partnership Program, Australian Department of Education) which focussed on making this aspect of expert teachers' largely tacit knowledge, explicit and available to the less experienced and out-of-field teachers. The STEMCrAfT framework is the tool that emerged from the project. It supports teachers to reflect critically as they make decisions about teaching and learning resources.
The STEMCrAfT framework was developed jointly by teachers, teacher educators and discipline experts as a professional learning tool. Less experienced primary and secondary teachers of science and/or mathematics and those teaching out-of-field or in rural or regional areas, were the cohort of teachers for whom the tool was designed. The aim of the project was not to change participants' assessment of resources or necessarily any aspect of their teaching. Rather the goal was to explicate the tacit knowledge that experienced teachers called upon when choosing resources which aligned with their pedagogies in support of their students' learning. The research questions addressed in the study were:
1.Upon what knowledge do expert teachers of science and mathematics draw when they make decisions about teaching resources?2.How can the knowledge of expert teachers of science and mathematics be made explicit and available to less experienced colleagues or colleagues teaching out-of-field?
In addressing the first of these questions the study adds to existing understandings of the knowledge needed by teachers of science and mathematics. Our findings in relation to the second question have the potential to inform providers of professional learning for teachers of science and mathematics as well as educators in these fields in initial teacher education. The processes we used to uncover the knowledge of expert science and mathematics teachers could be used to undertake similar work in relation to teachers of other school subjects and hence our findings have relevance to professional learning providers and teacher educators beyond science and mathematics.
We begin by outlining the issues faced by teachers in rural and regional areas and the implications of these for student learning before discussing the knowledge needed by teachers of science and mathematics and presenting the study and its findings.
1.1. Science and mathematics teaching in rural and regional areasIssues faced in rural and regional areas include the transient nature of the teacher workforce, professional isolation, lack of time for mentoring and collaboration, as well as poor access to technical, support services, and resources (Lyons et al., 2006). In addition to high rates of teacher turn-over (Handel, Watson, Petcock, & Maher, 2013) in rural schools, a large proportion of the new teachers are beginning teachers, often teaching out of their area of expertise (Hobbs, 2013; Lyons et al., 2006). This is particularly the case in science and mathematics, where more than a third of Australian secondary mathematics teachers and a quarter of science teachers are not trained to teach in that field (Productivity Commission, 2012). In rural and regional areas few of these teachers have access to senior teacher mentors.Teaching positions in rural and regional schools are difficult to fill and in many instances are filled by casual and contract teachers (Handel et al., 2013), few of whom have the opportunity to attend the professional learning activities needed to develop their capacity to teach unfamiliar content (Handel et al., 2013; Tytler, Mousley, Tobias, McMillan, & Marks, 2006). These factors impact negatively on the attraction to and retention of teachers in those schools (Beswick et al., 2006; Kidd, 2014). Consequently, many students are being taught science and mathematics by out-of-field teachers (Harris Jensz & Baldwin, 2005; Office of the Chief Scientist, 2014a; Weldon, 2016). Whitehurst (2002) found that being taught by teachers without qualifications in a teaching area negatively affects student achievement. Teaching out-of-field can also impact a teacher's identity, self-efficacy and sense of wellbeing (Pillay, Goddard, & Wilss, 2005).The confidence of some primary school teachers and their capacity to deliver lessons as a result of their low levels of content knowledge in these areas is also of concern (Marginson, Tytler, Freeman, & Roberts, 2013; Palmer, 2002). In 2011 the proportion of time spent on teaching science in Australian primary school classrooms was just 5.7%; less than that for all but two of the 11 countries for which data were available (Office of the Chief Scientist, 2014b). Primary and lower secondary school teachers' tendency to lack confidence, competence and self-efficacy for teaching mathematics (Beswick et al., 2006; Watson et al., 2006) and science (Hackling, Peers, & Prain, 2007) has also been established. A lack of deep knowledge of the subject area impacts upon primary teachers' confidence and competence to teach these subjects and hence to inspire their students to learn. Dinham (2014) has argued that primary students' attitudes towards mathematics and science are relatively good predictors of their ongoing study in secondary school and later achievement in these subjects.
1.2. Developing knowledge for science and mathematics teachingStudent learning in science and mathematics relies upon the teacher's ability to engage students in deep learning of content that is comprehensible to them (Ball, Thames, & Phelps, 2008). The knowledge that underpins this ability is referred to as pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) (Ball et al., 2008;Loughran, Berry, & Mulhall, 2012; Magnusson, Krajcik, & Borko, 1999; Shulman, 1986). PCK is more than the sum of a teacher's subject matter/content knowledge and pedagogical knowledge, rather it is their amalgamation and transformation to create a form of knowledge that is subject specific and unique to teachers (Shulman, 1986). Researchers have identified that for both science teachers (Morine-Dershimer & Kent, 1999; van Driel, Verloop, & de Voos, 1998) and mathematics teachers (Baumert et al., 2010), a thorough understanding of discipline content is essential to their development of PCK. Summarising the work of Whitehurst (2002), Sheehan and Mosse (2013) noted that science teachers who have a qualification in their area of teaching have higher achieving students when compared with the students of teachers teaching out-of-field, irrespective of the students' socioeconomic background or prior achievement. Similarly, Ponte and Chapman (2008) argued that teachers who do not have strong knowledge of mathematics are likely to be less able to help students develop relational and conceptual understandings. Countries such as Finland, which consistently ranks highly in international studies of science and mathematics achievement, require that their teachers are fully qualified in their discipline and understand how to teach it (Marginson et al., 2013).Teachers do not graduate from teacher education courses as expert teachers, rather they have an emergent PCK which develops over time and through experience in the classroom, as Hoban (as cited in Loughran et al., 2012, p. 1) attests:Upon reflection, I realised that, as a secondary science teacher for 14 years, I knew my science content but very little about how children learn. … Thus began my awakening about understanding the complex relationships between teaching and learning that is still evolving today. … In retrospect … I had such a simplistic conception of teaching during those first 14 years; it is a little embarrassing that I believed I had mastered the job (Hoban, 2002; pp. xvi - xvii).Berliner (1988) stated that developing PCK takes time and suggested that teachers move through five distinct phases as they develop it, moving from novice (rigid in action) through advanced beginner (gaining insight), competent performer (rational), proficient performer (intuitive), to expert. He describes experts as ‘arational’ in that they; … engage in performance in a qualitatively different way than do the novices or the competent performers. Experts are not consciously choosing what to attend to and what to do, they simply flow. They get involved and they just do it. They act effortlessly and fluidly and, in a sense, arationally, because it is not easily described as deductive or analytic (p. 19).Berliner (1988) found that experienced teachers have rich, contextualised stories to tell as they rely on case and episodic knowledge; compared with novice teachers they think and act differently. Beswick et al. (2012) identified four stages of development of middle-school mathematics teachers' knowledge, personal numeracy, pedagogical awareness, pedagogical content knowledge awareness, and finally pedagogical content knowledge consolidation. The PCK of expert teachers has become implicit; highly personal and hard to formalise although it can be seen in their actions and is quite difficult to communicate to others – it has become tacit knowledge (Loughran et al., 2012). As Polanyi (1966) suggests, “we can know more than we can tell” (p. 4). For the novice teacher to learn from the expert or subject-specific discourse communities, tacit knowledge must be captured and made explicit.Classroom observation and video-stimulated recall are frequently used means of uncovering teachers' thinking in the act of teaching (e.g., Muir et al., 2010; Patrikainen & Toom, 2004). The power of video-stimulated recall lies in its affordance of the identification of ‘critical incidents’ (Angelides, 2001) that become the focus of reflection-on-action (Schön, 1987). Schön's theory of reflective practice also offers other ways to think about how the tacit knowledge of practitioners might be made explicit. The theory is underpinned by a constructivist view of learning that posits that rather than uncovering an objective reality, individuals make and remake versions of the world that fit with their experience. Reflective conversations among practitioners can bring the tacit knowledge employed in such ‘worldmaking’ (Goodman, 1978) to light. Schön (1987) described the process as follows:Through countless acts of attention and inattention, naming, sensemaking, boundary setting, and control, they make and maintain the worlds matched to their professional knowledge and know-how … When practitioners respond to the indeterminate zones of practice by holding a reflective conversation with the materials of their situations, they remake a part of their practice world and thereby reveal the usually tacit processes of worldmaking that underlie all of their practice.(as cited in Kinsella, 2010, p. 10).Plack and Santasier (2004) described reflective practice as a cyclical process incorporating Schön's (1987) notions of reflection-in-action and reflection-on-action as well as Killion and Todnem’s (1991) reflection-for-action. Reflection-for-action is intended to encapsulate the combined purpose of reflection-in and on-action by generating insights that inform future actions (Killion & Todnem, 1991). Working either individually or with colleagues using each of the three types of reflection can allow practitioners to unpack the knowledge on which they draw before, during and after action (e.g., Plack & Santasier, 2004).
