Recently, autonomous underwater navigation has become a hot area of research with broad commercial and military applications. Hence, underwater image/video processing has drawn wide attention. On the one hand, projects like North-East Pacific Undersea Networked Experiments (NEPTUNE) sub-sea observatories suffer from an every-increasing difficulty and the time requirement for the extraction of useful information as their underwater video/image databases grow massively. On the other hand, the exploration and development of marine resources takes place all over the world. Thus, the precise detection of abnormal and salient objects in underwater environments is one of the primary and essential issues in underwater navigation research nowadays. Underwater saliency detection, serving as a pre-processing step like conventional visual saliency detection, aims to identify the most informative location of objects in underwater images and greatly benefits many practical computer-vision applications in similarity search/matching [1], [2], [3], object retargeting [4], automatic image cropping [5], scene classification [6], moving object detection [7], and motion detection [8], [9]. This detection cannot only efficiently focus on the interesting underwater image regions or objects, but also particularly benefits the development of underwater vision technology in the future.
Although significant progress has been made in last two decades, visual saliency detection remains a challenging issue [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17] due to the interrelated and mutually influenced interactions in the underwater scenarios, such as complicated illumination conditions, low-contrast objects under complex background, light absorbing and scattering, severe turbidity of water, etc. Therefore, modeling the saliency-detection mechanism in underwater scenes is a tough and challenging task. In particular, although there exists a data set of turbid underwater images for evaluating image-restoration methods [18], publicly available underwater databases can seldom be used for underwater saliency detection and only limited research has been carried out to investigate how to tackle underwater salient-object detection [19], [20].
Good benchmark data sets will accelerate and promote the development of related research fields [21]. In this paper, to extend saliency detection into the underwater vision domain, an extended underwater image database based on the OUC-VISION database [22], called the Marine Underwater Environment Database (MUED), is constructed and presented. This database contains underwater images with pose variations (with frontal, opposite, left, and right views of each individual underwater object), changes of different spatial location (underwater object located at the top-left corner, the top-right corner, the center, the bottom-left corner, and the bottom-right corner), complicated illumination conditions, varying degrees of turbidity, complex background and multiple-salient objects, in a single uniform database. The currently released underwater image data set contains 8600 images, 430 groups of underwater subjects under different conditions. Furthermore, we will also describe the design, collection, labeling, and categorization of the samples for the database in detail. The advantages of the designed underwater image database are that there are a large number of images for each distinct subject, and the images are categorized according to the controlled variations of the different situations. In our experiments, we have also compared and evaluated the performance of several state-of-the-art saliency-detection methods on this publicly available underwater database.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

•To the best of our knowledge, no underwater database for saliency detection and assessment is publicly available. To extend saliency detection to the underwater vision domain, a diverse underwater image database is constructed and presented.•This released underwater image database can be used to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the existing state-of-the-art saliency-detection algorithms for underwater images. The experiments with algorithms on the underwater image database provide reference-evaluation results for researchers working on underwater computer vision.•This database cannot only offer unparalleled opportunities to researchers in the underwater vision community and beyond, but also particularly benefit the development of underwater vision technology in the future.
A preliminary conference version of the released database was published in [22]. In contrast to the previous work in [22], which contained 4400 underwater images of 220 individual objects, the new MUED includes 4200 more underwater images of 210 conspicuous underwater objects. Furthermore, this database also considers complex underwater background variations, underwater floating debris, and multiple salient objects, so as to construct a larger and more comprehensive data set. We also provide baseline evaluation results to researchers in the underwater vision community, to facilitate the research on more applicable and robust methods for both underwater image processing and underwater computer vision.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we will introduce the related work on saliency detection and underwater salient-object detection. In Section 3, we introduce the imaging set-up and the lighting system for capturing underwater images. Then, the design and the contents of the MUED are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, the designed database is described in detail. The performance of several state-of-the-art saliency-detection methods is evaluated on the MUED in Section 6. Section 7 describes how to obtain the MUED. Finally, the paper closes with a conclusion and discussion in Section 8.
