Art and technology have a similar origin. Art originates from the Latin word, ars/artem, which means “work of art; practical skill; a business, craft”. Techne is the Greek word for “craftsmanship, craft or art”. Etymologically, technology includes the creation and study of art, as well as more practically-oriented artifacts. Cave paintings featuring animals in the Stone Age represent shamanistic themes that animals bring good fortune or more food. At the same time, these early art pieces can be seen as science and technology. The paintings of the cave of Altamira include anatomical details of the bison (i.e., science). They also represent a type of virtual reality enabling their creators to project their wishes by means of basic technology.
History includes numerous examples of people who contributed to both art and technology – e.g., Leonardo da Vinci or Michelangelo. However, the relationship between art and technology waxed and waned through different artistic eras (e.g., Rococo and Romanticism). At times, some even considered the application of technology a threat to art (e.g., mass photographic reproduction of art pieces, Benjamin, 1968). In the past century however, art and technology have started to be reintegrated with each other. For example, cinema was born with an innate connection to and support from technologies, whether dealing with reality – e.g., “Arrival of a Train at La Ciotat” (Auguste and Louis Lumière, in 1985) or fiction – e.g., “A Trip to the Moon” (Georges Méliès, in 1902). The use of technology to create contemporary art – specifically, in interactive art – is no longer seen as controversial. Obviously, many artists today use virtual reality technology – far more advanced than the Altamira cave paintings – to engender new and powerful experiences in their audiences, which are sometimes indistinguishable from “magic” (Clarke, 1973).
The use of technology has already gone beyond what we had imagined. A computer program can generate a new piece of art in the “style” of Rembrandt (https://www.nextrembrandt.com/). A smartphone app can turn our humming into a new song with all the necessary arrangement (e.g., http://hum-on.com/). Dancers danced with a gigantic robot arm at the Big Concert Night of Ars Electronica Festival 2018. From these examples, we have witnessed the effects of computing and technologies on art and aesthetics. However, little research has focused on the effects of art and aesthetics on computing and technologies. To shed light on this converse aspect, researchers coined the term, “Aesthetic Computing” (Shem-Shaul et al., 2003). Art and aesthetics allow technologists to explore more creative and innovative media for software and mathematical structures, make computing more accessible to various people, and facilitate personalization of computing structures at individual and group levels. Therefore, we can see reciprocal interactions between art/aesthetics and computing/technologies. On the one hand, art and aesthetic theory and practice have enriched computational representations and technological development. On the other hand, computing and technology have enabled novel perceptual experiences. Given that the original meaning of aesthetics is “the study of our perception of the whole environment” (Bolter et al., 2013), computing and technology have opened opportunities for new aesthetics.
In this article, we discuss the close connection between interactive art and Human–Computer Interaction (HCI) in the past and present, and we explain why they are indispensable to move forward in the digital age. To illustrate the ‘past’ element, we include a small number of pieces that the authors of the present article agreed upon in the brief history section and provide a quick overview of the evolution in this domain using the works of Ernest Edmonds1 who has contributed to this interdisciplinary area for around 50 years. For the present, we show how artists and HCI researchers have influenced one another by describing contemporary projects in different genres and forms of art. To illustrate possible future scenarios, we consider challenges and opportunities that occur when people from different disciplines collaborate with one another and discuss how we can facilitate such a process. Finally, we conclude our paper with suggestions and recommendations.
