The effectiveness of science parks in sustaining and inducing on-park firms' innovative performance has been extensively debated not only among scholars in innovation studies, but also among practitioners and policy makers. This is due to the increasing role of parks as an innovation policy tool both in developed and in developing countries (Albahari et al., 2017; Löfsten and Lindelöf, 2001). Science parks are built to foster the development of innovative start-ups and regional clusters, to support scientific and technological activities, and to create networks among public and private actors in the innovation systems (Etzkowitz and Leydesdorf, 1998; Etzkowitz and Zhou, 2017; Lundvall, 1992; Siegel et al., 2003). Indeed, one of the most important reasons for the development and diffusion of these institutions is their positive effect on tenants' performance in terms of innovation, economic growth and creation of relationships with the academia, through the incorporation of diverse public and private organizations (Albahari et al., 2013; Albahari et al., 2017; Bellavista and Sanz, 2009; de Mello and Rocha, 2004).
Many studies have analysed the role of science parks in promoting firms' growth and innovation, as well as the development of the surrounding area, highlighting a set of factors that might explain the potential positive effects of science parks on firms' performance - the proximity to university laboratories and research centres, the presence of incubators, the creation of networking opportunities, and the role of bridging institutions (Colombo and Delmastro, 2002; Link and Scott, 2003, Link and Scott, 2007; Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2009). Yet, the evidence of their impact on firms' innovative activity is not conclusive. In his seminal paper, Felsenstein (1994) describes science parks more as “enclaves” of innovation rather than “seedbeds” of innovation, arguing that their role is more innovation-entrenching than innovation-inducing. Along the same line, several contributions find no positive effect of science parks on regional development in terms of job growth or increase in the number of start-ups in the surrounding region (Massey et al., 1992; Wallsten, 2004), and no impact of these institutions on the performance of the on-park firms (Colombo and Delmastro, 2002; Ferguson, 2004; Liberati et al., 2016; Lindelöf and Löfsten, 2003; Löfsten and Lindelöf, 2001; Monck et al., 1988). However, there are also studies that find a positive effect of science parks on firms' performance (Battaglia et al., 2012; Fukugawa, 2006; Goldstain and Luger, 1991; Lamperti et al., 2017), and on tenants' innovative activity (Albahari et al., 2018a; Squicciarini, 2008, Squicciarini, 2009; Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2009). Such mixed evidence signals that science parks are not sufficient engines of innovations by themselves, but need to be part of broader research networks including firms, universities, and governments (Etzkowitz and Zhou, 2017). Furthermore, the extent to which science parks affect firms' innovative activity crucially depends on firm-specific and park-specific features (Albahari et al., 2018a; Huang et al., 2012; Liberati et al., 2016; Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2014, Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2016). Relevantly, science parks might be crucial actors within innovation (eco)systems (Adner and Kapoor, 2010; Jackson, 2011; Oh et al., 2016), where a network of public and private institutions contemporaneously gain and provide value with-in a joint technology development process. Indeed, governments and industrialists are particularly interested in creating systems that connect multiple innovation actors (e.g. universities, research institutes, firms, etc.) to cultivate favorable environments for innovators with the aim of pursuing value and creating synergies (Frankel and Maital, 2014; Walrave et al., 2018).1 Given the large use of science parks as innovation and development policy instruments, it becomes relevant to answer the question of whether such entities – by themselves – are effective actors in contributing to the innovative performance of the whole system and, particularly, to firms affiliated and located therein.
Our study contributes to the literature, by providing evidence about the effect of science parks on tenants' innovative performance, accounting for the heterogeneity of both tenants and science parks. More in detail, we aim at answering two research questions arising from the recent literature (Albahari et al., 2018a; Albahari et al., 2018b; de Mello and Rocha, 2004; Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2014, Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2016). First, do on-park firms outperform off-park competitors in terms of innovative performance? Second, what are the firm-specific and science park-specific features affecting the likelihood and intensity of firms' innovative activity?
To answer these questions, we rely on novel panel data on 26 Italian science parks, 470 firms located in the parks and a matched group of 511 firms outside the parks. This dataset combines information about firms' economic and innovative activity and information about the most relevant features of Italian science parks, including their size, age, sectoral specialization, number of research centres, number of research projects and links with universities. Our empirical analysis involves, first, an estimation of the treatment effect of being in a park on the innovation performance of companies, using a matching technique. Second, we look at the role of firm-specific and park-specific features – with a particular emphasis on science and technology collaborations within the parks - in driving the innovative activity of tenants. In doing so, we perform a two-step Heckman estimation to account for sample bias. Results show a positive effect of science parks on tenants' innovative activity as compared to off-park firms, and highlight the relevance of research collaborations involving different actors for the development of innovations within the park. Importantly, these effects seem to hold for firms that already have some degree of innovativeness, while firms with no innovation activity do not benefit from being located in a park, which is in line with recent contributions (Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2014, Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2016).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a review of the literature addressing the link between science parks and tenants' performance. Section 3 presents the data and the methodology, while Section 4 is devoted to investigate the existence and sources of differences in innovative performances of firms. Section 5 concludes and provides policy implications.
