Human trajectory prediction remains a core problem in computer vision with numerous applications, such as social-aware robots [1], intelligent tracking system [2], [3], object detection and tracking [4], [5], [6], and so on. Though significant progress has been made over the past years, human trajectory prediction remains a very challenging problem and continues to draw the attention of many researchers. To predict the future positions of pedestrians in a crowded space, researchers not only need to consider the pedestrian itself, but also have to discover the interactions between pedestrians and their neighbors. Pedestrians follow common sense rules based on social etiquette. When they navigate their way through a crowded space, they are able to predict others’ positions and adjust their paths accordingly. They also need to show respect to personal space and to collaborate with accompanying partners. Thus, in predicting human trajectory, the model needs to be designed to incorporate information of previous positions and to understand sociality.
Recent research in computer vision addresses or improves some of the challenges in trajectory prediction with sociality. For instance, Choi et al. [7], [8], [9] show that human motion and activity are influenced by other nearby people. Helbing et al. [10], [11] propose the Social Force method to model interactions among people to improve the robustness and accuracy of multi-objects tracking problem. Kitani et al. [12] demonstrate that scene semantics of a static environment provide strong cues for forecasting pedestrians trajectories. Alahi et al. [13], [14] show that humans are highly predictable in their transit patterns. The recent Social LSTM model [15] views the trajectory prediction as a sequence generation task and presents the architecture which connects the LSTMs with a social pooling layer. However, these works are limited by complex hand-crafted functions, or their testing environments are contrived or artificial. Thus, they can handle only simple interactions such as attraction and repulsion to avoid immediate collisions, but may fail when dealing with complex interactions in crowded scenes. Some of these methods are driven by data, but few methods can handle complex interactions during prediction.
In this paper, inspired by the Social LSTM model, we propose a novel architecture called the social-affinity LSTM (See Fig. 1). The architecture captures complex and subtle interactions among humans with a social model and forecasts their interaction that could occur not merely in close proximity but also in the future. The social-affinity LSTM employs the LSTM to learn the features of an individual trajectory and utilizes the Social Affinity Map to pool the hidden states of people in the vicinity. During pooling, the hidden states are connected by considering the social interaction between objects and their neighbors. This architecture can also automatically learn the general human moving patterns and interactions among different trajectories. In addition, it can capture the information of neighbors with spatial semantic descriptions.Download : Download high-res image (173KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The social-affinity LSTM. The social-affinity LSTM is an architecture which can improve human trajectory prediction in crowded space. As the motion of pedestrians is affected by others in the vicinity, the social-affinity LSTM uses the LSTM to learn the features of an individual trajectory and utilizes the Social Affinity Map(SAM) to pool the hidden states of neighboring LSTMs with social interaction factor. The illustration of our social-affinity LSTM model is shown in Fig. 3.
There are four reasons, which are also our main contributions, that our proposed social-affinity LSTM model can address the above challenges. First, driven by data, our model can capture more complex interactions which are more than repulsion and attraction among individuals and groups in a crowded scene. Second, our method is able to handle the interaction that could occur in the future. Third, the new architecture utilizes the Social Affinity Map to pool information with spatial semantic description which can learn the influence of different social affinities. Finally, different weights for pooling are utilized in our model according to different SAM locations and are updated via backpropagation. We compare the performance of our method with the Social LSTM model on several public datasets including ETH [16], UCY [17] and UAV [11]. Our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods on these datasets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, related works are presented. Our new algorithm is described in Section 3. Section 4 contains the implementation details. Then, the experimental results are presented in Section 5. In Section 6, we describe some discussions. Finally, conclusion and future work are given in Section 7.
