Model estimation is a crucial step in various computer vision problems, including structure from motion (SFM), image retrieval and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), etc. One of the main challenges during model estimation is that the measurements (often points or correspondences) are unavoidably contaminated with outliers due to the imperfection of current measurements acquisition algorithms. These contaminated measurements will probably lead to an arbitrary bad model which could bring a catastrophic impact on the final result in real world applications.
In order to identify and exclude the outliers, a variety of robust model fitting techniques [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8] have been studied for years and can be roughly categorized into two groups. One group of methods [3], [9], [10], [11] analyze each measurement by its residuals under different model hypotheses, then distinguish inliers from the outliers. These methods are usually used in multi-model fitting problems and limited by the requirement of abundant model hypotheses. The other group of algorithms generate model hypotheses by sampling in the measurement set, then find the best model via optimizing a well-designed cost function. The cost function can be solved by random sampling [2], [6], [7], [8], [12] or branch-and-bound (BnB) algorithm which guarantees an optimal solution with, however, much more time consuming [4], [4], [5], [13]. In real-world applications, these algorithms are carefully selected in terms of different usages.
Among these methods, random sample consensus (RANSAC) algorithm [1] is one of the most popular algorithms for robust model estimation, which is broadly recognized by its simplicity and effectiveness. The algorithm follows a vote-and-verify paradigm. It repeatedly draw minimal measurement sets by sampling from the measurements randomly, and calculate model parameter from each sample to form a model hypothesis in each trial. For every model hypothesis, a verification step is also needed. All measurements are incorporated to calculate their residuals with current model parameter. Then, measurements whose residuals below a certain threshold will be grouped as the consensus set of that model hypothesis. After sufficient trials of model generation and verification, RANSAC selects model hypothesis with the largest consensus set as the optimal hypothesis. And the final model parameter is calculated from the consensus set of the optimal hypothesis.
Though proved to be effective, RANSAC still needs improvement for better efficiency. In order to get sufficient trials in RANSAC, we must draw k trials to get at least one outlier-free sample with confidence η0,(1)k≥log(1−η0)log(1−ϵm),where ϵ is the fraction of inliers in the dataset, m denotes the size of the minimal sampling set. It’s obvious that as ϵ declines, k grows dramatically which brings heavy computational burden on the algorithm. This phenomenon results from the uniform sampling strategy in RANSAC, where the algorithm samples every measurement at equivalent chance. Therefore some valuable information indicating true inliers will be overlooked, which could have been used to cut down the running time of the algorithm.
In this paper, we mainly address on this problem and present ARSAC, which aims to boost the efficiency of the algorithm. We adopt a non-uniform sampling strategy where the samples in each trial are carefully chosen to improve the convergence speed of the algorithm. An adaptively ranked sampling algorithm is then proposed for finding new samples. The ranking of measurements is first calculated by their own quality and then updated by analyzing the current best model hypothesis. We can get a glimpse of the probability for a measurement to be an inlier through the ranking and leverage it to incorporate measurements into new samples. In addition, in the non-uniform sampling process, measurements with higher quality tend to cluster in images, which cause potential risks for degeneracy when estimating epipolar geometry. To avoid this, a geometric constraint is proposed to enforce the algorithm to sample measurements which have scattered distribution in images. This constraint is proved to be effective experimentally in the following section.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
•We propose a method which adopts non-uniform sampling based on adaptively ranked measurements. It updates the ranking of measurements in each trial, and incorporate most prominent measurement into sample, which is experimentally proved to achieve high efficiency.•We design a simple geometric constraint, which samples measurements with scattered distribution in images. It effectively alleviates degenerate cases in epipolar geometry estimation and improves the overall robustness of the algorithm.•We develop ARSAC, an efficient algorithm which is able to achieve better speed and robustness compared to other efficient RANSAC-like algorithms.
