Ozone exists naturally in the atmosphere. In the stratosphere, high concentrations of ozone protect the earth's surface from harmful ultraviolet radiation emitted by the sun. Much lower ozone concentrations are found in the troposphere and are mainly due to the occurrence of photochemical reactions and stratospheric intrusions. However, in the troposphere, especially in metropolitan areas characterized by substantial anthropogenic emissions, photochemical reactions involving anthropogenic nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) significantly increase ground-level ozone concentrations. High ozone levels and other air pollutants are harmful to both the natural ecosystem and humans (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, 2018). Thus, there is the need for regulations to control the emission of NOx and/or VOCs to reduce ground-level ozone concentrations.
In this study, we consider the issue of a state space multicollinearity for an ozone pollution problem from Atlanta, Georgia. The stochastic dynamic programming (SDP) formulation of this ozone pollution problem involves a 524-dimensional continuous state space (Yang, Chen, Chang, Murphy & Tsai, 2007), containing ozone concentrations and precursor NOx emissions occurring from 4:00 AM through 7:00 PM across the Atlanta metropolitan region. The cycle of ozone formation is daily, rising during the day and falling overnight. As commented in Ariyajunya, Chen, Chen and Kim (2017), the ozone concentrations are correlated spatially and temporally. Ozone formation is limited by the presence of precursor NOx and/or VOC emissions. Atlanta, is “NOx limited,” which means that lowering ozone concentrations can be best achieved by reducing NOx emissions (Chameides, Lindsay, Richardson & Kiang, 1988). Hence, the decision variables are reductions in NOx emissions in different locations and time periods across the Atlanta metropolitan region. The goal is to minimize the expected cost of reducing NOx emissions at each stage, so as to maintain the hourly-averaged ozone level at or below the EPA limit.
A design and analysis of computer experiments (DACE) based approximate dynamic programming (ADP) method has been employed to achieve a computationally-tractable numerical solution to this high-dimensional SDP problem (Yang et al., 2007; Yang, Chen, Chang, Sattler & Wen, 2009). In particular, Yang et al. (2009) focused on using ADP to solve the ozone pollution control problem with the state transition metamodel developed using stepwise regression in Yang et al. (2007). However, neither addressed the issue of state space multicollinearity. In fact, Ariyajunya et al. (2017) revealed that 3 of the 16 regression models in Yang et al. (2007) had very high variance inflation factors (VIFs), where high VIFs occur when there is high multicollinearity. Ariyajunya et al. (2017) demonstrated the presence of high state space multicollinearity in the ozone pollution SDP problem and proposed methods to orthogonalize the multicollinear state space, but did not demonstrate the impact of multicollinearity on the ADP solution.
In ADP value function approximation, the state space is analogous to the predictor or input variable space in statistics, and the value function is the unknown response surface. High multicollinearity among predictor variables leads to the situation in which there are infinitely many model forms with seemingly similar prediction accuracy, and there is no easy algorithm to choose among them (Kutner, Nachtsheim, Neter & Li, 2005: Ch 7). Consequently, an empirical model fit over a multicollinear space is subject to poor generalizability, meaning that the model form is sensitive to small changes in the data. While prediction accuracy might appear good within the multicollinear space, the wide variation in model forms can be extreme, with completely different sets of significant predictor variables, and estimated model coefficients that vary by orders of magnitude or switch signs, consequently affecting generalizability.
If the state variables are not multicollinear, then most any flexible statistical modeling method (or machine learning algorithm) can be used to generate a reasonable value function approximation. If multicollinear state space data are used to fit a value function approximation, then one is unlikely, given the infinite number of similarly accurate models, to uncover the appropriate relationships between the state variables and the value function. This, in turn, will provide misleading information to the subsequent stagewise optimizations that depend on the approximate value function. DACE based ADP is unique in ADP because it ensures an uncorrelated (or orthogonal) representation of the state space by using design of experiments, so as to provide better data for the value function approximation. Design of experiments is the gold standard for studying causal relationships (Box, Hunter & Hunter, 1978), with the most well-known being the clinical trial. However, state space multicollinearity must be addressed in order to take proper advantage of a DACE approach. The strength of our ADP research lies it in its foundation in well-established statistical approaches. In the next section, we provide background on the DACE based ADP approach. In Section 3, background is given on the ozone pollutions SDP problem. Section 4 presents development of state transition metamodels to study state space multicollinearity, and SDP results using these state transition metamodels are compared in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 presents the concluding recommendations.
