The term of sustainable city was derived from the concept of sustainable development. Sustainable development was first defined in 1987 by the Brundtland Commission (Bartelmus, 2003), formally the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED, 1987), solicited by the United Nations. This concept was enhanced by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development at the Earth Summit, Rio de Janeiro, in 1992 (UNCED, 1992). In 1995, Kahn wrote that the paradigm of ‘concepts, definitions, and key issues in sustainable development: the outlook for the future’ described in Agenda 21, in three conceptual pillars. These pillars were economic sustainability, social sustainability, and environmental sustainability (Kahn, 1995). Recently, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the broader 2030 Development Agenda (United Nations General Assembly, 2015), with the goal 11 of the SDGs were listing as sustainable cities and communities (Jandl, 2017).
Sustainable cities made contribution to sustainable development (Satterthwaite, 1997; Baccini, 1997; Lo and Chung, 2004). Fig. 1 showed important international movement on the sustainable development and cities. Richard first coined the term “ecocity” in his 1987 book, entitled “Ecocity Berkeley: building cities for a healthy future”, which has been gradually spread to almost every aspect of our lives. Even though the basis of official definition has been criticized as being vague and lacking operability (Register, 1987), it still provided us a platform for raising constructive questions and reaching an ideological consensus. The concept of sustainable city was defined as “Improving the quality of life in a city, including ecological, cultural, political, institutional, social and economic components without leaving a burden on the future generations” (Subject Matters, 2009). With the rapid urbanization movement throughout the world, it was predicted by the United Nations that 66% of the population will live in urban areas or cities by 2050 (UN, 2014). To make cities safe and sustainable means ensuring access to safe and affordable housing, upgrading slum settlements, investment in public transport, creating green public spaces, and improving urban planning and management in a way that is both participatory and inclusive (SDG, 2016). Sustainable city research which was linked to various missions and involves multiple disciplines, well deserved a comprehensive analysis to combine its development, research status and frontier trends.Download : Download high-res image (610KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Important international movement on the sustainable development and cities.
A common research instrument for this analysis is the bibliometric method which has widely been used to measure scientific progress in many disciplines of science and engineering, such as Honduras (Monge-Nájera and Ho, 2017), tea research (Wambu et al., 2017), psychology (Ho and Hartley, 2016). Recently, the bibliometric method has been employed to map different research themes of sustainable development, for example, environmental education for sustainable development in Spanish scientific journals during 2001–2010 (Villaverde and Ruiz, 2012), sustainability and sustainable development during 1991–2016 (Olawumi and Chan, 2018), transportation infrastructure during 2000–2017 which has an enormous impact on sustainable development (Wang et al., 2018). These studies provided researchers and practitioners with an extensive and in-depth understanding of the salient research themes, trends and pattern of sustainable development research worldwide. As for the research of sustainable city, due to China's important role in promoting low-carbon city development, a bibliometric approach and big data mining were adopted to uncover the scholars and the public perceptions on low carbon cities in China (Cai et al., 2017). The concept of sustainable city has gained worldwide attention recently which had enhanced its implementation. However, few studies have attempted to map the global sustainable city research involving both natural science and social science fields.
This study aimed to map the global research patterns and trends of sustainable city research during 1992 to 2016 from multiple perspectives, using a bibliometric analysis and newly developed visualization tools, like Science of Science (Sci2), gephi, and alluvial diagram. The analysis and results will help scientific researchers better understand the research status and frontier trends in sustainable city field, allow researchers to know the current research interests and patterns in this field, and provide useful information and references for further investigation and publication strategies.
