The ‘experiment’ has been a central topic in the history and sociology of science, especially since Science & Technology Studies (STS) set out to empirically study the segregated laboratory spaces where scientific experimentation takes place (Collins, 1985; Knorr-Cetina, 1981; Latour & Woolgar, 1979). Historical approaches focused on understanding how the experimental mode of knowledge production became dominant in the natural sciences, and to what effects (Shapin and Shaffer, 1985).
The perception that experiments are primarily conducted within the laboratory has quickly evaporated. Thus, we find an increasing emphasis on public experiments (Horst, 2011; Laurent, 2016; Marres, 2009). Some authors even view experimentation as a main component of our society. Whether denoted as collective experiments (Gross, 2010; Latour, 2011), hybrid forums (Callon, Lascoumes, & Barthe, 2009), ‘real-world experiments’ (Gross & Hoffmann-Riem, 2005) or ‘cultures of experimentation’ (Schwarz, 2016), such concepts point towards the everyday forms of collective experimentation needed to deal with sociotechnical controversies that ‘spill over’ the boundaries of the laboratory, create uncertainty and bring about unforeseen concerns.
While sociological analyses of experiments in the natural sciences primarily focused on understanding the role and function of experimentation in the production of scientific knowledge claims within the confines of the laboratory (and subsequent processes of translation beyond these boundaries), literature on collective experimentation aims to better understand how to come to democratic forms of decision-making under highly uncertain conditions.
Although experimentation thus has a long and rich history as a research topic, experimental research in the sociology of science has been rarer. Such experimental research – in which the experiment is viewed not as the object of analysis, but as a particular mode of social-scientific knowledge production – is currently gaining momentum in STS (Vertesi et al., 2016; Downey & Zuiderent-Jerak, 2017; Lury and Wakeford, 2012). What these approaches have in common is that they view experimentation as an ‘ethos’ (Jensen, 2014), ‘sensitivity’ or ‘resource’ that can be utilized to advance our understanding of socio-technical and political issues and, crucially, to simultaneously intervene in such debates (Marres, Lezaun, & Tironi, 2017; Zuiderent-Jerak, 2015). Notably, this also involves a broadening of the concept of experimentation from its traditional definition as a scientific procedure undertaken to make a discovery, test a hypothesis, or demonstrate a known fact to a more general view of experimentation as a form of ‘tinkering’ (Mol, Moser, & Pols, 2010) and trying out what works in a particular context.1
Where these forms of experimentation primarily focus on the singular or the unique, and broader lessons to be drawn become identified through the empirical details of the various experiments, another experimental approach originating in the sociology of science is taken by Harry Collins and Rob Evans. Their large-scale attempt to establish the experimental research program of the ‘imitation game’ (Collins, Evans, Ribeiro, & Hall, 2006; Collins & Evans, 2014) aims to systematize in a more top-down sense by producing cross-cultural and cross-temporal comparisons between different societies and communities. The imitation game is a Turing-like test (Turing, 1950) intended to test the ‘discursive ability’ of participants pretending to be members of a particular social/cultural group (Collins & Evans, 2014). As a blinded, computer-based experiment, the approach distinguishes between three distinctive roles: a Judge (J), developing experience-based questions as member of a particular social/cultural group; a Non-Pretender (NP) from the same community, answering these questions from experience, and a Pretender (P) from another group, trying to formulate a plausible answer by pretending to be a community member (Collins & Evans, 2014) (see Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (242KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The Imitation Game principle.
The imitation game program can be seen as a form of experimentation that at heart builds on notions developed within the sociology of science and STS more generally. Key insights about the importance of socialization and the acquisition of tacit knowledge for developing expertise are built into the core of the underlying ‘conceptual machinery’ of the experiments (Collins et al., 2015).
Collins & Evans’ research program aims to systematically conduct imitation game experiments to produce rigorous and generalizable social-scientific knowledge. The experiments, including the underlying theoretical framework, have been the focus of much debate (Collins & Evans, 2002, 2003; Collins, Weinel & Evans, 2010, 2011; Epstein, 2011; Fischer, 2011; Jasanoff, 2003; Rip, 2003; Wynne, 2003).
The point of this article is not to rehash these debates. Rather, this article arises out of the concern that the current way in which the imitation game experiments are discussed overemphasizes precisely their most problematic aspects, while neglecting their most promising aspects. I will argue that the debate is currently framed from a ‘representational register’ building on particular ideas about ‘proper’ experiments and the kinds of knowledge produced. Through an empirical exploration of a range of imitation game experiments conducted in various health care contexts, I outline an alternative ‘generative register’ for making sense of the usefulness of these experiments and the kinds of knowledge they produce for different actors. Crucially, this generative register recognizes intervening in science (or, in this case, medicine) as a legitimate goal in the sociology of science. Whereas many historians, sociologists and philosophers of science would primarily focus on studying knowledge production, pleas for more interventionist modes of research in STS are becoming more widespread (Martin, 2016; Zuiderent-Jerak & Bruun Jensen, 2007). Although the imitation game is originally developed for studying various forms of knowledge or expertise, a core claim of this article is that it turns out to be much better suited as a form of ‘interventionist research’.
In the next section, I outline the origins of the imitation game experiments and discuss relevant components of Collins and Evans’ broader research program. Next, I discuss the theoretical and methodological debates surrounding these experiments and articulate the implicit notions of experimentation. 2 Hereafter, I provide an empirical analysis of various imitation game experiments conducted in various healthcare settings. In the discussion, I reflect on the broader lessons that can be drawn from these studies about generative experiments in the sociology of science.
