As hurricanes such as Harvey, Irma, Maria, Florence, and Michael demonstrated during the 2017 and 2018 Atlantic hurricane seasons, improving hazard risk communication and decision making is critical for scientists and society (NASEM, 2017a, NASEM, 2017b, NWS, 2019). Most research on societal information flow and decision making for environmental risks is observational, using data from surveys, interviews, and other empirical methods. In the context of hurricanes (tropical cyclones), such research has developed a broad base of empirical understanding about how at-risk members of the public access and use risk information and make protective decisions (see, e.g., reviews in Baker, 1991, Dash and Gladwin, 2007, Lazo et al., 2015, Huang et al., 2016a). However, because this work typically focuses on specific populations or situations, findings can vary widely across studies (e.g., Huang et al., 2016a), and it is difficult to identify broader spatial and temporal patterns.
Many of these existing studies also utilize data at the individual or household levels, which limits their ability to elucidate how the socially interactive processes underlying hazard risk communication and response scale up to influence outcomes (e.g., Drabek, 1999, Dash and Gladwin, 2007, Taylor et al., 2009). Moreover, in today's world, forecast and warning information and its communication evolve rapidly as a hazard approaches, in conjunction with interacting individuals' information behaviors, risk perceptions, and decisions (Lee et al., 2009, Morss and Hayden, 2010, Sherman-Morris et al., 2011, Morss et al., 2017, Bica et al., 2019). Collecting the empirical data needed to analyze and understand these intersecting social, spatial, and temporal dynamics is challenging (Meyer et al., 2014, Morss et al., 2017, Demuth et al., 2018).
Computational modeling provides an opportunity to investigate hazard information flow and decisions using a fundamentally different approach—one that complements and builds on empirical studies. As discussed in Morss et al. (2017), weather prediction, communication, and decision making are interconnected components of a dynamic coupled natural-human system. When hazardous weather threatens, multiple types of actors interact to create, communicate, interpret, and use forecasts, warnings, and other risk information (Gladwin et al., 2007; Demuth et al., 2012, Morss et al., 2015, Bostrom et al., 2016, Bica et al., 2019). Within this system, the risk information available and associated uncertainties change across space and through time. Further, in the modern, hyper-connected environment, information can be widely exchanged almost instantaneously; little is known about how new hazard information propagates and influences protective decisions. Agent-based modeling provides a useful toolkit for exploring the dynamics of this type of system.
This article introduces a new agent-based modeling platform for investigating relationships among environmental hazards, hazard information, information flow, and patterns in people's protective decisions. The Communicating Hazard Information in the Modern Environment (CHIME) ABM was developed through collaboration among physical scientists, social scientists, computer and information scientists, and agent-based modelers, as part of a larger, multi-method project studying the dynamic, interconnected processes that characterize the modern hazard prediction, communication, and decision-making system (Morss et al., 2017). CHIME ABM was created to provide a platform for integrating knowledge and data across disciplines to build understanding about the dynamical system of interest, connecting concurrent geophysical predictive modeling and empirical social and information science research (e.g., Anderson et al., 2016, Bica et al., 2019, Demuth et al., 2018, Fossell et al., 2017, Kogan et al., 2015, Kogan and Palen, 2018, Morss et al., 2017, Wilenski, 1999). In doing so, we aimed to develop an interdisciplinary digital laboratory for running controlled experiments with different configurations of hazard information and social interactions, under various, dynamic scenarios (see, e.g., Waldrop, 2017, Verburg et al., 2016, Rovere et al., 2016, Magliocca and Ellis, 2016).
The modeling platform was designed to represent key aspects of the real-world system of interest given our research goals, while remaining sufficiently simple to allow meaningful exploration and knowledge building (Sun et al., 2016, Buchmann et al., 2016, Allison et al., 2018). It is currently implemented for a hurricane threatening the US coastline over a five-day period, but it was designed to represent general features of weather hazard forecasting, warning, and response in order to enable a variety of future extensions. A core component of CHIME ABM is a model of hazard information flow and protective decisions with heterogeneous agents who interact via peer and media networks. The agent types represent five types of key actors in hazard forecast and warning systems: forecasters, public officials, media broadcasters, other media aggregators and communicators, and citizens with varying individual characteristics. The agents interact with each other and with a virtual world with ocean and land areas, a hurricane that moves across the landscape, and forecast and other risk information that evolves as the storm approaches.
Although agent-based modeling has previously been used in hazards research, the research discussed here differs from this previous work in several ways. One body of related work uses agent-based modeling to study evacuation planning for hurricanes (e.g., Chen et al., 2006, Zhang et al., 2009, Yin et al., 2014, Ukkusuri et al., 2017) or other hazards (e.g., Dawson et al., 2011, Wang et al., 2016, Bernardini et al., 2017). Such work focuses primarily on how collective evacuation behaviors interact with built infrastructure, in order to explore issues such as traffic demand, evacuation routing, and strategies for improving evacuation effectiveness. The emphasis of the agent-based modeling in these studies is therefore not on who decides to take protective action, when, and why, but on how people and vehicles move and interact after they decide to evacuate. Although evacuation logistics are important, they are not examined here; in CHIME ABM V1 (version 1), the agents do not physically move. Instead, we focus on how inter-agent dynamics and human-information-environment interactions influence patterns in evacuation decisions.
Other studies have used agent-based models to examine how hazard information diffusion or protective decision making is influenced by a population's characteristics, such as social networks or inter-individual heterogeneity (e.g., Widener et al., 2013, Rand et al., 2015, Dixon et al., 2017). Again, the research presented in this article has a complementary but different emphasis. Although our work also focuses primarily on members of the public, we design and utilize a model with multiple types of interacting agents representing key roles in the warning communication and response system. In addition, we add a new type of dynamical interaction as a central theme by modeling different types of evolving hazard information — especially forecast information and associated uncertainty — interacting with the dynamical human behaviors simulated by an agent-based model.
Another previous application of agent-based modeling for hazards investigates hazard risk management decisions on longer (multi-year) time scales (e.g., Haer et al., 2016, Reilly et al., 2017, Tonn and Guikema, 2018). The modeling presented here expands on this type of work (and much of the agent-based modeling work on human-environment interactions; e.g., Parker et al., 2003, Boone et al., 2011, An, 2012, Rounsevell et al., 2012, Filatova et al., 2013, Barton et al., 2016, Groeneveld et al., 2017, Schulze et al., 2017) by examining interactions on much shorter time scales, where different types of information and decisions are important. The research presented in this article focuses on the time scale of a single hurricane threat, although CHIME ABM could be adapted to investigate social learning and other longer-term issues.
Building on and extending previous related work, here we describe the conceptualization and implementation of a new agent-based modeling laboratory for investigating how interactions among geospatially distributed, heterogeneous agents influence and are influenced by hazard information flow, decisions, and outcomes. We then present results from a set of experiments illustrating how large-scale patterns of hazard risk management decisions can emerge from the decisions of many simplified, heterogeneous agents as they interact with each other and with their evolving physical and informational environment. For the initial model development and research shown here, we used a case study approach, performing simulations for the state of Florida, US, and two hurricanes that previously made landfall in the state. The model was designed to be flexible, however, and thus the modeling framework can readily be modified to study other regions, agent configurations, hazards, and hazard information.
Section 2 provides an overview of CHIME ABM V1 and its key components. Section 3 describes the experimental design and implementation and the analysis of the experimental output. Section 4 presents results, beginning with the spatial and temporal patterns in evacuation decisions exhibited by the model. It then investigates the sensitivity of the model's behavior to changes in three key parameter sets (the Citizen agents' weighting of different types of information, the timing of public official agents' evacuation orders, and the geographic distribution of the Citizen-agent population) and compares results for forecasts with two different levels of skill for two different hurricanes. Section 5 summarizes key results and discusses implications of this work for hurricane risk communication and future research.
