On multiple occasions, human activities involve exploration and analysis of large amounts of data. It seems imperative to provide individuals with methods and tools that allows users to perform data processing tasks in an efficient and human-like way. A newly coined phrase – data science – that comprises variety of data processing approaches and technologies should include methods that offer an easy way to grasp a nature of data and provide its better understanding before a detailed analysis is performed. They should be performed in an informal and friendly manner using concepts defined by humans and reflecting human perception of these concepts. Such stated concepts will enable formulating more human-like queries that examine data and create a generic view of its content.
Modeling and manipulation of human-focused concepts is one of the most appealing and important applications of fuzzy sets [21], [27], [43]. Here, we propose and advocate utilization of an iPad as a fundamental methodology for inputting definitions of human-focused concepts, i.e., fuzzy objects and terms, into a computer-based system. In particularly, we emphasize the role of that technology in an application to linguistic summaries.
Users interact with databases in order to extract information they are interested in. They want to learn more about data and better understand its content. Up to now, this requires a formal approach to construct queries, and a set of skills to interpret the obtained results. However, users would like to learn more about data without being too specific. They want to know more about its content in a generalized form, they would like ‘see’ a condensed representation of it. In order to accomplish that, the users should have the ability to ask questions using imprecise and personalized terms. An introduction of soft queries [41], [46] seems to address that need. That type of queries involves usage of terms and phrases representing concepts that are natural for humans and are required by humans to gain understating of phenomena hidden in data. Such terms as MOST, AT LEAST, MORE OR LESS, AROUND are used to represent concepts essential for qualitative and quick assessment of data content as well as specifics of phenomena represented by it. Soft queries allow users to use such terms and interact with a database in a more human-like way. For example, it seems quite natural for a user to ask questions, such as:
Are MOST individuals TALL?
Are individuals ABOUT 30 years old WEALTHY?
Are OLD things EXPENSIVE? to learn something new about individuals/things represented by the data, or to determine if some facts are true.
One of necessities of constructing such queries is a process of defining linguistic terms representing human concepts, such as MOST, TALL, ABOUT, OLD, and WEALTHY or EXPENSIVE in the above example. It is not straightforward to express them in a mathematical way. This requires background knowledge and the ability to convert them into a numerical domain. It seems critical to provide users with a simple way to create definitions of such concepts. Such a process should be simple and intuitive. Any methods and tools that are able to accomplish that are of high significance.
In order to address the above-mentioned issue, we introduce and describe an iPad-based application that provides a convenient and user-friendly interface for entering – using fingers – definitions of linguistic terms and quantifiers required for linguistic-based analysis of data. The application is called Tablet input of Fuzzy Sets (TiFS). We illustrate usefulness of TiFS by its application to a process of linguistic data summarization. Via simple examples, we demonstrate easiness of personalization of definitions of linguistic concepts and its influence on a unique and user-oriented understanding of data.
We start the paper with a brief introduction to the concepts of linguistic terms and quantifiers as well as an explanation of the concept of data summarization including clarifying examples, Section 4. Section 5 contains an introduction and description of iPad-based application – Tablet input of Fuzzy Sets (TiFS) – enabling a finger-based process for defining linguistic terms and quantifiers. A case study illustrating easiness of using the proposed application is provided in Section 6.
