It was, prior to the 1950s, standard for American philosophers of science to deal with matters of political ideology and science policy, and to address, more generally, questions about the role of non-cognitive values in science (Cartieri & Potochnik, 2014; Douglas, 2009, 2012; Howard, 2003). At some point during the 1950s, however, this societally engaged philosophy of science started to lose its prominence; indeed, it eventually ceased to be part of the mainstream. Here we provide evidence for thinking that this change was, at least in part, due to decisions at the “History and Philosophy of Science” (HPS) sub-program of the U.S. National Science Foundation's (NSF's) Social Science program. These decisions were made by philosophers of science who (a) were committed to value-free approaches to the philosophy of science (i.e., approaches according to which the philosophy of science should not deal with non-cognitive values except in logically analyzing value-laden terms that have a role in the context of justification) and (b) favored value-free approaches at the expense of value-laden ones (i.e., at the expense of approaches according to which the philosophy of science should deal with non-cognitive values in a descriptive and/or normative way). We also situate our account of the impact of the HPS sub-program within a broader one about the growing dominance of analytic philosophy.
We start, in section 2, by clarifying the 1950s and early 1960s distinction between value-free and value-laden philosophies of science, and by presenting the logical empiricist philosophy behind the distinction. This material will inform our analysis of NSF projects as well as of the views of the philosophers who influenced NSF funding allocation. We then, in section 3, describe and summarize the funding decisions made in the first six years of the HPS sub-program (1958–1963). Virtually all the philosophical work that received support from the NSF conformed to the value-free ideal as it was then understood. In section 4, we argue that this ideal, and the logical empiricist philosophy behind it, was endorsed by the philosophers of science who were involved as advisors in the sub-program. Moreover, these philosophers were, to a considerable extent, responsible for the pattern observed in the funding records; philosophers who were committed to value-free approaches seem to have used institutional control to promote work that fitted their own standards. This is indicated by the fact that they had the discretionary power to grant funding, probably could have done otherwise (i.e., direct funds to individuals within the still significant pool of philosophers who engaged in value-laden philosophy of science) and were affiliated with analytic philosophy, which had (Katzav, 2018; Katzav and Vaesen 2017a, 2017b) a track record of using institutional control to reduce philosophical diversity. Section 5 suggests that the use of institutional control at the NSF was, due to the push funding gives to research careers and due to the NSF's prominence, an important cause of philosophy of science's withdrawal from social concerns. The resulting HPS policies were themselves, of course, also part of the withdrawal. Additional contributing factors that we identify, and that belong to analytic philosophy's track record, are the marginalization of value-laden philosophy of science at the journal Philosophy of Science and of pragmatism at The Journal of Philosophy. Furthermore, we assess our story in terms of other factors that have been claimed to explain the withdrawal. While some (Edgar, 2009) have taken it to have been, to a substantial extent, an effect of the adoption of logical empiricism by the philosophy of science community in America, we suggest that the adoption of logical empiricism and the withdrawal are better thought of as being driven by the actions and views of a portion of this community. We acknowledge that McCarthyite pressures (McCumber, 2001, 2016; Reisch, 2005) and, more broadly, conservative politics, may well have been factors in encouraging value-free philosophy of science, including in encouraging the HPS sub-program's promotion of such philosophy of science. We do argue, however, that conservative politics was, at most, an indirect factor in bringing about the exclusion of value-laden philosophy of science from mainstream philosophy of science and was neither a decisive factor in doing so – marginalization would have occurred anyway – nor one that, by itself, sufficed to do so. And we point out that Solovey's account (2013), according to which NSF administrators were primarily responsible for promoting the value-free ideal, overlooks the role played by philosophers in achieving that ideal in the philosophy of science. Section 6 considers how our study furthers the understanding of the use of institutional control in the promotion of analytic philosophy, as well as points to some unanswered questions about the development of philosophy of science.
