Cameras are essential sensors for marine systems as they provide detailed data at high update rates. Camera systems can accordingly be found on all kind of marine systems ranging from stationary platforms like landers to mobile robots like Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROV) or Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV). When using more than one camera, depth information can be obtained via stereo processing. Mobile robotics in general can profit for many tasks like navigation, object recognition, or manipulation from this depth information from stereo vision [1]. This holds especially also for underwater applications [2], [3]. Unlike acoustic sensors in form of sonars, stereo vision provides high-resolution, relatively noise-free measurements at high update rates and at much lower cost. The caveat is of course that good visibility conditions are required. But this is typically the case for deep-sea operations where visibility is usually very good and the illumination conditions are perfectly controlled by artificial light.
We present in this article a model based design of a stereo vision system for on-board processing in deep sea operations. Model based design in engineering employs digital models and simulations to optimize parameters, to find and to correct potential flaws, and to test the limits of the product before it is even manufactured. This includes two main contributions in this article. First, a formalized approach to the component selection for the stereo set-up is presented, which is of interest for the design of stereo systems in general. Second, we address the specific aspect of deep sea operations, among others the validation and optimization of the pressure bottles for the cameras with a Finite Element Method (FEM).
As mentioned, our perspective on the analysis of the stereo system is from a component selection perspective, i.e., it is on determining the best choices among different hardware options under formal constraints in a formal algorithmic way. In a recent publication [4], some considerations towards choosing the cameras in the design stage of the system are also presented. However, the focus in [4] is on monocular visual odometry. In [5] an other attempt is made to formalize the process of designing stereo systems. However, [5] focuses on optimizing the coverage of the human activities space. For a 3D reconstruction, different factors must be considered as shown in the analysis later on.
There are also many publications on estimating the reconstruction errors that result from the quantization error in a stereo system [6], [7], [8], [9]. But a quantization error analysis alone simply leads to the conclusion that for the smallest errors, a baseline of infinite length should be used [10], which is obviously impractical. Furthermore, it is also not an appropriate analysis when taking the curvature of the observed objects into account. In [11], an effort is made to define the optimal finite baseline based on extended analysis of the quantization error and the minimization of its depth component. However, this only leads to results where the optimal finite baseline can be specified for a given point in space, it can hence not be used during the design of a general purpose stereo vision system.
The second part of our model based design deals with the aspects of deep sea operations, especially the design and optimization of the housings for the stereo cameras. For this purpose, a FEM analysis is performed. A FEM is of course often used in a standard design process, especially in the area of structural analysis. The FEM can determine the deformation and stresses in the material. Consequently, the maximum permissible load applied to the investigated model can be determined based on material failure theory. Based on a specific use-case and the subsequent analysis of the mechanisms of stress development, the components with the highest stresses can be redesigned. Hence, a finite element analysis (FEA) can significantly accelerate the design process.
There are accordingly several examples of FEM for structural analysis in underwater applications. In [12], FEA is employed in the design process of a submarine radome. The numerical investigation allow the confirmation of the assumed safety limits and they indicate the critical zones in the radome, in which the highest stresses occur. In [13], an unmanned underwater vehicle is analyzed to operate at 6000 m water depth. Other examples of FEA in underwater applications include [14], [15], [16].
But for the development of pressure bottles for marine systems, it is a standard practice to just use general design guidelines in combination with time-consuming laboratory testing. This is usually sufficient as pressure bottles tend to be quite simple in their design. The (relatively) low cost of standard bottles is also a factor, i.e., a failure in a pressure test in the lab destroys the bottle but it is a financially viable approach. Camera housings are different in this respect. They are more complex in their design and the camera windows tend to be very costly. A strong point of a FEM is its applicability to complex geometric shapes and loads, as it is the case for our camera housings. But the analysis performed for our system is computationally non-trivial. In the work presented here, the FEM is hence executed on a high-performance computer (HPC), namely the RWTH Bull Cluster in Aachen.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces a formal approach to the selection of components and a corresponding accuracy analysis, which can be used for stereo systems in general. In Section 3, this approach is used in a concrete application case, namely for a stereo system for deep sea operations. The system requires suited pressured bottles, which are analyzed by a FEM in Section 4. Experiments and results are presented in Section 5, which include a validation of the component selection approach in air, robustness tests of the system in a pressure tank, and field trials of the complete system off the shore of Marseille on a commercial Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV). Section 6 concludes the article.
