Due to the rapid growth of information knowledge, the world is now heavily networked, meaning that we can enter information, communicate with other people, and run businesses via the Internet. Security has become a significant challenge for network organizations, e.g., detecting hostile attacks and guaranteeing data are only available to registered customers. Security is specifically essential for organizations and data centers [1], [2] because they frequently host many different services and preserve a large amount of private data (e.g., user profiles and company data) that exist among the thousands of occupants in a cloud environment [3]. If a system is not secured well, hostile users may gain access to secure information or facilities by taking advantage of system exposures, including vulnerability of entrance control and masked operations such as port perusing and IP9 spoofing [4]. To achieve good network defense, operators have to design and implement refined policies such as right-to-use control, rate-limiting, and isolation of e-mail communication in the network [5].
In conventional networks, middleboxes (MBs) such as firewalls and Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) systems are used to execute security policies [6]. Two main techniques exist: introducing MBs on network paths among the end-points [7] or introducing MBs outside of the network paths by connecting them to middle switches [8]. Both of these methods are impractical for different reasons. In the first method, adding a new MB is difficult due to network topology constraints [9]. In the second method, installation and updating the network configuration is difficult and less secure, as the operators cannot directly control packet progression [10]. In the first method, the quantity of MBs is similar to the quantities of switches and routers present in concrete implementations [7], and MBs of a similar kind may even be acquired from different sellers; these characteristics are associated with large investments and operational expenditure. In the other method, security policies that are organized over one or more of the devices converge with one another in many cases.
While network security strategies are usually defined by a single authority, the network administrator, that administrator frequently has to construct many different security strategies, firewalls, and hosts. Configurations of such networks have progressively become more centralized, requiring administrators to have a consistent security strategy at a single location and have this strategy be compulsory across numerous devices. Existing works require even more effort in that almost all network structures are pulled out of the datapath and added to a central supervisor [11], [12], [13], giving the central supervisor direct control over path detection, mobility, and access. While there are many benefits to centralizing the control of innovative networks, such centralization places a substantial burden on the administrator.
Contemporary Information Technology (IT) trends amplify the above difficulties. Generally, an increasing number of requests for augmented quantity and low communication latency necessitate allocating the load between terminating occurrences of the same employment. Additionally, server virtualization and scale-out amalgamation call are used for division of the same IT substructure, including the network services substructure, through numerous autonomous tenants. Finally, contemporary workloads are repeatedly virtualized as well as extremely mobile and dynamic, further requiring the substructures and network services to be flexible.
In addition to these issues, the handling and local configuration of the above strategies frequently lead to intra-conflicts [14] and inter-conflicts [15] of instructions that cause policies to be unmanageable, thus degrading both the defense of the systems and the device results. Recent system developments have been more prone to mistakes as security strategies have become large and complex, leading to bottlenecks when the need for policy modification arises. To deal with these problems, Network Function Virtualization (NFV) [16] combined with Software-Defined Networking (SDN) [17] provides a potential solution. The L4–L7 sanctuary MBs are employed for the physical attendants, and may be initiated at uninformed network nodes. The MBs work well with L2–L3 programmable modifications to distribute full-stack network facilities smoothly and quickly.
In the case of SDN, the data plane and controller plane are inaccessible. The operator programs the control plane to directly control the packets that are advancing in the data plane within some finished standard borders, e.g., OpenFlow [18]. This permits the operator to use applications found in the control plane to compliantly and routinely configure the switches in order to forward packets to dissimilar MBs, which reduces misconfiguration [19]. In addition, since OpenFlow provides support for more forward actions, such as drops, changing the packets header, and queues, operators can make straightforward use of OpenFlow switches to use security policies, e.g., connecting flow entries to directly drop out packages that are invalid as specified by the security policies. Additionally, the supervisor has a global perspective of the network [20], and hence is able to ensure continuity and extensiveness of security policy enforcement. In addition, the SDN-dependent method decreases human-based intervention and therefore helps in reducing work.
Since most uses of SDN and NFV strategies are principally orthogonal, these two strategies are generally accomplished through diverse sets of operations. Briefly, the description and implementation of security policies force the routing results to be carefully considered. As shown in Fig. 1, networking procedures and security MBs are distinctly controlled by their organizers. The security supervisor analyzes the routing strategy determined by the network supervisor and the global security strategy generated by the operator in the form of its input, and adopts appropriate strategy implementation points in the network. This implementation should follow the prescribed security rules while accommodating the routing strategy. In the present work, the routing policy is organized via switches and functions at the L2–L3 MBs. This defines navigation of the network paths for traffic at the packet level through coarse-grained rules, including the rules of the terminus IP. The safety strategy is then connected via the MBs and operates at L3–L7.
The proposed security strategy consists of numerous policies, and every policy includes a flow configuration and security actions. The flow configuration designates the standards of packet-header fields, as well as various actions that might comprise accepting/denying access-regulation usage, dissimilar autograph sets used for extreme-inspection circumstances, or service chains of several examinations. A Weighted K Set Covering Problem (WKSCP) was used to model this security strategy and we develop a computational-geometry-based PSA tool for determining a set of processes for the security mechanism. This PSA tool leads to a Non-Dominated Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm (NDMGA) that determines the difficulties of the security mechanism and then designs the strategy implementation. In such an application environment, it is crucial for the security controllers to automate the security scheme for massive-scale networks to smoothly distribute on-request security services in dynamic environments.Download : Download high-res image (417KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Network security policy enforcement in SDN.
