In our original Viewpoint Article (Larcombe and Ridd, 2018, LR18) we noted the “replication crisis”, where in many areas of science it is regularly found that around 50% of recently published findings have serious flaws (Prinz et al., 2011, Ioannidis, 2014; see also Maniadis et al., 2014; Camerer et al., 2018). We argued that it would be prudent to determine if similar problems exist in the environmental sciences. Although our paper was general to all environmental science, and indeed across all science disciplines upon which governments base policy, we tested the issue by examining a number of highly influential papers. The papers we examined were related to environmental threats to the Great Barrier Reef (GBR), where an iconic ecosystem is potentially threatened, and the government response to protect it has significant economic impacts on the public purse and on major industries in North Eastern Australia.
LR18 reached the conclusion that there is a prime-facie case that government policy documents and decisions have partly been based upon scientific results that themselves may have significant flaws. Noting the established evidence that the peer-review process is an insufficient quality control mechanism upon which to base important government policy decisions, we thus proposed the establishment of an independent science auditing body, which we termed the “Institute for Policy-Science Quality Control” (IPSQC). Its sole purpose would be to check, test and replicate “policy-science”, i.e. the scientific work upon which government policy is based. Although some of the functions of this organisation could be performed by existing organisations, LR18 argued that an independent organisation, similar to independent auditors in the financial industry, would be the most effective. Further, to date, existing bodies have not been effective in either recognising the issue we raise or addressing it.
Shaffelke et al. (2018, S18) responded to LR18 by agreeing with the general need for quality mechanisms in science. As well as objecting to the concept of “policy-science”, S18 disagreed that there is likely to be a significant problem with the GBR science, pointing to the use of multiple mechanisms to ensure science quality. Finally, S18 also made detailed rebuttals of our criticisms of seven of the nine individual GBR papers examined in LR18. Our criticisms of two papers (Bellwood et al., 2004 and Pandolfi et al., 2003) were not addressed by S18 and have not been addressed separately.
In this reply, we therefore:
•Expand our definition of “policy-science” and discuss the concept more generally than just its relation to the GBR;•Challenge S18's claim that the mechanisms used for GBR science are adequate to give sufficient confidence that policy is being based on reliable science.•Provide detailed comment on S18's rebuttals of LR18, and outline what further work an “Institute of Policy-Science Quality Control” might commission to test the results of the papers examined by LR18.
We cement the case that there is a significant issue to be addressed, and help suggest ways to improve the science and its appropriate uptake into scientifically defensible policy.
