When approaching the notion of the digital transformation of social theory, one is tempted to approach it as an interrogation of contemporary social thought. After all, digitalization tends to be billed as one of the mega or macro trends that constitute the present state of affairs. In other words, digitalization is construed as situated on the leading edge of the modernization front, constituting “the new” in our understanding of time. (Osborne, 1995) However, as we know from historians of technology, the digital computer has been “new” for quite some time now. As such, it has already had profound impact on significant historical developments and formations of thought.
For instance, one may point to how the computer simultaneously influenced Cold War planners and the cognitive scientists of the 1950s and 1960s (Edwards, 1996), or how it was mobilized in the rise of the counterculture and New Communalism of the 1960s and 1970s (Turner, 2006). The computer has “haunted” the social imagination and public life (21) during a lion's share of the 20th century, not least within the Anglosphere, which tends to be the context of the most famous computer historiographies. Nevertheless, there are prominent examples of the computer haunting imaginations of non-American, non-English thinkers. For example, note the work of Jean Baudrillard, whose digitally-inspired interventions in social theory have gone in and out of fashion over the past fifty years or so.
In short, the digital era not only represents a “now”, but also a “then”. Taking its cue from this historicizing approach, but focusing on the developments of the first two decades of the 21st century, this article will interrogate how ideas and metaphors sourced from the world of digital computers have influenced the development of social thought. More specifically, it will start from the following question: What impact, if any, has the computer-inspired notion of hacking had on social theoretical conceptions of critique? In pursuing this inquiry, the argument starts by revisiting the author's earlier attempt to answer that same question. (von Busch and Palmås, 2006) From this 2006 text, it will reexamine four theorists who – during the first half of the first decade of the 2000s – converged around the question of rethinking critique by drawing inspiration from the world of computers and hacking. These theorists are (in order of appearance): Bruno Latour, McKenzie Wark, Alexander Galloway, and Nicolas Bourriaud. However, the convergence among these authors was a momentary one, which will be evident as the article goes on to survey the more recent work of these four theorists. Thus, the text will explore how the invitation to rethink critique has fared over time, and interrogate where the thoughts of the four authors have diverged – and where they have re-converged – today. This allows for a periodization of the different ways in which the digital has influenced social thought, with a focus on comparing social theory of the early 2000s to that of the mid-2010s. As such, the approach can be placed alongside other periodizations of the digital era, be it the sequential “three distinct waves” of cybernetics sketched by Hayles (1999: 7), or the “nested historical cycles” of file sharing outlined by Andersson Schwarz (2014: 92). These periodizations complicate the idea that there is a uniform digital era: The “then” of the digital era is not one, but several.
The argument is structured as follows. After a short section on the method of this article, the subsequent section (Section 3) will revisit the argument from von Busch and Palmås (2006), in order to retrieve a general theoretical framework for understanding and historicizing social theory in relation to three “machinic eras”. Then, Section 4 will turn to the four above-mentioned theorists, surveying their attempts to reimagine critique by moving away from interpretation-based sensibilities, in instead embrace hacking-inspired ones. The article will thereafter (in Section 5) trace these same theorists on to present time, demonstrating how the problematic of a hacker-inspired reimagining of critique has been usurped by another problematic; how to theorize the Anthropocene. Here, the influence of digital computers re-emerges through the increased social significance and epistemological status of simulations. This leads on to a discussion on the periodization of digitalized social thought. This contextualizes of the current interest in simulation, and explores whether periodization is in itself indicative for digitally-inspired social theory (Section 6). The article ends with a short conclusion.
