With the recent advent of NAND flash technology with its super capacity scaling trend, the old-fashioned disk storage has begun to be replaced with flash memories for a variety of applications including high-end server and mobile embedded systems. However, as the raw capacity of flash increases and the number of bits stored in a given flash cell multiplies for a fixed die size, the physical size of the cells gradually shrink and they become more vulnerable to different types of device and circuit level failures, eventually degrading flash memory reliability and shortening its lifetime.
A flash memory block is a two-dimensional structure consisting of floating-gate (MOSFET) transistors. In L-level-per-cell flash memories, referred to as the multi-level cell (MLC) memory, each cell stores log2L bits, which is achieved via programming the threshold voltage Vt of a memory cell into one of L non-overlapping voltage windows. In this paper, we keep our discussions and derived expressions general, although the numerical results shall present one of the most frequently used MLC flash technology, 4-level memory cells as an example.
There are several error sources in the MLC flash channel, of which inter-cell interference (ICI), retention error, and random telegraph noise (RTN) have been determined to be the dominant ones, which are amplified as the flash device ages overtime [1], [2]. Effects of these error sources degrade the final sensed voltage of the memory cell and results in an erroneous and unreliable detection and reading experience.
To compute the optimal detection thresholds and consequentlyestimate the error rate of the MLC flash channels, the time-varying (and potentially non-stationary) probability density function (PDF) of the threshold voltage has to be accurately determined. However, due to the sophisticated two-dimensional channel characteristics and various complex error sources, there has not been any explicit channel modeling and derivation of the exact statistics of the flash channel, let alone its data retention reliability [3].
Although few notable studies in the literature have been conducted to this end, they fail to capture the full essence of different distributions of various error sources simultaneously. For instance, [4] focuses specifically on the retention noise analysis. In [5], effects of retention and RTN are not considered and a simple single-interferer ICI model is analyzed. Authors in [6] and [7] assume that the voltage distribution of each level follows a Gaussian PDF, while in [8], all noise sources, including ICI, are simply assumed to comply with Gaussian PDFs. In [9], despite a channel setup similar to this work is used, the erroneous effects of all types of degradation, excluding ICI, have been lumped into a zero-mean additive white Gaussian noise with a fixed variance, and the ICI definition has also been modified to ease the arithmetic tractability. Overall, an accurate and more comprehensive analysis of the distribution of the sensed voltage is still untouched and needs to be explored further.
In this paper, the basics of the NAND flash channel are reviewed first and then important error sources are individually identified and analyzed. Next, as the main contribution of the paper, a rigorous and accurate approximation model is developed for the erroneously sensed threshold voltage. This approach will be shown to help us estimate the error probability expression for such a complicated channel in a closed-form. In Section 4, computer simulations are provided to demonstrate that the proposed analytical distribution and its corresponding symbol error rate (SER) match the true underlying PDF and SER to a great extent. SER results of error-correcting code (ECC) enabled storage channel are also presented, which further corroborate the significance of derives analytical conditional probability distributions of the sensed threshold voltage. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
