The calcaneus, also known as the heel bone, is the largest tarsal bone forming the rear part of the foot. While it is designed to withstand great force, the calcaneus is the most frequently fractured tarsal bone, representing ∼2% of all fractures and 60% of tarsal bones fractures [1]. The primary cause of these fractures, which most commonly occur in males 30–50 years of age, is traumatic axial loading caused by falling, twisting, or motor vehicle accidents. Calcaneal fractures can be categorized into two types, on the basis of subtalar joint involvement: intra-articular and extra-articular fractures. Intra-articular fractures are more common as the posterior talar articular facet includes the calcaneus. Calcaneal injuries are often associated with a poor prognosis, with 40% of cases resulting in complications such as an unhealed wound, infection, or posttraumatic arthritis which can be exacerbated by pre-existing patient conditions such as diabetes or multiple open injuries [1]. In addition to pain and impaired mobility, inadequate and inaccurate initial treatment of calcaneal fractures can lead to serious long-term problems including neurovascular dysfunction, compartment syndromes, and even amputation [2].
Several new advances have been made in cross-sectional medical imaging in recent years [3], particularly in computed tomography (CT), which have assisted physicians in identifying and characterizing calcaneal fractures. Unlike conventional x-rays, tomographic slices consist of a sequence of thin-section 2-D images which provide voxels that are essentially isotropic, allowing for high-resolution multi-planar 3-D reconstructions. As such, CT images include significantly more information than conventional radiographs. In addition, CT images have been shown to be superior to routine radiographs for evaluating the complex structures of the axial skeleton including the osseous structures of the foot and ankle [4]. For instance, Grigoryan et al. (2003) showed that CT images allowed for more complete and detailed visualization for evaluating radial and tibial shaft fractures during healing compared with conventional X-rays [5]. Due to the significant amount of information contained in CT images, details such as skeletal structure, organ boundaries, and soft tissue properties may not be accurately assessed via visual inspection, depending on the experience of the radiologist. Manual detection of bone fractures in CT is also challenging due to low image resolution, the partial volume effect, and the potential presence of artifacts and noise in CT images [6]. The complex anatomy and corresponding soft tissue structure of the calcaneus further complicates this process, making it difficult to diagnose and treat. There is currently a lack of consensus on the use of operative or conservative fracture management plans, due in part to the lack of a standardized calcaneus fracture classification system [7]. In addition, the interpretation of CT images for diagnosing calcaneus fractures is difficult and studies have shown low intra-observer agreement and low intra-rater reliability in evaluating such scans. As such, a computer-assisted fracture detection methodology could be highly beneficial for assisting physicians in the timely and accurate diagnosis and treatment of these injuries [2].
While fracture detection in calcaneus CT images is an emerging area of research, several attempts have been made to detect bone fractures in other parts of the body using X-ray or CT images. For example, Anu et al. focused on bone fracture detection in X-ray images using gray-level co-occurrence matrices (GLCMs) [8]. However, the resulting classification using a decision tree or neural network for distinguishing fractures from normal bone was only ∼50% accurate, and in some cases the area of the fracture could not be determined. Similarly, Kurniawan et al. proposed using Canny edge detection to identify fractured bones in X-ray images [9]. However, the accuracy of this method was limited by the quality of the images, and the algorithm required significant processing time. Preliminary efforts in automated CT detection were also conducted by Sharma et al. who detected the edges of lungs using morphological algorithms [10]. Wu et al. proposed the registered active shape method (RASM) for segmentation, combined with an adaptive window and stationary wavelet transform, to detect contour discontinuities indicative of potential traumatic fractures [6]. However, this dataset was limited to pelvic CT scans.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a type of deep learning algorithm which produce the most satisfying results for visual image recognition [11], [12]. CNNs are multi-layer neural networks with the ability to imitate image recognition systems in the human visual cortex. CNNs belong to a class of multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), with the intended purpose of processing two-dimensional data, and have been widely applied in image processing. The original MLPs made of fully-connected layers are less suitable for image classification as they are unable to store spatial information from image data and consider each pixel to be an independent feature, thus producing poor results. CNNs have been shown to outperform other machine learning methods, such as support vector machines (SVMs), in image classification tasks. For example, Holger et al. used deep convolutional networks for the automated detection of posterior-element fractures in spinal CT, achieving good results with area-under-the-curve, AUC, of 0.857 corresponding to 81% sensitivity [13]. Speeded-up robust features (SURF) [14] is a scale- and rotation-invariant feature detector and descriptor used to identify regions of interest and commonly used in image recognition. It has been shown to be much faster than comparable techniques, producing highly-accurate results when provided appropriate reference images. For example, Du et al. used SURF for facial recognition and achieved better results in the detection step [15]. In the present study, we will first apply CNN in binary fracture classification of calcaneus CT images and use SURF for detecting the location and type of classified calcaneal fractured cases.
This study proposes an efficient method for the computer-assisted automated classification and detection of calcaneus bone fracture locations in CT images to reduce human error and reduce the amount of manpower required for the diagnosis of bone fracture. The current method combined CNN for classification and SURF for detection, which have not been applied previously in calcaneal fracture detection. Bone CT image data from clinical patients were classified into two groups, fracture and non-fracture, and the images were labeled by physicians accordingly to the Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) standard. Fracture classification was then performed using the CNN to separate CT scans into these two classes (fracture and non-fracture) from coronal, transverse, and sagittal views. Different network architectures with different width or depth have been reported to have different effect on classification performance [16]. Among different CNNs, these distinct architectures shared most of the network architecture but differed in depth were investigated: a visual geometry group (VGG) and a residual network (ResNet), with modifications on the softmax layer and the fully connected layer right before the softmax layer of each architecture type. This results in the number of output being reduced from 1000 to 2 categories, fracture and normal for the classification. Fracture detection was performed using the SURF algorithm, including reference images in which the areas of calcaneus fractures were based on ResNet classifier results from coronal, sagittal, and transverse views. Results obtained demonstrated high accuracy and reduced runtime in classifying and detecting the location of calcaneus bone fractures in CT images.
