One of the most interesting concepts in the field of marketing is motivation (Palmatier, Dant, Grewal, & Evans, 2006). Several consumer behaviour theories have been adopted by marketing scientists in order to better understand and address consumers' motivations. For example, the consumer decision model (Engel, Kollat, & Blackwell, 1968, pp. 3–20) and the theory of buyer behaviour (Howard & Sheth, 1969) have been considered pioneering theories in consumer behaviour research, followed by the theory of reasoned action (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975) and the theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1985, pp. 11–39). These four behavioural theories have been widely tested and cited in the marketing literature. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the theory of trying (Bagozzi & Warshaw, 1990) and the model of goal-directed behaviour (Perugini & Bagozzi, 2001) captured the attention of consumer-behaviour scholars worldwide.
Clearly, the literature on consumer behaviour is replete with examples of the influence of behavioural theories; however, the use of so many different theories has actually limited the applicability of those conclusions. One of the earliest attempts to predict consumers' motivations was the theory of reasoned action (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975), which suggested that ‘attitudes’ towards a particular behaviour and ‘subjective norms’ could predict consumer behaviour. However, the predictive ability of this theory is weakened when the studied behaviour is not under volitional control (e.g., in cases of behaviour over which the individual does not have full control) (Gentry & Calantone, 2002). The theory of planned behaviour (TPB) was thereby proposed by Ajzen (1985, pp. 11–39). In fact, the TPB is an extension of the theory of reasoned action supplemented by perceived ‘behavioural control’ to more holistically explain behavioural intentions (Ajzen, 1985, pp. 11–39). However, the TPB has had its own share of limitations, the primary one being its limited ability to “directly account for the influence of more superordinate, general cognitive influences on ‘attitudes’, ‘subjective norms’ and ‘perceived behavioural control’” (Hagger, Chatzisarantis, & Biddle, 2002 to account for more global goal-directed motives (Bagozzi, 1982; Hagger et al., 2002), and its predictability is certainly questioned by both academicians and practitioners alike.
These concerns have prompted researchers from different domains (e.g., the physical activity and computer software training context) to explore a more suitable alternative, and they have developed the model of goal-directed behaviour, which has been shown to predict consumers' motivations better than the TPB (Leone, Perugini, & Ercolani, 2004; Perugini & Bagozzi, 2001). The model of goal-directed behaviour (Perugini & Bagozzi, 2001) suggests that people primarily respond rationally through their intentions to act; the model further assumes that human behavioural intention is largely influenced by ‘past behaviour’ and ‘desires,’ which have been thought to be guided by ‘attitude,’ ‘anticipated emotions’, and ‘subjective norms.’ Although the model of goal-directed behaviour has proved to be more robust than its predecessor (i.e., the theory of planned behaviour, TPB), several studies have proposed ‘self-determined motivation’ as a better predictor of behaviour (Hagger & Chatzisarantis, 2009; Leung & Matanda, 2013; Moller, Ryan, & Deci, 2006; Ryan, Rigby, & Przybylski, 2006; Webb, Soutar, Mazzarol, & Saldaris, 2013; Weinstein & Ryan, 2010). For example, Webb et al. (2013) blended the constructs of goal-directed behaviour along with the constructs of the SDT to predict consumer behaviour, specifically in Australia. This blend shows the autonomous motivation of the SDT to be a better predictor of consumer behaviour in comparison to its more established predictors, such as ‘intention’, ‘subjective norms’, ‘perceived behavioural control’, and ‘past behaviour’.
It is quite surprising to learn that the theories mentioned above mainly have an extrinsic focus, and they do not predict intention development in light of intrinsic motives (Hagger & Chatzisarantis, 2009; Leavell, 2017). For example, a woman may not necessarily choose to buy designer clothes to signal her wealth and status (i.e., extrinsic motivation), but rather the choice may derive from her natural interest in new clothing designs (i.e., intrinsic motivation). This line of thought is thus similar to the intrinsic motivation component of the SDT, which maintains that people by nature possess intrinsic motivation that can be manifested in curiosity-based behaviours, the discovery of new perspectives, and the seeking out of optimal challenges (Gilal et al., 2018d; Ryan & Deci, 2000). In line with these rationales, we argue that SDT is a more promising way to account for different motives when trying to predict behaviour through the constructs of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation.
Moreover, earlier research within the marketing literature broadly predicted consumer behaviour by linking extrinsic motives such as an excellent price, quality, durability, and packaging (Grisaffe & Nguyen, 2011; Japutra, Ekinci, & Simkin, 2014; Levy & Hino, 2016; Vlachos, Theotokis, Pramatari, & Vrechopoulos, 2010). However, the roles of intrinsic motives (e.g., the fulfilment of autonomy, competence, and relatedness needs) in the formation of consumer behaviour have been ignored (Gilal et al., 2018f). We argue that sometimes, consumer behaviour cannot be solely explained by the provision of extrinsic incentives and benefits. For example, consumers may prefer a particular brand because it may make them feel appreciated, empowered, and able to express their individuality (e.g., autonomy need); conversely, consumers may become attached to a brand that makes them feel competent, successful, and capable of performing well (e.g., competence need), or consumers may feel emotionally attached to a brand that seems to care about them and provides warm feelings of openness and acceptance (e.g., relatedness needs). These types of consumer behaviour can only be addressed by the basic psychological need theory (BPNT) of SDT. BPNT maintains that intrinsic consumer motivation is shaped by the satisfaction of the basic psychological needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness; it further suggests that when these natural needs are met, they provide the ‘emotional security’ that is required to create emotional attachments, thereby leading to subsequent purchases (Loroz & Braig, 2015; Thomson, 2006).
The organismic integration theory (OIT) of SDT may be the only theory that has categorized the consumer's extrinsic motives into types that can be applied in marketing research to account for the different reasons why consumers engage in certain behaviours (Gilal et al., 2018g). For example, women may buy cosmetics because of their inherent interest in beauty products (e.g., intrinsic regulation), because they want to improve their appearance and look young (e.g., identified regulation), perhaps because they want to assuage their worry and guilt about not taking care of their appearance (e.g., introjected regulation), or because they simply feel jealous when they compare their physical attractiveness with that of another (e.g., external regulation). Similarly, an individual may be motivated to buy a high-status car because he has an inherent interest in or passion for cars (e.g., intrinsic regulation); because he identifies the importance of having a car, i.e., to save time and not be late to the office (e.g., identified regulation); because he thinks he should have such a car to avoid feelings of guilt and shame if other colleagues already have good cars (e.g., introjected regulation); or simply to maintain prestige and social status (e.g., external regulation).
The goal content theory (GCT) of SDT distinguishes a consumer's intrinsic life goals (e.g., personal growth, close relationships, community feelings, good health and/or fitness) from his or her extrinsic life goals (e.g., money, fame, image) and suggests that people tend to pursue intrinsic goals because of the internal satisfaction, pleasure, or personal meaning derived from their attainment, whereas individuals who chase extrinsic life goals tend to be more concerned about how they are perceived by others (Kasser & Ryan, 1996). Given this background, we argue that the intrinsic and extrinsic life goal constructs underpinned by GCT can be fruitfully used to explore many interesting marketing issues, such as whether consumers' intrinsic and extrinsic life goals enhance or undermine consumer preference for luxury and green products. Other constructs include whether the intrinsic or extrinsic goal(s) is/are prominent with regard to purchase intention for religious and non-religious consumers or whether the intrinsic or extrinsic life goal(s) is/are promising with regard to brand attachment/preference in an individualistic or collectivistic culture (Gilal et al., 2018d, 2018f; Paul, 2018).
Despite the richness and robustness of this theory when explaining unique marketing problems, less effort has been made to model consumer behaviour from the theoretical perspective of SDT. This study seeks to fill this void; it aims to inspire SDT research in marketing science by highlighting possible marketing problems (presented as propositions) where SDT appears to be particularly promising. To this end, the authors review the extant literature and propose possible research projects that could be undertaken under the purview of SDT constructs within the marketing and consumer behaviour disciplines.
Based on the guidelines suggested for writing classic review articles (Palmatier, 2016; Palmatier, Houston, & Hulland, 2018), we organize the present review into four sections. First, we begin with a discussion of each mini-theory of SDT. Second, we report on the methodology that was used in collecting, identifying, and analysing the extant literature. Third, we summarize all studies that have notably used SDT in the marketing context. Finally, we propose possible research projects that could be undertaken using SDT.
