Compared with spherical and aspheric optics, free-form surfaces can provide more degrees of freedom in optical design [1]. Therefore, they are very popular in the field of lighting, display, and imaging, etc. [2]. The fabrication technology for free-form surfaces has made a great progress in recent years. To keep pace with the development of fabrication, a high-precision metrology is needed. Currently, several aspheric and free-form surface testing methods have been proposed, such as using Shack–Hartmann sensor [3], phase measuring deflectometry  [4], [5], and interferometry [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], etc. As one of the most accurate testing methods, interferometry has made great achievements in the testing of free-form surfaces. With the help of special null optics, such as computed generated holograms (CGH) [8], null interferometry can achieve high-precision measurement. However, every test part requires one unique null optics, which strongly reduces the versatility of null interferometry. On the contrary, non-null interferometry such as sub-aperture stitching interferometer (SSI) [10] and tilted-wave-interferometer (TWI) [11], can provide much better versatility. By replacing the standard null compensator with the partial null lens (PNL), the partial compensating interferometer can obtain better versatility and keep high accuracy for the free-form surface test with the retrace error correction algorithms.
In either null or non-null interferometry, the misalignment of the free-form surface has always been one of the most important factors restricting the testing accuracy. The advantage of the null interferometric setup is that the testing results directly show the deviation of the test surface from the standard shape. Slight misalignment between the interferometric setup and the free-form surface under test will produce large aberrations, leading to high fringes density. Subsequently, alignment can be adjusted effectively based on the density of testing interference fringes. For non-null interferometric setup, it allows the introduction of higher fringes density, usually with the additional retrace error correction. However, the residual wavefront aberrations in the test wavefront make it difficult to distinguish the misalignment aberrations from the figure error and retrace error. Hou et al. [12] removed the first four terms from Zernike coefficients of the test wavefront directly and successfully aligned the aspheric under test. Baer et al. [13] proposed a calibration method for the radial and axial displacement of the aspheric based on TWI, which mainly includes the adjustment of the interferometric setup, as well as the coarse and five-dimensional adjustment of the test surface. Li et al. [14] proposed a method for the rotation error controlling of free-form surface in TWI and achieved promising results. These methods tried to adjust the position in the experimental system close to the theoretical one,
and achieve relatively high accuracy. Hao et al. [15] proposed an alignment method based on computer modeling, which the position parameters of the free-form surface in the model are consistently optimized to match the actual ones in a ray tracing program.Download : Download high-res image (258KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The sketch of non-null interferometric testing system.
In this paper, a practical and accurate correction method is proposed for the misalignment removal of the free-form surface in a non-null interferometric testing system. Firstly, the computer modeling of interferometric configuration is set up accurately, according to the corresponding parameters of each component in the actual experiment. Then, the misalignment aberrations, introduced by axial location error, rotation error and non-axial attitude error, are modeled and corrected step by step with three specific methods. During the correction, the position of free-form surface in the model is adjusted from the ideal position to the misaligned one, matching that of the actual surface in the experiment. Since the modeled position is consistent with the actual one, the test wavefront in the model is also considered to be consistent with that in the actual experiment. Therefore, the accurate figure error of the free-form surface can be further obtained using the computer reconstruction algorithms. This correction procedure is carried out in the computer modeling, without troublesome alignment for the free-form surface in the experiment. Both computer simulations and experimental results show that the proposed method can correct the misalignment of free-form surface effectively.
In Section 2, a non-null interferometric testing system and the analysis of misalignment are presented. In Section 3, a detailed illustration of the correction method is presented. Simulations, involving the accuracy analysis and the error consideration, is presented in Section 4. In Section 5, experiments are carried out to verify the practical feasibility of the proposed method. Conclusions are summarized in Section 6.
Download : Download high-res image (427KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Schematic diagrams of the free-form surface misalignments. (a) Three-dimensional sketch. (b) Vertical (x-y) cross section. (c) Horizontal (y-z) cross section.
