In 2011, Dórea and collaborators (Dórea et al., 2011) provided a comprehensive review of syndromic surveillance in animal health, highlighting ongoing initiatives and opportunities for automated extraction of surveillance information from the rapidly growing quantity of computerized animal health data. An update of that review in 2016 (Dórea and Vial, 2016) indicated remarkable growth in the field, but concluded that automated analysis and interpretation of animal health data was still hindered by a number of limitations. In particular, the lack of syndromic classification standards was preventing integration and interoperability among systems using different data sources.
The issue of compatibility becomes increasingly relevant as the number and type of animal health data sources grows, as do the opportunities and pressure for surveillance officials to gather (timely) evidence from multivariate surveillance systems (Gates et al., 2015; VanderWaal et al., 2016). Secondary use and interpretation of data collected in different contexts is only possible if “the integrity and meaning of the data is preserved throughout the integration process”, a quoted definition of semantic interoperability (Al Manir et al., 2018).
The adoption of data coding standards, such as the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine (SNOMED) (Stearns et al., 2001) can improve interoperability. However, as pointed out by Dixon et al. (2014), this puts the burden of data reuse solely on the data providers. The authors suggest, instead, a cooperative approach and maximization of the value of data collected through modern information management systems. Mirhaji (2009) listed interoperability and multidisciplinary reuse as two of four enabling principles to achieve translational public health informatics. The other two, dynamic adaptability and human-computer interaction, will require dynamic knowledge models that can be used by humans and computers to reason with large volumes and variety of data.
Considering these points, in this paper we outline the development of an ontological framework to promote semantic interoperability among health sources to be used for syndromic surveillance. Rather than coding data, we suggest gathering knowledge from the community of domain experts to develop harmonized rules to interpret data, that is, to translate health data into syndromic representations.
