1.1. Setting the context: backgroundAdvanced communication skills lie at the core of safe and effective clinical care (Kaplonyi et al., 2017). Good doctor-patient communication can improve patient outcomes (Silverman, Kurtz, & Draper, 2013) and as such is essential for delivering care of high-quality (Blackmore, Kasfiki, & Purva, 2017). Communication therefore comprises an indispensable part of the undergraduate teaching curriculum in medical school across the globe. However, the extent to which advanced communication skills can be taught is still in question.Over the years, various teaching approaches have been introduced to undergraduate medical degree programs to facilitate and enhance communication skills training. Programs that integrate more interactive (as opposed to more didactic) teaching approaches have been found to be more successful in helping students acquire and develop their communication skills (Aspegren, 1999). Empirical research, however, seems to suggest that doctors with little or no training in communication skills are highly unlikely to acquire such skills through years of clinical practice and that the training that medical students receive in important communication sub-skills, such as interviewing, giving information, and establishing patient rapport is somewhat insufficient (Aspegren & Lonberg-Madsen, 2005). The best approach to train future doctors in advanced professional communication skills is yet to be determined.Simulation (or simulation-based education), introduced in the 50 s (Bradley, 2006) as an effective tool for skills development in medical education (Kaplonyi et al., 2017), is currently integrated in medical school curricula all over the world (Motola, Devine, Chung, Sullivan, & Issenberg, 2013). Simulation is a student-centred, educational strategy through which students are safely exposed to lifelike scenarios that resemble real clinical environments allowing them to develop their skills, learn from their mistakes and receive feedback on their professional practice (Kaplonyi et al., 2017). Besides manual and clinical skills, simulation, in its many guises (manikin-based simulation, human-based simulation, computer-based simulation) allows students to practise and develop non-technical skills such as that of communication (Anderson, Stillman, & Wang, 1994).Simulation, as a novel teaching approach, appears to be popular with medical undergraduates worldwide (Anderson et al., 1994; Hargie, Dickson, Boohan, & Hughes, 1998). Research exploring the experience of students interacting with simulated patients indicates that this approach is frequently perceived to be more beneficial compared to other teaching approaches such as lectures or reading, and that the constructive feedback provided following the interaction is important for students to develop their skills (Eagles, Calder, Nicoll, & Walker, 2001; Koponen, Pyorala, & Isotalus, 2011). In terms of communication skills training, the response of students to the use of simulation has been largely positive, whereas cases have also been recorded in which students felt that for learning purposes they preferred to interact with simulated rather that real patients (Rees, Sheard, & McPherson, 2004).
1.2. Identifying the gap in the literature: aimsWhile there is plenty of evidence pertaining to the use of manikin- and human- based simulation for manual and clinical skills training (Kaplonyi et al., 2017), little is known about the impact of simulation on non-technical skills and communication in particular (Blackmore et al., 2017). Only few systematic reviews have explored the use of simulation aimed at enhancing communication skills of health care professionals (Cook et al., 2011, 2012; Lane & Rollnick, 2007), summarising the outcomes of the use of simulation training in general and in skill acquisition including communication (Blackmore et al., 2017). Empirical research to date seems to have produced inconclusive, and occasionally contradictory, evidence relating to the extent to which improvements in communication skills taught through simulation can be measured (Kaplonyi et al., 2017). This evidence is further limited by the wide range of study designs and outcome collection methods that each study employs that do not allow for data comparability or meta-analysis (Blackmore et al., 2017; Kaplonyi et al., 2017).The present systematic scoping review, a novel review approach used to cover a vast volume of literature on a broad topic (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005), is therefore proposed as the most practical method to examine the extent, range and nature of research activity, by synthesising research that has used a wide range of methodological approaches and identifying gaps in the evidence base where no research has been conducted. Considering the rapid rate of growth in the evidence produced on the field of simulation-based education and the multi-disciplinary nature of the topic under question (simulation, communication and medical education), providing a visual map of the evidence available is therefore essential. To the best of our knowledge, no study to date has attempted to systematically map and comprehensively explore the existing literature for evidence pertaining to the use of simulation for communication skills training in medical education and this is an important gap that the present systematic scoping review has been designed to fill in.This scoping review comprises the first step in a major empiric research project aimed to explore the extent to which technology extended learning (computer simulation) can be used to facilitate and enhance communication skills training in medical education.
