Brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) provide an alternative communication channel between the brain and the outside world (Krepki et al., 2007, Wolpaw et al., 2002, Zhang et al., 2013). In recent years, BCI systems, which can transform brain activities into control commands (Jin, Zhang, Daly, Wang, & Cichocki, 2017), have been developed rapidly and applied to a wide range of fields, not only to provide various help for disabled patients, but also to offer new techniques for entertainment, and smart home control (Jin et al., 2015, Xu et al., 2016, Yin et al., 2013). The electroencephalogram (EEG) is the most commonly used technology for brain signal acquisition in BCI systems due to its non-invasive nature, low cost, and high portability (Ahn et al., 2013). Currently, the most widely adopted paradigms for BCI system control include event-related potentials (ERP) (Xu et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2012), steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) (Pan et al., 2013, Xing et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2014, Zhang et al., 2018), and motor imagery (MI) (Ang and Guan, 2017, Zhang et al., 2017). MI-based BCI systems work without external stimulus and are operated more easily compared with stimuli-based BCIs (Velasco-Alvarez et al., 2013, Yu et al., 2012).
Multi-channel EEG data are often required for signal acquisition in BCI systems as they allow good performance. However, some channels contain redundant information and noise. Thus, channel selection methods are necessary to improve the performance of MI-based BCI (Qiu et al., 2016). The simplest channel selection method is based on neurophysiologic knowledge. For example, EEG data from 3 channels (namely C3, Cz and C4) are usually applied to isolate activity related to motor imagery in BCI systems. Channel selection methods also may be grouped into filter and wrapper methods. Filter methods are often based on certain criterion such as Fisher criterion (Yang, Kyrgyzov, Wiart, & Bloch, 2013) or mutual information (Ang, Chin, Zhang and Guan, 2012). Wrapper methods usually select channels coupled with a specific classifier like decision tree (Arvaneh, Guan, Ang, & Quek, 2010), genetic algorithm (Yang et al., 2012), etc. In summary, current channel selection methods have poor performance or lack a neurophysiological basis.
In terms of signal processing, the common spatial pattern (CSP) algorithm has proven to be an effective spatial filtering method in MI-based BCI systems. However, CSP is highly sensitive to noise and has low generalization capacity (Grosse-Wentrup et al., 2009, Wu et al., 2015). Thus, CSP has various improved extensions. Common spatial spectral pattern (CSSP) (Lemm, Blankertz, Curio, & Muller, 2005) extended the CSP algorithm to the state space in order to improve the accuracy. More importantly, the frequency bands of the CSP filter played a vital role in the accuracy of MI-BCI. Filter bank common spatial pattern (FBCSP) (Ang, Chin, Wang, Guan and Zhang, 2012) is an important example. Wavelet common spatial pattern (WCSP) (Mousavi, Maller, Fitzgerald, & Lithgow, 2011) took into account the effect of different frequency resolutions. But the above feature extraction methods are mostly based on EEG data from all channels. These approaches are not necessarily applicable to EEG data from selected channels.
In order to address the above drawbacks, the contribution of this work is:

1.Propose a filter approach based on correlation analysis to reduce the irrelevant channels;2.Present a new regularized CSP (RCSP) to extract features from selected channels;3.Train a support vector machine (SVM) classifier with the Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel for the classification;4.Conduct a set of experiments validating the effectiveness of the proposed methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the proposed methods. Section 3 shows the description of the datasets, experimental setup and results which are then discussed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.
