To enhance the security services of software, several research studies have been cited for understanding and classifying the ways for estimating security (Ruoti et al., 2015, Liu, 2011). Due to change in the users’ demand, security goals must be reset from time to time. The gap between literatures and actual practices that arise due to this is hard to bridge completely. The goals may be achieved through identification, establishment, and assessment. The main purpose of security is to secure software from malicious attacks. However, at times, a person using the system can himself become the weakest link and, unintentionally, invite attacks. Prevention of un-authorization is the main aim of security while usability focuses on the ease of users ‘keeping simple’ formula (Liu, 2011, Neilson, 1998). Hence, the focus of organizations should be on maintaining security along with usability.
To achieve this, researchers are trying to improve usable security by assessing it through different methods (Kumar et al., 2016). Plenty of work is available in this area of research but assessing the attributes of security and usability with applicability to real world problems is not found in literature. In addition, the user is the person who authorizes the security settings. Hence, usable and secure services are the need of today’s generation (Kumar et al., 2016, Pressman, 2005). Attributes of security and usability both play an important role in assuring security of software (Pressman, 2005). Usable-security of software services may be affected by usability and security attributes including CIAAN (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability, Accountability and Non-repudiation) and EESU (Effectiveness, Efficiency, Satisfaction and User Error Protection) (Fléchais, 2005, Pressman, 2005). The contribution of these attributes is different yet important in assuring security. Hence, assessment cannot be done by ignoring usability or security attributes. Consideration of attributes of both security and usability will help in a more efficacious and precise assessment.
Further, the assessment of usable-security is a decision-making problem because every organization adopts its own policies and methods (Pressman, 2005, Fléchais, 2005, ISO 9241–11:1998, 1998, McGraw, 1999). The assessment is helpful for decision makers to understand the preferences while ensuring usable-security. Hence, the authors of this paper are using Fuzzy-AHP methodology for the assessment. For this assessment, there is a need to establish a hierarchy which defines the affected attributes by usable security. Henceforth, a hierarchy of usable-security attributes is defined in the next section to address and assess the usable-security of software. With the help of the hierarchy and Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (Fuzzy AHP), usable-security of software has been evaluated. The results achieved by this assessment may help the security designers for developing usable-security during software development.
Rest of the paper has been organized as follows: the second section discusses the relevant work of usable-security of software services. The third section describes the need and importance of usable security assessment. The fourth section enunciates the methodology and discusses the results. The findings and the conclusion have been enlisted in section five and six, respectively.
