Artists and illustrators are able to indicate the presence of a human figure using a few strokes of a brush (Fig. 1). This contrasts with traditional painted portraiture which uses many thousands of strokes to represent a human at a fine level of detail (Fig. 2). Most humans are able to impute a considerable amount of information into the sketchiest of representations of human figures. The human brain is able to work with incomplete representations and our brains are particularly well-tuned to spotting humans. There is strong evidence that a new-born baby can perform effective facial recognition [1] and children rapidly learn to identify human figures. We train children to recognise abstractions of human figures and faces through cartoons and picture books [2], [3].Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Abstracted human figures. Details taken from, left to right, Paysage, Paul Gauguin, 1901, oil on canvas; Dans påstranden, Edvard Munch, 1899–1900, oil on canvas; Ètude pour “Une baignade à Asnières”, Georges Seurat, 1883, oil on wood; Chemin montant dans les hautes herbes, Pierre Auguste Renoir, around 1875, oil on canvas. All images are photographs of details of the original works taken by the author.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Two examples of detailed portraiture. Une mendiante, Hughes Merle, 1861, oil on canvas; Queen Elizabeth I, unknown artist, ca. 1570, oil on panel. Both images are photographs of details of the original work taken by the author.
This paper builds on a presentation at the 2018 Expressive conference [4] in which I used examples from two centuries of art to present the challenge: how could a computer algorithmically mimic the kinds of abstraction of human figures that a human artist is able to achieve? In that presentation, I suggested that the illustrations in children’s picture books could be a useful source of inspiration for how to achieve appropriate abstraction, because picture books contain multiple illustrations of the same figures, by the same artist, at potentially different scales. However, the accompanying paper contained only limited supporting evidence for this suggestion. In this expanded paper, I revisit my exploration of the human figure in impressionist art (2 Motivation: examples from impressionism, 3 The challenge for computer graphics and 5), provided a fuller discussion of the related work in non-photorealistic rendering (NPR, Section 4), present a more detailed exploration of the art in children’s picture books (Section 6), and draw everything together in a concluding discussion (Section 7).
