The nonlinear Schrodinger (NLS) equation is a ubiquitous equation that considers the evolution of quasi-monochromatic waves in weakly nonlinear dispersive media. It finds application in nearly all branches of nonlinear physics. In particular, it arises in the propagation of light in nonlinear optical fibers [1], in the ground state of Bose-Einstein condensates (BEC) [2] – where it is called the Gross–Pitaevskii equation, in the propagation of small-amplitude deep water gravity waves [3], in the propagation of Langmuir waves in hot plasmas [4], in the propagation of Davydov alpha-helix solitons for energy transport along deformable molecular protein chains [5]. In one spatial dimension (1D), the NLS equation is exactly soluble giving rise to localized stable solitons. If the nonlinear term is “focusing” one finds localized bright solitons which peak in their amplitude and decay to zero away from the peak. However, if the nonlinear term is “defocusing” one obtains dark solitons with non-zero asymptotic amplitude away from a depression. Moreover, there is a phase discontinuity across this soliton. Here we shall be interested in the defocusing problem with the amplitude depression going to zero – i.e., a quantum vortex. While a quantum vortex is stable in 1D, the structure becomes unstable in 2D and 3D. Moreover, in higher dimensions, the NLS equation is not integrable. Much effort has gone into finding quasi-stable 3D quantum vortex solitons. In particular, Efremidis et al. [6] have generalized the 3D NLS equation to be able to support 2D transverse dark solitons stabilized by a longitudinal bright soliton. Moreover, they have noted the required nonlinear media do exist: e.g., some specific AlGaAs alloys [7], [8], as well as in a Bose-Einstein condensate trapped in an optical lattice in which the longitudinal Bloch momentum corresponds to a negative effective mass and the transverse momenta correspond to positive effective mass [6]. The numerical procedures of Efremidis et al. [6] to determine the quasi-steady state 3D vortex soliton are non-trivial.
Here we present a novel unitary qubit lattice algorithm (QLA) for the solution of the generalized NLS equation. Our QLA can be viewed as an extension of the mesoscopic lattice Boltzmann and cellular automata algorithms [9] that have become important tools in nonlinear physics simulations because of their extreme parallelization and code simplicity. In these algorithms, one considers a collide-stream set of operations in which the collisions (e.g., a BGK-collision operator for lattice Boltzmann) are performed from local on site data and then this output is streamed (i.e., a simple shift operation) to a neighboring lattice site. As a result, these algorithms achieve a very high level of scalability with processors. In QLA [10], [11] we work with a qubit representation and require the collision operator to be unitary. The use of qubits as the building blocks and restricting all operations to be unitary permits the exploitation of quantum entanglement on a quantum computer. However, it is unclear at present in quantum information science if a particular quantum algorithm will achieve supremacy over a classical supercomputer solution. Indeed, it has been found that by clever mathematical steps one can improve some classical algorithm so that quantum supremacy becomes a moving target. There are problems that are very difficult to solve classically while ideal for quantum computers due to the use of quantum entanglement – e.g., the Shor factorizing algorithm or particular sorting problems. However, to outstrip improving classical algorithms many qubits need to be entangled. Problems that entangle only a few qubits do not seem ripe for exponential speed-up over classical solution techniques. While the solution of the scalar NLS requires only 2 qubits per lattice site, the corresponding QLA algorithm for spin-2 BEC will require 10 qubits/site. Interestingly, our QLA leads to an optimized algorithm on a classical supercomputer : as regards parallelization we saw no core saturation to the 786, 432 cores available to us on the IBM BG/Q Mira supercomputer. Moreover QLA is very lean on memory, so that even on 2009 technology a 11,000 core production run for 3D quantum turbulence was run on a grid resolution of 57,603 [11]. On the otherhand, standard nonlinear CFD algorithms (like those in [6]) do not scale well with cores – and rapidly saturate in performance.
In devising a QLA for a particular problem, a major task is to find an appropriate unitary collision operator and an appropriate sequence of collide-stream steps. In this paper, we show how to generalize the collision operator to permit a switch from eliiptic to hyperbolic form and so recover the Efremidis generalized NLS [6]. Interestingly this sign-flip on one of the second derivatives can be achieved by generalizing the unitary collision operator without the need of some fancy streaming operator sequence. We should point out that a somewhat distant cousin to our qubit algorithm is the quantum lattice Boltzmann work of Succi et al. [12].
In Section 2 we summarize the generalized NLS model of Efremidis et al. [6], while in Section 3 we present our radial Pade solution to the model. The unitary qubit algorithm is presented in Section 4 together with the generalization of this unitary sequence of collide-stream operators to obtain the Efremidis model, while our 3D numerical simulations of a quasi-steady state is presented in Section 5. We briefly summarize what we have achieved in Section 6.
