The U.S. construction industry employs 4.5 percent of the entire non-farm workforce (BLS, 2017) and encounters about 19 percent of the total fatalities (BLS, 2016). Over the past decades, concerns about safety have received focus from many stakeholders (e.g., OSHA, NIOSH, ASCE, ASSP), which has resulted in a decrease in the incident rate of fatal and disabling injuries. With all the progress in engineering and safety science, still, construction is prominent for its poor safety performance. Often the efforts to improve safety focus on the construction phase of a project while safety in the design and pre-construction planning is typically overlooked. Researchers have recognized a strong link between workplace fatalities and the absence of safety consideration in the design process. For example, when a researcher examined more than 200 fatality reports, he found that 42 percent of the fatalities reviewed were linked to the absence of safety consideration in design (Behm, 2005). Hence, it is vital to identify potential risks and develop solutions to prevent work-related injuries, illnesses, and fatalities through design and this approach is called Prevention through Design (PtD) (Manuele, 2008).
To address worker safety in design and pre-construction planning, several organizations have developed consensus standards such as ANSI Z10, Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems, and ANSI Z590.3-2011, Guidelines for Addressing Occupational Hazards and Risks in Design and Redesign Processes (ANSI/AIHA, 2005, ANSI/ASSE, 2011). These standards can be utilized by professors while teaching the topics of structural design, electrical and mechanical design, site layout planning and other related areas to prepare students for preventing workplace hazards before they occur. Realizing the importance of finding and designing out hazards in various products such as tools, equipment, processes, and buildings, the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) partnered with several professional organizations, including the American Society of Safety Professionals, the Center for Construction Research and Training, and others to launch the National Prevention through Design Initiative in 2007 (NIOSH, 2014). The purpose of the initiative was to facilitate the creation and distribution of business tools, case studies, model projects, and best practices focused on design solutions that decrease worker health and safety issues and associated costs. Still, a major obstacle in developing safe designs is that most newly graduated architects and design engineers are not knowledgeable in safety and construction processes fundamental to “design out” hazards (Gangolells et al., 2010). Often university architecture and engineering programs do not teach students about PtD at all or introduce briefly in their courses (López-Arquillos et al., 2015). Thus professionals, typically, learn about PtD once they enter professional practice. Ideally, the architects and engineers who are involved in designing portions of the permanent and temporary structures needed for a successful project should have the knowledge of construction safety to develop safe designs. In addition, personnel in the supervisory position such as project engineers, superintendents, and project managers should understand the value of safety inclusion in decision making during the project design and pre-construction project planning process.
1.1. Statement of the problemThe challenges of teaching PtD concepts to future designers, engineers, and construction managers have not been fully addressed due to several reasons, including the lack of room in the existing curricula for an additional required course (Behm et al., 2014, Mann, 2008), shortage of the trained faculty to teach the topics of PtD, shortage of the PtD teaching resources, and not fully recognizing the value of PtD education of engineers by some professors (Zarges and Giles, 2008). While the development of teaching resources such as textbooks and educational modules is being encouraged under the NIOSH PtD initiative (Popov et al., 2013); the teaching and learning potential of innovative teaching strategies such as digital game-based learning should not be overlooked.The use of digital games in different disciplines is on the rise. Mostly serious games are the predominant application type of digital game-based training systems (Ritterfeld et al., 2009). A serious game is a game developed for the main purpose of teaching other than only entertainment (Susi et al., 2007). Serious games use computer game settings to train, educate, motivate and change the behavior of users in an engaging and entertaining way (Ritterfeld et al., 2009). Today’s “millennial” college students appreciate playing video games more so than past generations (Gale, 2011). Therefore, by incorporating characteristics of games with the instructional material of PtD, the potential for motivating students to learn new concepts in less time or outside the traditional classroom may increase. Students may also improve the retainage of knowledge through experiential learning in the game environment. These improvements need to be assessed. In the absence of convincing empirical proof supporting the implementation of games for learning and teaching of a particular subject, serious games can always be rejected as an overstated, optimistic solution.The main contribution of this paper is empirical evidence for the use of serious games in PtD education. This empirical evidence focuses on whether the use of serious games can address some shortcomings of traditional and alternative approaches of teaching. To obtain empirical data, an evaluation framework was developed to measure the effectiveness of the SafeDesign game which is a prototype serious game prepared for this study. The paper also explores the relationship, if any, between variables (gender, relevant work experience, computer use frequency, and learning-game playing experience) and student test performance among each of the instructional techniques.
