Since its inception in the late 1980s, complexity science has evolved into a well-established and highly popularized area of science (e.g., for a description of the field's history, Mitchell, 2009). The exploration of complexity has been connected to a number of foundational claims, ranging from a redefinition of the arrow of time (e.g. Davies, 2003) to the often quoted slogan, ‘more is different’ by Anderson (1972). Such foundational claims have generated much philosophical debate (e.g. Bedau and Humphreys, 2008, Coveney and Highfield, 1995, Frigg, 2003, Hooker, 2011, Kauffman, 1993).
However, a survey of the existing philosophical literature (e.g., for collections of philosophical works on complexity science, Gregersen, 2003, Hooker, 2011) shows that there are few works that focus on analysing the actual work of practitioners in the field.
This paper aims to address the lack of philosophical analyses of the methodology of complexity science and to provide a detailed account of one crucial aspect of the work of complexity scientists, namely the construction and transfer of complex models. The philosophical literature on modelling in the natural sciences has traditionally been focussed on the construction of these models from both empirical knowledge about a particular target system as well as the general theory that governs this system (e.g. Frigg and Hartmann, 2012, Toon, 2012). I will call this kind of model construction ‘vertical construction’. In recent years, the existence of other kinds of model construction has also been highlighted, including the construction of models through the alteration of existing models (Bokulich, 2003), which I will henceforth denote as ‘horizontal construction’, and the transfer of models from one target system to another (e.g. Hesse, 1966, Bokulich, 2014, Bokulich, 2015). Some studies on the transfer of models have been based on case studies of complex models (Bokulich, 2014). However, to my knowledge, there exist no studies that provide integrated accounts of the interplay of different modelling activities in complexity science. My study here aims to provide such an account.
The paper has two main theses: (i) I will argue that all three modelling activities described above, i.e. vertical construction of models; horizontal construction of models; and the transfer of models to new target systems, can be identified in complexity science; and (ii) that the interplay of these activities is structured in a particular way. In particular, with respect to thesis (ii), I will argue that the modelling activities in complexity science can be divided into two categories: the creation of a repository of general models through large-scale horizontal modelling; and the transfer of these models to particular target systems, which can be combined with an extension of the transferred models through additional vertical constructions. This division is not just one between activities but also one between epistemic fields: the creation of the repository is mainly undertaken by computational scientists and mathematicians while the transfer and extension of models takes place in the natural and social sciences. Accordingly, this interplay between different modelling activities provides a mechanism through which knowledge is transferred between different scientific communities.
Furthermore, my identification of this division of the modelling activities in complexity science can be used to derive a methodological definition of the field of complexity science itself. Namely, the field seems to consist of a core area that can be defined methodologically as comprising those activities that contribute to the creating, cataloguing and investigation of the repository of models without fixed target systems and of a number of auxiliary areas that overlap with other disciplines and that can be methodologically defined as the use of models from the repository to investigate phenomena located in these other areas. This definition of the field of complexity science based on the crucial methodologies used by scientists that self-identify as complexity scientists (i) avoids relying on the currently not unequivocally defined term ‘complexity’ and (ii) allows for the fact that a large number of complexity scientists also have strong associations to other fields, which has contributed to the difficulties in delineating the field.
The methodological definition offered here is clearly neither the only possible definition of the field (e.g., in the context of emergence in complexity science, a division into three schools has been offered by Richardson & Cilliers, 2001) nor will it be able to offer a demarcation criterion that allows an unequivocal assignation of a given investigation or a given scientist as belonging to the field of complexity science or being a complexity scientist. Furthermore, by defining complexity science through the structure of its modelling activities, important parts of the field that could also be viewed as definitional (e.g. metaphorical descriptions, slogans and conceptual definitions) are neglected. However, a delineation of the field that includes all of these parts has so far not been possible. The methodological definition offered here can therefore be viewed as a preliminary definition: a later construction of a more comprehensive definition might find it to be a good starting point.
Furthermore, I hope to show that the methodological definition identifies a large number of activities as being part of complexity science and thereby also provides a clearer exposition of the work conducted by researchers in the field. As explained above, it also reflects the fact that there seem to be two classes of complexity scientists: those who primarily self-identify as such (e.g. Stephen Wolfram, section 4.1) and those who profess to work with complex models but to primarily belong to an existing field of science (e.g. Michael Batty, section 4.2).
It should be noted that the transfer of models in the auxiliary regions of complexity science is not restricted to the transfer of models from the repository to a particular target system. Within these regions, models are also transferred from one target system to another. This transfer often crosses disciplinary boundaries and, in doing so, seems to have a preferred direction: in many cases, these transfers consist in the adaptation of a natural science model for a target system in the social science. Such cross-disciplinary transfers of models – in complexity science and elsewhere – have recently been investigated by several authors (e.g. Chettiparamb, 2006, Bokulich, 2014, Thebault et al., 2017). Since the focus of this paper is the horizontal construction of models and their subsequent transfer, I will not discuss this second transfer mechanism with the same detail. I also maintain that the creation of a repository of models and their subsequent transfer is one of the most distinguishing features of complexity science, while the transfer of models from one target system to another also takes place in other fields (e.g. Thebault et al., 2017). However, it is clearly an important part of the methodology of complexity science and – as I will describe below – also plays a crucial role in the structuring of its auxiliary regions.
I also maintain that it is through this structuring of modelling activities and the resulting overlap with other disciplines that complexity science becomes an interdisciplinary field. As foreshadowed in the description above, I will argue that the defining methodology of complexity science includes the transfer of models into many different areas of the natural and social sciences. The adaption and use of these models could be viewed as auxiliary areas of complexity science: areas that are methodologically connected to the field as being part of the interplay of different modelling activities, but whose phenomena under investigation are traditionally part of another area of science. Accordingly, the term ‘interdisciplinary’ can be given a more precise meaning in this context: it denotes the fact that the methodological core area of complexity science, the stocking, investigation and cataloguing of the repository of models, is connected with many different disciplines through the transfer of these models to different target systems.
Furthermore, the cross-disciplinary transfer of models within the auxiliary regions further increases the overlap of complexity science with other fields by providing bridges to additional parts of the natural and social sciences. Given that the directionally of such cross-disciplinary transfers generally seems to be from the natural sciences to the social sciences (e.g. Thebault et al., 2017), the picture that seems to emerge is one in which areas of the natural sciences are primarily tied to central repository of models through the transfer of horizontally generated models, while areas of the social sciences are then added to the auxiliary regions of complexity science through the subsequent transfer of such models from a natural science target system to a social science target system. This interpretation is dependent on the classification of different branches of science as ‘natural’ and ‘social’; in some cases, including the field of urban planning, which provides one of my major case studies (Section 4), such a classification is not easily performed. Furthermore, there are also cases in which a model has been transferred directly from the repository into a social science field (e.g., into linguistics, Lansing & Downey, 2011). As explained above, the focus of this paper is on the former mechanism; however, the cross-disciplinary transfer of models from the natural to the social sciences is clearly another important methodological feature of complexity science.
As far as I am aware, the identification and analysis of this interplay of modelling activities is a novel contribution to the philosophical discussion of complexity science.
In Section 2, I will review some relevant material on different kinds of model construction. As outlined above, I will distinguish between vertical (Section 2.1) and horizontal (Section 2.2) model construction.
In Section 3, I will discuss the transfer of models to new target systems. The framework for this discussion will be an adaptation of the analogy-based account of model transfer by Hesse (1966).
In Section 4, I will analyse the interplay of different modelling activities in complexity science. I will first introduce the kind of models that are prevalent in complexity science. I will then show that a division of modelling activities into the two categories mentioned above, i.e. the creation of a repository of models (Section 4.1); and the transfer and extension of models from this repository (Section 4.2), is supported by an analysis of both the actual interplay of models in complexity science as well as the representations of this interplay by practitioners.
