Rising demands to meet the needs of a population on earth of more than 7.5 billion, has put tremendous pressure on the natural resources of the planet. Earth's resources though vast are finite, therefore, activities related to resource utilizations must be carried out in ways that will meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. In this aspect the chemical process industry plays a very important role in providing new products by converting the specific raw materials technologies, chemicals and processes that are efficient, economical and sustainable. In this aspect sustainable process synthesis plays a pivotal role in achieving our goals. The solution approaches for process synthesis problems can be classified into three main classes: methods that rely on knowledge base; methods that employ mathematical or optimization techniques; and, hybrid methods. Knowledge based methods (Jaksland et al., 1995, Siirola, 1996), rely on rules based on a combination of experience, insights and engineering knowledge (data) to solve the synthesis problem; (2) Mathematical programming-based methods (Chen and Grossmann, 2017, Li et al., 2018, Papalexandri and Pistikopoulos, 1996), where the best flowsheet alternative is determined from network superstructure optimization. This approach requires one to define and represent the network of alternatives in a mathematical form and solve the resulting mathematical problem using suitable solvers. (3) Hybrid methods (Babi et al., 2014, Kuhlmann and Skiborowski, 2017, McBride, Kaiser, and Sundmacher, 2017, Skiborowski, 2018, Tula et al., 2015) that combine different approaches to solve the synthesis problem. Since applying only knowledge-based methods or optimization-based methods often oversimplifies or complicates the process synthesis problem, a more logical way is to use hybrid methods where we can leverage the advantages of the two approaches while still keeping the complexity of the synthesis problem manageable.
For an effective, efficient and flexible design approach, what is needed is a systematic approach to identify the types of tasks and/or operations that need to be performed, the corresponding design of the operation-equipment, their configuration, mass-energy flows, etc., giving the optimal process flowsheet. It is also necessary to include metrics for ecological and sustainability performance in the early stages of process synthesis to assess the quality of a process synthesis-design solution. This approach should support innovation that allows the generation of novel, unconventional processing options, such as, combinations of existing technologies or new technologies that can satisfy the process specifications while also significantly improving a reference process design. The design approach should be flexible so that the processing route alternatives generated by solving synthesis problems at the grassroot and/or retrofit level could be verified easily. In a grassroot situation, one would be looking for an optimal process for building a new plant, while in retrofit situation, an existing process is modified to make it more efficient in terms of specific performance criteria.
The objective of this paper is to present an integrated framework consisting of a collection of methods and computer-aided tools to assist engineers in achieving sustainable process development given a problem definition, grassroot or retrofit or process analysis, by performing the full cycle of process development calculations quickly, reliably and efficiently. The method has the capability to perform process synthesis, design, analysis and innovation systematically and consistently for a wide range of process engineering problems. The detailed architecture of the framework together with the main actions needed for successful application of each step of the workflow are presented. An overview of the algorithms used in each step and the necessary methods and computer-aided tools embedded within the framework are also presented. The application of the framework together with its embedded methods and computer-aided tools are highlighted through case studies where industrial process engineering problems of interest are solved by employing the needed features and/or options available through ProCAFD.
