1.1. The need for assistive communication technologiesThe United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities defines communication as a human right (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2007). Lacking the means to communicate meaningfully increases feelings of isolation, social anxiety, and depression (Knutson and Lansing, 1990). These symptoms in turn are capable of further progressing to feelings of worthlessness, guilt, and suicidal thoughts and feelings (Taylor, Taylor, Nguyen, Chatters, 2016, Weeks, Kalucy, Hill, 2009).Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) solutions exist to promote and support communication for those who do not communicate verbally. AAC techniques have long been a topic of research. Studies have yielded exhaustive lists of those who could benefit from AAC technologies due to difficulties communicating (McNaughton and Light, 2013). These lists frequently include a variety of neurological and developmental conditions; according to the University of Sheffield and the Barnsley Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, AAC solutions are particularly applicable for those with the following six conditions: Alzheimer’s disease, dementia, Parkinson’s disease, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), learning disabilities, and cerebrovascular accident (often referred to as a stroke) (Creer et al., 2016). There are 475 individuals with these top six conditions for every 100,000 people; this number increases to 536 when considering the remaining 13 categories of conditions discussed in the study. Regarding autism spectrum disorder (ASD) as a specific example, experts have determined that 20–30% of individuals diagnosed with ASD cannot express themselves well enough to meet their own basic needs, with some estimating the number may be 50% or more (Anderson, Lord, Risi, DiLavore, Shulman, Thurm, Welch, Pickles, 2007, Cafiero, 2001, Lorah, Tincani, Dodge, Gilroy, Hickey, Hantula, 2013, Wodka, Mathy, Kalb, 2013).
1.2. Types of AACWhile some can communicate through unaided means, such as gesture or sign language, others must rely on aided means. Aided AAC solutions fall into two major classifications (The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 2019a). The first is the low-cost, low-tech category which includes both homemade tools and commercially-available products. Such devices are typically considered to be cost-effective yet somewhat inconvenient. Manually created picture boards are very affordable, taking only time and few other resources to create. However, these systems inherit the limitations of whichever language representation method (LRM) they use, e.g., alphabet-based or image-based (The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 2019b). Alphabet-based methods that rely on spelling generally have higher time and motor requirements; word-based and image-based methods encounter a physical limitation on the number of concepts they can represent, resultingly restricting communication to broad concepts and ideas. The Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) improves on this type of device by providing a mechanism to group phrases into sentences and communicate more effectively (Bondy and Frost, 1994). Overall, this category of tools can place a significant burden on a communication partner to interpret meaning from the AAC device.The second category of solutions is high-tech AAC devices. Such devices aim to reduce issues common to manually-created instruments but carry an additional cost to the user. This category includes apps or hardware devices that offer some increased depth of communication through speech output or sentence generation. They may offer some dynamic control, but this customization is usually quite limited in scope. With the downsides of notably higher costs both fiscally and from time and energy spent on maintenance such as keeping the device charged and operational (Van der Meer et al., 2012), high-tech AAC solutions may not fit the needs of all individuals.Inequities with respect to monetary situations, availability of consumer solutions, and internet access can bar people from using high-tech AAC devices. As such, these AAC users are restricted to low-tech devices that they often have to make at home. Low-tech devices, however, often lack expressiveness due to the physical limitations of the systems and can be cumbersome to personalize to the specific needs of the user. With that said, there is a critical need to make features associated with high-tech solutions available in a cost-effective, accessible manner. We present CommBo in an effort to combat these challenges.
1.3. CommBoCommBo is a web-based, speech-generating picture communication board that offers a customizable interface and machine learning capabilities to provide intelligent suggestions to the user. These intelligent suggestions help mitigate the inherent physical limitations of picture boards by making the most relevant communication options more readily accessible. The utility of an adaptive and easily modifiable board layout and speech generation make communication more convenient and personalized. Evaluating CommBo with two individuals who use AAC devices showed that CommBo scored better than a traditional picture board with respect to physical demand, performance limitations, effort, and frustration.CommBo leverages technologies compatible with virtually any smartphone, tablet, or other computing device. As a free web-based interface, users can save hundreds compared to most other high-tech tools which often have specific hardware needs or license costs (Alliano et al., 2012). This means that CommBo can be deployed even in developing countries where budget smartphones are widely owned. A 2018 survey determined that smartphones can be purchased in parts of Africa for as little as 30 USD, with continual adoption of smartphones growing across the world (Poushter, Bishop, Chwe, 2018, Scott, Wyche, Olson, 2018). This provides a low-cost entry to the use of our application and will potentially provide means for better communication for those who otherwise could not afford an AAC solution.Additionally, CommBo’s use of storage libraries and browser APIs allows it to cache itself on a user’s device. This enables entirely offline operation, making the app accessible to those who lack consistent internet access. CommBo only requires internet for the initial setup. This design consideration further drives down operating costs.The application improves upon traditionally inflexible interfaces by utilizing machine learning to suggest cards to the user. Information such as time of day and frequency of use are used to build a predictive model for an individual’s needs. This allows operation of the application to be faster, easier, and more intuitive. This sensitive user data gathered to produce these results is appropriately hashed and stored on the server within a local MongoDB collection following at minimum the HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) guidelines.
