Big Data is a collection of huge amount of historical and important data, which is the most valuable asset of every organization and being utilized intelligently for business can support decisions based on real facts rather than perceptions. The term Big Data was coined by Charles Tilly in Oxford dictionary in 1980 [1]. At present, considerable data is generated from multiple sources including social media sites, different remote sensors, cell-phone GPS signals, transaction records, and log files. Owing to the socialization of the Internet, terabytes of structured, unstructured, and semi-structured data are produced online every day and much of this information has inherent business values. Thus, if it's not captured and analyzed properly, then considerable vital data will be getting lost. Big Data is to archive a collection of historical data, using Hadoop framework with the help of different tools for analytics, which are faster than previous traditional analytic tools.
Hadoop is a synonym of Big data. Big Data comprises of four V's or characteristics: volume, velocity, variety, and veracity [2], [3]. The significant growth of data has led to issues related to not only volume, velocity, variety and veracity of data but also to data security and privacy. Recently, the addition of another “V”, i.e., vulnerability, has been proposed to be related to it (See Fig. 1) [4].Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The V's are represent different characteristics of Big Data, due the system vulnerabilities one more V is included.
Big Data technology extracts interesting value from a data lake and many countries have launched important projects based on this technology. USA is one of the leaders to seize the Big Data opportunity. In March 2012, under Obama’s Administration, USA launched the Big Data Research and Development Initiative with a budget of $200 millions [5]. Due to this Big Data project initiated globally with new technologies, frameworks, many new models have been developed. Infrastructure has been created to provide for more storage capacity, parallel processing, and real-time analysis in a heterogeneous environment [6]. Big Data technology offers improved flexibility, scalability, and performance in a cost-effective manner with commodity computers. The cost of most storage and processing solutions is continuously dropping due to the use of the advanced sustainable technology [7].
This new technology has been developed to ensure data privacy and security in contrast of traditional technologies. However, this technology can also be used for negative purposes. As a growing number of businesses and individuals store and process their private data using this technology, it has become a significant target of data attacks.
