The phenomenon of video hosting services and increasingly popular video-streaming platforms has changed the cultural narrative of many countries, making the voices of individuals from various backgrounds heard and listened to. It has also turned the Internet into a powerful tool of audio-visual self-expression, allowing millions of people to entertain, influence and inform each other, as well as create their own agenda.
One of the most influential platforms to interact on and build a community around is YouTube (youtube.com), an American video-sharing website, which allows people to create video channels, upload, view, rate, share and comment on videos. Yet, what it essentially allows its users is, in the website's own words, a number of “freedoms”: freedom of expression, freedom of information, freedom of opportunity and freedom to belong (youtube.com, 2019), which makes YouTube one of the most dynamic spheres of societal creative practice and exchange.
However, it seems that today the image of YouTube is shaped not only through the content and opportunities that it offers, but also through the narrative built around it. YouTube increasingly attracts attention of the media that in turn voice most prominent driving concepts lying behind the success on the platform as well as provide commentary on the issues existing within the sphere of computer mediated communication or brought about through such. This kind of relationship between video services and mass media motivates current research paper, as it seems relevant to establish the role of mass media texts in shaping the public's perception of YouTube, and, furthermore, to look into the linguistic aspects of certain values which are verbalized and spread through the language of the texts about YouTube.
Currently, various forms and functions of numerous online services and platforms motivate extensive scientific research which can be categorized based on the focus of the studies. Research papers cover such aspects of information technology as discursive and sociolinguistic features of the content shared online, for example, videos (Calhoun, 2019), images, hashtags (De Cock and Pizarro Pedraza, 2018); discuss interpersonal and mass communication processes, which influence and shape communication produced by mass media (Lee and Tandoc, 2017) as well as “opinion climates” (Neubaum and Krämer, 2017). There are studies that observe online social behavior and evaluate the effect that social networks have on its users in regards to the factor of connectedness (e.g., decreased or increased feeling of loneliness, online ostracism or heightened sense of connection) (Ryan et al., 2017).
YouTube is primarily studied through the lens of sociolinguistics, while researchers concentrate on the communication features inherent in creators on the platform, e.g. they evaluate the connection between languages, digital products in the form of videos and interaction that accompanies culture and nationality-specific media content (Dlaske, 2017). Along with studying the impact within the platform, researchers turn to outward changes in individual, professional, institutional behavior (Shogan, 2010; Grube, 2017), together with studying users’ emotions and reactions (Dale et al., 2017).
Yet, despite the fact of increased attention of various scholars towards the new media and particularly to the video sharing platform YouTube, to date scholars have not looked into the specifics of intentional and unintentional creation and dissemination of values by professionals, i.e. journalists in the texts that they produce on the topic of YouTube. Yet, these texts form a distinctive opinion of the industry, people involved and the impact YouTube has on the lives of individuals. Moreover, a closer study of axiological characteristics of the modern-day IT-discourse could be a starting point for further interdisciplinary research aimed at establishing the connection between the values of a community, their communicative models and behavioral patterns.
This study is an attempt to fill the gap in the scientific knowledge of axiologically charged communication. For the first time professionally compiled written texts about IT are viewed as a tool for creation and dissemination of a system of values which affects the addressee and shapes certain ways to perceive technology and, ultimately, YouTube. The novelty of the conducted research is also conditioned by the fact that apparently never before have linguists attempted to identify, analyze and structure the most prominent value entities verbalized by professionals and aimed at non-professionals in the texts which popularize this technological platform and constitute the narrative about YouTube. Finally, it is important to mention that within this research, language materials covering YouTube in mass media are regarded as an information and communication phenomenon in its own right. It is, thus, studied as such from the standpoint of several branches of social sciences, and more prominently, linguistics.
The objectives of this study, thus, include (1) analyzing the language materials on the topic of YouTube and establishing dominating communicative strategies employed by the texts’ authors, (2) identifying values explicitly and implicitly verbalized in the analyzed texts, (3) defining linguistic features of these values and organizing them into a system as they are presented by the authors of the texts, i.e. professionals.
