This paper presents the field of affective games (AGs), a sub-field within the so-called affective computing field of research [1]. Videogames have become a mainstream form of entertainment over the last years, becoming one of the fastest growing industry of entertainment. However, due to the increase of competitiveness in the industry, game designers are constantly encouraged to make their games engaging and attractive to the users.
Although developers have traditionally focused their efforts on improving the graphic quality of videogames, in recent years it has been very difficult to stand out in this regard, forcing them to discover new ways of getting attraction to their games. This is where affective games come into play, assessing the emotions of players and adapting the gameplay to them as well as triggering the right emotions into the players in order to improve their overall satisfaction.
This review analyses the initial steps that researchers took towards addressing the aforementioned topic and also the most recent work on affective games aiming at sketching out the main research challenges in the field as well as studying what can and cannot be achieved with such methods. A taxonomy that introduces several distinctions between the approaches in the literature is also proposed, and a comprehensive survey of work that we found in the literature is discussed and classified according to these distinctions. First, there is an introduction to this field of research.
Affective gaming was originally conceived as the search of suitable methods for measuring the affective state of videogame players [[2], [3]]. It began as the desire of translating the advances achieved in affective computing and, more precisely, in the human–computer interaction to videogames. This technology could provide several benefits to the player experience such as adopting new game mechanics depending on her/his affective state and creating game content dynamically to fit and provoke certain feelings to the player, to name a few (see Fig. 1).
The main problem that affective gaming tackles is the fact that, since its inception, the interaction between the game and the player has been fixed, that is, for every action performed by the player there is a default reaction in the game, and vice-versa. We are not referring here to the reactions the game is able to select, which can be even randomly selected from a predefined set, but to the (lack of) ability of affective games to create new reactions on their own.
Furthermore, affective games deals with player’s emotions [4], which in turn is another issue that has been studied in the literature, that is, how to measure and detect human emotions.
Although there are other papers in the literature that study and review the area, they are very specific. For instance, Chu et al. [5] focused on the user experience when playing games, while Kivikangas et al. [6] and Ng et al. [7], Kotsia et al. [8] targeted the physiological measures and the videogame design, respectively. Regarding the historical survey by Christy and Kuncheva [9], they provided an industry-centred review, focusing on hardware and videogames. On the other hand, Calvo and D’Mello [10] authored a deep survey on affect detection, however it has a wider focus than the present paper, focusing on how to measure the emotional state of the user from an affective computing point of view as a whole, instead of focusing on affective game. Finally, Dormann et al. [11] presented several videogame design patterns related to understanding emotions, affective representation, and socio-emotional interactions as well as a taxonomy to classify them.Download : Download high-res image (106KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Typical affective game feedback loop.
