In the recent times, the medical image processing provides various detection techniques for detecting the dental caries in an early stage [1]. The dental decay or tooth decay is generally referred to as dental caries, and this disease takes place in the hard tissue of the tooth due to the action of the micro-organisms. These dental cavities can be prevented at the individual level. In case, if the caries were not detected at the early stage, they may lead to more complex and may require costly treatments. This may also lead to huge infections on the pulp tissue inflammation [2, 3]. Hence, there is a necessity to detect the caries in an accurate way as well as in an early stage [18]. Since posterior teeth have larger proximal surfaces and mineral loss is insignificant in incipient caries, incipient approximal carious lesions in posterior teeth are often hard to detect. Thus, radiographic examination is extremely important for the evaluation of proximal surfaces of posterior teeth [4]. When the dental caries is larger in size, they can be viewed by naked eye, whereas, smaller lesions are difficult to identify. In the primary level of diagnosis, all the tooth surfaces of the patient are inspected by utilizing a light source, dental mirror and explorer [5, 6, 7]. Most of the diagnosis is made with the Dental radiographs (X-rays), and they are efficient in exhibiting the dental caries that takes place between the teeth [19, 20]. Further, the “hidden caries” are complex to estimate, because they are invisible at the surface [8]. These hidden caries are due to the bacterial action that penetrates the enamel in order to reach the inner surface of the teeth [21]. Here, the outer surface of the teeth will be intact. These types of hidden caries cannot be detected in an accurate way by using the X-rays [9, 10].
For the early diagnosis of tooth caries, more enhanced visual techniques were introduced. They made use of the light scattering phenomenon and is based on the depth of the wavelength of the light [[15], [16]]. It is capable of detecting the presence of absence of caries [11, 12]. But, this method requires different fluorescence of different colours. Then, the Ultrasound Caries Detector was used, in which the images of tissues can be collected by reflected sound waves. This method reduced the amount of ionizing radiation and hence the caries detection was accurate [13, 14]. Even though most of the existing works on the classification of the caries region from the non decay region employs the dental explorer as well as X-ray radiography, these methods are found to be more complex [17]. Hence, there is a necessity to have an algorithmic analysis on the dental caries detection [23].
The main focus of this research is to propose a caries detection methodology on the basis of MPCA based feature extraction. The classification of the extracted features is accomplished using NN classifier. Once the features are extracted, they are multiplied with a weighting factor. Further, the Nonlinear Programming Optimization is employed with an intention of maximizing the distance between the resultant feature outputs. NN classifier is trained using an adaptive DA algorithm. An algorithmic analysis is carried out in this paper, by comparing the proposed MPCA-ADA model with other existing methods like PCA, LDA, ICA and MPCA in terms of accuracy, specificity, sensitivity, precision, False positive rate (FPR), False negative rate (FNR), Negative Predictive Value (NPV), False Discovery Rate (FDR), F1Score and Mathews correlation coefficient (MCC).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the literature work; Section 3 portrays the steps allotted for caries detection. Section 4 describes the architecture of proposed caries detection model. V discusses the obtained results, and Section 6 concludes the paper.
