Transducers are used in both actuation and sensing applications, for example, as speakers and microphones [1], or for haptic wearable devices [2]. Many modern transducers are made from piezoelectric crystals such as lead-zirconium titanate (PZT) [3], which change shape in response to an applied voltage, or change voltage in response to an external force. These piezoelectric transducers can be made to be very precise and find use in small-scale control systems or measurement systems [4]. Another example of a common transducer would be the voice coil [5,6], which is composed of coiled wire. When an electrical current is passed through the wire, it generates a strong magnetic field to move a coil. This technology is common in speakers and microphones. However, most common transducers have several limitations which prevent their entry into new markets. Both ceramic piezoelectrics such as PZT and voice coils are rigid, and voice coils can have high energy requirements [7]. Piezoelectric polymers are a promising new field of research, with materials like polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) able to generate large displacements [8], but the polymers tend to have significantly lower piezoelectric constants than the ceramics [9]. This means that higher voltages and power outputs are necessary to generate the same level of displacement. Finally, most commercial transducers are restricted to either sensing or actuating, even if the fundamental material that drives them is capable of both (although see [10]). As modern technology becomes more integrated, there is a need for transducers capable of both sensing and actuation with the same element, even simultaneously. Typical applications include devices such as fitness wearables, smartwatches, or health-focused devices. Continuous sensing allows for higher quality data, especially when recording physiological signals. We have previously designed a flexible electrostatic transducer powerful enough to be used in haptics applications and show here that it is also capable of useful simultaneous sensing and actuation [11,12].
The flexible electrostatic actuator is composed of a moving buckled electroded film connected to a rigid electrode, as shown in Fig. 1a. Flexibility has previously been shown to be a crucial component in many soft actuator or conformal technologies [[13], [14], [15], [16]]. When a voltage is applied between the two films, electrostatic force will pull the buckled film in towards the rigid film, similar to the action of electrostatic MEMS devices [17], but without the pull-in effect [18]. This allows the film to actuate and generate vibration when an AC voltage passes through it. As it is composed of a pair of electrodes, it is electrically similar to a parallel plate capacitor. The capacitance of the transducer changes significantly based on the degree to which it is displaced. Thus, by passing a high-frequency current through the transducer, the current shape and thus the displacement can be determined. While the transducers in most systems are designed to either sense or actuate, a benefit of the technology is that a standard device can do both, switching between actuation and sensing as the need arises. This is similar to how piezoelectric actuators work in ultrasonic imaging to first send and then receive an ultrasonic pulse [19]. Through careful design of the electronic and physical systems, these devices can sense and actuate simultaneously. This allows for smoother operation, better data collection, and higher-fidelity actuation output. If we can avoid interruptions in actuation caused when a device switches to a sensing mode, the user will feel an uninterrupted signal. Similarly, there will be no gaps in the sensed data. Simultaneous input and output allow for a further improvement to this class of devices – automatic displacement control. Self-sensing is a well understood process in piezoelectrics and dielectric elastomer actuators [[20], [21], [22]], but has not been extensively studied with flexible electrostatics. When sensing while actuating, the device can also sense its own motion. With the correct circuitry and programming, it can then adjust if the motion is too large or too small. This technique requires a good understanding of the electromechanical response of the transducers to different driving amplitudes, frequencies, and loads. In addition, whatever system is designed must be able to differentiate between motions generated by the electrostatic response of the transducer and motion external to the system.Download : Download high-res image (219KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Flexible electrostatic transducer. A) Schematic of transducer layers. B) Image of prototype transducer. As the applied voltage compresses the transducer, the capacitive area between the top and bottom Kapton films increases. This increases the overall capacitance by a precise amount and allows for the determination of displacement. A properly designed circuit can drive actuation while measuring the instantaneous capacitance change. When a load is applied, the transducer remains compressed at all stages, and the change in displacement Δd is smaller.
The device is composed of a buckled 25μm Kapton film mounted to a rigid film composed of a Mylar insulator, a sputtered gold electrode, and a backing Kapton layer. Kapton was chosen for the buckled film due to its favorable electromechanical properties. Kapton has a high dielectric breakdown, allowing it to take high voltages despite its low thickness. It is also relatively stiff, which translates to an ability to generate higher forces when actuating. Specifically, the buckled film material and thickness was chosen to fall within a certain stiffness band, such that it was stiff enough to generate displacement into the skin, but not so stiff as to require very high voltages to move. The dimensions of the transducer were chosen to be LR=20mm,w=10mm, and h=3mm. These dimensions were chosen to optimize the displacement response at the voltage range under study. Simulations and theory were conducted during the design phase to ensure that the resulting device was capable of produce a perceptible signal into the skin, and the results of this research are presented in [23].
