1.1. CanMars mission and goalsThe CanMars Mars Sample Return (MSR) analogue mission was an analogue rover mission conducted over a total of five weeks in November 2015 and November 2016 (see Osinski et al., 2018, for an overview). The goal of the overall mission exercise was to accurately simulate the conditions of a remote operated rover mission to Mars. Thus, limited communication windows and data transmission volume limitations were implemented as constraints similar to those experienced by real Mars rover missions. The two primary scientific goals of the analogue mission as stated by the CanMars Science Team Lead in Caudill et al. (2018a) were “to determine the accuracy of sample selection by a rover-based remote science operations team, and to determine the optimal approach to using the Mars 2020 instruments to select a sample target”. A location north of Hanksville, Utah, near the Mars Desert Research Station (MDRS) was chosen as the field site for rover operations during the analogue mission. Additional details on the analogue site location selection process can be found in Tornabene et al. (This Issue). Exploration of the analogue field site was limited by the mobility constraints of the MESR rover platform (discussed below), and the analysis of the local environment was limited to the onboard instrument suite carried by the rover.
1.2. Mars Exploration Science Rover (MESR) platform and instrumentationThe Mars Exploration Science Rover (MESR) is a prototype rover platform under development by the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) (Langley et al., 2012). The primary intended function of this rover is to conduct in situ geologic observations and collect rock samples while being operated remotely. The MESR platform features six wheels set at a wheelbase of 180 cm. The corner wheels are capable of turning independently, providing the rover platform with the ability to pivot turn around a single point. The rover features a single mast above the main chassis, atop which is mounted the Mastcam instrument. The rover is powered by a single 320 W solar panel that stores energy within an 8S6P lithium-ion battery. The rover chassis has a ground clearance of 45 cm, and is capable of traversing slopes of up to 16° across natural terrain. However, the rover can only come to a stop on terrain that has a slope of 5° or less. The MESR platform features several front-facing attachment points for interchangeable science instruments as well as a small manipulator arm that could be lowered into contact with a rock outcrop for contact measurements or sample collection.For the CanMars analogue mission, MESR was accompanied by an in-field instrument suite approximating the instruments and tools proposed for the Mars 2020 rover mission. These instruments included: The mast-mounted Mastcam stereo camera, a Remote Mirco-Imager (RMI), the Three-Dimensional Exploration Multispectral Microscopic Imager (TEMMI) instrument (Bourassa et al., 2018), the Wide-Angle Topographic Sensor for Operations and Engineering (WATSON), SuperCam Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectrometer (LIBS), SuperCam VIS-IR (visual and infrared light), Raman, the Scanning Habitable Environments with Raman and Luminescence for Organics & Chemicals (SHERLOC) instrument, and the PIXL X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD). For additional details on the rover platform and the instruments used during the CanMars analogue mission see Osinski et al. (2018). From the perspective of the Science Team within the mission simulation, the remote or standoff instruments were mounted to the main body of the rover platform and the contact instruments were mounted to the rover's small manipulator arm. The Science Team was required to follow strict guidelines to ensure the rover was positioned properly before being commanded to use each of the included instruments, otherwise insufficient or incomplete instrument data would be returned. In reality, most instruments were not physically mounted to the rover platform. The out-of-simulation field team used a series of handheld instruments to take the requested measurements and return data. This “green carding” of instruments followed the exact same mobility and operational constraints as if the instruments were mounted to either the rover body or arm resulting in no practical difference in instrument use from the perspective of the in-sim Mission Control Team. For additional information on the CanMars instrumentation and data collection methods see Osinski et al. (2018) and Caudill et al. (2018a).
1.3. CanMars team structureThe CanMars analogue mission team consisted of a Mission Control team located at the University of Western Ontario in London, Ontario, Canada; the CSA Team responsible for the rover operations, based at the CSA headquarters in Montreal; and the Field Team, which included the MESR rover platform and instrument suite, at the selected analogue site in Utah, USA. In order to prevent any out-of-simulation bias or knowledge of the field site or surrounding region from affecting the decisions made by the Mission Control Team, the exact location of the analogue field site within the state of Utah was not provided to the Mission Control Team during the 2015 mission. All provided satellite images and other remote sensing datasets (discussed below) had any associated geographic metadata removed so that the Mission Control Team could not identify the location of the analogue field site. At the start of the 2016 mission, GPS coordinates for sample locations and rover waypoints were released to the Mission Control Team so that datasets could be georeferenced in real-time.The Mission Control team was split into Science and Planning sub-teams (Osinski et al., 2018). The Planning Team was responsible for managing the daily rover time, energy, and data volume budgets as well as uploading the command sequences to the rover for execution in the field. The Science Team was responsible for analyzing data returned from each of the rover's onboard instruments and for making scientifically informed decisions on where to send the rover as well as where and when to take rock samples. During the 2015 and 2016 CanMars analogue missions the Science Team was organized into a series of instrument teams: Imagery Team (in charge of Mastcam, RMI, TEMMI, and WATSON), SuperCam LIBS Team, SuperCam VIS-IR Team, Raman Team, SHERLOC Team, PIXL (XRF) Team, and the “GIS (Geographic Information Systems) and Mapping” team. Each of these science sub-teams were responsible for analyzing data obtained by their designated instrument as well as targeting their specific instrument for additional data acquisition. Additional details on the CanMars team structure and organization as well as an overview and synthesis of the entire CanMars MSR analogue mission is provided in Osinski et al. (2018).
1.4. GIS and Mapping TeamThis contribution reports on the activities and results of the GIS and Mapping Team. This team was tasked with the organization and analysis of a suite of provided remote sensing datasets, selected to be both analogous and complimentary to datasets readily available for Mars (see Tornabene et al., This Issue). The GIS and Mapping Team was also partially responsible for rover localization and traverse mapping. Throughout the analogue mission, the GIS and Mapping Team was in charge of the mapping and geospatial organization of rover-collected data as well as the interpreted geomorphologic mapping of the operational field site and surrounding area. It was the responsibility of the GIS and Mapping team to update and maintain each of these mapping products with new locations and interpretations as the mission progressed. In this way, the CanMars GIS and Mapping Team fulfilled a number of duties analogous to a set of real-world roles held by teams on the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) exploration mission. For example, though the students involved in the CanMars mission were not involved in the landing site selection process, the GIS and Mapping Team used the provided regional orbital remote sensing datasets to characterize and better understand the terrain in which the rover landed, much like the initial reconnaissance work undertaken by the Landing Site Selection Team for MSL (e.g. Grant et al., 2011, Golombek et al., 2012). Additionally, the CanMars GIS and Mapping Team provided continual updates to the rover traverse map with locations visited and distance traveled, as well as providing input into the big-picture rover traverse plan. These tasks were similar to a subset of the duties performed by the Long Term Planning team on MSL (e.g., Vasavada et al., 2014). Given the limited duration of the analogue mission deployment, the wealth of both orbital remote sensing data provided and the in situ data collected by the rover platform, it was practical for all geospatial data organization, mapping, and orbital data interpretation to be relegated to a single dedicated team throughout the duration of the CanMars analogue mission.The provided remote sensing datasets, and their organization in a GIS database, provided the framework for the understanding of the geologic and morphologic context of the field area in which the rover was operating (Fig. 1). As described by Caudill et al. (2018a), at the outset of this analogue mission, these remote sensing datasets provided the Science and Planning Teams with a first look at the region of operations and were used in conjunction with the initial panoramic image of the landing site to plan the first 2 Sols of rover operations including the first traverse to the feature referred to as the “Alfheim” outcrop (Fig. 1C). The remote sensing datasets were also heavily relied upon during early stages of the mission while planning the traverse toward the topographic feature dubbed “Jotunheim” (Fig. 1C) when limited field data had yet been downlinked from the rover itself. These datasets also provided information on the composition and morphology of the surrounding region, covering areas that were well beyond the reach of the MESR platform (Tornabene et al. This Issue). The use of the provided remote sensing data enabled the Science and Planning Teams to begin to develop a preliminary concept for the geologic history of the region, that would later be augmented with sample and images obtained by the rover (Caudill et al., 2018a).Download : Download high-res image (304KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. (A) LandSat-8 image of the region surrounding the operational field area. Landing ellipse is marked in white. (B) Quickbird-2 satellite image of the CanMars landing site, operational field area, and immediately surrounding terrain. Landing ellipse is marked in white. White dot indicates the exact landing location. (C) Close-up of the Quickbird-2 satellite image focusing on the operational field area. Landing site is denoted as a gold star. Rover traverse is marked as a blue line with the end points of the 2015 and 2016 missions displayed as red points. The names given to prominent topographic/geomorphologic features are also displayed. The extent of these named regions is indicated by the white dashed lines.The GIS and Mapping Team worked to consolidate interpretations of the regional GIS datasets, primarily the high-resolution colour Quickbird-2 image along with topographic datasets, into a series of interpreted geomorphological maps. These maps would become more detailed as the mission progressed through the incorporation of field data obtained by the rover. The final interpreted geomorphological map was an essential product of the CanMars mission as it helped to refine the Science Team's interpreted geologic history of the region (Caudill et al., 2018a). The iterative development of the geomorphologic mapping is discussed in detail below.Having a dedicated GIS and Mapping Team within the larger Science Team helped to ensure that all the observations made by the rover instruments at an outcrop scale could be fit into both local and regional contexts. The inclusion of the GIS and Mapping Team was intended to simulate the way in which real-world planetary exploration missions utilize regional information collected via remote sensing. Regional data is used to target ideal landing locations, identify sample locations, and navigate through traversable terrain throughout the course of a rover mission. The main objective of the GIS and Mapping Team was to interpret the provided regional datasets to assist the overall Science Team in constructing initial hypotheses concerning the morphology and composition of the operational field area. It was also our intent to make the regional level geomorphologic and compositional data as easily accessed as possible and to create digital representations of the rover's operational field area that were as immersive as possible. We accomplished these goals by utilizing several specific technologies for data analysis and display including:1.The creation and maintenance of a 2D GIS database in ArcGIS;2.The creation and maintenance of a 3D GIS database in ArcScene;3.The creation of a web-based immersive digital terrain model of the landing site and surrounding region based on the provided DTM with a high resolution colour visible image (60-cm/pixel); and4.The development of web-based immersive versions of the panorama images captured by the rover's MastCam.In this paper we discuss the development and implementation of each of these databases and visualization interfaces. We also assess the impact each had on Science Team members’ abilities to efficiently share, understand, and interpret geographic information in the time-limited analogue mission scenario.
1.5. Data productsPrior to the start of the analogue mission, a set of remote sensing datasets was provided to the Mission Control team. A brief summary of the terrestrial remote sensing datasets made available to the CanMars team, and their Martian equivalents are provided in Table 1 (for more details on selection of these datasets, see Tornabene et al., This Issue). These datasets were specifically selected to approximate the scale and type of orbital remote sensing datasets that would be readily available to a mission-planning team at the outset of a real Mars rover mission, and include: a 60 cm/pixel Quickbird-2 (Digital Globe, 2017) visible image for HiRISE (McEwen et al., 2007), and both Landsat 8 Operational Land Imager (OLI) (Knight et al., 2014) and Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission Radiometer (ASTER) multispectral datasets providing visible-near infrared (VNIR) short-wavelength infrared (SWIR), and thermal infrared (TIR) as a proxy for THEMIS (Christensen et al., 2004), OMEGA (Bibring et al., 2006) and CRISM (Murchie et al., 2007). Also included was a digital elevation model (DEM) (UTAH Automated Geographic Reference Center, 2017) with a horizontal resolution of 5 m/pixel and a vertical accuracy on the order of 4 m or less for 95% of the data as per the National Standard for Spatial Data Accuracy (NSSDA). This DEM was intended to approximate a HiRISE or CTX stereo image derived-DEM (Malin et al., 2007; McEwen et al., 2007).Table 1. CanMars remote sensing dataset details and Martian equivalents.CanMars Data ResourceData TypeResolution (m/pixel)Mars EquivalentQuickbird-2RGB Colour Composite0.6HiRISEUtah Automatic Geographic Resource CenterDigital Elevation Model (DEM)Horizontal:5 m/pixelCTX or HiRISEStereo image derived DEMVertical Accuracy:4 m or less, NSSDA 95%Landsat-8VNIR, SWIR, Visible30CRISMASTERSWIR, TIR, Apparent Thermal Inertia30, 90Themis
1.6. Higher-level data productsIn addition to the base level data products provided to the Science Team at the outset of the CanMars mission, several higher-level data products, produced from these base-level products were provided at the start of the mission, including a shaded relief map based on the elevation data contained in the DEM and an apparent thermal inertia map for the surrounding region. Details on the derivation of these derived higher-level data products are provided in Tornabene et al. (This Issue). The GIS and Mapping Team produced several additional derived higher-level data products during the analogue mission. For example, elevation data was used to derive a slope map, contour map, and a virtual 3D model of the surrounding terrain, which are discussed further below.
