Teachers make decisions about what matters for the learners in their science1 classrooms every day (Fitzgerald & Smith, 2016; Hattie, 2003). They are required to create effective learning environments and build relationships that nurture the ongoing development of science knowledge and skills. Teachers are responsible for ensuring that every student has equal opportunity to learn science in ways that are personally meaningful to them and their lived experiences (Tytler, 2007). Science teaching is far more than simply delivering curriculum as there are a number of borders that science teachers need to negotiate including the cognitive, disciplinary and/or socio-cultural (Sumadic, 2015). There is no ‘one size fits all’ approach that works for every student and this makes science teaching challenging. While there is an implicit understanding that this is the case, the reality can be even more challenging when faced with a classroom of students embedded in a culture and context that at times can run counter to scientifically-accepted ways of perceiving the world (Parsons & Carlone, 2013). This paper seeks to explore this tension in the context of a Pacific island state, the Cook Islands.
In further considering this notion of science as being relevant and authentic to everyday experiences, ‘border crossing’ is an analogy that was adopted by Aikenhead (1996) to acknowledge the act of moving between the everyday subcultures and the subculture of science. This work, while published over two decades ago, remains particularly seminal in the field of science education as a reference point for grappling with non-western (including Indigenous) ways of knowing and connecting with science and science education. In exploring this movement, it is recognised that this process is easier for some than it is for others with these border crossings characterised as smooth, manageable, hazardous and virtually impossible (Phelan, Davidson, & Cao, 1991; Cobern & Aikenhead, 1998). Unsurprisingly, the journeys between these subcultures are more usually experienced by people using western2 perspectives of science; the belief system in which this knowledge is usually privileged and formalised (Mazzocchi, 2006). This dominance leaves the experience of the virtually impossible journey into the subculture of science to be typically experienced by people using non-western perspectives to make sense of the science phenomena they encounter in their worlds (Aikenhead, 1996; Banner, 2016).
It is mostly within educational institutions where the difficulties in negotiating these borders crossings are perpetuated as western science is foregrounded as a way of knowing over traditional, indigenous or non-western ways of understanding science (Aikenhead, 2001). Despite the call for ‘the demythologising of school science’ being discussed in the scholarly literature for over four decades (Smolizc & Nunan, 1975), changes to the ways in which science is taught in schools have been slow to emerge. However, it seems that an openness to integrate western and non-western understandings of science is becoming more commonplace in the learning and teaching of school science (Smith & Fitzgerald, 2018). For example, the Australian Curriculum - Science acknowledges Indigenous ways of knowing science as part of the ‘science as a human endeavour’ strand (which has equivalence with the widely used construct, the Nature of Science) (Australian Curriculum, 2014). This suggests that teaching students about the different ways in which science phenomena are understood and interpreted is valued as part of the formal science curriculum, but it is not necessarily enacted in meaningful or lasting ways due to lack of confidence and professional learning opportunities (Keys, 2003). From here emerges a concern that students and subsequently pre-service teachers are not developing in-depth understandings about the role and value of non-western perspectives of science.
Much research in the field connected with ways of knowing in science has reported on teachers' and teacher educators' experiences of teaching science in culturally diverse settings as well as acknowledging the value of such diversity (e.g. Luft, Bragg, & Peters, 1999; Mensah, 2011). The experiences of students’ learning science in culturally diverse contexts have also been documented (Pintrich, 2003). Typically research in this area, the integration of western and non-western perspectives of science knowledge, has focused on working with teachers and teacher educators to better understand how they make sense of culturally diverse and responsive science teaching and the how they action these understandings in their practices (see Aikenhead & Ogawa, 2007).
In contrast, the research reported on in this paper leverages a unique opportunity to gather data that captures the experiences of pre-service science teachers as they work with students in a cross-cultural context. The significance of this research is that there is the chance to better understand the ways in which the participating pre-service teachers negotiated their own border crossings between the teaching of western ways of understanding science and the more traditional Cook Island Maori ways of understanding science. There is also the opportunity to explore the ways in which these pre-service teachers support their students in their own grappling with these culturally diverse science understandings.
This paper consequently, examines the experiences of two western pre-service teachers' teaching science to students in a non-western setting through the frame of border crossings (Aikenhead, 1996). The setting for this project is the Cook Islands as Monash University pre-service teachers have the opportunity annually to complete an optional three-week teaching placement in one of 12 schools located across two islands. The author was the lead academic supporting this program at this time and was able to explore an aspect of this opportunity through a research lens related broadly to their field of study – science education. This documentation provides insights into the ways in which pre-service teachers negotiate the integration of western and non-western science knowledge as well as how they support their students in negotiating the border crossings that are encounter. The teachers' sense of journey is captured in the research questions: What are the border crossing experiences of western pre-service teachers’ teaching science in a non-western setting, and How do they influence their ways of being a science teacher?
