Learning has seen a drastic shift from the traditional classroom to the e-learning platform.
E-learning is defined as learning that takes place utilizing electronic media, principally using the Internet. Other educational environments which are also gaining popularity include learning management system, adaptive hypermedia, and forums, among others. Mining data from the educational background is intended to predict student's performance and to group students according to their similarities. It also helps to detect undesirable behaviour in students and to recommend courses to them (Mohamad & Tasir, 2013; Romero & Ventura, 2010). Extracting such hidden data has become a massive need for the e-learning domain (Sanchez, 2011).
Educational data mining is an umbrella term under which recommender systems are used. Mining hugely available academics related data for i) analysis and ii) for recommending courses is known as Educational Data Mining (EDM). Learning Analytics (LA) gathers academics related data from different sources. Furthermore, meaningful information is extracted from the collected data. EDM and LA complement the working of a recommender system. Fig. 1 shows the relation between i) mining educational data, ii) applying learning analytics by academicians to discover knowledge, and iii) generating recommendations to learners (Sanchez, 2011). The big data available from the educational institutions are mined. Consequently, the mined data is used by administrators or decision-makers to get figurative feedback about several courses. The decision-makers can then pass on the required changes needed in the course to the pedagogues who are in charge of projecting and maintaining the course. The big data available from the educational institutions are also mined to generate recommendations for the students. Fig. 2 gives statistics on the popularity earned from the educational data mining field (Baker & Inventado, 2014). All educational research continues to revolve around analytics and data mining, which in turn leads to recommendations given by recommender systems.Download : Download high-res image (377KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Cycle of educational data mining.Download : Download high-res image (332KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Statistics on educational data mining.
The benefits of e-learning are mainly flexibility in time, takes into consideration the interest of the learner and the availability of quality resources that are free. However, the biggest problem faced by e-learning systems is the information overload on the Internet. The task of a recommender system in e-learning is to recommend relevant learning materials to the learners and help them in decision making (Aguilar, Valdiviezo-Díaz, & Riofrio, 2017). Recommender systems in e-learning is a branch of information retrieval where learning resources are filtered and presented to the learners (Chughtai, Selamat, Ghani, & Jung, 2014). Artificial intelligence is seen more in the forefront of research in retrieving and filtering of information. Recommender systems are a good example of using the artificial intelligence approach (Nilashi, Ibrahim, & Bagherifard, 2018). Recommender systems have a high success rate in the e-commerce domain. Recommender systems are seen across many other domains like movies, E-learning (Dascalu, Bodea, Mihailescu, Tanase, & Ordoñez de Pablos, 2016), E-business, E-government, E-library, E-tourism (Lu, Wu, Mao, Wang, & Zhang, 2015), and management science (Murthi & Sarkar, 2003). The interest in recommender systems is high, mainly due to the problem-rich research area, including the need for personalized recommendations (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005). Unfortunately, the algorithms underlying conventional recommender systems in other domains are not directly transferable to the area of e-learning. When comparing learning content to movies or books, the cognitive state of the learner and the learning content may change over time and context (Núñez-Valdéz et al., 2012).
Some common problems occur with traditional, non-personalized recommendations. A new user or new item can lead to a commonly referred problem known as cold-start. Cold-start occurs when it is not possible to make reliable recommendations due to an initial lack of ratings (Celdrán, Pérez, Clemente, & Pérez, 2016). This leads to no overlapping of ratings, which could have otherwise been used to suggest courses for the target learner (Shishehchi, Banihashem, Zin, Noah, & Malaysia, 2012). Rating sparsity is another problem where the number of users is high compared to the number of ratings. Hence to make recommendations for that item, with a very low number of ratings, becomes difficult. Scalability is yet another issue that occurs with the number of users, items mushrooming over the Internet (Paradarami, Bastian, & Wightman, 2017; Xiao, Wang, Jiang, & Li, 2018).
Resnick and Varian (1997) observed other issues in recommender systems like that of incentive problem and privacy. There are two incentive problems in recommender systems. Firstly, users who have established their profiles of interests may tend to get recommendations with the help of huge ratings that are available, i.e., the chance of free riding to occur is highly likely. So to avoid the phenomenon of free riding, the system offers an incentive that first the user should provide a recommendation as a pre-requisite to receiving recommendations, or the user provides a recommendation so that the user can get some incentive in monetary form. The second incentive problem occurring in recommender systems is if anyone can give recommendations, as stated above, content owners may generate a huge amount of positive recommendations for their content. Besides, they may try to generate negative ones against their competitors. Privacy is yet another concern where the users may not want their entire views, interests to be made available to the public.
Lack of proper student-support during the learning process, lack of appropriate content, and lack of personalization often lead the learner who is initially enthusiastic, to have less motivation, and thereby loses interest. Accordingly, Latham, Crockett, McLean, and Edmonds (2012), designed an intelligent tutoring system that predicts learner's learning style and suggests tutoring materials accordingly. The intelligent tutoring system helps a student to have a more positive learning experience. Having a personalized recommender system leads to more effective and efficient use of the wealth of information available over the Internet. When a learner browses for an online course with criteria like course name, many course suggestions are given. Therefore, this leads to the learner not being able to make a more informed choice. The low ratio of, students registering for the courses when compared to students completing those courses, is evidence for the same. Hence, personalized learning is meant to incorporate a learner's varied attributes, including learning style, knowledge level on a subject, preferences, and learner's prior knowledge. Learning style (Bernard, Chang, Popescu, & Graf, 2017; Fatahi, Moradi, & Kashani-Vahid, 2016; Hung, Chang, & Lin, 2016; Thalmann, 2014; Truong, 2016), learner profile, learner history, learner background knowledge are some of the factors that help for an adaptive, personalized recommender system in e-learning. In fact, there is a relationship between the learner's personality and his learning style; learner's performance and his learning style.
At the same time, one must keep in mind the different phases that exist in the e-learning cycle, which includes design, publication, use, and the auditing phase while designing courses. This assists in attracting learners and helping them finish the course they registered for (Santos & Boticario, 2015). Having adaptability in e-learning is beneficial to the learner. Several indicators show the effectiveness of adaptability that is possible in massive open online courses as noted by Leris, Sein-Echaluce, Hernandez, and Bueno (2017). The authors propose indicators like having the course content accessible according to the learner's choice; allowing the learner to study according to the learner's pace.
Table 1 highlights some of the papers in which user interests and ratings are used in recommender systems. An interesting finding is as the diversity in user's choices are included, the accuracy of the recommender system seems to improve (Hu, Zeng, & Shang, 2016). Knowledge of users' interests, preferences helps in personalization and thereby in getting better recommendations (Bennett, Collins-Thompson, Kelly, White, & Zhang, 2015).Table 1. Highlight on papers covering user interests, ratings in recommender systems.ReferenceUser InterestsRatingsCantador et al. (2008), Fraihat and Shambour (2015), Hawalah and Fasli (2014), Karpus et al. (2016), Tarus et al. (2017)✓✓Harrathi et al. (2017), Margaris et al. (2018), Makwana et al. (2017), Obeid et al. (2018)✓Nilashi et al. (2018)✓
Particularly, when it comes to e-learning, there is no single model for the learner profile or the structured content, which makes the need for ontology even more essential. Ontology is especially essential when interoperability of models is required. As defined by Gruber (1993), an ontology is “an explicit specification of a conceptualization.” Another definition of ontology given by Agarwal (2005) is that “ontology is the manifestation of shared understanding of a domain that is agreed between a number of agents.” Ontology is thought to be very important and useful for the development of Semantic Web (Klašnja-Milićević, Vesin, Ivanović, & Budimac, 2011; Martinez-Cruz, Blanco, & Vila, 2012; Ramakrishnan & Vijayan, 2014). Some of the limitations while using ontology in e-learning are i) creating ontology is time-consuming, ii) evaluating ontology-based recommender systems becomes difficult with no standard dataset available on e-learning, and iii) using ontology requires skills in knowledge engineering.
The purpose of the current study is to highlight the main research findings in recommender systems in the domain of e-learning. Mainly with the information overload existing on the Internet, the present study contributes to focus on those research papers that achieve personalization by using ontology. The main contribution of the paper is as follows:
1)Research findings in the area of recommender systems in the e-learning domain mainly during the period of 2010–2019. The distribution of journal papers covering exclusively on the topic of ontology and journal papers on the topic of ontology with E-learning has also been illustrated graphically.2)The paper gives an overview of recommender systems in e-learning based on ontology and based on hybridization.3)The paper also covers literature that discusses several techniques to calculate user similarity based on user interests.
The categorization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 deals with the related work relevant to recommender systems. Section 3 introduces ontology-based recommender systems. Section 4 gives an overview of hybrid recommender systems in the e-learning domain. Section 5 presents recommender systems built using techniques other than ontology and other than hybridization. Finally, Section 6 concludes with direction for future work.
