There has been broad recognition over the past few decades that advances in the cognitive and psychological sciences have been slow to influence educational research, let alone practice. Youtie et al. (2017) and McNamara (2006) noted that calls for bringing these literatures into more systematic contact increased during the 1990’s, as evidenced by focused initiatives launched by US governmental funding agencies (e.g., National Science Foundation, Office of Naval Research, Institute of Education Sciences) as well as by private foundations (James S. McDonnell Foundation, Mellon Foundation, Carnegie Foundation).
In this paper, we examine the effectiveness of one particular federally-funded effort aimed at bridging this gap: the publication in 2000 by the US National Research Council (NRC) of the consensus report How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (hereafter, HPL). HPL (NRC, 2000) is the third most popular report that the US National Academies has ever produced (NRC, 2018). It is broadly seen as having been a success in its explicit goal of fostering the integration and diffusion of research knowledge on the science of learning, so much so that the National Academies (NRC, 2018) has just released a follow up consensus report: How People Learn 2: The Science and Practice of Learning (hereafter HPL2).
HPL had as its central goal the synthesis of a science of learning, bringing into greater and more systematic contact a range of scientific literatures that were deemed not to be sufficiently known to each other. As the committee who wrote HPL stated in the introduction, “The revolution in the study of the mind that has occurred in the last three or four decades has important implications for education … Thirty years ago educators paid little attention to the work of cognitive scientists, and researchers in the nascent field of cognitive science worked far removed from classrooms” (p. 3). The Acknowledgements section of HPL further amplifies the goal while discussing the history of the report, “A good deal of the excitement surrounding the project that resulted in the original version of this volume was due to people’s seeing the relevance of basic science to education” (p. 358), where basic science largely implied cognitive science. Experts were brought to the National Academies with the expressed purpose of presenting to the committee concepts in Cognitive Science that were relevant to education. Our paper focuses on this explicit goal of HPL of distilling findings in Cognitive Science (hereafter CogSci) about the nature of learning and thereby influencing researchers in education.
We ask, simply: Did it? To what extent is there evidence of HPL’s having provided a gateway, as it were, to the CogSci literature? We develop a framework for investigating this gateway role based on the prior existence of disciplinary literatures on the topics at hand and recognition of their significance to scholarly research. We use citations as an indicator of the influence of HPL (Leydesdorff, 1998), acknowledging the caveats that analysis of citations entails (Cozzens, 1981; MacRoberts and MacRoberts, 1996). Though this is not an evaluation study, in examining questions about HPL’s role in facilitating cross-disciplinary knowledge flow, we do make contact with questions about the effectiveness of National Academies consensus reports more broadly in spurring interdisciplinary research, a policy goal of increasing importance (National Academies of Science, 2005; National Science Foundation, 2018; Rylance, 2015).
