Due to good randomness and sensitivity to initial conditions, some chaotic maps and chaotic systems have been applied to cryptography, especially the image encryption. Zhang et al. [1] designed a symmetric image encryption algorithm based on mixed linear-nonlinear coupled map lattice. Chaotic system combined with special encoding method and technique can also achieve good encryption results. Wang et al. designed chaos based image encryption schemes with DAN coding [2], perceptron model [3] and dynamic random technique [4].
To produce more complicated orbitals and better pseudo-random sequences, some complex hyper chaotic systems based on classical chaotic systems have been constructed in recent years. Yuan et al. [5] studied the synchronization of complex hyper chaotic Lorenz system and Lü system. Wang et al. [6] constructed a memristor-based complex hyper chaotic Lü system, and studied its adaptive complex generalized synchronization. Wei et al. [7] investigated the synchronization in complex dynamical networks coupled with complex chaotic system. Liu et al. [8] researched the projective synchronization of complex chaotic system and its application.
Mahmoud et al. [9] proposed a new nonlinear chaotic complex model and researched its complex anti-lag synchronization.
Chaotic system remains chaotic state under multiple impulses injection into parameter or state variable, as long as the parameter or state variable after injection is still within its significant interval. Impulse injection was first used to achieve chaotic system synchronization [10,11], and guaranteed the stability in the presence of parameter fluctuation [12]. Xu et al. [13] researched the dynamical performance of the chaotic finance system with parameter switching perturbation, and investigated projective synchronization of chaos.
Due to more complex nonlinear characteristic and larger key space, some researchers studied the application of complex chaotic system. Xie et al. [14] formulated some properties of Fridrich's chaotic image encryption scheme with matrix theory, and found some minor defects by using Solak's chosen cipher attack method on it. Liu et al. [15] designed an asymmetric pathological image encryption algorithm using a complex hyper chaotic system. Wang et al.[16]. designed a hybrid image encryption algorithm using two complex chaotic systems. Based on complex chaotic system, Hussain et al. [17] proposed an image encryption technique using coupled map lattice and one-time S-Box.
But when we encrypt image with large size, the dynamical degradation problem of chaos on account of finite-precision effect must be considered. To solve the problem, random and multiple impulse injections to state variables of chaos during the iteration process has been adopted, Kadir et al. [18] designed a color image encryption scheme using coupled hyper chaotic system with multiple impulse injections into state variable, but the perturbation way of impulse injection into parameter has never been reported.
In this paper, to solve the problem of finite-precision of computer and avoid the dynamic degradation of chaotic system, we analyzed the dynamical behavior of complex hyper chaotic Lü system, and used impulse injection to make four parameters change within their significant intervals during the revolution process, to enhance the randomness of chaotic sequences. To investigate the application of the proposed complex hyper chaotic system, we used it to encrypt color image. Time-saving bitwise operations, such as modulus, XOR and cyclic shift, were applied to confuse and diffuse the pixels simultaneously. Security and statistical analysis verified the effectiveness of the impulse injection and application in image encryption.
