Adaptive learning environments in e-learning systems are part of a new generation of computer-aided learning systems that deliver e-learning courseware. Such an environment provides learners' personalised experiences during the learning process by capitalising on its knowledge of the learners’ learning styles, knowledge levels, personality types, cognitive potential and other factors (Liu, Zhao, & Liang, 2010). Different learners prefer different methods of learning, acquiring and processing information (Truong, 2015a, 2015b). Incorporating an adaptive learning system with personal traits in the learner model can help learners by adapting tasks to the learning objectives.
An adaptive learning environment consists of four models, namely, learner model, domain model, adaptive engine and instructional model (Shute & Towle, 2003). The learner model incorporates various components to construct a learner profile tailored to the learning domain (i.e. personalisation or adaptive learning) (Alshammari, Anane, & Hendle, 2015a, Alshammari, Anane, & Hendle, 2015b) and can be defined as a model that contains the learners’ current knowledge and personal traits, such as their learning styles, cognitive styles and emotions (Garc, 2007). A personal trait is an underlying user characteristic that defines a learner as an individual (Nguyen & Do, 2008). Considering the personal traits of learners and determining this information during the learning progress can positively influence the learner. For instance, learners aware of their preferences based on their personal traits can improve their understanding and confidence during the learning process (Radwan, 2014), increase their motivation (Khenissi & Essalmi, 2015) and retrieve suitable learning materials in learning situations that constantly shift and change (Yasir & Sharif, 2011). Learning materials are resources which include text and multimedia used to deliver instruction to the learner (Popescu, Badica, & Trigano, 2008).
The main goal of the current study is to report the findings from a systematic literature review (SLR) of the most commonly used learner personal traits in learner models and the most common techniques applied for modelling such traits. Personal traits are important components in developing effective adaptive learning environments. The objectives of this study are as follows:
RO1: To identify the most common personal trait used in the learner model.RO2: To determine the most common techniques applied in identifying personal trait attributes.RO3: To investigate the issues in the adaptive learning environment.
In this study, personal traits will be observed from two aspects: implicit and explicit. The findings from this study reveal the most common personal traits used and the existing techniques that identify the personal trait attributes utilised in adaptive learning environments. The remainder of this article is organised as follows. Section 2 presents the details of the review process. Section 3 discusses the review of related works. Section 4 provides an analysis of the results obtained through the review process. Section 5 examines the results obtained from this analysis. Finally, Section 6 concludes the article and suggests future work.
