Effective instruction and comprehension of mathematics, as shown by other authors [1,2], are important for achieving academic and professional success and are obligatory exclusively in technical professions. In the case of blind and visually impaired people, difficult access to mathematics instruction and appropriate computer aids is an additional cognitive barrier affecting various areas of life [3,4]. The difficulties in math accessibility encountered by blind people often lead to those individuals having more problems with science than sighted people. Sight disability affects social performance and academic achievement to similar extents. Almost 85% of what is learned socially is mediated through vision [5]. Additionally, Bogacka believes that deficits in the field of vision cause three types of difficulties: difficulties in cognitive processes, difficulties in physical and emotional activity, and additional difficulties associated with reduced self-esteem [6]. Analysis of the relevant literature indicates that blind and sighted children have the same intellectual ability. However, their methods of learning and assimilating learned information differ; blind children mainly learn through polisensory approaches and surrogate and analogous images [7]. These limitations can sometimes lead to faster discouragement and tiredness in blind and visually impaired people than in sighted people [8]. In summary, the education and cognitive development of blind and visually impaired students requires more effort, commitment and motivation.
In the past, the aim of the authors’ research was to extend the Digital Accessible Information SYstem (DAISY) standard (books for visually impaired people) to allow visually impaired people to read math formulae [9], and this goal was partially achieved in the mathematics extension of the DAISY standard (ANSI/NISO Z39.86–2005 R2012 Specifications for the Digital Talking Book) [10,11]. Considering the significance of these issues, as discussed in the literature, one can find a distinct research effort aimed at qualitatively describing the phenomena accompanying the science of mathematics.
The authors’ motivation to begin research work related to the evaluation of computer-aided math instruction and comprehension was this previous experience working with blind students (9, 12–14) and the conclusions reached by the authors, which are described below.
Bouck and Weng [15] evaluated a single-subject, alternating treatment design to understand how the performance of three secondary students with visual impairments was impacted by accessing algebra via a digital textbook compared to accessing it via a traditional textbook. The results influenced the implementation of digital text in mathematics for visually impaired students and suggested that further research is needed. Regec [16] studied the ability of teachers in 11 counseling centers to use assistive technologies for blind and visually impaired people. He showed that the use of self-help tools was of the most benefit for blind people. Other authors [17] examined the application of assistive technologies for various topics in mathematics in a group of 82 visually impaired students. Personal computer and speaking systems were found to be the most effective for approximately 70% of the participants. Janu and Hari [18] developed a method of preparing materials for learning mathematics involving the use of an existing audio tactile device, which they examined in a group of 8 students. An increase in learning motivation was indicated by the high students’ will to study, perseverance, enjoyment, and curiosity. In summary, the literature concerning assistive technologies used by visually impaired students demonstrates the effectiveness of using personal computers in combination with spoken mathematics, the increased motivation and the greatest benefit obtained by the use of self-help tools, and the need for further research in this area.
A separate group has been conducting research on aspects related to the learning of mathematics. These authors [2] discussed the problem of engagement in math and science, and their research was divided into two phases. In the first phase, the authors used qualitative methods to examine how students and teachers conceptualize math and science engagement and disengagement. In the second phase, they used qualitative information obtained from interviews to develop a new self-reported measure of engagement. This analysis supported the multidimensional construct of engagement and focused on behavioral, emotional/affective, cognitive and social engagement (four dimensions). Their research results show that social indicators are also key aspects of the new instructional emphases in both math and science classrooms on small group work. The question is whether social engagement is indeed a distinct dimension of engagement and whether it can be conceptualized as social, behavioral, emotional and cognitive engagement. The final conclusion from their research is that developing valid and reliable measures of engagement is especially important in math and science, which are critical for academic and professional achievement.
Other scholars have identified variables that can affect students' intrinsic motivation for learning mathematics [1]. The main point of their research was to examine the effects of the controlling strategies used by the mathematics teachers on students’ intrinsic interest in mathematics. They divided their research into two studies: a cross-sectional study and a longitudinal path analysis of panel data collected from school-age children. The results clearly show that perceived autonomy had a positive impact on the perceived competence, intrinsic motivation and conceptual learning of the school-age children. Moreover, students with more motivation also perceived themselves as more competent in mathematics and achieved better results. Najafi et al. [19] analyzed the cooperative learning of mathematics and evaluated the method in a group of 40 visually impaired students. The results of t-tests indicated that cooperative learning could have a positive effect on the solving capacity of blind students for basic mathematical concepts.
The aim of the current paper was to identify factors affecting the process of learning mathematics in visually impaired and blind people. The main goal of the research was to determine whether the developed method providing an alternative description of mathematical expressions is better than the traditional method of learning mathematics for blind people. Moreover, this work examined whether the new approach to the structural description of mathematical expressions has a positive effect on blind and visually impaired students in terms of improving behavioral, cognitive, emotional, motivational and social aspects.
The article is organized in the following way. The Materials and Methods section includes assumptions, characteristics of the developed teaching, learning, and evaluation methods, and a description of the conducted experiment. The Results section presents the outcomes numerically and graphically. The Discussion section describes the significance of the results obtained, and the Conclusion section provides a summary.
