In the last years, cities became a sources of a variety of Big Data. Since the mid 2000's it was possible to observe the digital traces left by citizens and visitors using mobile phone records and social media posts [1], but only recently cities have been equipped with a broad set of sensing technologies that allow observing the physical behaviour of citizens and visitors.
Thanks to Big Data technologies, we are now able to capture a sharper and sharper picture of our cities and to track changes in their dynamics with seconds of delay. And thanks to Data Science methods, we are now able to analyze at scale both the digital reflections of our cities and their physical everyday businesses.
1.1. ContextExploring cities of the 21st century offers a great opportunity to understand the ever evolving modern society. In fact, cities are increasingly attracting new people, with half of the world's inhabitants living in urban areas [2]. Furthermore, cities are not only physical centres but also virtual hubs, where individuals and communities interact and exchange messages through social media [3]. As a consequence of this dense network of interactions, a great amount of data, the so called Big Data [4], can be tracked.On the one hand, data created by the single identities of the city, i.e. inhabitants, are available; on the other hand, we need to capture the big picture by aggregating them. This situation allows us to observe both the activities at a micro-societal level and to draw the main features that characterize the city at a macro-societal level. Therefore, Big Data can be regarded as a lens to understand cities, or, using the words by De Rosnay [5], Big Data is a macroscope – i.e., a tool for capturing complex systems – applied to the urban environment.In this context, data visualization is a recognized method to directly interact with data that allows to absorb more information easily, discover patterns between business and operational activities, and identify emerging trends faster. As such, it allows increasing the value detection and intake based on data insights, and therefore it must be considered since the early phases of the design, thus improving the understanding of city events and phenomena.
1.2. Existing worksUrban computing [6] has clearly shown the huge opportunity for Big Data research to exploit mobile phones data to get insights into urban dynamics and human activities. This type of data was used to estimate the density of crowd and vehicles in urban regions [7], [8], [9], [10], [11] and to predict returning frequencies to points of interest [12], [13]. When merged with other kind of information, mobile phones data can reveal interesting insights for city dynamics and urban monitoring [14], [15], [16], [17].Although mobile phones data is a priceless source to gather underlying patterns of cities and their citizens, they hide some limitations since they can not reveal any information about people interests and thoughts. A parallel investigation of social media steams has recently carried out by the research community [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24].However, only few research groups tried to tame the variety present in those Big Data sources [25], [26]. This is exactly were our research began in 2013. We have already published few specific papers on this topic [27], [28], but this is the time we tell the full story in a comprehensive way and providing extensive real-world evidence on the validity of the approach we propose.
1.3. ObjectivesIn this paper, we aim at defining a high-level model, a method, and a set of practices that allow us to represent the urban ecosystem in terms of analysis and aggregations that improve decision making processes and deliver added value to city stakeholders, spanning citizens, tourists and visitors, public officials, and businesses.In order to obtain this: (1) we define a high-level semantic model of the domain and a logical architecture that fits it; (2) we implement both of them in a set of technical embodiments using Big Data technologies; and, then, (3) we put them at work on concrete cases of urban data monitoring and computing using Data Science method at scale.Thanks to this three–step–process, we obtain the following benefits:•We have available a common set of conceptual assets (models) and technical assets (implementations) that can be reused across different scenarios.•We are able to integrate diverse city-wide data sources, with different types of content, format, and time/space granularity.•We enable different types of analysis and processing, spanning description, prediction and anomaly detection.•We allow accurate and intuitive visualization and navigation of the results, which are considered since the early phases of the design, thus improving the understanding of city events and phenomena.
1.4. Research problemsThis paper will, therefore, address the research problems of: RP1.defining a conceptual model as well as a logical architecture;RP2.defining appropriate technical instantiations of the above models;RP3.assessing feasibility and effectiveness of those models and practices by deploying them in real world scenarios.The above research questions will be addressed taking into account the following requirements: Req1.Enable aggregation, analysis and prediction over city-wide data streams along space and time axes;Req2.Enable integration of heterogeneous data sources, considering diverse content types and (temporal and spatial) granularity;Req3.Support intuitive and explanatory visualization and exploration of results.
1.5. Structure of the paperThe remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the conceptual model at the core of our approach. Section 3 covers the different methods we employ in our experiences. Section 4 describes the architectural infrastructure that implements the proposed model. Section 5 extensively presents our experiences in applying the conceptual model presented in Section 2, the methods illustrated in Section 3 an the implementations described in Section 5 to perform Urban Data Science at scale. Section 6 presents the related work. Finally, Section 7 concludes.
