"Storytelling", which has existed before the printed sources, has been replaced by digital storytelling with the rapid development of technology. Digital storytelling has affected information gathering skills, problem solving and attitudes towards collaboration of teachers and students. Educators also use digital storytelling as a motivational tool to attract attention and guide their students. Because of these reasons, as a pre-service teacher-training faculty, the necessity of creating digital story training with pre-service teachers has also been brought to the agenda. Considering the related literature, it is seen that digital story creation studies were carried out with students from different age groups, pre-service teachers or teachers (Robin et al., 2006; Ciğerci, 2015; Yamaç, 2015; Dinçer, 2019; Ulusoy, 2019; Özüdoğru & Çakır, 2020; Wu & Chen, 2020). It has seen that creating a digital story contributes to both pedagogical content knowledge and learning, and teaching experience of the stakeholders in those studies.
It is known that storytelling existed long before even printed materials. From the narrative pictures drawn on the cave walls thousands of years ago, from the stories told between people through verbal communication, now the humanity is in a developed environment in different manners. The story is a narrative based on people's own experiences, literary works or traditions (Simmons, 2008). Storytelling has different uses. For instance, storytelling is frequently used in product advertisements. “Story” is shown as one of the 6 keys to business success in the conceptual age (Pink, 2006). It is an important factor in marketing to create a story about the background of the product and to transfer the story to the target audience by referring to the story in marketing the products. One more area of using storytelling is medical treatment. Besides the new methods of modern medicine, the fact that medical doctors listen to the “stories” of the patients and apply the necessary treatment in line with that story also emphasizes the effectiveness of the story in different areas (Charon, 2001). It is clear that the feature doctors should have here is the listening skill. Since the storytelling's reflection on the other side is listening, as Wacker and Hawkins (1996) stated, it can be confirmed that the most used language skill in daily life is listening skill with a rate of 45 %.
Furthermore, storytelling has started to integrate into educational environments, since the storytelling also has a teaching aspect. People want to learn what is happening around them. It would not be wrong to say that the time when this desire to learn is experienced is childhood. Children, who strive to learn from the environment with curiosity and willingness to learn, make social learning by following the stories told with interest in childhood. According to Vygotsky (1978), the child learns from what is said and told through social learning and speech is an indispensable part of social learning. Pedersen (1995) said that the courses in which stories are used would always be an important milestone in teaching. Although storytelling has been so important and has been the focus of the research in the past, digital storytelling has become more widespread than storytelling with the development of technology today.
Prensky (2001) named the students of his period as digital natives and stated that they are individuals who are prone to technology and can easily adapt to technology. Considering that the students of that period received their undergraduate education today and even started their business life, the importance of training both pre-service teachers and students as individuals with high technological competence will be understood more clearly today. Owing to this reason, the significance of reading, writing, speaking and doing these over digital technologies, which has an important place in education, will become more popular with these studies. If pre-service teachers are involved in the process of creating a digital story, they will both learn about it and have it applied to their students. Since, in the process of creating a story, students become active producers of multimedia rather than passive (Ohler, 2006).
Information technology education starts from elementary school and information ethics is also included as a title in this course in our country (MEB, 2018). It is important to transfer some forms of behaviors to the students such as behaviors should be displayed in virtual environments, behaviors related with cybercrimes or cyber security, since these are the topics of information ethics. It is considered that giving digital citizenship issues through storytelling, using stories that are interesting, exemplary and eventually giving a social message will be useful in explaining information ethics. According to Bonds (2016), the most important components of digital story applications in education are, building trust, transfer of ideas and value information and commitment. Students trust the story and the narrator because of storytelling, the main ideas and values in the story are transferred to the listener, and there will be a commitment between the listener and the story. Creating and sharing stories about informatics ethics and how individuals should act in virtual environments will be beneficial in terms of learning, adopting and applying these behaviors.
1.1. Digital storytellingAccording to Shin (2016), digital story is the biggest, most important stage in which it evolves today, even if other forms of storytelling still survive. First, the digital story, which is a means of expression, has been defined differently since the 2000s with the development of technology. An artistic, creative and at the same time aesthetic product of a story created in a digital format using the possibilities of the multimedia tools can be given as a current, common and valid definition (Sawyer & Willis, 2011). Actually, the emphasis in all definitions is the use of sound, graphic and text elements in different formats. Since, the concept of multimedia has been brought to the fore. The emergence of the concept goes back to the 80 s. It has gained importance with the start of the works of Joe Lambert and Dana Atchley, which have turned into Center for Digital Storytelling today. Lambert mentioned the center for digital storytelling and digital story creation processes in detail in his book (Lambert, 2002). There are seven elements of digital stories: point of view, dramatic question, emotional content, economy, pacing, the gift of the voice and soundtrack (Bumgarner, 2012; Lambert, 2010; Satterfield, 2007). These elements should be effectively prepared and presented to the audience.Digital story has different creation steps in different sources. According to Ohler (2013), this process has five steps: planning, writing a script, preparing a storyboard, collecting necessary materials, production and evaluation. In this study, determining the topic, writing a scenario (script), preparing storyboards, developing and publishing the digital story were used as a mixed process. The development phase also includes steps such as collecting images and making sound recordings. According to Robin et al. (2006), digital stories are divided into three as personal narratives, historical themes and event narratives, and informative and instructive stories. Informative and instructive stories are used as this study and reference studies are for educational purposes.
1.2. Digital storytelling in education and digital literacyIt is known that digital stories provide convenience for individuals (writers and readers) to express themselves (Bull & Kajder, 2004). It is seen that the use of digital storytelling in the educational process has become widespread for pedagogical purposes in the literature. Robin et al. (2006) classifies digital stories used in education as stories used by teachers as an effective teaching tool and digital stories used by students as an effective learning tool. Considering this classification, there are two separate sections as teacher and student.The concept of literacy has also changed and new literacy skills have been brought to the agenda with the development of technology. Robin (2008) has defined today's literacy skills that students should have in five classes as digital, global, technology, visual and information literacy. Learning and teaching the use of technology also enables these new literacy skills to be acquired. It is known that working with audio-visual tools such as creating pictures, videos and movies contributes to these skills (Collier, 2013). Based on this situation, it is considered that providing a training of digital story creation to pre-service teachers will contribute to the development of their digital literacy skills. Since this process requires writing, collecting information, using technology tools and using synthesis skills. An education that serves all these areas is considered very important for teachers and students. It has been observed that teachers who can create their own digital stories find them useful for students to be interested in the content, to create a discussion environment about the subject in the story and to make abstract concepts understandable (Robin, 2008). It is not only necessary to write and read, but also to understand, apply, analyze, synthesize, evaluate and create information, and use technology to get today’s literacy. It is emphasized that pre-service teachers may have difficulty in using technology while creating digital stories, but they still find it important to teach by creating a story (Özüdoğru & Çakır, 2020). Consequently, teachers and students need to have multiple literacy skills that include them.Considering the Information Technologies and Software course curriculum (all primary, secondary and high school curriculums), some of the skills were emphasized in the first article as “students should comprehend technological concepts, systems and processes as digital citizens” and in the fourth article as “students should create products using digital technologies” (MEB, 2018). The emphasis on "digital citizen" is important because this concept, which takes the traditional literacy concept to an advanced level, indicates the necessity of acquiring digital skills.
1.3. Aim of the studyConsidering the importance of digital storytelling for both teachers and students, this study, which includes both (pre-service teachers are actually undergraduate students), is important. This study was conducted in a Faculty of Education. Faculty of Education, as a place that trains the teachers of the future, tries to prepare both the technological pedagogical content knowledge and digital competencies of the pre-service teachers in accordance with the new age. Pre-service teachers will both learn and understand the process of creating a digital story and prepare activities for their students with this skill. The aim of this study is to examine whether actively taking part in the process of creating digital stories has an effect on digital literacy skills of pre-service teachers and evaluate their digital story creation skills. Moreover, the opinions of the pre-service teachers about digital story creation and its contributes to some skills and educational setting were collected.
