Citizens’ health should occupy a prominent position in policy makers’ and relevant stakeholders’ agendas. Aging populations, rising morbidity and high healthcare costs are placing an ever increasing burden on healthcare systems, with substantial costs being incurred towards the treatment of non-communicable diseases (World Health Organization, 2015), such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and cancer. Many of the risk factors for these diseases, such as unhealthy diets and physical inactivity, could be modified. For example, obesity has been shown to significantly increase the risk of many of these diseases and, worryingly, recent data suggest that, in 2016 39% of the world’s adults aged 18 years and over were overweight and 13% have obesity (World Health Organization, 2018). The health benefits garnered from nutritionally balanced diets and physically active lifestyles are an important objective of government policies. Decision makers have defined several priorities in the area of nutrition (Mozaffarian, Angell, Lang, & Rivera, 2018). Following decades of dramatic increases in overweight and obesity, particularly amongst children, the World Health Organization has identified actions that governments can take to tackle this problem, with specific initiatives directed towards curbing intakes of unhealthy fats, salt and added sugars (European Commission, 2014; Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, W., 2015; World Health Organization, 2012)
Health economics has long been used to assess, quantify and compare the costs and benefits of health care interventions. Its role is becoming increasingly important in today's society as health expenditure increases and the allocation of limited resources represents a considerable challenge for policy makers. Applying the classic field of health economics to nutrition or sports sciences has been gaining momentum and reflects the importance of an interdisciplinary approach to address the complex interdependence of diet, lifestyle and health.
Modelling the impacts of (changes in) diet and lifestyle-related health determinants on health frequently draws from existing guidelines for health economic modelling, such as those established by NICE and ISPOR (Developing NICE guidelines: the manual, 2014; Roberts et al., 2012).
The impact of strategies and policies aimed at improving health and reducing costs is quantified using diverse modelling approaches (Briggs, Wolstenholme, Blakely, & Scarborough, 2016). Markov-chain model typologies are often widely adopted in the emerging field of nutrition and public health economics, which still lacks consistent or unanimous methodologies and approaches among the various stakeholders (Hendriksen et al., 2017).
More recently, the need for systems thinking when evaluating public health interventions has been recognised, to avoid assessing single policies in isolation, to identify the complex interdependencies that exist (Rutter et al., 2017) and to facilitate dialogue among stakeholders.
Health outcomes may be caused by the exposure to a plethora of confounding factors, which include environment, chemicals, food consumption and other behavioural risks. The Global Burden of Disease (Global Burden of Disease, 2016) documents eighty-four risk factors with complex interactions across the pool, some of which are yet to be documented. Hence, decisions in the field of public health must always be taken in the presence of uncertainty, and additional effort is required to both analyse and characterise this uncertainty.
A substantial portion of the uncertainty is attributable to the large and complex datasets often required to adequately describe the study population, the disease processes and the associated costs and benefits. In the wake of national and global initiatives to reduce intakes of salt, sugars and saturated fats, many modelling studies have investigated the cost-effectiveness of various policy options, such as labelling (Allen et al., 2015; Capacci et al., 2012; Cecchini et al., 2010), food reformulation through voluntary cooperation with industry (Moodie et al., 2013) and imposing legal limits to specific ingredients/nutrients of concern (Martin-Saborido, Mouratidou, Livaniou, Caldeira, & Wollgast, 2016). Such modelling endeavours are constrained by considerable limitations at the outset, such as resorting to imprecise figures of the various nutrients dietary intakes and causally linking these intakes to health outcomes, as well as by the difficulty of evaluating cumulative effects among different factors. This process is often hampered by infrequent and outdated food-consumption and food-composition surveys. Commercial data providers can help to bridge this data gap in some respects by providing harmonised datasets for many countries. However, such proprietary data are often costly and the resultant lack of transparency in modelling results inhibits independent replication and validation. Open-access and publicly available data would be preferred and could offer increased credibility to the research field. Furthermore, restrictions on the sharing of such data can be an obstacle to effective communication and stakeholder engagement. By necessity, outdated surveys are currently being relied upon for modelling future impacts and gauging the progress of policy interventions in spite of all the limitations of relying on this source of information.
The picture is made more complex and controversial by the longstanding practice of instrumental use of evidence by important players (Kearns, Schmidt, & Glantz, 2016). On top of this, recurring complaints of the public’s loss of trust in nutritional science - an important ingredient of health policies - are increasingly gaining visibility (Leslie, 2016; Penders et al., 2017). For example, Ioannidis (2018) has openly questioned the validity of the findings of many nutritional studies in a recent piece, pointing the finger especially at the inadequacy of their underpinning randomized trials.
Many studies describe a direct link from nutrient intake to health outcome, relating exposure to a nutrient with a resultant lowering in mortality or disease occurrence, while neglecting the complexity of the underpinning relationship often influenced by many interacting physiologic mechanisms and risk factors (Cho, Dietrich, Brown, Clark, & Block, 2003; Hu, 2002). In contrast, other studies strive to incorporate this complexity and describe the complete underlying pathway (Micha & Mozaffarian, 2009; Mozaffarian, Katan, Ascherio, Stampfer, & Willett, 2006; Tungland & Meyer, 2002). This is particularly difficult for nutrients such as sugar and fibre where the epidemiological evidence is still lacking in some respects. Some practitioners favoured the former direct link modelling approach, as available data is not sufficient to model the physiological mechanism through which the health determinant acts (Maki, Slavin, Rains, & Kris-Etherton, 2014). Conversely, others advocate for including the physiologic mechanism in modelling endeavours. Practitioners in this modelling field have not yet reached a consensus about which approach is more scientifically sound. Typically, dose-response risk associations are used to provide the link between health determinant and health outcome. These values are obtained from pooled studies and meta-analysis but the reliability or uncertainty surrounding such studies is rarely scrutinised or assessed. One example of this is the conflicting results obtained for a single nutrient from different food sources, (e.g. cereals-fibre, fats), (O’Sullivan, Hafekost, Mitrou, & Lawrence, 2013; Stephen et al., 2017).
Policy decisions are frequently subjected to public opinion, stakeholder scrutiny, lobbying, etc. For this reason, it is increasingly important that decisions are based on sound evidence and that modelling studies used to support or build such evidence be rigorously evaluated. Otherwise, the process may be easily hijacked by those having vested interests, as Kearns et al. (2016) show for the case of sugar and coronary heart disease in their historical analysis of the Sugar Research Foundation internal documents.
Post-normal science (PNS, Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1993) offers tools and approaches that can be applied to the area of economic evaluation models. PNS is designed to deal with situations of uncertain facts, values in dispute, high stake and urgent decisions. One can easily recognize here aspects which are present in nutrition and lifestyle analysis.
Several tools for quality checks of modelling have been developed under the theoretical framework of PNS, among which is sensitivity auditing. The case for the use of sensitivity auditing has been reinforced inter alia by its inclusions in the Better Regulations Toolbox of a prominent international actor in the policy-making field such as the European Commission (European Commission, 2017 - Tool #62), which has also put in place new practices for regulation (European Commission, 2019; Regulatory Scrutiny Board, 2018).
In the present work we attempt to tailor sensitivity auditing and related tools to models used in nutrition and public health economic evaluations. In this respect, our sources will be: i) the checklist for model building proposed by (Jakeman, Letcher, & Norton, 2006), ii) the sensitivity-auditing checklist (Saltelli & Funtowicz, 2014, 2015; Saltelli, Guimarães Pereira, van der Sluijs, & Funtowicz, 2013), iii) elements from NUSAP (Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1990), and iv) quantitative storytelling (Saltelli & Giampietro, 2017).
All these approaches are directly inspired by the PNS epistemological framework, with the exception of the first, which nevertheless makes reference to NUSAP and to PNS background literature on uncertainty and quality such as (Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1990). In the next sections we shall attempt to describe these approaches and recipes, and to conjugate them in the specific setting of nutrition and public health economic evaluation models. We shall do so using as the main thread the seven steps of the sensitivity-auditing checklist.
