Recent years have witnessed the emergence of the online social network as a prevalent and pivotal platform for opinion spreading and confrontation [1], yet still growing. Within such cyberspace, overwhelming volumes of users discuss social topics [2] and share personal opinions [3], meanwhile providing a perfect platform for malicious opinion manipulations. For example, a panic buying might appear, if malicious sellers exploited the opinion manipulation on some rumors for benefits [4], [5], such that the salt is extremely effective for preventing the COVID-19 virus [6]. Moreover, the unprecedentedly convenient access to this cyberspace also diversifies the approaches for malicious opinion manipulations [7], [8]. Manipulators are possible to utilize human-like Artificial Intelligence (AI) agents [9], [10], [11] to achieve automated manipulation, making conventional defending methods rigid and incapable [8], [12], [13]. Therefore, more flexible and advanced AI-based countermeasures are imperatively needed for defending the opinion manipulation.
Within the opinion defending, one prominent and typical approach is to intelligently search for the susceptible and key users to execute purposeful prevention. These key users are likely targeted by malicious manipulators, as they are both susceptible [7] and will dominantly influence the public opinion [14]. Therefore, searching for such users for a given social platform is critical for both sides of opinion confrontation. Abebe et al. first formalized this searching task as the Opinion Dynamics with Varying Susceptibility (referred as ODVS) problem [7], where the user opinion is jointly determined by user innate opinion, susceptibility, and opinions of user’s friends. The objective of ODVS is to search a number of key users and merely vary their susceptibilities to certain degrees, in order to maximize or minimize the support of all users for a target opinion in an almost unaware manner. Therefore, manipulators are able to only impact a small group of users to manipulate the public by exploiting opinion diffusions, instead of directly targeting on all users.
Generally, ODVS is proved to be NP-Hard and categorized into the unbudgeted and budgeted conditions [7]. Under the unbudgeted condition, manipulators are able to vary susceptibilities of all users, thus key user search is needless. Chan et al. systematically investigated the unbudgeted condition, and proposed an effective strategy for choosing optimized susceptibility values [15]. The method provides state-of-the-art performance and also reduces the complexity of susceptibility determination to linear time. On the other hand, the budgeted condition (referred as BOVS) just allows manipulators to vary susceptibilities of a limited number of users. BOVS is actually more practical and valuable, since directly varying susceptibilities of all users (the unbudgeted condition) may be infeasible in reality. However, existing works lack the proper and remarkable study on BOVS. Existing greedy search algorithms for BOVS simply set susceptibilities to minimal, neglecting potential key users who hold maximum susceptibilities as optimal. Besides, these approximate algorithms request high computational consumption and providing no performance guarantee.
Therefore, this work reconsiders the BOVS problem, and proposes a novel greedy algorithm, together with an accelerated algorithm based on the community property. According to the comprehensive analysis, it is revealed that both algorithms provide a certain approximation guarantee under a special case of BOVS, referred as the Budgeted Opinion dynamics with Decreasing Susceptibility (abbreviated as BODS) problem. Compared with basic BOVS where user susceptibilities can be increased or decreased, BODS will only try to vary user susceptibilities in a descending direction. Generally, the descending assumption of BODS is actually more practical, as making users stubborn (decreasing the susceptibilities) is usually easier than making users susceptible. There are both psychological and environmental reasons for this assumption. From a psychological perspective, people prefer to trust what they innately believe in [16] and resist subsequent opinions. From an environmental perspective, Filter Bubbles in social networks [17] always show the content supporting users’ innate opinions, also strengthening their belief. Therefore, only decreasing user susceptibilities will be more effective and reasonable than varying in both directions.
In specific, this work proposes an advanced greedy algorithm for BOVS, which overcomes the shortage of existing algorithms [7] via an optimal strategy of determining susceptibility values. We also adopt the unsupervised learning and fully utilize the community property of a network to design an accelerated algorithm, which is developed on the intuition that the impact of a user within a proper community could be a good reflection of the impact in the whole network, while the former one could be computed much more efficiently. This community-based algorithm significantly outperforms the state-of-art algorithm by reducing the time consumption by more than one order of magnitude. Under the BODS scenario, the approximation guarantee of the proposed greedy algorithm is comprehensively analyzed and proved through the approximate submodularity [18], then the community-based algorithm is proved to hold a close approximation ratio to the greedy algorithm. Finally, comprehensive evaluations on real-world datasets show the superiority of proposed algorithms on both effectiveness and efficiency. As far as we know, this is the first work that comprehensively investigates both susceptibility determination and key user search for BOVS. In summary, the contributions of this work are as follows.

•We propose an advanced greedy algorithm to overcome the shortage of the state-of-art algorithm on susceptibility determination.•An accelerated algorithm is designed, which adopts unsupervised learning and fully utilizes the community structure of the network.•We formally define the BODS as a more practical case of BOVS.•Systematical analysis of approximation guarantee is performed on both algorithms with respect to the BODS scenario.•Extensive evaluations on different real-world datasets reveal that our algorithms significantly outperform the state-of-the-art algorithm.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the second section, existing works related to the target problem in this work are reviewed. In the third section, we introduce our preliminaries used for problem analysis and algorithm design. In the fourth section, we introduce our advanced greedy algorithm, and the analysis of its approximation guarantee under the BODS scenario. In the fifth section, we introduce our community-based algorithm, together with its performance analysis. In the sixth section, we analyze comprehensive evaluations. Section 7 concludes our work.
