Agriculture has been a major source of economic growth in India. The farmer selects the required crop based on the soil type, the location's weather condition, and economic value. As a result of rising populations, weather changes, and political uncertainty, the agricultural industries began to look for new methods to increase food production. This allows researchers to look for new high productivity innovations that are effective and accurate. Through the use of precise agriculture in information technology, farmers may collect information and data to make the right decision on high farm production. Precision agriculture (PA) is a modern technology that offers sophisticated techniques for optimizing farm production. Through making use of these sophisticated technologies, Economic development in agriculture can be achieved. PA can be used for many applications, such as plant pest identification, weed identification, crop yield production and detection of plant diseases, etc. To control pests, avoid diseases, and increase crop yield, a farmer uses pesticides. Crop diseases are causing problems for farmers due to low output and economic losses and industrial agriculture. Therefore, disease detection and severity are focused on the need to be defined as appropriate [1].
Agriculture assumes a significant part for individuals in India and the economy of the nation.
Regular manifestations include anomalous leaf development, color distortion, hindered development, withered, and harmed units. Even though infections and bug vermin can cause significant yield misfortunes or carry passing to plants and it's likewise legitimately influential to human wellbeing. These require cautious analysis and ideal taking care of to shield the yields from weighty losses [2]. In plants, infections can be found in different parts, for example, natural products, stem, and leaves. Leaf presents a few points of interest over blossoms and natural products at all seasons around the world [3], [4], [5].
Next-generation technologies, for instance, ML and DL have been used to grow the acknowledgement rate and the precision of the results. Distinctive investigates have happened under the field of ML for plant contamination acknowledgement and assurance, such traditional ML approach being sporadic forest, SVM, fuzzy logic, K-means system, Convolutional neural networks (CNN), etc. In agribusiness research, ML procedures are on a very basic level used to recognize, perceive, and anticipate crop diseases and plant pressure phenotyping. Unlike unmistakable confirmation of iotas subject to genomics data, ML procedures in plant disease research are significantly dependent on motorized stages, for instance, raised vehicles and ground robots with sensors to assemble steady data from fields [6, 7]. Ordinarily, data was removed from significant standard pictures or sensor data and a short time later pre-taken to dispose of immaterial noteworthy information. Space data in plant disease (PD) was fundamental for pre-dealing with and picking an authentic strategy, which could improve the presentation of ML conjecture [8]. ML methods were used regularly as gadgets to perceive plant diseases. The purpose behind such examinations is to perceive whether a sickness is accessible on plants. A couple of assessments have utilized ML to distinguish Huanglongbing (HLB) for citrus trees. Another critical utilization of ML is structure, which organizes PD into different stages or different sorts. The ML counts were genuinely applied to the gathering of fine development, an infectious organism that causes yield mishap in varieties of harvests [9,10].
Our main contribution in this work is as follows:
•We aimed to classify citrus leaf disease using both methods ML (SGD, RF, SVM) & DL (Inception-v3, VGG-16, VGG-19) to find out which one of these is performing better in disease detection.•For classification problems stratified 10-fold cross-validation is applied, in which the folds are chosen such that each fold contains approximately the same ratios of the target class.•When new images are given as the input for the system, it predicts the type of disease and helps to take contour action before the plants get affected more.•The agriculture sector is the backbone of the nation and our work will support to optimize the yield from the field by detecting diseased plants earlier.
The rest of this article is structured as Section 2 presents the various existing works done in this area. The methodology proposed of the current work is presented in Section 3 followed by an explanation of various ML & DL methods referred. The experimental setup details are presented in Section 4. Section 5 presents the experimental results with their detailed discussion. The paper concludes in section 6 followed by possible future work of current work.
