A valuable operation common to CG (Computer Graphics) and GIS1 (Geographic Information Systems) is the simplification of city layouts and maps. The goal of this operation is to generate simplified representations of street networks that satisfy some specific features needed for a final use: less cluttered maps, customized maps (e.g., for turistic brochures or entertainment), memory space saving (e.g., for web or mobile application). These features may include, among others, preserving some significant paths, resizing a map, making the map easy to understand, helping the map-user to move in a city or making the map perceptually similar to the original one. From an implementation point of view, the simplification of street networks entails a reduction of the memory space needed to represent the network, that benefits its use in web and mobile applications. Actually, these algorithms are able to provide LoD (Level of Detail) representations of the street network. Within this context there are two correlated concepts embedded in the simplification process: legibility and generalization. We define and discuss these in Section 3. While these concepts have been used since the mid 20th century in cartography and a little later in GIS, interest from the Computer Graphics community has increased in the last decade and can now be found in the most important Computer Graphics journals and conferences. The importance of simplification is also highlighted by its presence in the leading general purpose Computer Science journals [1], [2].
While the first contributions to this field are found in the 60’s of the 20th century, we may state that the modern generalisation discipline stablishes its fundamental concepts in the 80’s and 90’s with contributions like the ones of Brassel and Weibel [3], McMaster and Shea [4] and Müller et al. [5]. These concepts were later formalised and it is widely accepted as key contributions those of Regnauld and McMaster [6] and Foerster et al. [7]. Furthermore, by the end of the last century much of the foundation for the geometric data structures in Computer Graphics had been established, on which many of the current GIS systems are now based. Hanan Samet’s contributions have been especially relevant to this field  [8], [9], [10].
From the formalization of generalization  [6], [7], the techniques involved are classified into two types: model generalization and cartographic generalization. In this paper, we are interested in model generalization, which is mainly oriented towards structure-based filtering. On the other hand, cartographic generalization deals with geometrical simplification which, in principle, does not modify the network layout of the street(s), for instance uncluttering overlapping signals or aligning buildings (Renard and Duchêne [11]). Cartographic generalization is usually related to a scale modification process.
Generalization is a large and complex discipline where a number of operators combine their efforts to reach different goals. These include low level geometry enhancement, e.g., improving the model of the streets (Jiang [12], [13]), simplifying 3D elements, like building generalization does (He et al. [14]); or implicit generalization for a virtual 3D flyby of a route (Huang et al. [15]). In this work, we focus on techniques able to deal with the model generalization of 2D city street networks’ structures. Therefore, we are dedicated to algorithms that, given a city street network layout, produce a new layout of the city with less elements, i.e., simplified. This removing process may focus on the basic geometric elements (points, road segments, polygons) or, instead, focus on aggregation of road segments (complete streets, natural roads). The techniques we have studied rely heavily on the use of graph theory tools, even though other fundamental tools are used, such as information theory principles (Bjørke et al. [16], [17]) or tree data structures (Chang et al. [18], [19]). Function optimization techniques are also central in some works (Agrawala and Stolte [20], [21], [22]).
The objective of the paper is to shed some light on the characterization of street network generalization techniques and connect the GIS literature with that of Computer Graphics. In particular, the paper is intended to facilitate researchers of both fields their introduction to the knowledge of the generalization techniques by means of presenting the features that characterize the main algorithms and showing their similarities and differences. It is also a purpose of this paper to contribute to bring the GIS literature closer to the Computer Graphics community. Finally, we provide some lines of investigation for further research on street network generalization.
