Research has shown that teachers can play a key role in stimulating children's interest in science and scaffolding meaning-making interactions during inquiry-based science (Gillies, 2013). Science education research has become increasingly interested in finding opportunities for stimulating and developing primary teachers' interest and knowledge in science. This is important since limited opportunities for initiating and developing interest, confidence, and learning in STEM are noticeable during primary-level education (Christensen & Knezek, 2017; Kazempour & Sadler, 2015), with evidence that time spent teaching science in primary education tends to be low (Fitzgerald, Dawson, & Hackling, 2013) and decreasing (Blank, 2012). Research conducted in different countries has reported that primary teachers typically do not have formal science education, do not feel confident about teaching science, and have relatively unfavourable attitudes towards science and teaching science (for example, in The Netherlands: van Aalderen-Smeets, Walma van der Molen, van Hest, & Poortman, 2017; USA: Avery & Meyer, 2012; Michaluk, Stoiko, Stewart, & Stewart, 2018; and Australia: Petersen & Treagust, 2014). The impact on behaviours of preservice teachers' unfavourable attitudes has also been investigated in the area of reading (Vansteelandt, Mol, Caelen, Landuyt, & Mommaerts, 2017). In the science education literature there is also evidence that positive attitudes can be promoted during professional training (Michaluk et al., 2018; van Aalderen-Smeets et al., 2017).
Empirical research aimed at understanding the nature and significance of preservice primary teacher students' science-related attitudes and how those with diverse attitudes actually engage in collaborative science learning is important. Small groups of preservice teacher students working on activities together offer highly suitable research sites because group interactions make their behavioural and cognitive engagement visible, and also to some extent their motivation, affect, and cognitive beliefs. Group learning environments also make it possible to explore how members reciprocally influence one another's engagement in learning and the degree of relationship between engagement and entry characteristics. In general terms, engagement refers to “active, goal-directed, flexible, constructive, persistent, focused interactions with social and physical environments” (Furrer & Skinner, 2003, p. 149). In the present study engagement was empirically examined in terms of the participatory roles spontaneously adopted by preservice teacher students during science activities undertaken in small groups. Exploring the focus of group members' self-adopted roles as these emerged in interactions with peers and the evolving activity was expected to provide insight into the quality of engagement in learning, especially in situations where members have diverse attitudes towards the subject.
The overall aim of this study, therefore, was to explore how preservice primary teacher students with diverse science-related attitudes actually engage in collaborative activities designed to consolidate their understanding of fundamental science concepts, and in particular, how favourable attitudes and background relate to the quality of self and group members' engagement.
1.1. Attitudes towards science, science teaching and science learningPrior research on the science attitudes of pre- and in-service primary teachers has examined various phenomena in relation to attitudes towards science and towards science teaching. Researchers have investigated aspects related to attitude, such as teachers' own prior science learning experiences, and achievement in science (e.g., Liang & Gabel, 2005; Tosun, 2000). Others have examined characteristics and factors associated with self-efficacy for science and science teaching (e.g., Avery & Meyer, 2012; Bleicher, 2009; Palmer, Dixon, & Archer, 2015). For example, Palmer et al. (2015) explored the contextual factors that enhance attitudes during participation in compulsory science courses in teacher training programs, and Bleicher (2009) examined the relationship between enthusiastic and disinterested science teacher-learners, in terms of their science content learning. A number of instruments for assessing attitudes have also been developed (see Blalock et al., 2008, for a review).Overall, the extant research on science attitudes encompasses a broad range of theoretical perspectives and methodological approaches. Numerous conceptual and methodological limitations have however been identified (Osborne, Simon, & Collins, 2003). A major limitation is the ambiguous conceptualisation of what constitutes attitude, often with opaqueness in precisely what has been examined, or the use of a range of “subcomponents” that converge to form attitude, as proxies for attitude (van Aalderen-Smeets, Walma van der Molen, & Asma, 2012). Methodological quality also varies widely in empirical studies. The theoretical model developed by van Aalderen-Smeets et al. (2012) has made a significant contribution to the literature by conceptualising the notion of attitude towards science teaching as a multidimensional construct, which accounts for the multiple sub-constructs of attitude and their cognitive, affective, and behavioural dimensions. Their model, informed by an extensive literature review, was explicitly aimed at addressing the inconsistencies in attitude constructs that have restricted cross-study comparisons. Their model has been psychometrically validated and underpins successful interventions aimed towards improving science attitudes (van Aalderen-Smeets et al., 2017; van Aalderen-Smeets & Walma van der Molen, 2015). The instrument used in the present study to determine preservice primary teachers' attitudes towards learning science was therefore adapted from van Aalderen-Smeets et al.'s (2012) model of attitude towards teaching science.Gaining insight into preservice primary teacher students' own science learning as it takes place in real time, and how their attitudes towards learning science may enhance or impede their learning processes, warrant special attention. Such understanding appears essential to inform how best to support science learning, to promote positive attitudes and efficacy for science, and subsequently to enhance teaching science in primary school (Kazempour & Sadler, 2015). The ‘change-in-context’ (Hoadley, 2010) factors that spark and sustain the situational interest of preservice teachers for science (Palmer, 2004) as learning activities unfold is largely unknown. Examining the dynamic interactions of preservice teachers as science learners during collaborative science activities is an opportunity to develop such insight.Of key interest in this study was to develop a better understanding of how preservice primary teacher students with diverse science attitudes actually engage in shared inquiry-based activities aimed at learning fundamental science concepts. It was expected that members with more favourable science related attitudes and knowledge would play a key role in supporting their peers' learning.
1.2. Exploring the quality of engagement in diverse groups through participatory rolesIn the present study, the quality of engagement was examined in terms of the participatory task-related roles preservice teacher students adopted spontaneously as they interacted with each other during their collaborative activities. It was expected that analysing these students' participation through the roles they adopted would provide insight into their engagement in the activities and most importantly their engagement in the conceptual learning that the activities represented. Since quality of engagement in collaborative learning is associated to quality of learning outcomes (Barron, 2003; Khosa & Volet, 2014) it was reasonable to assume that group members' productive engagement with the concepts underpinning the activities, rather than simply completing the set tasks, would be critical for enhancing conceptual understanding.Previous studies on the value of roles to explore the quality of engagement in group activities can be found in computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) research (Hoadley, 2010; Strijbos & Weinberger, 2010). This work has highlighted the usefulness of roles in revealing participants' engagement and interactions with peers. To date, however, roles have typically been conceptualised as relatively stable over the duration of an activity, regardless of whether the roles were self-adopted by participants or whether they were pre-designed, fixed roles assigned by teachers to maximize students' participation and quality of engagement (e.g., Morris et al., 2010).Research conceptualising roles as spontaneously adopted, emergent, dynamic and interactional is recent (Volet, Vauras, Salo, & Khosa, 2017; Lehmann-Willenbrock, Beck, & Kauffeld, 2015) but promising. A dynamic conceptualisation of task-related roles is based on the assumptions that while interacting in a shared activity, participants can enact multiple roles, and as observed in earlier work (e.g., Benne and Sheats, 1948, Benne and Sheats, 2007; Chiu, 2000), any one role can also potentially serve multiple purposes or functions. Individuals' self-adopted roles as “contribution and interaction patterns” (Hoadley, 2010, p. 553) during group science activities are of interest, as these roles provide indicators of the quality of individuals' and groups' actual engagement. Importantly the enactment of such roles is expected to be observable since roles emerge and change through group interactions (Lehmann-Willenbrock et al., 2015). There is empirical evidence that the roles spontaneously adopted by members as a group activity unfolds can capture the nature of productive engagement (Volet et al., 2017) since they illuminate ongoing processes associated with groups' collaborative thinking, rather than just the doing of the activity (Morris et al., 2010).The roles adapted for the present study were developed in the context of previous research investigating the characteristics of productive engagement in science learning (Volet et al., 2017; Khosa & Volet, 2014). In that research, features of quality engagement in collaborative learning during small groups' discussions were identified in terms of high-level cognitive processing that facilitate productive co-construction of knowledge. For example, asking probing questions that explore and improve conceptual understanding, supporting suggestions and argumentation with evidence from readings and other resources, and consolidating collective knowledge of science phenomena through socially shared regulatory processes. Furthermore, interactions aimed at meaning-making contrasted with merely seeking and sharing information and such differences in focus of engagement were found to be consistent with the quality of the group outcome. The roles examined in the present study were conceptually grounded in this work with some adaptations to the specific learning context. By adapting an existing roles framework that was developed and validated in another science context, this study addressed Strijbos and De Laat's (2010) concern that many studies tend to empirically identify roles for each new learning context, which is problematic to advance this field of research since it offers limited generalisability.
1.3. Aim and research questionsThe specific aim of the present study, therefore, was to explore how preservice primary teacher students with diverse attitudes towards science learning engage in their small group science activities as these unfold in real time. Given evidence of associations between teachers' attitudes towards science, their teaching practices and their student outcomes in science (e.g., McDonnough & Matkins, 2010), and between quality of teaching science and students' attitudes towards science (Osborne et al., 2003), a better understanding of how pre-service teacher students' attitudes towards learning science relates to their engagement in science learning is crucial. Focusing on this particular group of science learners is important, since once they become teachers of primary science, they will be expected to act as models and as mediators of their own students' views of science and attitudes towards learning science. Furthermore, since experience of collaborative science learning is expected to enhance motivation for science in school and teacher education contexts alike, and since the probability that small groups of learners will comprise members with a diversity of attitudes is high across contexts, gaining insight into this phenomenon is imperative.In the present study, scrutinizing the participatory roles spontaneously adopted by preservice primary teacher students as they interact with each other and the science learning activities over time was expected to reveal processes that lead to productive engagement in collaborative science learning, which is crucial given the established link between quality of engagement and outcome in collaborative science learning (Khosa & Volet, 2014; Koretsky, Vauras, Jones, Iiskala, & Volet, in press). Understanding the extent to which productive engagement in group activities is related to initial attitude towards learning science, and how members with relatively favourable entry characteristics may influence group engagement, is particularly important when peers' attitudes are diverse. It is reasonable to expect that members with positive attitudes may have a positive influence on their peers with more negative attitudes, but little is known about how group dynamics play out in such situations. A better understanding of these issues is expected to be relevant beyond preservice primary teacher education, and extend to school contexts where diversity of attitudes towards learning science is also likely to be found.Two research questions were generated:1.How do preservice primary teacher students with diverse attitudes towards learning science, and diverse science backgrounds, engage in collaborative science learning activities, in terms of self-adopted participatory roles?In light of limited prior research on the impact of diversity of attitudes towards learning science on engagement in collaborative science learning, no specific hypotheses could be generated. However, based on evidence that diverging goals and priorities within a group create socio-emotional challenges (Järvenoja, Volet, & Järvelä, 2013), it was reasonable to expect that diversity of attitudes towards learning science would impact on the nature of engagement in the activities.2.To what extent do those students with relatively favourable entry characteristics (a positive attitude towards learning science; stronger science background) influence their group's engagement towards productive collaborative learning?Based on widely spread evidence that positive attitudes and high levels of self-efficacy towards learning impact favourably on individual engagement in learning, it was reasonable to expect that students who displayed such favourable entry characteristics could potentially have a positive influence on their group engagement – however, the extent to which the less favourable characteristics of other group members may interfere needed to be established.
