Research designs are fundamental to the production of knowledge that support development and performance. Research particularly plays a critical role in gathering data to support the development and management of library and information science (LIS). The quality of decisions made, and performance targets met, depend on the quality of information gathered, its accuracy, relevance and how it is applied. Research that is likely to make a difference to the development of a discipline and the production of dependable, sound and valid knowledge should be conceptually and methodologically strong. Various research strategies have been used in the production of knowledge in the LIS field (Ullaha & Ameen, 2018). Many authors, as evident from the list of references in this article, have analysed methodological trends in LIS research in different contexts, using a variety of sources including journals and dissertations. Those methodological trends and patterns are characterised as ‘cartographies”. Cartographies map out developments and trends in a specific context. In the field of LIS such mapping has been achieved through systematic reviews, content analyses and bibliometric studies (Togia & Malliari, 2017; Ullaha & Ameen, 2018).
Mapping the trends in research designs used in library and information science education in South Africa and Nigeria may provide professionals, researchers, teachers, students, policy-makers and anyone interested in scholarly communication involving methodological discourses insights into methodological processes. To this end, a content analysis of PhD research outputs completed during the 2009–2015 period was conducted. The focus on dissertations was based on the premise that dissertations provide one of the important forms of scholarly communication. Dissertations as well as journal articles, are subjected to some degree of vetting for quality and rigour by gatekeepers and experts in the field. Furthermore, dissertations tend to cover research designs extensively, and thoroughly describe and present the research methodology in contrast to journal articles which focus on brevity as a result of editorial controls and limitations (Hayward, 2017). There is also evidence that research in library and information science at the PhD level in some contexts is conceptually and methodological weak (Rana, 2011). The analysis aims to provide a broad understanding of the research designs used in LIS research in Nigeria and South Africa.
