A Human Interaction Proof (HIP), a method using brief tests to authenticate users accessing the web (Chellapilla et al., 2005), can take one of three forms: It can allow users to identify that they are themselves as opposed to another user, an adult as opposed to a child, or human rather than machine (Chellapilla et al., 2005). The Completely Automated Public Turing Test to Tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA) is a HIP designed to prevent Internet robots, automatic scripts, and programs from accessing online resources intended for human use only. A reversal of the classic Turing Test, it generates and grades a test that ideally is easily solved by a human user but difficult for a computer program to solve (von Ahn et al., 2004).
The use of CAPTCHAs originated with Altavista, a search engine that applied an algorithm that assigned importance to URLs submitted by users (von Ahn et al., 2003). Some users began using web bots to automatically submit URLs to skew the ranking system. As a solution to this problem, in 1997 Alta Vista employed a text image (Coates et al., 2001) easily read by humans but not web bots (Baird and Popat, 2002; Press, 2009; Pope and Kaur, 2005). Later, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University developed the Gimpy CAPTCHA, which features two distorted words overlapping each other. These CAPTCHAs were used to keep web bots from accessing Yahoo chat rooms and email accounts (Baird and Popat, 2002; Press, 2009; Pope and Kaur, 2005) in addition to allowing web administrators to protect against malicious activities such as using automated multiple scripts to abuse free email sites, ticket agent websites, online auctions, and file-sharing sites (Pope and Kaur, 2005). According to Baird and Popat (2002), the characteristics of an effective CAPTCHA include being automatically generated and graded by a computer, admitting virtually all humans while at the same time denying virtually all web bots, and being able to resist automated attacks for a suitable period of time even if its algorithm is known (Baird and Popat, 2002). Even though CAPTCHAs have effectively incorporated these characteristics while being more affordable than other HIP alternatives (Pope and Kaur, 2005), they require a large database and server, can be unlocked through certain attack methods and result in delays and frustration for legitimate users (Pope and Kaur, 2005). To address these concerns, image-based CAPTCHAs based on pictures and audio-based CAPTCHAs featuring sound have more recently been introduced (Markkola and Lindqvist, 2008).
Early CAPTCHAs were text-based CAPTCHAs, which featured a distorted word or nonsense text string that the user interpreted and typed into a response box (von Ahn et al., 2004), (von Ahn et al., 2003). Although most CAPTCHAs are still text-based, there are several security and usability difficulties associated with a Character Recognition task (Press, 2009). Users with malicious intentions have developed attack methods for text-based CAPTCHAs, most of which feature text segmentation. As Chellapilla et al. (2005) found, for CAPTCHAs with high clutter and background noise, computers could identify a single segmented letter faster than humans could. In addition, the limited dictionary databases employed by most text-based CAPTCHAs pose a security threat as they make them susceptible to guessing attacks (Chellapilla et al., 2005).
In addition to the security issues associated with character recognition, usability problems are often experienced with text-based CAPTCHAs. (Madathil et al., 2010), (Fraune et al., 2013) Even though CAPTCHAs are ideally designed so that humans can easily solve them, users often find it difficult to identify the distorted text correctly. In usability testing, even participants with 20/20 vision had difficulty completing text-based CAPTCHAs (Chellapilla et al., 2005). CAPTCHAs also often generate negative attitudes, including frustration and intimidation (Yan and El Ahmad, 2008). Some users view them as a waste of time (Baird and Popat, 2002), (Baird and Bentley, 2005). Although short, they distract users from their intended activities on the web, and the time spent typing is perceived as a further delay. Another major usability issue with text-based CAPTCHAs is their non-universal nature, meaning non-native English speakers may experience significant difficulty in successfully completing the test (Chellapilla et al., 2005), (Yan and El Ahmad, 2008). However, as multiple researchers have found, there is an inverse relationship between robustness and the usability of CAPTCHAs, meaning that as a task becomes more usable for a human, the CAPTCHA also becomes easier for a web bot to break. (Yan and El Ahmad, 2008), (Golle, 2008; Chandavale et al., 2009; Kolupaev and Ogijenko, 2008) One focus of current research in this area is the development of alternatives to standard Character Recognition tasks that address these usability and security issues.
One alternative to the text-based CAPTCHA is an image-based CAPTCHA, a Human Interaction Proof featuring pictures rather than words. Banday et al. (Banday and Shah, 2015) suggest that these image-based CAPTCHAs, similar to text-based ones, are not completely secure as they can be attacked by image segmentation, shape matching, and random guessing techniques. In addition, image-based CAPTCHAs also require significant page area and result in increased server processing (Banday and Shah, 2015), (Tariq Banday and Shah, 2011). However, image-based CAPTCHAs do seem to be a potentially more robust and usable alternative to text-based ones. Their databases of pictures have the potential to be much larger than those that hold words, meaning random guessing techniques would not be as effective for spammers. Usability is expected to increase when using image-based CAPTCHAs as well because they require minimal interaction with the keyboard and they have the potential to be inclusive to many cultures (Chow et al., 2008).
In the current research, we present two studies investigating the usability of text-based and image-based CAPTCHAs, using both performance and subjective measures. The first study investigates user performance with four image-based CAPTCHAs: Asirra, ESP-PIX, SQ-PIX and IMAGINATION. The second study investigates user behavior using the two better performing CAPTCHAs identified in study 1, Asirra and ESP-PIX, and the two most commonly used text-based CAPTCHAs, ReCaptcha and Google's CAPTCHA.
