The mission of the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Office of Pesticide Programs (OPP) within the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention (OCSPP) is to protect humans and the environment from potential risks associated from exposure to pesticide chemicals. The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) is the federal statute that governs the registration, distribution, sale, and use of pesticides in the United States. Under 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 158, EPA-OPP requires substantial toxicology and exposure testing for human health and the environment to support registration of food and non-food use pesticides. The total cost of toxicology and exposure testing ranges from $200–300 million for a conventional, food-use pesticide. To assess the potential hazard of a chemical for human health risk assessment, toxicological studies in laboratory animals are generally used to provide information on a wide range of adverse health outcomes, routes of exposure, exposure durations, species, and lifestages. The human health toxicology testing costs $8–16 million and uses 5000–7000 animals.
Federal regulations give EPA substantial discretion to make registration decisions based on what the Agency believes are the most relevant and important data for each action. The actual data and studies required may be modified on an individual basis to fully characterize the use and properties of specific pesticide products under review. The Agency may waive data requirements or request additional data beyond the default studies. Alternative methods and approaches can also be considered.
In 2007, the National Research Council (NRC) released its report, Toxicity Testing in the Twenty-first Century: A Vision and a Strategy, which provides a new paradigm for toxicology testing that is less reliant on in vivo testing in laboratory animals, but instead uses human-relevant cells and tissues, understanding pathways to toxicity, and development of computational and predictive modeling. Shortly after the NRC's 2007 report, EPA-OPP developed its own “Strategic Vision for Adopting 21st Century Science Methodologies” specific to pesticide testing that provides the framework for implementing the NRC's new vision for toxicology testing. This strategic vision describes several key areas including development of a broader suite of computer-aided methods to better predict potential hazards and exposures and to focus testing on likely risks of concern; improved approaches to more traditional toxicity tests to minimize the number of animals used while expanding the amount of information obtained; and improved understanding of toxicity pathways to allow development of non-animal tests that better predict how exposures relate to adverse effects.
In 2013, EPA-OPP developed its document entitled Guiding Principles for Data Requirements (USEPA-OPP, 2013a) (herein called the guiding principles document). The purpose of the guiding principles document is to provide consistency in the identification of data needs, promote and optimize full use of existing knowledge, and focus on the critical data needed for risk assessment. The guiding principles document notes that EPA-OPP needs to “… ensure there is sufficient information to reliably support registration decisions that are protective of public health and the environment while avoiding the generation and evaluation of data that does not materially influence the scientific certainty of a regulatory decision …. avoid unnecessary use of time and resources, data generation costs, and animal testing.”
At EPA-OPP, the Hazard and Science Policy Council (HASPOC) is tasked with considering requests for waiving most guideline mammalian toxicity studies for use in human health risk assessment, with the exception of the acute six-pack (acute lethality and irritation/sensitization studies), which is the purview of a different committee within OPP. HASPOC follows a specific approach outlined in guidance developed for waiving repeat dose studies (USEPA-OPP, 2013b). This guidance entitled Part 158 Toxicology Data Requirements: Guidance for Neurotoxicity Battery, Subchronic Inhalation, Subchronic Dermal and Immunotoxicity Studies describes a weight-of-the-evidence (WOE) approach to waiving four study types that considers physical-chemical properties, the exposure and toxicology profile, and the pesticidal and mammalian mode of action. HASPOC applies this same general WOE approach when considering the need for multiple other guideline studies including, but not limited to, developmental and reproduction studies, as well as chronic and subchronic oral studies. This paper describes EPA-OPP's systematic WOE approach, as applied by HASPOC, in considering the need for guideline animal studies for pesticide regulatory purposes.
