Preparation and enjoyment of food are by nature multi- or transdisciplinary phenomena. From the rearing of animals and sowing of seeds, via harvest to be considered as food, to cooking and until the last mouthful has been swallowed, several academic disciplines, crafts, and possibly arts will have had their say.1 Hence, if we wish to shed light on the complex phenomena of cooking and eating, the possibility is present for cooperation across disciplines. And if we have the desire to develop the phenomena further, such cooperation might be a fruitful path to take. Based on our experience in this type of collaboration we are intuitively convinced about the productiveness of such inter-domain dialogue. We believe that we need more examples from a variety of culinary contexts, as well as structured discussions to fully explore the various possibilities. Such dialogue can occur between professionals from different domains, but conceptually it is also possible to envisage an “epistemic inter-domain dialogue” between knowledge domains within one individual or within a single profession, e.g., as described by Borkenhagen (2017) when chefs in high-level modernist-oriented environments acquire scientific knowledge and seek to integrate it with tradition-derived culinary knowledge and practices.
When two or more such enterprises search for ways to work together, at the same time seeking desired benefit for their own mission, they would ideally search for a mutual language to allow for productive dialogue. Consequently, challenges may arise, or even stand in the way for dialogue to occur in the first hand. In the work reported in the present paper, we describe an attempt to shed light on such dialogue via an online survey distributed to chefs in four different countries asking them about their views on interaction and collaboration between chefs and researchers. The overarching aim is to describe understandings, experiences, and views among food professionals related to such collaborations, and inherent possibilities and challenges therein. To our knowledge, this is the first in-depth, structured survey on attitudes, opinions, and views of chefs from several countries about the role of science and inter-domain collaboration in their work. It includes views from a diverse group of respondents from various culinary contexts and professions, e.g., including culinary educators, and not solely molecular cooking-/modernist cooking-oriented practitioners. Even though it is intuitively to be expected that dialogue is a desirable thing when asking or observing practitioners in the field, this remains to be studied and discussed in relation to relevant theory. A deeper understanding of these issues might thus support productive practices and reveal pitfalls and obstacles for dialogue.
The survey was distributed in January 2017, reaching 86 respondents and receiving 43 answers from respondents in Finland (9), Norway (8), Spain (15), and the United States (11). The 43-item survey was designed to give access to quantitative as well as qualitative in-depth data. The present paper mainly describes the quantitative results together with part of the qualitative, focussing on descriptive accounts as well as the respondents’ stated views on dialogue and collaboration. The results are framed in a theoretical perspective of forms of disciplinarities (Ramadier, 2004).
Interdisciplinarity, multidisciplinarity, transdisciplinarityWhen dealing with phenomena that transcends disciplinary boundaries it may be beneficial to take a meta perspective of that studied. From the perspective of urban studies, Ramadier (2004) describes distinctions between various notions of disciplinarities as displayed in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (68KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Disciplinarities as illustrated by Ramadier (2004, p. 433). Boxes indicate disciplinary boundaries; shaded area represents the issue/phenomenon under study. Reprinted with permission.A disciplinary (unidisciplinary) perspective would reduce the issue at hand to something understood solely from the perspectives and knowledge of a single discipline. Cooking, eating, and related culinary practices are such complex phenomena that we do not consider this to be a productive perspective, as initiatives such as the Gastro-Science-Chef symposium, or the existence of the present journal, would be redundant. Hence, we assume that there is consensus that crossing or fusing disciplinary boundaries is seen as both desired and necessary and that a unidisciplinary perspective is not sufficient.The second possibility, multidisciplinarity, is described as the juxtaposition of perspectives/models from the different disciplines. E.g., each discipline elucidates one part of the issue, and as complimentary to each other the disciplines together seek to paint a composite picture, or perhaps mosaic without mixing. Disciplinary thinking is in essence maintained, rather than challenged, and “thus it is no surprise that multidisciplinarity encourages the creation of new sub-disciplines […]” (Ramadier, 2004, p. 434). Also, as indicated by the shaded areas in Fig. 1 representing the phenomenon/issue under study, this is limited or reduced to something to be described within the confines of the disciplines.Interdisciplinarity is described as two or more disciplines together “seeking to construct a common model for the disciplines involved, based on a process of dialogue between disciplines” (p. 433). In practice, this is achieved by transfer, or borrowing, of models, understandings and tools from one discipline to others. The result is either some participating disciplines being forced to submit under models/thinking of others, or that some disciplines appropriates/borrows perspectives from others. Some must sacrifice their perspectives to take a subservient role in the dialogue, resulting in an uneven basis for dialogue. In both inter- and multidisciplinarity, paradoxes are avoided since perspectives, models and tools are either used side by side, or borrowed and applied in new domains.A transdisciplinary perspective seeks to preserve various perspectives on the issue and rather confront them with each other. Paradoxes may, or will, arise but rather than several perspectives working side-by-side without much intermingling (multidisciplinary), or one perspective taking control (interdisciplinary), they are confronted in dialogue. Thus, consensus is not necessarily a main goal, but rather the search for articulations. The aim will be to “avoid reproducing fragmentary models typical of disciplinary thinking” (p. 434), but still acknowledging the “different realities” (ways of thinking) whilst at the same time challenge the parties to readjust their perspectives. In our view, a transdisciplinary thinking should therefore, as far as attainable, seek to avoid reducing a complex issue to something that can be described within the confines of certain disciplines, as indicated by the shaded area transcending the box boundaries in Fig. 1. Also, the door is held open for disciplines not yet included, or even envisaged, to shed light on the issue at hand.Several new concepts, fields, or disciplines, have appeared as result of collaboration between chefs, researchers, artists, and artisans. Molecular gastronomy is an obvious, and somewhat contested, term (e.g., Barham et al., 2010; Blanck, 2003; Pedersen, 2007; van der Linden et al., 2007). This (2002) has explicitly stated that molecular gastronomy is a discipline within food science. In Ramadier’s (2004) terms, this would be considered as either interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary. Still, elsewhere, the joint works of researcher This and chef Gagnaire (e.g., This and Gagnaire, 2008) displays clear patterns of transdisciplinarity, as the work of the researcher appears to be influenced and perhaps modified by the chef, as well as the other way around. In the wake of debates around molecular gastronomy, and the need to expand perspectives, terms such as “neurogastronomy” (Sheperd, 2012) and “gastrophysics” have been introduced. The latter “places itself as an emerging new scientific and molecular-based (sub)discipline at borderlines between soft-matter physics and chemistry, culinary sciences, and food chemistry” (Risbo et al., 2013). Like neurogastronomy, it includes perspectives from sensory science and experimental psychology, such as (multi)sensory experiences, and crossmodal correspondences (e.g., Møller, 2013; Spence and Blumenthal, 2017). Also here, there appears to be a wide variety of modes of collaboration and disciplinarities in the adjoining and newly coined fields, which is quite natural as modes of collaboration will depend on the issue at hand, the people involved in the collaboration, funding models, and so forth. The main body of research publications on these issues hitherto have been from the perspective of the researcher. In the present paper, we have sought to bring forth the voices of the practitioners, although the borderline between chef and researcher occasionally appears blurred when chefs take the role as researcher and vice versa. The topics we have sought to elucidate were:•Which attitudes, opinions, and views do chefs state with respect to possible collaboration with researchers?•From the chefs’ perspective, which conditions may stimulate collaboration between disciplines?•Which key challenges and obstacles do the chefs see for such collaboration to occur?•Where are the promising potentials to be found?
