
“The formative pre-doctoral years are a critical window, because students’ experiences at this juncture shape both their beliefs about their own abilities and subsequent persistence in science.” – Moss-Racusin et al., 2012: 16475
In response to the widely documented gender gap in science and engineering (S&E) fields (e.g. Moss-Racusin et al., 2012), policymakers have implemented educational policies – ranging from primary to higher education – to increase female enrollment in S&E training and reduce workforce attrition.1 Regarding enrollment, these policies appear effective with recent evidence reporting that female matriculation into S&E higher education programs is increasing (e.g. Carrell et al., 2010; Miller and Wai, 2015; Van Arensbergen et al., 2012). In many S&E fields, women now exceed the number of men in both undergraduate and graduate program enrollment (Sugimoto et al., 2015). This varies across academic disciplines with women accounting for half or even the majority in certain fields – including life sciences, psychology, and social sciences.2
However, the most recent U.S. National Science Board’s S&E Indicator Report notes large discrepancies remain at later career stages. Women hold less than 30 percent of S&E positions in the workforce,3 and they notably lag in research-related appointments in academia and industry (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012; Van der Lee and Ellemers, 2015; Ceci et al., 2014; Sugimoto et al., 2015). Importantly, this discrepancy appears to be a function of productivity differences in publication activity (Lerchenmueller and Sorenson, 2018).
Given that graduate training serves as a critical bridge between program matriculation and professional placement, there may be differences in graduate training for men and women that account for the diverging trends at later career stages. Prior studies have found evidence of gender separation in graduate training with women serving on smaller research teams (Buffington et al., 2016) and facing implicit bias discrimination from senior researchers over their lab assignments (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012). Female graduate students also are not granted the same research collaboration opportunities with advisors as their male counterparts (Pezzoni et al., 2016). Research at this juncture of professional training, however, is scant; more work remains to understand whether and how the gender gap persists at this early career stage.
To address this issue, we document variation in the response to signaling associated with federal funding that leads to divergent trends in research productivity by gender. Specifically, we draw upon the U.S. National Science Foundation’s (NSF) prestigious Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP) to identify a sample of life science graduate students with demonstrated research potential. We leverage variation in federal research and development (R&D) funding allocation between groups of high-quality awardees and honorable mentions. Using this variation in funding allocation, we examine productivity trends. We employ a differencing research design to estimate the relative difference of the effect of the award for women on publication productivity.
We document that the award’s impact takes effect five years following the GRFP allocation; this is at the time when many students are transitioning from graduate school to their first professional placement. The results of the triple difference estimation show a negative effect for women compared to men from the award. When we investigate the driver of this effect by examining trends within gender, we find a large, positive effect of the award for men but fail to find such evidence for female awardees. The differential effect between the productivity trajectory of female awardees and honorable mentions is nominal in size and statistically insignificant. Further, female awardees underperform both male awardees and male honorable mentions.
We explore a series of mechanisms that may moderate this effect and find preliminary evidence that women engage in different training compared to men that disadvantages them professionally. Graduate advisors collaborate disproportionately less with female awardees. Specifically, highly cited male advisors publish more with their male students than their female students. Further, they also publish more with their female honorable mention students than with their female awardee students. Female advisors producing lower-impact research also publish more with female honorable mentions and male awardees than with female awardees. Given the collaborative nature of this field, this suggests that women do not receive the same boost as male students when receiving the competitive award. Our results indicate that the signal of the award, and the opportunity it confers, varies by gender.
This study provides evidence of differing perceptions of signals along observable characteristics. These impacts are long lasting and have important implications for professional trajectory and the production of science. We advance the growing scholarship on the gender gap by redirecting attention to an earlier career stage during graduate training. Moreover, we show that biases can result in worse outcomes for disadvantaged groups even when policies are meritorious.
