Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has several benefits over other medical imaging modalities, hence having an important role in neuroscience research [1], [2], [3] and typical neurotic abnormalities analysis. This tool has distinctive points of interest for incorporating imaging in various ways, as it bears the capability to provide the functional activity of the brain [4]. Furthermore it is moderately protected when contrasted with other imaging modalities. Therefore, many frameworks have been proposed for the investigation and analysis of MRI information [5]. The symptomatic estimations of MRI are immensely opened up by the mechanized and exact segregation of the MRI images. In recent years, analysts have proposed a lot of promising approaches for achieving this target.
Over the span of the latest decade, different systems have been proposed with the goal for recognizing neurotic brain. Picking a proper classifier with biased features is the essential requisite for errand in these schemes. Fig. 1 shows the general structure for such a classification framework.
In any case, while dissecting MR images, the utilization of patient’s identifiable data must strike a congruity between opening up the information use and constraining potential damage caused by unintentional sharing of personal information. It is a challenging domain to design new frameworks for privacy protection in the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) [6], [7] to carefully ensure legit access and usage of the patients’ sensitive information. The security of patient’s private information is endangered when the corresponding electronic health records and data are shared beyond the entrusted parties. It imparts a negative effect on the patients and legit parties. Henceforth, privacy of patient’s sensitive information is of specific worry to analysts who use such information in certain analyzing processes. In view of the recent quantum progress of the IoMT in healthcare segments, it is normal that healthcare related information of the patient will have mobility over the web, which makes it vulnerable to different types of attacks. Hence the security, privacy, trustworthiness, and at the same time accessibility of the patient’s therapeutic and personal data has emerged as a potent challenge for healthcare services. In [8], to handle patient’s private data, a Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) bolstered framework is proposed which utilizes permanence and self-sufficiency properties of the blockchain. Hence adjusting the clashing interests of ensuring privacy while giving access to detailed data for legit purposes is a point of interest for investigation. To ensure the privacy of patients Electronic Health Records (EHRs) and encourage the aforementioned trade-off, a few approaches are concisely explained in [9]. Privacy preserving frameworks intend to counteract divulgence of delicate personal information of the patients’ [10], while making the anonymized data usable for licit issues.Download : Download high-res image (121KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Block Diagram of medical CAD system classifying pathological brain from MR image.
Luckily, different researches and procedures from the spaces of sensitive information security [11] might be conveyed to offer as a ground-breaking impact for this issue. Utilization of these systems and techniques, permits exchange off between data security and classification, giving analysts access to usable data while restricting the potential harm of a breech in information security. With healthcare based Internet of Things (IoT) systems, information transmission is a routine course of action, making it important to devise proficient analytic models for ensuring protection of the patient’s personal information, while such information is imparted over web.
As medical images include the patients’ personalized data, privacy protection have turned out to be substantially huge amid transmitting medicinal images over the web [12]. Hence, steganography is adopted to provide privacy and confidentiality by covering the private data of the patient’s in therapeutic image itself.
The article is organized as follows. The existing works related to steganography, classification, and medical data privacy are discussed in Section 2. Followed by this, the proposed steganography based privacy preservation scheme is elaborated in Section 3. Section 4 shows the experimental outline of the proposed framework followed by results and comparative analysis. Finally, in Section 5, the significance of the present work is presented with an outline of possible future extensions to this research.
