During talking, our brains automatically generate predictions about the sound of our impending vocalizations in order to adjust ongoing speech to better match our intentions (Burnett et al., 1998; Houde and Jordan, 1998; Sitek et al., 2013) and to mirror our social environment (Pardo, 2006). In addition to optimizing performance to match intentions, these rapid comparisons allow us to distinguish between auditory sensations resulting from our own actions, including overt actions (e.g., speech) and possibly covert actions (e.g., thoughts), and externally generated sounds (Crapse and Sommer, 2008; Greenlee et al., 2011). In human (Ford et al., 2007a; Ford and Mathalon, 2005; Ford et al., 2001a, Ford et al., 2001b; Ford et al., 2012; Ford et al., 2007b; Heinks-Maldonado et al., 2005; Heinks-Maldonado et al., 2007) and non-human primates (Eliades and Wang, 2003; Eliades and Wang, 2005; Eliades and Wang, 2008). This is seen as reduced auditory cortical responses to self-generated compared to externally generated sounds. When a vocalization adjustment is needed or when the source is external and possibly important, auditory cortical responsiveness is heightened. These comparisons have been attributed to a putative efference copy/corollary discharge mechanism (Crapse and Sommer, 2008).
In humans, the function of the efference copy/corollary discharge mechanism can be assessed using scalp recorded EEG and the EEG-derived event-related potentials (ERPs). Specifically, the auditory N100 (N1) component of the ERP, which emanates from auditory cortex (Ford et al., 2016), is reduced in amplitude in response to vocalizations as they are being produced relative to when they are played back (Chen et al., 2011; Curio et al., 2000; Ford et al., 2007a; Ford et al., 2001a; Ford et al., 2013; Ford et al., 2007b; Greenlee et al., 2011; Heinks-Maldonado et al., 2005; Heinks-Maldonado et al., 2007; Heinks-Maldonado et al., 2006; Houde et al., 2002; Sitek et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014).
The amount of suppression is related to precision of the match between the vocalized sound and the expected sound. The precision of the efference copy/corollary discharge mechanism can be studied by pitch-shifting the sound fed back to the ear (Behroozmand et al., 2009; Heinks-Maldonado et al., 2005) and by incidental differences between the modal sound and spoken sound (Sitek et al., 2013). Specifically, Sitek et al. found that N1 to speech sounds as they are being spoken was sensitive to the degree of match between the current and the immediately preceding utterance. N1 during passive listening to that sequence of sounds was not sensitive to these small variations in moment to moment sounds. This may reflect a largely unconscious monitoring the spoken sounds and the rapid corrections in articulation to match intentions (Levelt, 1983). This automatic, rapid process is likely instantiated in cerebellar side-loops, capable of rapidly comparing sensory input with intended motor output (Ramnani, 2006).
We have shown that patients with schizophrenia (Ford et al., 2007a; Ford et al., 2001a, Ford et al., 2001b; Ford et al., 2013; Ford et al., 2007b) and people on the psychosis spectrum show less suppression of the auditory N1 in response to self-generated vocalizations than healthy controls, with similar abnormalities in schizophrenia patients early in their disease course (Perez et al., 2012) and people at clinical high risk for psychosis (Mathalon et al., 2018). Together these findings suggest that patients with schizophrenia show attenuated or absent suppression of auditory cortex in response to self-generated sounds, possibly due to deficits in efference copy/corollary discharge mechanisms. These deficits, consequently, may underlie an inability to make predictions about the sensory consequences of self-generated actions and to utilize them to adjust behavior and tag experiences as self-generated.
In this study, we ask if auditory training targeting discrimination of complex speech-related stimuli might restore this system to normal levels in patients with schizophrenia early in their disease course (ESZ). The training exercises target feed-forward auditory perceptual processes by placing implicit, increasing demands on discrimination of basic auditory and verbal stimuli. Feedback attention and cognitive control operations are engaged by signaling correct/incorrect trials and by embedding the psychophysical training within increasingly complex auditory and verbal working memory/verbal learning trials. The mechanism of action is thus posited to be the “re-tuning” of the bi-directional operations between temporally detailed resolution of auditory inputs in auditory cortex, prefrontally-mediated attention, and auditory/verbal memory functions. Indeed, emerging electro- and magneto-encephalographic data indicate that targeted auditory training enhances both early representations in primary auditory cortex and auditory sensory gating (Dale et al., 2016; Dale et al., 2010; Popov et al., 2011), as well as both early and later task-related activity in prefrontal regions (Dale et al., 2016). Improved efficiency in distributed prefrontal-temporal auditory systems is therefore thought to drive improvements in untrained higher-level cognitive operations (Biagianti et al., 2016; Vinogradov et al., 2012), which may have a role in implementing the efference copy/corollary discharge mechanism. Recently, Ramsay et al. (2017) found that schizophrenia patients who underwent 48 h of working memory focused cognitive remediation training showed increases in thalamo-prefrontal connectivity that correlated with improvements in global cognition.
We hypothesized that individuals in the TAT but not in the CG treatment group would have improved N1 suppression, due to improved functioning of the efference copy/corollary discharge system during vocalization. Improvement with training could be due to these factors that contribute to the successful operation of this system: (i) transmission of this efference copy from frontal lobes to auditory cortex (Chen et al., 2011; Ford et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2014), and (ii) sensory re-afference in auditory cortex. TAT could improve transmission of the efference copy to auditory cortex by improving frontal-temporal connectivity during talking (Ford et al., 2002). As mentioned above, thalamo-prefrontal connectivity in schizophrenia improves with working memory training (Ramsay et al., 2017), supporting the possibility that frontal-temporal connectivity might be improved by training that targets the speech perception system (Whitford et al., 2018). TAT could also improve processing sounds in speech-spectrum and consequently the sensory re-afference of speech sounds. If either is improved, N1 suppression would be improved, as patients could better match the external sound of their own speech to their internal (intended) representation of it (Sitek et al., 2013). More specifically, if the intended sound is more effectively transmitted to auditory cortex via the efference copy, TAT will specifically affect N1 during talking. If sensory processing is improved, TAT will specifically affect N1 during listening.
In this study, we randomly assigned individuals with recent onset schizophrenia-spectrum illness to targeted auditory training (TAT) or computer games (CG), which was a strong, active control condition. Cognition and N1 suppression during talking were assessed before and after 40 h of self-paced TAT or CG with 5 h per week as the recommended pace. Healthy controls were also tested twice to assess the simple effects of the passage of time.
