In recent years, the cyber security has gained a lot of attention in the research community. The cyber security makes protection of information systems, such as hardware, software and related infrastructure, data on these systems and the services provided by these systems, which can be done by illegal access by adversaries (intruders or attackers), and also can be caused by harm or misuse. Sometimes, intentionally a harm can be caused by an operator of the system. Therefore, either intentional or accidental harm can result in failing to obey the security procedures [1].
According to a review conducted in 2016 including the significant stakeholder engagement and evidence gathering from a wide range of sources, it was pointed out that there is requirement for additional regulation or inducements to lift the cyber risk management across various essential services, such as critical national infrastructure [2]. The concern raised from this review was to deal with the growing threat from various cyber attacks with probable implications for consumer confidence, public protection as well as economic growth. Consider the Internet banking fraud, which includes dishonest payments taken from the bank accounts of a customer with the help of the Internet banking procedure. According to the report in [2], such banking fraud jumped up by 64% to £133.5 m in the year 2015. It is mentioned that the number of such fraud cases is increased at a lower rate of 23% and there was a significant tendency for criminals to select business and high-net-worth consumers.
Recently, the evolution of mobile banking was discussed by Wazid et al. [3]. Various threats associated with mobile banking as well as some of the most recent mobile banking malware attacks are also discussed in [3]. Finally, a review of recent security solutions for enabling secure, mobile banking was also presented, mainly on user authentication problems and their solutions.
Download : Download high-res image (242KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. NIST cybersecurity framework .[4]
1.1. Importance of standards in information security and cyber defenseIn this section, we discuss the importance of various standards needed in both information security and cyber defense.The following important reasons are behind the development of standards, which play a crucial role in enhancing approaches to information security across various geographical regions and also the communities.•Improve the efficiency and effectiveness of key processes.•Facilitate the systems integration and interoperability.•Entitle various products or methods, which need to be compared significantly.•Provide a means for users to evaluate new products/services.•Structure the method to deploy new technologies/business models.•Simplify complex environments.•Promote economic growth.
1.2. Minimum cyber security standardA new minimum set of cyber security standards are needed. These standards help the government to expect departments to adhere to and exceed wherever possible.The security policy framework (SPF) provides the mandatory protective security outcomes that all the departments are required to achieve those. This defines the minimum security measures that the departments should implement with regards to protect their information, technology and digital services in order to meet their SPF and the national cyber security strategy obligations. As far as possible the security standards should define outcomes, allow the departmental flexibility in how the standards are implemented depending on their local context. Since the definitions of ‘sensitive’, ‘essential’, ‘important’ and ‘appropriate’ are deliberately left open, the departments can apply their own values based on their particular circumstances. However, the departments are accountable for the effectiveness of these decisions, and these shall reflect the government security classifications policy where they are relevant [5].Compliance with the standards can be achieved in many ways depending on the technology choices and business requirements. For digital services, this set of standards is complementary to the digital service manual. The standard presents a minimum set of measures, and departments need to look to exceed them wherever possible. Over the time, new threats and various vulnerabilities increase [6].The cyber security framework was needed in response to executive order 13636 [4]. This framework was used to improve the security of the nation’s critical infrastructure from various cyber attacks discussed in Section 2. The framework is also considered as a useful guide to any organization that looks to improve the cyber security attitude (see Fig. 1). We have provided the comparative features of information security and cyber defense in Table 1.Table 1. Comparison of features [7].S. no.FeaturesDescription1.Identify(a) There shall be clear lines of responsibility & accountability to the named individualsDepartments shall putfor security of sensitive data (information) and key operational services.in place appropriate(b) There shall be appropriate management policies and processescyber securityin place to direct the departments for overall approach to cyber security.governance(c) Departments shall identify and manage the significant risks to sensitiveprocesses.information and key operational services.(d) Departments shall understand and manage security issues that arisebecause of dependencies on external suppliers or through their supply chain.This should ensure that the standards defined in this document are met bythe suppliers of third party services. This could be achieved by having suppliersto assure their cyber security against the cyber security standard or byrequiring them to hold a valid cyber essentials certificate as a minimum.Cyber essentials allows a supplier to demonstrate appropriate diligence withregards to standard number six, but the department should, as part of their riskassessment, determine whether this is sufficient assurance.(e) Departments shall ensure that senior accountable individuals receiveappropriate training and guidance on cyber security and risk management, andshould promote a culture of awareness and education about cyber securityacross the Department.2.Protect(a) Access to sensitive information and services shall only be provided to authorized,Access to sensitiveknown and individually referenced users or systems.information and key(b) Users and systems shall always be identified and authenticated prior to beingoperational servicesprovided access to information or services. Depending on the sensitivity of theshall only be providedinformation or criticality of the service, it is needed to authenticate andto identified,authorize the device being used for access.authenticated andauthorized users orsystems.3.Detect(a) As a minimum, the departments should capture events that could be combined withcommon threat intelligence sources (e.g. Cyber Security Information SharingDepartments shallPartnership (CISP)) to detect known threats.take steps to detect(b) Departments shall have a clear definition of what must be protected and whycommon cyberattacks.(based upon Standard 1), which in turn influences and directs the monitoring solutionto detect events which might indicate a situation the department wishes to avoid.(c) Any monitoring solution should evolve with the department’s business andtechnology changes, as well as changes in threat.(d) Attackers attempting to use common cyber-attack techniques should not be able togain access to data or any control of technology services without being detected.(e) Digital services that are attractive to cyber criminals for the purposes of fraudshould implement transactional monitoring techniques from the outset.4.Respond(a) Departments shall develop an incident response and management plan, with clearlydefined actions, roles and responsibilities. A copy of all incidents shall be recordedDepartments shallregardless of the need to report them.have a defined,(b) Departments shall have communication plans in the event of an incident whichplanned and testedincludes notifying the relevant supervisory body, senior accountableresponse to cyberindividuals, the departmental press office, the national cyber security center,security incidents thatgovernment security group (cabinet office), information commissioner’s officeimpact sensitiveor law enforcement as applicable.information or key(c) In the event of an incident that involves a personal data breach, departmentsoperational services.shall comply with any legal obligation to report the breach to the informationcommissioner’s office.(d) The incident response and management plan should be tested at regular intervalsto ensure all parties understand their roles and responsibilities as part of the plan.Post testing findings should inform the immediate future technical protection of thesystem or service to ensure identified issues cannot arise in the same way again.Systemic vulnerabilities identification shall be re-mediated.(e) On discovery of an incident, mitigating measures shall be assessed and appliedat the earliest opportunity, drawing on expert advice where necessary (e.g. a cyberincident response (CIR) company).(f) Post incident lessons shall be assessed and lessons implemented into futureiterations of the incident management plan.5.Recover(a) Departments shall identify and test contingency mechanisms to continue to deliveressential services in the event of any failure, forced shutdown, or compromise ofDepartments shallany system or service. This may include the preservation of out of band or manualhave well defined andprocesses for essential services.tested processes in(b) Restoring the service to normal operation should be a well-practiced scenario.place to ensure the(c) Post incident recovery activities shall inform the immediate future technicalcontinuity of keyprotection of the system or service to ensure the same issue cannot arise in theoperational servicessame way again. Systemic vulnerabilities identification shall be re-mediated.in the event of failureor compromise.
1.3. Research contributionsThe contributions made in this article are listed below.•We list and discuss the cyber attacks, security requirements and measures.•We then discuss the cyber security incident management framework and its various purposes.•We also discuss the standardization challenges in cyber security.•The national strategy to secure cyberspace and various government policies have been discussed.•Finally, we provide some recommendations that are essential for both cyber security and cyber defense.
1.4. Paper outlineThe organization of the rest of this article is as follows. Section 2 gives the cyber attacks, security requirements and measures, while in Section 3 the cyber security incident management framework is discussed. In Section 4, the standardization challenges in cyber security are discussed. Section 5 focuses on the strategic objectives to secure cyberspace and Section 6 provides various government policies to handle cyber security. Some essential recommendations for both cyber security and cyber defense are given in Section 7. The article is finally concluded in Section 8.
