1.1. MotivationMesh parameterization.Mesh parameterization refers to the process of mapping a surface onto a canonical domain, which plays a fundamental role in computer graphics and geometry processing. In general, mesh parameterization will unavoidably introduce distortions, angle distortion and area distortion. Typically, parameterization methods emphasize the importance of angle preservation, which may induce huge area distortion and cause numerical unreliability. For many applications in graphics, such as normal map and texture map, it is highly desirable to develop area-preserving parameterization algorithms. However, compared to conformal parameterizations, area-preserving parameterizations are much less studied in the literature [1], [2].Most parameterization algorithms can only handle topological disks, namely genus zero surfaces with single boundary. In order to process closed meshes, such as topological spheres, the mesh needs to be partitioned into a collection of simply connected patches, before each patch can be parameterized individually. This will introduce severe discontinuities along the boundaries of the patches. In practice it is valuable to design global parameterization methods, that can handle the whole closed meshes without partitioning.The goal of this paper is to develop a novel spherical area preserving parameterization method based on optimal mass transport theory, that maps any genus zero closed mesh onto the unit sphere without area distortion nor slicing the mesh open.Optimal mass transportation.Optimal transportation is well known for the ability to transfer one probability measure to another with the least cost and has become a powerful tool for both theoretic development and engineering applications. Optimal transport has intrinsic relations with many other branches in mathematics. For example, Brenier’s theory [3] focuses on finding the optimal transportation map with L2 cost and reduces the problem to Monge–Ampere equation, which is equivalent to the Alexandrov theory [4] in convex geometry. Optimal transport has been applied for medical imaging applications [5], [6]. Recently, optimal transport itself has been applied in data sciences, especially Wasserstein distance is used for constructing generative adversarial networks [7], [8].Optimal transportation theory has been applied for surface and volume parameterizations as well. Dominitz and Tannanbaum proposed a spherical area-preserving parameterization method in [9], which is based on the fluid mechanics view of the optimal mass transportation theory, and uses gradient flow method to optimize an energy function. The method is implemented iteratively and requires many variables, resulting in complicated computation and slow convergence.Recently, semi-discrete optimal mass transportation map has been introduced for surface and volume parameterization by Levy [10], Su [11] and Su [12]. This method is also generalized to compute angle–area-distortion balancing parameterization in [13]. These methods are based on the intrinsic relation between optimal transportation and the convex geometry, and formulated as a variational framework and reduced to a convex optimization problem with O(n) variables [14].Unfortunately, the method introduced in [11], [13] is based on Euclidean geometry. For spherical mapping, it maps the unit sphere onto the plane either by using stereo-graphic projection or by slicing into two disks, and converts the spherical optimal transportation map into a Euclidean one. The solution heavily depends on the choice of the north pole, therefore, the method is not intrinsic.Proposed method.In this work we propose a novel method for computing spherical optimal transportation maps, which is intrinsic to the spherical geometry. It generalizes the theory of semi-discrete optimal transportation in Euclidean background geometry [14] to the spherical background geometry. Both methods are variational, with convex energies and the Hessian matrices have explicit geometric interpretation. Furthermore, both methods require only O(n) variables and can apply Newton’s method directly.Similar to the semi-discrete optimal transportation map method in Euclidean geometry [10], [14], the spherical optimal transportation map is also given by a spherical power diagram, the power can be found by a convex optimization, the existence and the uniqueness of the solutions are claimed in Theorem 1, Theorem 2, Theorem 4. The gradient and the Hessian of the energy have explicit geometric meanings as claimed in Lemmas 3, 4, and Eq. (17). Due to the nature of spherical geometry, all the formulations are more complicated than Euclidean counter parts; furthermore, if we let the variables go to infinitesimal, the spherical formula converges to Euclidean ones asymptotically.Comparing to the existing spherical area-preserving algorithms, the proposed method is based on Newton’s method, therefore much more efficient than Dominitz and Tennanbaum’s algorithm [9]; our method is intrinsic to the spherical geometry, independent of the choice of the north pole, hence more robust than Su et al.’s algorithm in [11]. The experimental results demonstrate the efficiency and efficacy of the method, such that the spherical area-preserving map can efficiently generate the diffeomorphic, area-preserving, and seamless parameterizations of large models.
1.2. Our contributionWe summarize our contributions in this paper as follows:•Generalize the Euclidean semi-discrete optimal transport theory to spherical setting via spherical power diagram;•Construct area preserving mapping from topological spheres to unit spheres without slicing the surface into patches or stereo-graphic projection, leading to an efficient, robust and accurate algorithm based on rigorous mathematical theory.
