Fog Computing is a recently introduced architecture and a paradigm in which the computing capabilities of a traditional cloud-based network is shifted from a centralized data centers to local end-user devices and networks. Fog computing principally extends the cloud computing architecture to the edge of the network which enables an innovative variety of silent services and applications for end-users. Since the initiation of IoT based applications, the number of devices connected to the internet has jumped from millions to billions and it is more likely to grow in the near future. Traditional cloud based centralized system cannot respond to all connected devices in real-time without degrading user experience. To manage challenges, presented by IoT infrastructure, Fog computing is introduced, that promises to effectively provide low latency, high mobility and wide spread of geographical coverage with compensation of huge number of nodes. Fog computing or sometimes also referred as Fogging is still nascent and gaining popularity due to its potential in wide range of applications including IoT based systems [15], [25], real-time computing systems, energy aware computing applications [9], [18], latency sensitive applications [9] and mobile applications etc. [4].
Smart cities are not an abstract concept anymore, as more and more tech giants like Alphabet is investing in first completely connected smart city project [10], [14]. Future smart city projects are essentially based on the IoT infrastructure. As smart cities promise to provide comfort and a higher level of satisfaction to the citizens, one of the major issue that it can resolve is the public security [29], [30]. Public security is a growing problem for cities worldwide therefore, future cities area aimed to be equipped with IoT based technology to provide facilities to police and emergency services to fight crime and make cities safer [28]. Furthermore, future cities must ensure all these services with limited resources and lean more towards clean and renewable energy [6]. To enable challenging IoT applications with resource-demanding heterogeneous application requirements, researchers assesses, extends and improves state-of-the-art IoT communication technologies and protocols that are suitable for resource constrained devices [19]. These activities include the design of resource allocation protocols, improving resilience and robustness of communication with decreased energy consumption.
The underlying smart devices which make up the whole IoT architecture are expected to be resource constrained. This constraint not only applies to memory and processing capabilities, but the low-power radio standards which could further constrain the network interfaces. To enable reliable IoT applications using small, low power, battery operated devices different design tradeoffs have to be considered, both in hardware, communication and software implementations. To cope with these diverging requirements, this research provided a proof of concept design to enable security over smart devices in smart cities using limited resources over IoT and Fog infrastructure.
In this paper we propose a novel framework for distributed summarization of surveillance videos over the Fog network. The network itself is composed of multiple regions combined as clusters of Raspberry Pi. The video stream collected by surveillance cameras connected to the Raspberry Pi is summarized by the cluster itself without the use of any centralized server. Only the summarized content of the video is periodically sent to the cloud for long-term storage. The proposed method not only is cost effective, but also serves as a proof of concept for scalable, resilient and robust distributed Fog network that can render streams of videos in parallel. In summary, the contributions of this work are as follows:

•We propose a novel fully distributed multi-region Fog computing enabled framework for surveillance videos summarization without having to use a centralized cloud server. To the best of our knowledge, no such solutions exists yet.•The fog computing platform is built on low-cost, low-powered Raspberry Pi clusters, orchestrated with Apache Spark and Hadoop for distributed storage and speedy summarization of surveillance video streams.•The proposed framework not only replaces the need for any centralized server, but it also significantly reduced the bandwidth consumption of a centralized and costly cloud-based solutions.•We designed and conducted series of experiments with real workload to evaluate the performance of the Fog network based on these small low-powered devices.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we discuss the recent advancements in fog-based solutions and Internet of Things (IoT) in general. We also discuss some related literature for video summarization and Raspberry Pi. In Section 3 we discuss the proposed framework and methodology along with layout of the proposed method in detail. Section 4 presents the experimental results and performance evaluation of the proposed framework based on real workload. Section 5 concludes the paper with some insight and future directions.
