Power grid is one of the most vital infrastructures of any country, and due to the dependency of a whole nation on this public utility, utmost reliability and constant availability of power supply is a basic necessity. Power grid topology refers to the network of high-voltage transmission lines that transmit electricity over long distances within and between countries. The vertices of aforementioned network are the generators and substations and its edges are high-voltage lines. While all transmission substations are important components of power grid, position and operating condition of some substations make them more essential for network stability, which in turn make their reliability, safety, and security all the more imperative. In this context, the term vulnerability analysis refers to the process of identifying key substations and evaluating their role in the reliability of electricity grid [1].
Two important aspects of power grid vulnerability analysis are: network topology and network operating condition. Network topology is concerned with how its components are connected while network operating condition deals with how the load is distributed over the grid. Network topology is essentially static while operating condition is dynamic and in constant change depending on grid characteristics such as peak load.
The majority of published works on power grid vulnerability analysis that employ the network science approach have focused on network topology and paid little attention to weights and directions of its components [2]. In the few cases where direction is taken into account, lack of attention to core characteristics of a power grid, namely line load and line failure rate, have made the results inconsistent with network reality.
In this paper, we first introduce a novel power grid vulnerability prediction method and then use this method both to analyze the condition, structure and vulnerabilities of Iran’s 400 kV and 230 kV power grids and to predict their vulnerabilities at different time horizons.
The following section, firstly, the literature on power grid analysis that is based on the network science is reviewed. Secondly, weighted power grid is considered based on the proposed method and identify power grid vulnerabilities by taking both network topology and grid characteristics. In the next section, the proposed method is applied for a fragment of Iranian power grids at 400 kV and 230 kV, and the results are evaluated against those obtained by engineers at the dispatching centers.
