The global thin film transistor liquid crystal display (TFT-LCD) manufacturing process is characterized by capital intensity, shortened product life cycles, rapid technology migration, and complex production networks. As a result, TFT-LCD manufacturers are under constant pressure to expand capacity and adopt new methods and technology to control costs and improve overall yield [1], [2]. For example, the quality improvement of industrial products and processes requires solving quality-related manufacturing problems (e.g., yield-loss and rework) [3]. However, some manufacturing processes is indeed complicated and similar to semiconductor manufacturing processes; for example, array module includes the rework process and the critical photolithography equipment to grow thin films on a glass substrate. Improving product yield and quality, or quickly solving problems in a complex process is becoming increasingly more difficult when it comes to the real life manufacturing [4]. Shi and Zhou [5] provided a review of the quality control methodologies regarding the modeling and analysis in the multistage system. In particular, the intelligent root cause diagnostics can be categorized into statistical-estimation-based methods and pattern-matching-based methods. The former is like a linear mix model to capture the causal relation, and the latter identifies the present error if there is a match between the patterns of the error symptom and the current error pattern (i.e. pattern recognition). Fortunately, the latter with new machine learning, deep learning, and other data mining techniques can enable rapid, computer-driven exploration and assessment of the "big data" being collected [6].
Among the critical factors necessary for maintaining a competitive edge in semiconductor manufacturing, Peng and Chien [7] identify two in particular: lowering die costs and increasing yield. Die yield is defined as the ratio between the number of good chips and the total number of ships on a silicon wafer. Circuit probe (CP) yield enhancement can be divided into line yield enhancement and low yield trouble shooting. The former "tunes" the process recipes to improve device performance and reduce defects, and the latter diagnoses and monitors the failures caused by abnormal events, such as inappropriate operation [8]. Metallic contaminants, photoresist, microscopic particles, and organic residues caused by the environment, such as machines [9], can affect a wafer's yield. The profusion of factors even led Chien et al. [10] to propose a framework for data mining and knowledge discovery of large datasets that could identify the possible causes of faults and process variations. Chien and Chuang [11] handled the sub-batch processing system in a complex data structure and detect the root causes by proposing the framework including the key factor screening and the integration of the random forest (RF) and sub-batch processing model (SBPM) in big data system. Hung et al. [12] proposed the automatic virtual metrology system consider the performance and cost based on the main memory database for the TFT-LCD industry. They showed that the proposed efficient database storing recent data can significantly reduce the query time and save cost. Fernando and Surgenor [28] used the adaptive resonance theory (ART) and rule-based approach to identify the multiple fault conditions on an assembly machine and gave a comparison. The results of numerical experiments showed that the rule-based approach is more practical and feasible for fault detection and identification. In addition, for the big data environment, Tsuda et al. [29] and Nakata et al. [30] developed integrated systems embedded with big data analytics of the fault classification and failure monitoring for yield improvement in semiconductor manufacturing.
In TFT-LCD manufacturing, a color filter (CF) defines the image quality on displays by absorbing certain wavelengths of color and transmitting the other wavelengths, i.e., it enables a colored display when backlight passes through a filter onto which red, green and blue patterns are formed on a thin glass substrate. There are four processes in CF manufacturing: a black matrix, RGB layers (i.e. red layer, green layer, and blue layer), ITO (indium tin oxide) film, and photo spacer (PS) [32]. The black matrix forms the backing material of the CF after glass cleaning. The black matrix process consists of Cr material deposition with in-line sputter, positive photoresist coating, mask exposure, developing, Cr material etching, photoresist striping, and pattern inspection. In the RGB process, the pigment diffusion is a common method which can be accomplished by the steps of color resist, etching, and dyeing. For color resist step RGB process, we first place the red negative resist based on the black matrix then exposure for resist developing and the green and the blue one are the same. For etching step RGB process, red resin is first placed on the black matrix, then positive photoresist, red color exposure, photoresist removal, red resin etch, and last step photoresist striping which are performed followed by and also the same process for the green one and the blue one. For dyeing method step of RGB process, color resin using spin coating is first performed and the following processes are positive photoresist, red pixel exposure, photoresist removal, then red color dyeing for the completion of the red one and so do the green on and the blue one. In the ITO film, the common electrode properties are transmittance, sheet conductivity, thickness uniformity and crystalline structure. Fig. 1 illustrates the color filter manufacturing process and photo spacer.Download : Download high-res image (417KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Color filter manufacturing process and photo spacer (PS).
Photo spacer (PS controls the cell gap between two glasses (color filter and TFT array) more precisely to improve the image quality, by generating a film “thickness” to maintain the best gap. PS also affects the LCD one-drop filling (ODF) process, which uses liquid crystal dispensing, vacuum assembling, and curing the sealing material by thermal treatment for large-screen displays. The ODF process can shorten the waiting time of liquid crystal injection and conserve the use of the liquid crystal. In practice, the PS process is especially critical to obtain optimal yield, because it affects image quality. PS grows too much or too less will directly lead to the defects in the CF.
This study proposes a three-phase data science framework consisting of variable selection, metrology prediction, and process control. The variable selection phase applies data mining and machine learning techniques to identify the key factors potentially affecting the thickness of the PS process [13]. In practice, engineers usually identify the key factors based on engineering experience and conduct experiments to find the relationship between the production recipe variables and the quality metrology variable (i.e., the thickness of PS). However, it is costly, time-consuming, and labor-intensive; (i.e., there can be more than ten thousand variables (i.e. high-dimensional dataset) controlled in a CF production line with a series of high-tech equipment). To overcome the curse of dimensionality problem, we propose the iterative framework to remove the unimportant and redundant factors while still maintaining the robustness of the prediction model. The metrology prediction phase estimates the thickness of the PS. As noted, the PS thickness is the result of the complex interaction of large amounts of equipment parameters in the CF production. These parameters lead to a dynamic and nonlinear result to the PS thickness. Using a simple linear regression approach may not provide a good prediction result without clarifying the interaction among several independent variables. To address the issue, we build several prediction models of PS thickness to investigate the relationship among variables and formulate a nonlinear structure to forecast the metrology result. Using the results of the first two phases, the process control phase modifies the recipe parameters in order to obtain the product specification–described dependent variable (i.e., the PS thickness) target can be obtained. The third phase, therefore, is a form of feedback control.
This paper contributes to the existing literature by (1) proposing the data science framework to address the yield improvement issue in the CF manufacturing; (2) identifying the important variables affecting the PS thickness for predicting the metrology result and benefiting the new employee orientation or tutorial; (3) conducting an empirical study of a leading CF manufacturer in Taiwan to validate the proposed data science framework by comparing the current practice in the company. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the data mining and machine learning methodologies used in this study. In Section 3, we develop the iterative data science framework including data collection and preprocessing, variable selection, metrology prediction, process control, and validation. In Section 4, we conduct an empirical study of the leading TFT-LCD manufacturer in Taiwan, to highlight the practical issues, and validate the proposed framework. In Section 5, we conclude and suggest for future research.
