Recent large-scale studies have made the point that Hong Kong university students often experience significant difficulties in studying content subjects in English, due in large part to their problems with academic writing (Evans & Green, 2007). While writing is an essential component in the teaching of English as a Second Language (ESL) in the current curricula of universities in Hong Kong, the traditional focus on grammar correction as the primary (or only) form of feedback is inadequate (Truscott, 1996).
As part of the LCC/SLATE (Language Companion Course/Scaffolding Literacy in Academic and Tertiary Environments) project (Lee and Webster, 2012, Mahboob and Devrim, 2013, Webster et al., 2011), the Halliday Centre has investigated the feedback effect on ESL writing by offering language-tutoring support to Hong Kong university students in their English writing assignments. Students submitted drafts of their assignment to their assigned language specialist tutor, who then graded the drafts on language quality and provided feedback. A major focus of the feedback concerned students' ability to use the full range of options available along what M.A.K. Halliday calls the cline of metaphoricity, ranging between the clausally complex, lexically simple congruent construal of experience at one end, and the clausally simple, lexically dense metaphorical re-construal at other end. A subsequent evaluation of the project (Mahboob, Chan, & Webster, 2013) showed both increased writing proficiency and favourable reception to the tutors’ comments among participating students.
With the goal of making such feedback broadly available to the university student population at large, we are developing an intelligent web-based system that helps students gain mastery both in comprehension and production of the full range of alternatives between what is common in everyday speaking (i.e. the congruent), and what is often expected and thus required in occupational and academic settings (i.e. the metaphorical). The system aims to help university students improve their proficiency in ESL writing tasks, and especially the language of science, which since Newton and Darwin has been characterized by the use of simple clauses whose process expresses a causal or other relation between two lexically-dense nominal groups.
This article presents the current version of this system and describes how it assists students in the use of grammatical metaphor (GM). A proper understanding of the meaning of GM, as well as the disciplines, levels and genres in which GM is appropriate (Devrim, 2015a, Devrim, 2015b, Gardner et al., 2018, pp. 1–30), is essential for students. Accurate analysis on meaning and context, however, cannot yet be reliably performed by state-of-the-art language technology. Hence, the system currently focuses on form, and provides feedback on the lexico-grammatical options in the nominalization of clauses. We report on an empirical evaluation, which suggests that the tool can help students produce more grammatically appropriate nominalization.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Following an overview of grammatical metaphor (Section 2), we describe English Nominalizer, our prototype system for assisting students in nominalizing sentences (Section 3). We present the evaluation methodology on the system's effectiveness as a pedagogical tool (Section 4), and then report our findings from the evaluation (Section 5.1) as well as an analysis on students' nominalizations (Section 5.2). Finally, we conclude and outline plans for future work (Section 6).
