Throughout the world, an increasing volume of vehicular traffic not only causes traffic jams but also poses an important and frustrating problem—finding a parking space. When a driver searches for a parking space, two factors cause an increase in searching time: driver frustration and air pollution produced by vehicular exhaust.
Searching for a parking space is a common global problem that needs urgent solutions. However, the majority of the solutions involve finding a parking space within a parking lot instead of searching for on-street parking. Because a parking lot is a type of fixed-point space with a single type of entrance and exit, the number of empty spaces in a parking lot can be easily calculated. However, the number of on-street parking spaces is difficult to calculate.
To solve parking problems, some renowned automobile companies, such as BMW, in collaboration with the big data analytics company Inrix, have employed the parking spot prediction system “iPark” [1]. This system can assist drivers with finding not only a parking lot but also an available space within a parking lot. According to a survey conducted by Frost & Sullivan, Americans spend an average of 55 h per year searching for a parking space. The parking regulations in every city differ, as explained by Inrix; the number of free parking lots vary by city, and some paid parking lots have time restrictions. Drivers who are not familiar with the road conditions in an area may need additional time to search for a parking space. Some current parking solutions are described in this paper.
Paper [2] proposed a community parking method, which established responsible and trustworthy groups in a decentralized and dynamic manner; group members help each other search for parking spaces in accordance with safety mechanisms. To search for a free parking space, the decision and information transmission and reception require a reliable high-performance encryption and signature algorithm assessment model.
Paper [3] proposed a college campus parking system concept, in which parking spots are a resource that can be collected and shared; this concept is associated with the idea of complement between day and night users. This system considered user demand on service quality and planned temporal and spatial arrangements to obtain an optimal resource utilization rate. The author indicated that the system can also be applied to small cities due to its demand and supply complementary nature.
In addition, paper [4] introduced an innovative strategy of randomly distributing parking spots, which provided an optimal selection method when more than one parking space is available. This paper also proposed a calculation method to achieve stability and feasibility by establishing a mathematical relationship between infrastructure and motor vehicles.
Some papers described a hardware method for information sensing. For example, paper [5] proposed an automatic parking system based on a combination of surrounding monitoring systems and ultrasound sensors. Paper [6] demonstrated the rapidly increasing volume of vehicles in various metropolitan areas, which increases the difficulty of finding free parking spaces and noise and air pollution. This paper proposed an innovative method to encourage vehicles to use wireless sensor networks to locate parking spots. Every parking spot uses three sensors to distinguish the type of parked vehicle, which provides convenience for drivers to quickly find free parking spots in a parking lot.
Most existing techniques are geared toward applications in a parking lot; for example, paper [7] introduced an automated intelligent valet parking management system that can guide vehicles in a parking lot. This management system is composed of two modules: the system functionalities of the first module include environment scanning, suitable parking spot searching, and collision avoidance guidance; the second module screens parking spaces in the parking lot to reduce the parking space searching time.
An important feature of an intelligent transportation system (ITS) is parking guidance and information (PGI), which recommends the best parking spot based on the estimated probability of the time of arrival [8]. Some information can facilitate prediction analysis; for instance, paper [9] illustrated how to obtain a suitable parking spot based on preference and usual behavior. This paper considered parameters such as driver parking duration, arrival time, destination, parking type preference, cost preference, and driving duration, as well as time varying parking regulations and price. Paper [10] investigated dynamic on-street parking in heterogeneous conditions and compared the combination of parking sensors and the vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) strategy.
Paper [11] indicated that approximately 30% of the traffic flow in a congested city is attributed to on-street parking searches. Corresponding on-street parking information is lacking, and the technology application in on-street parking information systems only gradually emerged in recent years. However, this paper employed communication application methods, such as V2V and sensor-to-vehicle.
This study contributes to the system goals in six aspects: (1) improve the indicating efficiency of a cooperative SOI; (2) use a CA model and small world mechanism to achieve on-street parking space searching and recommendation; (3) reduce on-street parking space searching time; (4) improve the success rate and real-time efficiency of recommending on-street parking to drivers; (5) reduce the air pollution problem induced by vehicle exhaust; and (6) alleviate driver frustration.
The rest of this paper has the following organization. Section 2 discusses related research on the Section 3 problem. Section 3 describes the system model. Section 4 discusses the simulation. Section 5 concludes this paper and identifies future research directions.
