The landscape of data analysis in linguistics and other fields is constantly changing. Advances in computational power have made new analytical approaches possible, and the use of open access software such as R (R Core Team, 2013) increases the speed with which new statistical methods are shared both within our field and across disciplines. As accessibility to these methods increases, more and more people within linguistics employ increasingly complex analytical techniques. Parallel to the ever-growing toolkit of statistical methods, there are shifts in methodological traditions and statistical philosophies, with an array of differing views about how data should be analyzed, how it should be reported, and how it should be shared. In sum, the field of data analysis is in flux. Amidst the backdrop of changing practices, it is important to critically assess past practices, to reflect upon present practices, and to look out for what new developments will affect our future practices.
We approach data analysis with George Box’s famous quote in mind, “all models are wrong, but some are useful” (Box, 1979, p. 2). This often-repeated quote embodies a fundamental truth about data analysis: We perform analyses to gain a better understanding of our world and the phenomena we investigate. Statistical models are thus supposed to be “useful”. However, all models are also necessarily “wrong” to some extent, with each model providing only a snapshot of the underlying complexity of the phenomena to be modeled. Models can be “useful” in different ways and to differing degrees, and models can be more or less “wrong” as well. There is no single model that is the best model and that is equally useful across theories and phenomena. This very fact necessarily creates a plurality of analytical approaches, within and across disciplines. Even expert statisticians reach different conclusions when given the same dataset (Silberzahn et al., 2018). Rather than trying to provide gold standards and recipes, we endorse the plurality of approaches and highlight that pluralism calls for comparison, reflection, and a critical discourse about methods. We should not try to elevate any one method to the status of a “best” method or a canonical way of analyzing particular datasets; instead we should discuss the advantages and disadvantages of particular approaches openly.
In line with the idea of plurality, data analysis varies along important dimensions. We would like to highlight a few of these dimensions to not only introduce the contributions to our special issue, but also to review what we conceive as important topics for data analysis in quantitative fields such as phonetics. In the following, we will discuss the distinction between exploratory and confirmatory analysis (Section 2); the differences between null hypothesis significance testing and Bayesian inference (Section 3); and analytical choices surrounding the multidimensionality of phonetic data (Section 4). Beyond reflecting on past and future methods it is also important to think about how data analyses are communicated and shared with the community. To this end, we will discuss the relevance of reproducibility and the benefits of an open and transparent phonetic community (Section 5), exemplified by the contributions in this special issue.
