The discovery of quantitative relationships between morphological properties of microscopically disordered porous materials (like randomly packed beds of spherical particles in liquid chromatography) and relevant fluid as well as solute transport properties, such as the longitudinal dispersion coefficient DL (and plate height HL in liquid chromatography), belong to major challenges in materials science [[1], [2], [3]]. Many processes in adsorption, separation, and catalysis rely on efficient mass transfer besides material functionality, so that the optimization of material performance exposes the detailed understanding of relevant transport properties (such as DL) and transport limitations as major research theme [4,5]. This, in turn, requires the generation of sufficient knowledge about the consequences of material preparation conditions for the resulting three-dimensional (3D) material morphology and process-relevant transport properties [[6], [7], [8], [9]]. The approach is completed by identification of morphological descriptors that sensitively correspond to mass transfer resistances in the microscopically disordered pore spaces [10].
For example, we have previously applied Voronoi tessellation [11] to computer-generated bulk [12] and cylindrically-confined [13] packings of monosized hard spheres, to characterize their degree of heterogeneity and correlate it with eddy dispersion simulated in the packings. Voronoi tessellation partitions the entire packing space into a set of non-overlapping Voronoi volumes associated with local packing density. The Voronoi cell in a packing of monosized hard spheres is the polyhedron that covers all points closer to a given sphere center than to any other, as illustrated by Fig. 1 in two and three dimensions. With the precise knowledge of particle positions, size, and shape, we performed a Voronoi tessellation for packings with systematically varied porosity and microstructure [12], to assign statistical moments of the Voronoi volume distributions (standard deviation, skewness) to the carefully adjusted bed characteristics. The derived scalar measures correlated strongly with eddy dispersion in these packings: We observed excellent agreement between the statistical analysis, revealing a bed-porosity and packing generation-protocol dependent short-range disorder, and the short-range interchannel contribution to eddy dispersion [12]. The latter characterizes eddy dispersion in the interparticle pore space of randomly packed beds originating in velocity fluctuations over a length scale of 1–2 particle diameters [4,5,14,15].Download : Download high-res image (217KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (A) Voronoi cells in a random configuration of monosized disks (two dimensions). The Voronoi cell of disk i (encased by the bold red lines) covers all points that are closer to this disk than to any other. The gray-shaded area represents the contribution of disk j to the Voronoi area of disk i. (B) Highlighted Voronoi cell in a random packing of monosized spheres (three dimensions), where the edges and corners of the cell are indicated by yellow sticks and red dots, respectively. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
While this simple tessellation scheme (Fig. 1) is straightforward for monosized disks and spheres, it has also been extended to polydisperse disks and spheres as well as to irregularly shaped objects [[16], [17], [18], [19]]. However, real packings (like those in liquid chromatography) pose an even greater challenge with respect to the microstructure of particulate beds: In contrast to computer-generated packings of monosized or polydisperse ideal spheres, they may contain packing defects like particle oligomers and larger voids as well as contaminations and particle debris [20,21]. This issue is illustrated by Fig. 2. It is obvious that defects characterized by such a fine structure and a highly irregular shape make extremely difficult the adaptation and evaluation of a spatial tessellation scheme (similar to that in Fig. 1) to capture their influence on the effective longitudinal dispersion coefficient DL and plate height HL at a given average flow velocity (uav).Download : Download high-res image (189KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Packing defects in selected images from physical bed reconstruction by confocal laser scanning microscopy. The interparticle void space is shown in white.
An alternative to the spatial tessellation approach for morphological analysis of packings with defects (cf. Fig. 2), which helps us out of this problematic situation, is to resort to chord length distribution (CLD) analysis [10]. Since the generation of CLDs does not require assumptions about the size and shape of a solid, liquid, or void phase, it is virtually applicable to all multiphase materials [[22], [23], [24], [25]]. In general, the chords sample a geometry by measuring distances between two interfaces set apart by a homogenous phase. For this purpose, seed points are placed, for example, in the interparticle pore space of a packing. From each point, vectors are projected into space until they hit the interface. Chord lengths are then extracted as the sum of the absolute lengths of a pair of opposed vectors. Once a statistically significant number of chords has been collected, they are evaluated and assembled into a CLD. The chord lengths analyse the pore space morphology on a local scale, i.e., the majority of chords probe a single pore, but some chords also probe adjacent pores. Therefore, the CLD reveals information about local and short-range heterogeneities over length scales of a single pore and a few pores, respectively [10].
We have used CLDs in the past to compare the morphologies of silica-based [[26], [27], [28]] and organic-polymer monoliths [29,30], which similar to particulate beds with complex defects (Fig. 2) do not lend themselves to spatial tessellation schemes. In this brief follow-up article, we extend the CLD analysis to physical reconstructions of chromatographic packings. These have been investigated previously, especially in the context of column wall effects [20,21,31]. In the present work, we restrict ourselves to the analysis of bulk regions from these packings, which are unaffected by wall effects, to search for a relationship between short-range bed heterogeneity, parameters from the CLD analysis of the interparticle pore space, and longitudinal dispersion. The dispersion coefficients DL for that purpose are derived by adapting the lattice-Boltzmann method (LBM) to simulate fluid flow directly in the reconstructions, serving as realistic 3D geometrical models, and a random-walk particle tracking (RWPT) technique to determine the transport and dispersion of passive, i.e., non-adsorbing, point-like tracers in the simulated flow fields.
These data for the physically reconstructed packings are complemented by corresponding data for computer-generated packings of monosized hard spheres, for which the packing-generation algorithm has been adjusted to realize a systematic variation of the bed density (porosity) and degree of packing heterogeneity (evaluated after the statistical analysis of the Voronoi volume distributions [12]). This systematic modulation contrasts with a random variation of these parameters in the real packings and will be therefore trendsetting in the establishment of generic morphology–transport relationships.
