Digital forensics is defined as the process of understanding the data on electronic devices [1], [2], [3]. The main purpose of digital forensics is to solve the legal process with the data obtained from these devices [4]. All data transferred to electronic media in digital forensics can be evaluated as digital data and thus data that is not available in electronic devices is digitized and rendered meaningful by image, signal and data processing techniques [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10].
One of the important research topics of digital forensics is biometric data [11], [12], [13], [14]. Biometric data is to ensure that the unique characteristics of human beings are transformed into a unique structure that will define the individual [15]. The main objective of biometry is to obtain a unique identifier by processing the structures such as audio, iris, signature, gait, face with various mathematical or artificial intelligence methods [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. Thus, the identification of the person can be achieved with a gait or an audio obtained from a video. This situation can be an important parameter in proving that the person is guilty or innocence [23], [24].
The most widely used biometric data in the field of digital forensics is audio recognition. Audio recognition is the process of examining and understanding the voices of people in forensic cases. In digital forensics, there are basic problems for instance speech recognition, audio identification, fiction detection in audio. Apart from these problems, the recognition of diseases such as Parkinson’s disease with audio signal is one of the important research topics of our day. Many algorithms have been developed in the literature for many different purposes. Some of these algorithms are given follows. Korkmaz et al. (2019) [25] proposed a method for Turkish vowel classification. The proposed method consisted of pre-processing, feature extraction, feature selection and classification phases. In the proposed method, genetic algorithm was used for feature selection and classification phases. This study assessed according to accuracy and time. Leng et al. (2017) [26] developed a model for audio scene recognition. Probabilistic latent semantic analysis and latent dirichlet allocation were utilized in this method. Two public dataset was used for experiments. Liu et al. (2019) [27] presented a method for voice activity detection. This method based on approximate computing and deep neural networks. Spille et al. (2018) [28] compared automatic speech recognition and human speech recognition systems. The comparisons were presented according to threshold and signal-to-noise ratio. Ariav et al. (2018) [29] presented an approach for speech detection. In this method, recurrent neural network was used. Xu et al. (2018) [30] proposed high performance system for audio recognition. Convolution neural networks was applied in the proposed method. Ooi et al. (2014) [31] developed an approach for audio recognition. Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients was used for feature selection. In classification phase, principal component analysis and linear discriminant analysis were utilized. The success of the proposed method was tested for different emotions. Xie et al. (2012) [32] proposed an improved method for audio recognition. In this method, Mel frequency cepstrum coefficient method was improved. Saudi et al. (2019) [33] presented an improved framework for speech recognition. Gabor audio features was applied to this method and this method was compared to mel frequency cepstrum coefficient, perceptual linear prediction and relative spectral transform. The results were presented according to recognition rate, signal to noise ratio and accuracy. Andics et al. (2010) [34] analyzed neural mechanisms. This analysis was performed for voice recognition. Hernández-García et al. (2019) [35] investigated effect of surgery on voice recognition. This surgery is functional endoscopic sinus. In this study, machine learning techniques were used. For this purpose, data was collected from 67 patients at University Hospital. These data were divided into two groups. These were operated and control groups. Thus, these data were evaluated with machine learning techniques. Accuracy values for different signal-to-noise ratio were presented in this study. Abdalrahman et al. (2018) [36] proposed a voice system. This system was designed for speaker and speech recognition. In this study, mel frequency cepstral coefficients method was chosen for feature extraction. Confusion matrix was presented as evaluation parameter.
The main aim of this paper is to recognize audios which are collected from YouTube. The main problem of the real world audios is not to achieved high performance rates using both hand engineered and deep learning methods. Hence, we presented a novel network and this network is called as dynamic center based binary and ternary pattern (DC-BTPNet). This network is called as a feature extraction network. Also, a special pooling method is used in this method. As we know from the literature and capsule network, single pooling methods are not good solutions for machine learning. Therefore, a multiple pooling method is presented. This method uses mean, median, minimum and maximum pooling methods together and it is called as M4 pooling method. The proposed DC-BTPNet has 9 layers because binary pattern (BP) and ternary pattern (TP) uses 9 sized overlapping blocks. Also, BP and TP extract 256 and 512 features respectively. The proposed DC-BTPNet extracts 756 + 3072 × 8 = 25,344 features. To reduce the sizes of the features, a neighborhood component analysis based feature selection method is used and 256, 512, 768 and 1024 features are selected. In the final phase, the reduced features are forwarded to polynomial kernel support vector machine. The major contributions of the proposed method are given as below.
•The BP and TP have been widely utilized as feature extractor for images and signals. However, they are hand engineered method. They also use 5th value as center pixel and use same patter to extract features. In this paper, each value of the block is utilized as center pixel to extract distinctive features. Therefore, this method is called as dynamic center based BTPNet.•In this article, local image descriptors are used to create a novel deep feature extraction network. The proposed network extracts low, middle and high level features.•As we know from the literature, pooling is not good routing method. Hence, deep learning methods couldn’t achieve high performance in some problems. To overcome this problem, we presented a multiple pooling method by using mean, median, maximum and minimum pooling together to achieve high performance rates. The proposed multiple pooling method is called as M4 pooling [37].•The proposed DC-BTPNet extract 25,344 features. The main aim of the proposed DC-BTPNet is to create a big feature pool and select distinctive features from this pool. Hence, a cognitive feature selection method which is neighborhood component analysis (NCA) is utilized as feature selector. Variable sized (256, 512, 768, 1024) features are used to test the proposed method comprehensively.•To test the proposed method, real world noisy audio dataset is used. The proposed DC-BTPNet is resulted successful on this dataset also it is compared to other widely used convolutional networks (AlexNet, ResNets, VggNets). The comparisons clearly show the superiority of the proposed method. In this view, a novel successful deep method is presented in this paper.•The proposed DC-BTPNet is deep, lightweight and cognitive method. It has 9 layered and it is clearly demonstrated that we present a multi-layered and deep method. Any metaheuristic or gradient descend like optimization method is not used in this paper. Therefore, the proposed method is cognitive method. Also, the computational complexity of the presented DC-BTPNet is calculated as O(nlogn). This is proved that the proposed method has short execution time.
The novelties of the proposed are given as below.
•A novel multiple pooling method is presented.•TP and BP are modified using dynamic center strategy.•DC-BTPNet is presented in this paper.
