The publication of academic papers is inseparable from peer review. Efficient peer review helps academics to screen truly valuable papers. In the current peer review, the number of reviewers and manuscripts is many, even thousands.1 Such large number of reviewers and manuscripts leads to a slow manual assignment, so peer review is very troublesome for the conference chair, magazine editors or fund managers [1]. Hence, the automatic reviewer assignment method has become an important topic in the academic world.
There are many ways to solve the problem of reviewers assignment, and the best way is the text processing method based on natural language processing. A new manuscript should be quite different from other papers in sentences because of the existence of plagiarism detection software. But different manuscripts need to use terminology, concepts, and logic that are common in academia, so text processing methods can capture the field differences caused by these features. These text processing methods mainly include topic model approach [2], language model approach [3], and word embedding approach [4]. Mimno and McCallum [2] used latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) to convert the papers of reviewers and manuscripts into topic features and proposed an author-persona-topic (APT) model to calculate the topic distance between reviewers and manuscripts. Charlin and Zemel [3] calculated the distance between the reviewer and the manuscript by the generative probability of the manuscript’s keywords in the reviewer’s text information. Zhao et al. [4] used the word2vec-based word mover’s distance (WMD) algorithm to calculate the text distance between reviewers and manuscripts and used information of label to classify reviewers. These methods have a common feature of finding the field relationship between the reviewer and the manuscript through textual information. However, the current approach does not allow the machine to know the field from what angle to review the reviewer and manuscript, but only the general text representation.
Manually assigning reviewers requires experts to have a good understanding of the reviewer’s field of research, but how to make the machine understand the reviewer’s field is a huge challenge. There are two challenges in letting the machine learn the reviewer’s field. One is how to tell the machine what is the field knowledge of the person, and the other is how to learn the knowledge. Current methods ignore the first challenge and allow the machine to understand the field feature directly through statistical learning. Therefore, it is difficult to determine the correct angle of learning in the reviewer assignment problem for these methods. Since it is difficult to find accurate labeled data on reviewer assignment problem, the first challenge has been difficult to solve. In this paper, the field relationship between the title of the paper and the abstract is used as the supervision information, so that the model can learn the correct field relationship and overcome the first challenge. For the second challenge, this paper treats the reviewer’s assignment problem as a sentence pair modeling issue, which is a good combination of supervision information constructed by sentence pair. Given two pieces of sentences S and T (sentence pair, such as title and abstract), sentence pair modeling is a type of model that models the relationship between S and T [5]. According to the purpose of the model, sentence pair modeling can be divided into [6]: semantic textual similarity, paraphrase identification, natural language inference, question answering [7] and machine comprehension and so on.
We compare the performance of our sentence pair modeling-based reviewer assignment (SPM-RA) metric to that of seven existing methods on two real datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach significantly improves the recommendation precision by at least 18% on public dataset.
Our contributions in this paper are summarized as follows.
(1)We overcome the challenge that current methods are hard to borrow from human field knowledge. We use the field relationship between the title and the abstract of the reviewer as the supervisory information. This supervisory information greatly expands the range of data that the reviewer assignment problem can be learned and helps machine to understand field relationships from the right perspective.(2)We overcome the challenge how to learn field knowledge by supervisory information for the reviewer assignment problem. We treat the reviewer assignment problem as a sentence pair modeling issue. The sentence pair modeling greatly expands the natural language processing methods that can be used for the reviewer assignment problem, and can learn field relationships very well.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the related research. Section 3 provides the problem formulation. Section 4 explains our proposed model, describes the model learning algorithm and introduces the applications of the model. Section 5 describes the experimental setup, and analyzes the performance results. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper.
