First described by James Parkinson in 1817, Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease affecting around 7 to 10 million people worldwide, being nearly 1 million people only in the United States of America. Also, according to the National Parkinson’s Foundation [1], the number of new cases diagnosed each year ranges from 50,000 to 60,000 individuals. PD is caused by the loss of a neurotransmitter called Dopamine [2], being a chronic, progressive and multi-lesion disease. The lack of Dopamine increases the malfunctioning of the brain affecting the communication among its cells. As a consequence, messages are not sent correctly, which may lead to cases of depression, sleep disturbances, dementia, depression, psychotic features, and autonomic dysfunction [3]. PD patients may also face motor dysfunctions, such as tremor, and an increase in the risk of falls and mobility disabilities due to alterations in gait and posture. It has a tremendous negative impact on the daily routine of PD patients and their families, thus reducing their quality of life [4], [5], [6].
Although non-lethal, life expectancy is shorter for PD patients compared with the general population. Its diagnose is usually performed using a clinical exam and by a neurologist with expertise in movement analysis. The current treatments for PD symptoms include therapy and drugs known as dopaminergic medications, being the Levodopa (L-dopa) the most widely used for such purpose. Another widely employed treatment is the Deep Brain Stimulation, which is a surgical procedure that delivers electrical pulses to brain cells to reduce the effects of the symptoms.
The science does not measure efforts to improve the quality of life regarding PD patients [7], [8], [9], [10]. Computer-aided detection and diagnosis systems based on image processing, neural networks, and other techniques have been widely applied in the pursuit of better results in both treatment and aid of diagnosis [11]. One of the motivations for the development of such tools comes from the fact that pattern recognition and other techniques may be able to detect subtle signs assigned to PD that might not be noticed by a human. Also, they may provide some relevant information to support the final diagnosis. Spadotto et al. [12], for instance, proposed the automatic PD identification using the Optimum-Path Forest (OPF) [13], [14] classifier. A later work of the same group proposed the selection of a subset of features through evolutionary-based techniques, which helped to improve PD identification accuracy [15], [16], [17].
Most works that address automatic PD identification cope with voice-based data. Procedures to identify voiced and unvoiced(silent) periods have been actively pursued to analyze continuous speech samples since most techniques that quantify periodicity and regularity in voice signals are applied in the voiced regions only [18]. Das [19] compared different classification methods (e.g., neural networks, decision trees, and regression) for the diagnosis of PD. The experiments were carried out in a dataset comprised of biomedical voice measurements collected from 31 people, being 23 diagnosed with PD and eight healthy individuals. The approach was evaluated under several methods, with the best results achieved by neural networks with an accuracy of around 92.9%.
However, the clinical diagnosis of PD can also be performed by the identification of some motor signs such as bradykinesia, tremor, rigidity, and even postural instability [3]. A few studies were dedicated to monitor, assist, and aid the detection of PD based on signals collected from accelerometers and other sensors placed in wearable devices and biometric pens, which can provide valuable information of any existing motor dysfunction. Recently, Mamun et al. [20] proposed a cloud-based framework to allow the diagnosis and monitoring of PD. The individual interacts with the doctor through mobile devices connected to the internet. Voice samples are recorded and have features extracted for the diagnosis using machine learning techniques.
Khan et al. [21] worked with different accelerometer data including those from PD patients performing daily activities to find an optimum sampling for human activity recognition. Sama et al. [22] proposed to detect the freezing of gait (FoG), another common symptom in PD patients, based on data collected by a single-waist accelerometer in home environments. The work aimed at the monitoring of FoG to apply real-time cueing strategies by selecting a subset of optimal features. Bächlin et al. [23] introduced a wearable assistant for PD patients that present FoG called “wearable health assistant”, which aims to reduce the number and length of their motor blocks, and thus increase their safety while walking by performing an online movement analysis and providing a rhythmic auditory signal that stimulates the patient to resume walking.
A work on accelerometer-based posture analysis in PD was proposed by Palmerini et al. [24]. A total of 175 measurements are computed from the accelerometer data, and a feature selection technique was applied to select the most discriminative set of measurements to characterize PD and healthy control (HC) subjects. The subset of measurements was used to quantify tremor, acceleration, and displacement of body sway.
Moreover, a significant number of works explored tremor,which is the most common disorder in PD patients. Rigas et al. [25] proposed an automated method to assess both resting and action tremors by estimating the type and severity of data acquired from accelerometers attached to specific positions at a patient’s body. The estimation is based on features extracted from the signals and Hidden Markov Models. Abdulhay et al. [26] used tremor along with gait and machine learning techniques for the diagnosis of PD. They extracted features from signals recorded by sensors placed underneath the patients’ feet and at the forefinger during deep brain stimulation.
Pereira et al. [27], [28] proposed the identification of PD using visual features extracted from a handwriting exam comprised by tasks supposed to be nontrivial for PD patients. The patient is asked to perform some drawings (spirals and meanders) over a guideline that are compared against templates, whose difference between them (tremor) provides information to feed machine learning techniques to classify an individual as either healthy or PD patient. In a later work, Pereira et al. [29], [30] drove their approach to a deep learning application focusing on the signals captured during the same handwriting exams from [27], [28] using a smart pen.1  The signals were mapped into the image domain with different resolutions using visual rhythms and used as input to a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Despite the possible loss of information caused by the mapping of the signals, the approach was able to outperform those proposed in [27], [28].
Although the recent advances achieved by computer-aided detection and diagnosis systems, there is still room to improve research in automatic PD identification. Moreover, any improvement is relevant to early diagnosis. As shown in the work of Pereira et al. [29], signals turned to be a promising data source for the PD identification since more subtle variations can be detected. In this work, we propose an extension of the work performed by Pereira et al. [29] by applying the recurrence plot technique (RP) to map signals into the image domain to further feed a CNN. The RP is a technique proposed by Eckmann et al. [31] that enables to visualize repeated events of higher dimension through projections onto a two or three-dimensional representation. Moreover, CNNs are capable of learning very discriminative features, and their application has provided many promising results as well [32].
In short, the contributions of this work are: (i) to the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of recurrence plots for modeling signals in the context of PD identification, (ii) the investigation of the proposed approach performance under different configurations, and (iii) the accuracy improvement provided by the usage of RP with respect to our previous work [29].
The remainder of this work is organized as follows. The proposed approach, as well as material and methods used as evaluation tools, are described in Section 2. The experiments are detailed in Section 3, and Section 4 states conclusions and future works.
