Selective laser sintering (SLS) is one of the latest 3D printing technology which is used to turn the digital design into three-dimensional physical objects [1]. SLS is one of the main technologies used in lightweight manufacturing, however, there are other techniques available for lightweight manufacturing [2]. It was first proposed by Deckard and Beaman [3] and patented the process of selective laser sintering, however, they were far from the first to use sintering [4]. Sintering is a process of creating objects from powders using atomic diffusion to create three-dimensional objects. Sintering has been used for thousands of years to create everyday objects like bricks, porcelain and jewelry [5]. Similar to other 3D printing technique, an object printed with an SLS printer starts as a computer-aided design (CAD). CAD files are converted to. STL format, which can be understood by a 3D printing apparatus. 3D printing has gained too much importance that researchers are trying to develop designated printers for specific function [6]. Most of the objects printed with SLS are made with plastic powder, such as nylon, which is dispersed in a thin layer on top of the build platform inside an SLS printer. A laser, which is controlled by a computer that tells it what object to “print,” pulses down on the platform, tracing a cross-section of the object onto the powder. The laser heats the powder either to just below or above its sintering point, which fuses the particles in the powder together into a solid form.
Early additive manufacturing equipment and materials were developed in the 1980s. In 1981, Hideo Kodama of Nagoya Municipal Industrial Research Institute invented two additive methods for fabricating three-dimensional plastic models with photo-hardening thermoset polymer, where the UV exposure area is controlled by a mask pattern or a scanning fiber transmitter [7]. The design of the SLS 3D printer has been modified several times in the past all having the same targets, i.e. to improve accuracy and reduce operating cost. This printer, working on additive manufacturing principles, performs sintering layer by layer. Therefore, it is necessary to have a control movement of the beds containing raw powder and the manufactured product by using a well-designed mechanism. An article named “DIY SLS 3D Printer” has efficiently designed this mechanism along with rest of the parts of the printer [8]. Moreover, intensive research has been carried out on various aspects of this technology to improve it and make it preferable over other manufacturing techniques [9], [10], [11], [12]. Adindu et al. analyzed one such improvement in their article in which they shifted the focus of research from printer development to the cost parameters of direct fabrication of metallic finished parts [13]. The most common contribution made by various researchers was to improve technology in terms of time by modifying various parameters such as scan speed, layer thickness and powder handling time. Diego et al., however, inspected an interesting aspect of this technology in their article in which they analyzed the possibilities of this technology to be used for composite or two-phased materials [14]. They deduced significant changes in operating parameters through their findings but all that comes at the cost of the diminished mechanical properties of the part. Furthermore, good results have been observed in SLS technology in dental restorations as illustrated in Ref. [15], but there are challenges for the industrial application of additive manufacturing which are addressed in details in Ref. [16].
This work focuses on the improved design of the SLS printer with a unique heating mechanism to ensure enhanced mechanical properties of the final part. Additionally, a control system is developed that can precisely follow the given pattern and compute a three-dimensional structure with high accuracy by using computer numerical control (CNC), while leaving the option of galvanic mirror aside. The decision of choosing CNC over the galvanic mirror is totally based on the accuracy provided by CNC even though the galvanic mirror is the faster option. The complete design and analysis along with the demonstration of the control system have been illustrated in this paper, however, the final fabricated SLS printer will be submitted in a future contribution.
