The application of artificial neural networks (ANNs) for prediction and optimization of concrete properties is relatively a new research area and recent studies have demonstrated that ANN is one of the best machine learning tools for this purpose (Chopra et al., 2015; Muthupriya et al., 2011; Torre et al., 2015). The comparison between ANN and some classical modeling techniques such as response surface methodology (RSM), Plackett-Burman designs, full factorial designs and randomized block designs showed the supremacy of ANN as a modeling technique in analyzing non-linear relationships of data sets, which consequently provides good fitting for data and as well as better predictive ability (Hacene et al., 2013).
Artificial neural network can be described as a simplified model with a structure similar to a biological network. It imitates the ability of the human brain in performing neurological processes (Ghoushchi, 2015). Through iteration process, the network learns from examples and continues the iteration process until the output is in conformity with the provided response based on the specified level of accuracy. Every example consists of series of inputs and corresponding outputs also known as responses and the network makes changes through the internal connections known as weights (Shihani et al., 2006; Muthupriya et al., 2011; Altarazi et al., 2018; Muthupriya et al., 2011).
In recent times, the application of ANN as a prediction tool by a wide range of discipline including engineering has been on the increase, due to their capability to utilize learning algorithm and recognize input and output relationship for non-linear, complex systems (Alavala, 2008; Zobel and Cook, 2011; Pilkington et al., 2014). ANN technique possesses great potentials for experimental modeling and optimization due to their ability to understand the interaction behind complex processes (Ebrahimpour et al. (2008). ANN is suitable in engineering research since most problems in engineering are non-linear in nature.
Several training algorithms have been explored in ANN such as Powell- Beale conjugate algorithm, Palk-Ribiere conjugate gradient algorithm, Levenberg Marquardt, Scaled conjugate gradient back propagation, resilient back propagation, one step secant back propagation, Flectcher-reeves conjugate gradient algorithm and Quasi-Newton algorithm with Broyden, Fletcher, Goldfrab and Shanno (BFGS) alongside different network architectural parameters. Compared to other training algorithms, LM with tan-sigmoid transfer function was reported to give the best prediction efficiency for concrete compressive strength (Chopra et al., 2015).
Also, multilayer perceptron back propagation algorithm of ANN and multi-layered feed forward with back propagation algorithm of ANN were found suitable for predicting the compressive strength and durability of concrete with good level of accuracy (Hacene et al., 2013; Muthupriya et al., 2011). Also, several number of non-linear functions are available in ANN such as sigmoid, Tanh, Gaussian, Linear, Threshold Linear, Bipolar Linear (CPC-X software 2003). The sigmoid function was observed to be the most commonly used function (Muthupriya et al., 2011).
In the multilayer normal feed forward connection, information flows only in one direction, that is from the input layer through the hidden layer to the output layer, while the multilayer full feed forward accommodates direct connection between the input layer and the output layer as shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (b).Download : Download high-res image (170KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) Multi-layer normal feed forward (b) Multi-layer full feed forward (CPC-X Software 2003).
Furthermore, although there are a number of learning algorithms, the back propagation (BP) also known as Delta-rule algorithms is most often used. Training of the neural network is carried out to match the set of input data fed into the network through iterative adjustment of weights. In this process the weights between neurons is optimized during the learning or training process by the backward propagation of the error. The performance of the ANN was statistically measured by the root mean square error (RMSE), mean prediction error (MPE), using Eqs. (1) and (2).(1)RMSE=∑i=in(Opre.i−Oexp.i)2n(2)MPE=∑(Opre.i−Oexp.i)nwhere the predicted output for observation i is Oper.i, the experimental output is Oexp.i obtained for the observation i and n is the total number of data obs.
Other training algorithms available in ANN include gradient descent back propagation algorithms and genetic algorithm (GA). The gradient descent back propagation measures the output error and calculates the error gradient making necessary adjustment to the ANN weights in a descending gradient direction. There are three kinds of gradient descent back propagation algorithms namely incremental back propagation (IBP), batch back propagation (BBP) and quick propagation (QP). While BBP algorithm performs updating of the network weights once per iteration, as well as processing all the learning data pattern through the network, IBP performs updating of the network weights when every pattern in the learning data set has been presented, instead of updating the weights once per iteration (Ghaffari et al., 2006; CPC-X Software, 2003). QP is a modified back propagation equipped with fast processing time.
On the other hand, GA has the advantage of acquiring an optimal solution from a generational search instead of the one point (local) search employed by the gradient descent and Levenberg Marquardt algorithm. The search is done according to predefined objective functions such as reproduction, crossover, and mutation (Fang et al., 2005; Ghaffari et al., 2006). Also, compared to gradient descent algorithm, LM has the advantage of stability and fast convergence and has been useful in several modeling techniques (Sakamoto et al., 2005).
Recently, the need for sustainability in the construction industry, has brought about the incorporation of numerous wastes in concrete (Thomas et al., 2014; Prusty and Sanjaya, 2015; Maddalena et al., 2014). One of such wastes is steel fiber obtained from discarded tyres. Various researches in this area has found the material suitable for use as reinforcement in concrete and a suitable replacement for industrial steel fibres (Pilakoutas et al., 2004; Gregory, 2005; Papakonstantino and Tobolski, 2006; Aiello et al., 2009; Mohamad, 2011; Syaidathul and Izni, 2012; Onuaguluchi and Banthia, 2018). Furthermore, steel fibers have been identified as having the advantage of reducing the brittle nature of concrete as well as improving the mechanical properties of concrete (Chanh, 2004; Sawant et al., 2015; Hameed et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2011).
In addition, different studies reported that addition of moderate quantities of steel fibres improved the compressive strength (CS), flexural strengths (FS) and tensile strengths of conventional concrete with improved crack control as a result of improved bonding (Pilakoutas et al., 2004; Syaidathul and Izni, 2012). The studies also reiterated the need for development of rapid and reliable prediction model to give an insight into the fresh and hardened mechanical properties of this concrete to encourage its application in the construction industry.
Therefore, the aim of our study is to identify the best ANN training algorithm for modeling the fresh and hardened properties of steel fibre reinforced concrete (SFRC). The five learning algorithm of ANN explored in this study were incremental back propagation, batch back propagation and quick propagation, Levenberg Marquardt and genetic algorithm. The objectives of our study are:
1.Identify the best ANN training algorithm to model the fresh and hardened properties of steel fibre reinforced concrete2.Evaluate the interactions of the investigated variables such as water-cement ratio, steel fibre aspect ratio and cement content on the fresh and hardened properties of SFRC utilizing the identified best ANN training algorithm.
