As the Maker movement becomes mainstream, Making and digital fabrication practices are slowly entering schools as a desirable approach. The question of the actual benefits this brings to individual learners is of utmost importance. A pedagogical approach based on Making has a high cost-benefit ratio due to the non-trivial infrastructure and materials required for implementation at a school, or even in a single classroom. Understanding how integrating Making into a school curriculum affects learner variables will not only help to inform educational policy but also validate the raison-d’être of further research in this area. This paper presents a two-year longitudinal study of the impact of children's engagement in curriculum-aligned Making activities within the formal school context. The study was conducted with 190 students in a low socioeconomic status public elementary school that predominantly serves students from underrepresented populations. While the effects of engaging in Making could apply to a host of potential variables (e.g., learning, comprehension, vocabulary, test performance), the current research focuses on the impact of engaging in Making on the self-concept (i.e., beliefs about who one is). Specifically, we addressed effects on students' self-efficacy, interest in, and identification with both Making and science. We also examined more global effects on career interest in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) and STEM-related possible selves. All of these variables broadly capture beliefs about who one is (i.e. self-concept) and have been shown to have consequences for behavior (e.g., Leary & Tangney, 2002).
We believe that Making, as a set of easily accessible technologies (related to electronics, programming, digital fabrication) enabling construction of artifacts, can affect self-concept variables in both technology and science because, within the formal context of the classroom, it is able to address students' basic psychological needs (particularly autonomy and competence) in a distinct manner. In typical science classes, students are usually given the tools and materials to conduct their science experiments. This certainly does not have the potential to affect students' self-concept as Makers, but is also limited in its ability to affect their self-concept as scientists. In Making-based classes, students build the tools for their science experiments using technology. Because a key characteristic of Making is that it has a “low threshold” (Chan, Pondicherry, & Blikstein, 2013), students are able to both construct their tools and conduct their science experiments using their constructed tools in the formal classroom. This should affect both students’ Maker and science self-concepts, as it leads them to feel that they are more autonomous and competent not only in terms of creating using technology, but also in terms of doing science.
In the following sections, we review the role of Making in education, as well as studies that explicate the effects of Making particularly as they relate to the self-concept. We then describe our approach to curriculum-aligned Making and the various psychological constructs that we hypothesize it would affect. We follow up with our study methods and results.
