Differentiation of the various layers in a semiconductor device is becoming increasingly more difficult as device dimensions decrease. The typical layer thickness in a 22 nm node devices is in the order of a few nanometers, i.e. a few tens of atomic layers. A molecular electronic device may have several carbonaceous layers such as polymers and e-beam deposited layers that have nearly identical chemical composition and nearly no difference in their mean atomic number and their mean inner potential (MIP).
To visualize the layers of such devices in 3D, it is necessary to use an imaging method that provides sufficient contrast between the materials the device is composed of. Often the contrast of bright field transmission electron microscopy (BFTEM) or annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF STEM) is too low and would require high irradiation dose to obtain adequate signal to noise ratio (SNR) for reliable 3D reconstruction (Hayashida and Malac, 2016). The high irradiation dose implies extensive radiation damage (Egerton et al., 2004) and unreliable reconstructed volume. High angle annular dark field (HAADF) in scanning TEM (STEM) can distinguish device layers that have large differences in their mean atomic number, but does not sufficiently differentiate between low mean atomic number layers, such as Si from silicon oxides or carbon films deposited by electron beam evaporation (e-carbon) from polymers. Elemental mapping using core loss electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) requires high irradiation dose due to small inelastic cross section leading to long acquisition time and extensive sample damage. The use of plasmon excitations is not desirable due to high delocalization of the signal (Wang et al., 2008).
While the use of spherical aberration (CS) correctors can decrease the acquisition time by increasing beam current, it does not reduce the radiation damage of the sample (Egerton et al., 2004). The use of spherical aberration corrector implies high convergence angle of the incident beam in STEM and consequent geometrical beam broadening in the sample (Hayashida and Malac, 2016). The high convergence angle is not desirable for 3D reconstruction of practical samples because it reduces the sample volume that can be examined (Hayashida and Malac, 2016). Typically, to observe the entire device structure, such as a transistor in 3D, a cube of data ∼ 100 × 100 × 300 nm3 of data needs to be examined. Isotropic ∼1 nm resolution in the reconstructed volume can be obtained for this size of sample when a small convergence of the incident beam in STEM is utilized to avoid geometrical beam broadening in the sample (Hayashida and Malac, 2016). While ADF STEM works well when imaging samples with large difference in their mean atomic number (Hayashida et al., 2015), it does not help with low mean atomic number sample with a small difference in MIP.
It is possible to obtain phase contrast from low mean atomic number layers with small difference in MIP using a HFPP (Danev et al., 2014; Fukuda et al., 2015; Hettler et al., 2018; Malac et al., 2017, 2012, 2010). HFPP utilizes a uniform thin film placed in the back focal plane of the objective lens, to achieve a phase shift between the direct and diffracted beams (Malac et al., 2010, 2012). The HFPP does not suffer from image contrast ringing due to the cut-on spatial frequency as seen in Zernike phase-plate where direct beam is passed through a hole in a film or in a device (Malac et al., 2012). Recently, a particular implementation of the HFPP concept referred to as a Volta Phase Plate (Danev et al., 2014) has been combined with electron tomography to observe thick biological specimens (Fukuda et al., 2015). The contrast improvement provided by the phase plate was confirmed in projection images of 400 nm thick biological samples.
The applicability of HFPP to thick materials science samples and electron tomography in materials science has not previously been demonstrated. Here we report 3D imaging of a transistor from a smartphone processor chip and a molecular electronic junction using HFPP combined with electron tomography. To ensure isotropic reconstruction of the sample volume, we fabricated a rod-shaped sample of a transistor with 250 nm diameter using a focused ion beam (FIB). Furthermore, we measured interface roughness between e-carbon and bromo-phenyl of the molecular electronics device using a rod-shaped sample with 150 nm diameter. To gain insights in the image contrast origin, we observed a multi-layer test sample composed of carbon/silicon oxide (SiOx) /silicon nitride (SiN)/ silicon (Si) to quantify the relationship between sample thickness, composition and contrast for each layer with and without HFPP.
We start by describing the experimental procedure. We then present the experimental results for the smart phone processor chip, molecular electronics device and multilayer test sample. Then we discuss results of strong phase object simulations of the multilayer to guide the interpretation of future data.
