Methane explosions are the most feared hazards in the coal industry worldwide. Nearly all coal mine explosions initially started with the ignition of combustible gases such as methane, carbon monoxide, etc. How to manage sealed mine areas and keep them under effective controls and to avoid any potential risks, are intractable problems for mining engineers and researchers.
Once the mined-out area is sealed, the gas composition in a sealed mine area changes with time especially in the first few weeks or months after being sealed. Sometimes, this time range is often called “critical” period which historically indicates most explosions have occurred during this time. Hence, it should be carefully watched and well controlled. In order to adequately address the previous problem concern, the following questions may arise: is there any potential risk, what is the probability of an explosion occurring and how severe will it be? In order to answer these questions, an effective way is to develop a reliable method to determine the mine gas explosibility for the sealed mine atmosphere. This task is also very critical for man-aging the sealed mine area, especially for planning and implementing a mine rescue strategy after an accident.
New findings and research developments in recent years may provide possible approaches to address such problem. The flammability of gas-mixture has been studied for a long time (Ma et al., 2014) and still being improved for better presentation both in theoretical calculations and experimental testing (Ma and Larrañaga, 2015). Kondo et al. (2006) developed an extension Le Chatelier’s equation to calibrate the flammable limits for fuel mixtures with considering carbon dioxide dilution effects. The influences by the ambient pressure on the flammable limits of organic gases are investigated (Arnaldos et al., 2001, Carona et al., 1999, Du Plessis, 2014, Humphreys, 2000, Vanderstraeten et al., 1997). Zigmund and Janovsky, (2007) developed the graphical computer software named “Vybuchovy trojuhelnik” for assessment of explosibility of fuel-air mixture. Jacobs and Porter (1998) proposed their algorithms to generate a control chart depicting the changes in percent of combustibles and the lower and upper explosive limits of the current atmosphere. The gas explosion handbook also gave a brief introduction to gas explosion safety. Based on current knowledge of the subjects and experiences, it can apply them to practical problems in the industry (Bjerketvedt et al., 1997). A series of fitting equations are proposed to identify their relationships.
Generally speaking, the gas species changes with time are governed by various influential factors, which will cause the difficulties to understand the changing of underground atmosphere. Therefore, a useful tool, essentially a mathematical model which can inosculate the field reality, to perform such explosibility determination as well as risk assessment and trend analysis is urgently desired. This research work has contributed to an improved ability to understand and analyze the sealed mine atmosphere. In order to aid their working and improvements on the mine ventilation system, a PC-based computer package CCMER (Comprehensive Consultation Model for Explosion Risk in Mine Atmosphere) has been developed. The following sections start with briefly introducing the basic mathematical models which make up the backbones of the computer program package. Key mathematical equations to derive the solutions are going to be discussed and provided. Then, the structure and usages of CCMER are described based on the presented mathematical models. Finally, applications of program are also listed.
