Agricultural production is governed by regulations, such as phytosanitary authorizations and Integrated Pest Management guidelines, that restrict farming practices harmful for the environment (Nikkilä et al., 2012). For instance, the phytosanitary authorizations contain obligations and prohibitions about the place where a treatment can be applied (greenhouse or outdoors) and the amount of pesticide that can be supplied. To avoid information overload, farm software, such as a Farm Management Information System (FMIS), should have a module that guarantee compliance control in operations managed (e.g. spraying pesticides) by ensuring that such operations are conform to the relevant regulations. This module would be easier to implement if regulations were available in both machine-readable and natural language formats (Nash et al., 2011). FMIS refer to a planned system for collecting, processing, storing and disseminating data in the form needed to carry out a farm’s operations and functions (Salami and Ahmadi, 2010). Currently, their functionalities are useful in farms that seek to comply with agricultural standards while maintaining high product quality. However, to meet reliably all these needs, there is a double bottleneck: firstly, relevant information is scattered among different sources and, secondly, it is only available through texts in natural language. For this reason, making them computer-oriented require an analysis of their objectivity, interpretability and feasibility to transform it into a formal representation as a statement in first-order logic (Nash et al., 2011). In order to obtain the logical structure of the regulations, it is necessary to label previously all the relevant information used within the definition of the rule (e.g. crops, phenological stages, temporal relations). However, because of the increasing amount of regulations, automatic techniques supporting the labeling task are desirable.
Although legal language is considerably more constrained than ordinary language, its syntactic structures require labeling approaches using techniques related to Natural Language Processing (NLP) and machine learning (ML) (Maat and Winkels, 2008, Brighi and Palmirani, 2009, Wyner and Peters, 2011, Dragoni et al., 2016). However, despite the huge number of proposed approaches, the problem of extracting rules is still open. Most traditional high performance sequence labeling models are linear statistical models, including Hidden Markov Models and Conditional Random Fields (CRF) (Ratinov and Roth, 2009, Passos et al., 2014, Luo et al., 2015), which rely heavily on hand-crafted features and task-specific resources such as orthographic features and dictionaries. However, such task-specific knowledge is costly to develop (Ma and Xia, 2014), making sequence labeling models difficult to adapt to new tasks, domains or languages.
With advances in deep learning, neural network models have reached state-of-the-art results on many sequence labeling tasks (Lample et al., 2016, Ma and Hovy, 2016). Different neural architectures such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), recurrent neural networks (Goller and Kuchle, 1996), together with its variants such as Long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) have gained prominence in past few years. Collobert et al. (2011) proposed a seminal neural architecture for sequence labeling. It captures word sequence information with a one-layer CNN based on pre-trained word embeddings, followed with a CRF output layer (Lafferty and Mccallum, 2001). dos Santos et al. (2015) extended this model by integrating character-level CNN features. LSTMs have shown great success solving sequence labeling tasks and achieving competitive performance against traditional models (Graves et al., 2013, Huang et al., 2015, Hu et al., 2016).
Deep learning has recently entered in the domain of agriculture. Different areas have introduced this method to improve their efficacy. Some of them are highly related to plant protection; for example, general recognition of plant diseases by leaf image classification with CNNs (Sladojevic et al., 2016, Mohanty et al., 2016) and transfer learning (Ferentinos, 2018) or specific ones such as disease recognition in banana leaves (Amara et al., 2017). There are also works in weed identification (Xinshao and Cheng, 2016, Tang et al., 2017). More works can be found in Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú (2018).
However, the state of the art represented by the previous works, focuses on computer vision techniques. Nowadays, there are very few works in literature that focus on information extraction and the automatic text labeling from regulations. For example, Patil et al. (2013) used unsupervised learning to extract crops, diseases and chemical treatments. Malarkodi et al. (2016) proposed an approach for labeling crops, chemicals, locations and temperatures among others by using CRF. None of these examples have used deep learning techniques.
Despite the proposals approaching the problem of translating from natural language regulations to a set of machine-processable rules, the task still remains challenging but it is promising (Zhang, 2015, Dragoni et al., 2016). We must ask ourselves if today it is possible to develop an information extraction system based on deep learning techniques as a preliminary step towards the future automation of the translation of phytosanitary regulations into formal rules. To address this goal, we evaluate 8 state-of-the-art neural network architectures to label the meaningful parts of textual rules found in a phytosanitary products registry (phenological stages, maximum number of applications, temporal relations, etc.). The phytosanitary products regulations are especially relevant for society because sustainable plant protection is a pressing challenge (Garrett et al., 2006). Moreover, in the Spanish phytosanitary authorizations, regulations can be structured into a set of individual rules which roughly fulfill with the requirements to achieve an automatic compliance assessment (Nash et al., 2011). (i) The analysed phytosanitary rules are obligations or prohibitions which could be encoded in a machine-readable form. We do not have documentation rules. (ii) The rules have a recurrent terminology, which could be modelled with an ontology. (iii) They also have a discrete outcome and, finally, (iv) the required data inputs could be available in future years with the use of technologies related to precision agriculture such as remote sensing, computer vision and FMIS.
The main contribution of this work is an end-to-end sequence labeler based on deep learning techniques for automating the translation of phytosanitary regulations into formal rules. This system automatically labels important parts of phytosanitary regulations without requiring specific resources beyond pre-trained word embeddings from an unlabelled corpus. Thus, our approach can be applied to a wide range of sequence labeling tasks on different agricultural regulations of different countries. We explore three neural model design decisions: character sequence representations, word sequence representations and inference layer. We combine character and word-level representations and feed them into bi-directional LSTM (BLSTM) and CNN to model context information of each word. On top of BLSTM and CNN, we compare two different inference layers: a CRF to jointly decode labels for the whole sentence and a Softmax layer that makes a local decision without taking into account the label context. This research is the continuation of Espejo-Garcia et al. (2018), where the categorization of rules as obligations or prohibitions was evaluated. In this work, we go one step further and we evaluate different deep learning architectures in order automatically label the meaningful parts of the rules.
This article is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the different deep neural networks that we are going to evaluate. Section 3 explains the experimental setup. Section 4 shows the results and Section 5 presents a discussion. Finally, in Section 6 conclusions are drawn and future directions envisaged.
