Among innovation policies, science parks (hereafter: SPs) belong to the traditional supply-side instruments that facilitate networking among actors (Edler and Georghiou, 2007). SPs have existed since the 1950s and have gained increasing attention from academia since the 1990s in regard to their impact (Albahari et al., 2010). According to Link and Scott (2015) a SP is set up as a public-private partnership and the current definition by IASP which is most often used by academia is: “…an organisation managed by specialised professionals, whose main aim is to increase the wealth of its community by promoting the culture of innovation and the competitiveness of its associated businesses and knowledge-based institutions. To enable these goals to be met, a Science Park stimulates and manages the flow of knowledge and technology amongst universities, R&D institutions, companies and markets; it facilitates the creation and growth of innovation-based companies through incubation and spin-off processes; and provides other value-added services together with high quality space and facilities” (IASP, 2017). However, Hansson et al. (2005) stated that due to the broadness and wide application a universal accepted definition has not been decided on.
Many different terms, such as research park, innovation centre, hi-tech park, science & technology park have been used interchangeably in prior SP studies (Chan and Lau, 2005; Vásquez-Urriago et al., 2016). It seems that the popularity of the terminology is country-specific, such as research park in the United States, SP in Europe, technology park in Asia (Link and Scott, 2015), campus in the Netherlands (Hoeger and Christiaanse, 2007; Boekholt et al., 2009), and technopole in the Francophone world (Massey et al., 1992; 5). Also, initiators of SPs may vary from governments, regions, universities, high-tech firms to investors or developers with each having different goals (Saublens, 2007). In the past there have been attempts to characterise SP types. Link and Link (2003) concluded that there are mainly three categories of SPs in the U.S.; real estate parks with no university affiliation; and university research parks with and without tenant selection criteria. Other studies have chosen different criteria. For example, Escorsa and Valls (1996) proposed SP segmentation either by regional policy on technology transfer or SP activity. Zhang (2002) used knowledge intensiveness and size in relation to other real estate properties and Hoeger and Christiaanse (2007) applied a spatial segmentation (e.g. inner city-campuses and greenfield campuses) and a functional segmentation (e.g. high-tech campuses, and corporate campuses). As a result of different dimensions of SPs studied so far, these prior studies seem insufficient for recognising SP types. Moreover, the focal objective of these past studies was not the identification of sound and different types. To do so, a more extensive list of defining characteristics should be used.
Therefore the main research question of this paper is: what are the main characteristics of SPs and which SP types can be distinguished?
The need for a comprehensive SP classification is manifold. In general, a classification or segmentation makes advanced conceptualisation, reasoning, and data analysis possible (Bailey, 1994). It serves as a means to distinguish SPs from other property-based initiatives such as business and light-industrial parks (Shearmur and Doloreux, 2000) and as an explanation of growth differences in number of firms and employees (Link and Link, 2003). Current SP assessment literature does not acknowledge differences in structures, aims, and functions (e.g. Siegel et al., 2003a; Capello and Morrison, 2009).
From a policy perspective, SP development involves risk and capital and it is therefore essential not to take one generic SP model for granted, but further investigate the SP concept for better decision-making (Morlacchi and Martin, 2009). Also, because a clear and shared segmentation of SPs is absent, discussion on SP performance remains difficult (National Research Council, 2009; Ferrara et al., 2015). Although some specific SP cases prove to be effective in enhancing the performance of tenants, the conditions that result in successful SPs remain unexplored (Yang et al., 2009). The exploration of possible distinct types is needed from a policy perspective as various regions have different objectives and therefore require different policy implementation. A segmentation therefore advances the debate regarding firm benefits as a result of different SP models (Siegel et al., 2003b; Saublens, 2007; Capello and Morrison, 2009), and it makes evaluation of SP performance less complex (Lamperti et al., 2017). Empirical proof of different SP schemes could also provide practitioners with useful insight in the adequate design, development, operation, and evaluation of SPs.
This paper adopts an empirical and inductive approach towards the SP context in Europe with limited emphasis on theory, which is in line with research on science technology innovation policy focussing on a specific policy measure (Morlacchi and Martin, 2009). The aim of this study is to come to an empirical conceptualisation of SP types based on their distinguishing characteristics in practice.
To answer the research question, first relevant SP characteristics from prior research are inventoried (literature review Section 2). Then data is collected on SP characteristics through a survey among European SP managers (Section 3) and a cluster analysis is performed based on the (dis)similar SP characteristics to produce a segmentation (Section 4). Lastly in Section 5, conclusions, limitation and directions for future research are considered.
