1.1. BackgroundSmart grids promise an effective energy management solution to world. The advantage of smart grids can not only provide the two-way communication between energy providers and consumers, but also achieve the real-time collection of various analyzed data. Further, smart grids also promote the optimization and development of modern power grid [1]. As some new energies are accessed to smart grids and some new wireless communication network technologies [2], [3], [4] are used into smart grids, it will bring some new threats to the security of smart grids, such as computer malware, malicious code [5], malicious nodes, computer viruses [6], denial-of-service attacks and brute-force attacks [7], [8], [9]. So, some intrusion detection methods are proposed, the most commonly used method is called as the deployment intrusion detection system (IDS) to monitor and defend various network attacks. Fig. 1 shows the overall structure of smart grids. Smart grids applications usually consist of power systems and communication networks. Power system components include service providers, power operation centers, smart meters, household appliances and renewable energy sources. The network communication of smart grids mainly relies on advanced metering infrastructure (AMI). And AMI network is mainly composed of home area network (HAN), neighborhood area network (NAN) and wide area network (WAN).Because advanced metering infrastructure is a key component of smart grids [10], it is very important to deploy a large number of dedicated IDSs in AMI communication network for the security of smart grids. And the role of AMI is to realize communication between utility companies and smart meters, including electricity price information, remote electricity usage readings and other communications. Fig. 2 shows the architecture of AMI network attacked by network intruders. The network intruders mainly attack the AMI’s three-layer network in order to steal user’s data, disclose user’s privacy [11], [12], and even cause the paralysis of smart grids. The network threats in the AMI network mainly include malicious code and malicious software. Attackers can insert malicious code into the memory of an IP-based energy meter for future attack plans [13], and malicious software agents can propagate worms through network traffic in the AMI network [14]. Therefore, some IDSs are deployed to HAN, NAN, WAN, concentrator and data collection center according to their different functions [15]. In smart grids, NAN is the key component of the AMI network. NAN mainly consists of central access controllers, smart meter data collectors and NAN IDSs. The central access controller is responsible for managing the communication between the energy providers and the home area networks (HANs), the smart meter data collector is responsible for collecting related data of each community composed of multiple neighbor HANs, and the NAN IDSs are collaboratively responsible for detecting all related data through NAN. Further, in multiple NAN IDSs, these IDSs can discover their neighbors with each other through information exchange and then achieve the collaborative detection between them.Download : Download high-res image (232KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Network Communication Architecture of Smart Grids.The security risk of smart grids is greatly reduced by deploying IDSs in relevant three-layer networks and instruments, but there are still some security threats and limitations. Although many intrusion detection systems are proposed, some embedded IDSs in instruments cannot run all intrusion detection algorithms [16] due to their resource constraints. Also, single IDS cannot complete all intrusion detections due to its resource constraint. Therefore, the related researches in smart grids mainly focus on the resource deployment and configuration of IDS [17], [18]. The aim of their researches is to let IDSs detect more attacks by making use of detection resources in the intrusion detection network (IDN).Download : Download high-res image (266KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. AMI network architecture attacked by network intruders.However, when the IDN management center configures the detection resource libraries between IDSs, it could reduce the collaboration between IDSs. On the other hand, many attack strategies are also being upgraded rapidly, thus how to employ the collaboration detection between IDSs to effectively detect the new attack strategies is very important when we consider the problem of resource configuration between IDSs. Additionally, there are some similarities and differences between the IDSs in NAN of AMI network and the IDSs in ordinary network. The most important one in these similarities is that the deployed IDSs are required to have a very high detection rate for intrusion behaviors. However, compared with the IDSs in ordinary network, the IDSs in NAN of AMI network are required to have the higher real-time detection of intrusion behaviors. In smart grids, the real-time attack data may lead to that the energy service providers make inaccurate decisions. For example, the wrong real-time meter data can result in incorrect downstream instruction issuance in the metering systems.To the best of our knowledge, some existing collaborative intrusion detection schemes in smart grids do not take into account the optimization of resource allocation and the problem of resource restriction between IDSs, where this problem include the limited number of detection libraries and the network transmission delay. Therefore, we focus on the collaborative scheme based on sharing strategies of detection resource, whose purpose is to rationally promote the IDSs to update their detection resources under the condition of resource restriction. In our proposed scheme, we not only consider the optimization problem of detection resource allocation between IDSs to increase the detection effectiveness of IDSs, but also consider the effect of resource restriction on resource allocation, where we further quantify the effect of resource restriction.
1.2. Our contributionsIn this paper, we analyze the optimization of resource allocation and the resource restriction problem between IDSs in NAN of AMI network,1  then a two-layer collaborative scheme based on sharing strategies of detection resource is proposed. We propose a stochastic game model based on sharing strategies in the first layer and a resource allocation scheme based on distributed resource restriction in the second layer. In this paper, our contributions are as follows:(1)We propose three different payoff matrices of the IDSs which share their defense strategies according to three different detection results of other IDSs in our proposed scheme. In our proposed payoff matrices, we analyze the benefits of sharing strategies between IDSs. Moreover, two key parameters, the benefit factor φ and the difference ratio of the detection resource strategies d, are proposed in the payoff matrices. When an IDSj shares its detection resource strategies with the another IDSi, the IDSi will return the relevant profit to IDSj according to itself strategy behavior.(2)We establish a stochastic game model based on sharing strategies to model the Nash equilibrium of the related stochastic game. In the proposed game model, we provide each IDS with two different options for its strategy updating at each stage in the stochastic game, where the IDS can choose to update to the strategies shared by other IDSs or choose to change to the strategies generated by itself according to the results of the stochastic game.(3)According to the detection strategies generated by the proposed stochastic game, we build a detection resource allocation model under the conditions of limited detection resources and transmission resources, and prove the Nash equilibrium properties of resource allocation between IDSs. Since the AMI network belongs to the private network in smart grids, there are the detection resource restriction problem in the AMI network. In order to solve this problem, we further quantify the effect of resource restriction through Eq. (14) and Eq. (15). When the resource restriction in NAN of AMI network is considered into the proposed detection resource allocation model, the proposed model can more rationally promote the IDSs to update their detection resources.(4)We have conducted some experiments to simulate and test the proposed two-layer cooperative scheme. Further, we compare our proposed scheme with other three resource allocation methods. Experimental results show that our proposed scheme is more effective.
1.3. OrganizationThe rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the related works about resource allocation between IDSs in smart grids are reviewed. In Section 3, we propose a two-layer IDS collaborative resource allocation scheme based on sharing strategies. In Section 4, we have conducted some experiments to test the effectiveness of our proposed scheme. In Section 5, we draw our conclusion and discuss the future work.
