Damage to high-value electronic equipment such as sensitive medical, communication, or infrastructure-control systems would be a major concern during the remediation of buildings contaminated with a biothreat agent such as Bacillus anthracis (the causative agent of Anthrax). During the 2001 Amerithrax incident, seven mail or office buildings contaminated with Bacillus anthracis were fumigated with either chlorine dioxide or hydrogen peroxide, or underwent formaldehyde fumigation of subsections containing mail sorting machines (Schmitt and Zacchia, 2012). Small items of value, computer disks reportedly among them, were fumigated in chambers off-site with ethylene oxide (Canter et al., 2005). Although these buildings undoubtedly contained electronic equipment of value, the total value is likely far less than that of the sensitive equipment found in an airport, hospital, or data center.
Fumigants available for volumetric decontamination of buildings fall into two categories: oxidants (e.g., hydrogen peroxide, chlorine dioxide), and alkylating agents (e.g., formaldehyde, methyl bromide (MB), methyl iodide (MI)). The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) conducted material compatibility testing of hydrogen peroxide, chlorine dioxide, MB, and ethylene oxide under sporicidal conditions using desktop computers as surrogates for valuable electronic equipment (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2010a; b, 2012). Although hydrogen peroxide caused no damage to electronic equipment, separate studies using three different model computers reported damaging corrosive effects of chlorine dioxide (3000 ppm for 3 h) on electronic equipment (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2010a; b, 2012). Additionally, fogging with a liquid solution of hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid was effective under some conditions against Bacillus anthracis on subway railcar materials and did not cause visual damage to a variety of materials (Richter et al., 2018), but the effect of fogging on electronic equipment was not investigated. Less aggressive chlorine dioxide fumigation conditions (lower concentrations with longer contact times) were effective in laboratory testing for specific conditions and were used to decontaminate electronics in the lab and field without substantial impact (Czarneski, 2009; Girouard and Czarneski, 2016; Lorcheim and Lorcheim, 2013; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2014b).
Although the USEPA reported that ethylene oxide did not damage computers, the explosive concentrations required to reach sporicidal activity and its reported carcinogenicity limits it to treatment of deenergized electronics moved to chambers (Lynch et al., 1984; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2014a). Similarly, in-chamber treatment with high-pressure carbon dioxide and water can effectively decontaminated sensitive equipment (Calvo and Casas, 2018), but cannot be employed on a whole-building scale. A recent US Navy study used hot humid air to decontaminate an aircraft inside a hangar, but the impact on aircraft functionality was not reported (Buhr et al., 2016). Mail sorting machines fumigated with formaldehyde during the Amerithrax incident were successfully returned to service and formaldehyde fumigation is routinely used to decontaminate laboratories (Canter et al., 2005; Science Applications International Corp, 2005), but its classification as a possible carcinogen limits its use (Spotts-Whitney et al., 2003).
Identification of commercially-available technologies for decontaminating facilities containing high-value electronic equipment is needed to address known and potential capability-gaps and limited capacity, which could be exceeded in the event of a wide-area incident. Porous materials are difficult to decontaminate using hydrogen peroxide and field-scale structural fumigations have reported difficulties maintaining target concentrations (Rogers et al., 2005; Science Applications International Corp, 2005; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2011, 2013; Wood et al., 2016a). Furthermore, additional studies could reveal incompatibilities of hydrogen peroxide or low concentration chlorine dioxide with critical materials not yet tested. MB is a FIFRA-registered pesticide (Meth-O-Gas 100: EPA no. 5785-11) labeled for use against many insects, but not as a sporicide against B. anthracis (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2017a). Although subject to commercial restrictions as an ozone-depleter, MB is used under critical use and quarantine exemptions (Federal Register, 2015). Unlike chlorine dioxide, MB is not an oxidizing agent and there is no evidence of its gas-phase corrosiveness to metals found in electronics. Separate field trials fumigating a mock-home and a subway railcar containing computers and other electronic equipment reported no damage at the end of the trials (Serre, Personal communication; Serre et al., 2015; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2017b).
A previous USEPA study, however, evaluating the impact of fumigation using a mixture of 98% MB and 2% chloropicrin (added as a warning agent) on electronic equipment (300 mg/L at 75% relative humidity and 37 °C) reported substantial damage to exposed computers. Analysis of the corroded surfaces by LGS innovations, LLC (Alcatel-Lucent, Murray Hill, NJ), implicated chloropicrin in most of the observed damage (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2012).
The present study evaluates the impact of fumigation using MB without chloropicrin under target conditions that were sporicidal in the lab and recently tested in the field (Serre et al., 2015; Wood et al., 2016b). Although no longer a FIFRA-registered pesticide and not currently in use in the US (Sutton et al., 2015), the effect of MI under conditions reported to be sporicidal in the lab was also evaluated (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2014c). MI is expected to be less available than MB during the remediation of biothreat-impacted buildings, but could see niche use if compatible with electronic equipment. In the present study, desktop computers were used as surrogates for high-value equipment and the impact of sporicidal fumigation on computer functionality was assessed using visual inspection and diagnostic software. Metal coupons used in the electronics industry were included to test for corrosion.
