Any electrical or electronic appliance that has reached their end of life and is destined to be recycled or dumped is considered as e-waste. The European Directive 2002/96/EC divides e-waste as waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) into ten different categories including IT and telecommunication equipment (Directive, 2003). Previous studies indicate that generation of electronic waste is almost 10% of the global solid waste stream, but the growth rate is 2–3 times faster than other waste stream (Walden, 2012). The frequent upgrades and rapid product innovations added with decreased prices, especially information and communication technologies (ICT) equipment has contributed to substantial growth of market for electronic products along with increased quantity of e-waste. Subsequently the disposal of the generated e-waste is also required to be carried out in a safe manner using resources and state of the art technologies as significant quantity of hazardous materials (heavy metals, organic pollutants and flame retardants) are present in e-waste stream (Robinson, 2009). However, to avoid the expenses of proper disposal, the major portion of the e-waste generated in developed countries is generally exported to developing countries including Pakistan for further utilization or disposal accordingly (Iqbal et al., 2015, Nordbrand, 2009). Thus, the large quantities of this incoming e-waste to Pakistan are resulting in environmental threat due to improper handling and disposal.
Studies estimate that total amount of e-waste generation in European Union ranges from 5 to 7 million tons per annum corresponding to about 14–15 kg per capita and is expected to grow at a rate of 3–5% per year (Eurostat, 2012). Similarly e-waste generation in China is estimated about 2.3 million tons per year domestically and stands second to the USA with about 3 million tons of e-waste generation per year (de Oliveira et al., 2012). Previous reports estimate the annual worldwide generation rate of e-waste is about 40 million tons (Schluep et al., 2009), whereas, the recent study conducted by United Nations University (Baldé et al., 2014) indicates the worldwide quantity of e-waste generation was around 42 million tons in 2014. According to an estimate, almost 80% of the e-waste generated in developed countries is exported and shipped to Asian countries especially China, Pakistan and India for further processing and informal recycling using crude methods (Lundgren, 2012, Sepúlveda et al., 2010, Umair et al., 2013). The basic reason of e-waste import to Pakistan may be attributed to low labor cost which is less than $ 2.00 for recycling a single unit of computer as compared to $ 20.00 in developed countries (Chi et al., 2011). Moreover, strict laws and regulations are being implemented in regional countries, especially China and India, and it is thus expected that more e-waste will find its way to Pakistan due to non-implementation of environmental laws (Iqbal et al., 2015).
Lot of research has been carried out on the hazardous impacts of the toxic substances present in the e-waste. However, a few studies are available on the e-waste generation and management issues in Pakistan. Study on social life cycle assessment (S-LCA) has been carried out by Umair et al. (2015) and it concluded that handling and disposal activities of e-waste in Pakistan are adding toxics to the environment and affecting the human and environmental health. Thus, it highlighted the need for e-waste inventory assessment along with the detailed study of informal recycling sector in Pakistan. The negligence and little interest of environmental legislators and protection agencies have played a vital role in the increased inflow of e-waste into Pakistan. Recent review by Iqbal et al. (2015) discussed the status of e-waste in Pakistan with estimation of generation and imports. Furthermore, this study also identified some major data gaps which are needed to be addressed to help manage the present and future impacts of informal e-waste recycling in Pakistan (Iqbal et al., 2015).
The present study was designed to quantify the e-waste volume in Pakistan with a specific focus on three major cities i.e., Peshawar, Rawalpindi/Islamabad and Lahore. Home appliances, IT equipment’s and their corresponding wastes have become the main target for e-waste management in most of the developing countries. It is pertinent to mention here that for this study, only those items are selected which form the major portion of e-waste imported to Pakistan. This includes desktop computers, laptops/notebooks, computer monitors and liquid-crystal display units. With that, this study also takes account into identification of practices involved in the handling and processing of e-waste which would eventually be an important pillar for establishing baseline data for effective e-waste management in the country.
