Recent research has explored the ways in which energy systems can be affected by a range of non-energy policies, or what are sometimes described as invisible energy policies [1]. These are those policies that are not purposely designed to intervene in the energy system but do so as a result of the indirect implication of their design. While recent research has explored this specifically in relation to energy demand [[2], [3], [4], [5]], Cox et al. [1] note that comparatively little research has focused on the education sector, in particular the link between education policy and energy demand (p.29). This is an important area of research given that education is the second largest consumer of energy in the UK service sector [1,2]. Furthermore, within Higher Education (HE), research-intensive universities have been argued to be significant contributors to HE carbon emissions. For instance, the 20 institutions that belong to the Russell Group (known for their research intensity), collectively contribute to over half of the UK’s Higher Education Institution’s (HEI) carbon emissions [6].
This paper builds on this growing, but small area of research. It adds a new perspective by exploring invisible energy policies using a governmentality approach, and is the first qualitative paper to explore the role of non-energy policies in teaching and research laboratory spaces. In doing so, we reveal points of tension in Higher Education (HE) in relation to sustainability (including energy) and most notably relating to the neoliberalised agenda of the HE sector. Indeed, it is these ‘tensions’ we wish to bring more readily to the fore, and in doing so create space for more debate and dialogue within and across the energy community, policy domains and higher education sector. We highlight the ways that neoliberalism can work against ideals of sustainability more widely, and reducing energy consumption specifically.
Based on a case study, this paper demonstrates the role of national and local-level invisible energy policies as experienced in research and teaching laboratories within a department of a UK university. This suggests that the way in which the ability to ‘do good science’ is perceived and practiced is driven by a broader university agenda on productivity, competitiveness, and income growth, which thus influences the activities and levels of energy demand in these spaces where science is done. This paper uses a localised example of intentional energy policy (the ‘Triad’ warnings1) to explore and demonstrate how tensions between ‘productivity’ and energy demand emerge, and how governmentality can be used to understand the complex ways that policies and other technologies of governance act on researchers in multiple ways.
The framing for this paper is set across a number of key literatures including the current literature on invisible (non) energy policies, governmentality and also an emerging literature on campus sustainability. Although this research is focused specifically on energy, ‘sustainability’ is often the main framework with which institutions engage with energy in the context of carbon emissions. It is therefore important to engage with the setting of sustainability, to understand and explore how conflicting priorities emerge in relation to energy within HE. The following Section (2) explores how sustainability, energy demand and invisible energy policies are positioned in the context of HE, Section (3) then sets out our conceptual framing. Sections (4) and (5) set out our case study context and methodology, followed by our results and discussion and reflections (Sections 6 and 7) before ending on our conclusion (Section 8).
