The Internet has witnessed an explosion of video sharing sites in the recent years. Among them, YouTube is one of the most successful one (Gandomi & Haider, 2015; Orús et al., 2016). Its great achievement lies in the combination of rich media and more importantly the social networks. The growth of User Generated Content(UGC) on YouTube (Burgess & Green, 2013; Lee & Lehto, 2013) has revolutionized education too. YouTube has changed the way people learn. It has brought classrooms in our pockets. We can study anytime, anywhere and at our own pace on almost any topic we are interested in (Cheng, Dale, & Liu, 2008; Lee & Lehto, 2013). The Online Educational channels on YouTube have changed the way education is perceived. Our main goal in this paper is to understand the popular characteristics of educational videos and model the video and user behaviour. This can have substantial technical and business impact. There has been considerable amount of research that has been done to show how videos help students learn better. In (Ljubojevic et al. Vaskovic), the authors study the effectiveness of multimedia in making teaching more effective. Similarly in (Mthembu & Roodt, 2017), the authors demonstrate the effectiveness of YouTube videos when shown in classrooms to the young students. It was observed that the attention and interaction of the class improved considerably by using these videos in class. In (Jung & Lee, 2015), the authors try to find the factors that have led to the success and acceptance of the YouTube videos for education among the university students and (Karvounidis, Chimos, Bersimis, & Douligeris, 2014) evaluates the effectiveness of the web 2.0 technologies for the development of education. All the above works were mostly concerned in studying the efficacy of multimedia, web 2.0 and YouTube in the development of education. However, very little work was done in the modelling and statistical analysis of the educational content present in the YouTube. In (Cha, Kwak, Rodriguez, Ahn, & Moon, 2007), Meeyoung et al.performed the statistical analysis of the YouTube videos and found significant results regarding the popularity distribution, evolution of videos on YouTube and the user behaviour. However, these characteristics would differ significantly based on the content of the video. For example, movies, songs and sports would be having significantly different characteristics compared to the educational videos present on YouTube.
Hence, there is an urgent need for the modelling and statistical analysis of the educational videos on YouTube which could assist the content creators and the business owners to improve their channel experience. For deeper study of these characteristics, it would be more useful if the analysis could be done on channel owners data as it provides much more detailed data for analysis which is not available publicly. This analysis could be used for making better educational content by understanding the user behaviour and interests. It can also be used for performing search optimization by the content creators and improving recommendation systems by the educational advertisers. Hence, to understand the nature and impact of YouTube EDU videos, we analyze a popular YouTube Educational channel owned by the author of this paper. The channel has got millions of views, thousands of subscribers, and hundreds of videos. Being the channel owner, we were privileged to get the channel related data that cannot be mined by any third party or outsider. Our analysis of this privately owned data reveals some very interesting characteristics about the educational videos on YouTube. The highlights of our work and findings are summarized below:
1.Seasonality and Trend of Views per Day: We use Fast Fourier Transform and Moving Average to find the seasonality and trend of views per day of our channel. We discover that views per day of our channel are periodic with a period of six months. This very closely relates to the semester system followed in the technical institutes and universities across the world. The seasonality of data can be used to predict the best time to publish educational videos.2.Effect of Video Upload Activity and age of videos on channel Viewership: We carried out t-test to find the correlation between upload activity, the age of videos of the channel and its viewership. The viewership increases with the age of the channel and it also increases with the upload of new videos. However, it is pertinent to consider the effect of similar content uploads from other competing channels. This can stall the increase in viewership to some extent. The result can be utilized for planning the optimal upload and update of content for the channel.3.Classification of Videos: We used decision tree based classifier to classify the videos based on the number of comments, subscribers, shares, and likes. We also sorted these features based on their importance and found out that the importance of feature from highest to lowest is given by (1) number of subscribers (2) number of likes (3) number of play-lists the video is added to (4) number of shares (5) number of comments and (6) average percentage viewed. These features could be used to predict the popularity of a video based on the initial trend and certain strategic and business decisions could be made to provide an incentive to the video-lecturers and upload more of his/her lectures on a new topic.4.Geographical Location of Viewers:Using the latitude, longitude data for the viewership, we produced the global heat map using an R package known as rworldmap. We discovered that the location of viewers is closely related to the location of the industry it caters to. Our channel is related to programming and software interviews. We found that consumers of our videos were mostly from locations like India, USA, Canada and European countries where software is a major industry. Moreover, the location of viewers is also correlated to the country of origin of the video lecturer due to native accent and language affinity. This result can be used to customize the video content according to the given parameters.5.Cumulative distribution function: Cumulative distribution function (Ross, 2014) of the number of comments, the number of likes and number of subscribers per day were constructed from the channel data. Similarly, cumulative distribution function for views, likes, shares per video was also analyzed. This data can be used for modelling these channel and video characteristics and answering important academic, technical and business queries.6.The Effect of Video Length on Views, Average percentage viewed and use of Translations: We created a scatter-plot for (i) The number of views and length of the video in minutes and (ii) Average percentage of the video viewed and the number of views. Most of the popular videos are around 10–15 min in length. Short length videos are not always effective in explaining the concept well and lengthy videos can bore the audience. We observed that most of the videos are watched on an average for only 30–50% of their length. So, we infer that medium-length videos should be preferred and initial part of the video needs to be exciting enough to keep the users engaged till the end.7.Zipf Distribution and the Pareto Law: When we analyzed the rank of videos in terms of the number of views, we found that number of views of videos were inversely proportional to their rank in the viewership table. This phenomenon is known as the Zipf law (Adamic). The same phenomenon was also observed for number of subscribers, number of comments, number of likes and number of shares of videos and the video rank. The inherent Zipf distribution could be used for finding a lot of properties of the educational videos on YouTube. This knowledge could be used in constructing better recommendation system and search optimization techniques. It can also be used in deciding the value of cost per click of advertisements on YouTube.8.Devices used, operating systems, playback location, and traffic sources: We also studied the most prevalent Operating System, Devices used for watching these videos, the playback locations and the traffic sources of the videos. Windows and Android turned out to be the favorite operating systems. Computers and mobile phones are the top two devices for viewing videos. YouTube Search page, suggested videos and playlists were the most important sources of traffic. These data could be used for making better tailor-made videos keeping in mind these device type and OS. The knowledge about the traffic sources, demographics and playback locations can be useful for making videos that cater to the given audience.9.Content Based Analysis: In this section, we have tried to capture user behaviour based on the content of the video. We have tried to derive the relationship between the audience and the topic of the videos. We have shown how the user behaviour changes in terms of views, likes, shares and comments with respect to the change in the relevance of the content. We observed that the individual playlist's average likes, shares and comments differ vastly from that of the channel as well as from each other. This is dependent on the topic of the playlist. This information can be used to suggest that the coherence and correlation between the playlists help in garnering a better viewership.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first ones to use channel owner's data to provide a deep insight into the educational videos available on YouTube. Most of the results provided in this paper cannot be mined from YouTube by a third party or an outsider. We believe that our results and analysis would be pivotal in answering some of the most pressing questions regarding the academic and business strategies and opportunities available in the educational industry.
The results presented in this paper would provide valuable information to educational video creators, Universities, Massive open online courses, and trainers. It can assist the content creators in finding out who their audience is, what are their interests, how to keep them engaged and what is the general attention time span. Our analysis can be used to know the demographics, the device and the Operating System used by the audience so that the contents can tailor-made for them. The results can also be used to model the random and stochastic process involved behind the YouTube videos and audience.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the related work. In Section 3, we perform time series analysis of our YouTube data. We find the seasonality and trend of our YouTube channel. We also find out the relationship between various features of a video and find the relative importance of the features in Section 6. In Section 5, we find the effect of the age of channel and video uploading activity on its popularity. In Section 6, we find the relationship between the rank of a video and its various attributes. In Section 7, we provide the cumulative distribution function for various channel parameters to better understand the characteristics of the educational video on YouTube. In Section8, we provide a heat map of viewers to study the geographical location of the audience and their numbers. In Section 9, we describe the operating system and devices used for watching education channels. We also provide the important traffic sources, playback location, and information regarding the age and gender of the viewers. Finally, in Section11, we provide the conclusion of our work.
