Celiac disease is a critical lifelong autoimmune condition, whereby the consumption of gluten (protein that is present in barley, rye, and wheat) will damage the small intestine of genetically vulnerable individuals [1]. The disease is due to the inflammatory reaction in the mucosa of the small intestine that is resulted from a dysregulated immune response, stimulated by ingested gluten [2]. Fig. 1 shows some examples of healthy and damaged villi. Intestinal villi consist of millions of finger-like projections extending from the lining of the small intestine, that enable the efficient absorption of nutrients from digested food. When the villi are damaged or inflamed, they become flattened and are unable to absorb nutrients, leading to malabsorption.
This disease affects roughly 1% of the human population globally, although the majority with celiac disease are undiagnosed [3]. Furthermore, the prevalence of this disease is multiplying at a fast rate. Thus, there is a need to develop a proper diagnostic technique to accurately diagnose celiac disease [4]. This is also because it is difficult to diagnose celiac disease, and it is often misdiagnosed. However, if the disease is left untreated, there will be long-term health effects; celiac disease is correlated with having a higher probability of developing cancer and it might possibly also contribute to the onset of other autoimmune diseases.
Celiac disease may be divided into classical, non-classical, or silent, as stated by the World Gastroenterology Organization [5].
Classical: This group presents clear signs and symptoms of malabsorption which includes weight loss and diarrhea.
Non-classical: This group experiences slight gastrointestinal symptoms without explicit indications of malabsorption or are present with unassociated symptoms.
Silent: This group is also termed as having asymptomatic celiac disease. No clear symptoms are exhibited but the patients experience villous atrophy within their small intestine.
Presently, endoscopy with biopsy is the gold standard to confirm the diagnosis of celiac disease [6]. Typically, the healthcare professional inspects the duodenum, as it is the entrance to the small intestine, and is considered the area that is often the most affected. However, the procedure is invasive, time-consuming, and costly. By comparison, video capsule endoscopy is a pain-free, noninvasive, and more economical alternative to standard endoscopy [7]. Furthermore, it has portrayed its sensitivity toward the detection of celiac disease, and it can capture images of the entire small intestine. The pill-shaped device, which contains a video camera, is swallowed and subsequently travels through the gastrointestinal tract. A data recorder will be attached to the patient’s body and then is removed after eight hours. The pill will be expelled from the body in the stool after one or two days.
Following data acquisition, images obtained from the data recorder are characterized according to Marsh’s criterion [8]. Nevertheless, the grading of the endoscopic images is somewhat subjective and is susceptible to inter-operator variabilities. Therefore, it can be relatively challenging to manually diagnose the patients. Moreover, the lack of physician awareness of celiac disease plays a part in the underdiagnosis of the disease. Thus, a computer-aided detection (CAD) system for celiac disease using video capsule endoscopy images is proposed to aid doctors in the diagnosis of the disease. Also, in this study, previous work conducted using video capsule endoscopy are summarized and discussed.
Download : Download high-res image (629KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A representation of (a) healthy and (b) damaged villi.Adapted from: https://www.dreamstime.com/stock-illustration-celiac-disease-medical-illustration-modification-intestinal-mucosa-subject-image41508355.
