There has been a long history of classifying the steel materials by observing sparks emitted by the grinding wheel [1]. An experienced worker would observe the spark of the unknown piece of steel, and then compare it to the spark patterns of the known steel [2]. Spark observation is not only a simple and effective method, but also a quick and inexpensive way in industrial practice. The force applied to the grinding wheel can change the amount and configuration of the spark [1], and the spark observation method is only suitable for experienced workers. To overcome those limitations, computer recognition is adopted to identify spark images captured by mobile phone or camera, which make restriction smaller and raise spark testing efficiency. Computer recognition has high speed development and widespread applications in recognition field, such as Fingerprint Recognition and face recognition [3], [4], but seldom applied to spark recognition. Takeo Nakata [5] developed an automated spark testing technique to measure carbon content in steel material based on image processing. This technique detected the explosion spark and the streamline sparks in all captured images, and calculated the explosion spark ratio, which is defined as the number of explosion spark divide by the number of all spark. There is relationship between the explosion spark ratio and carbon content. However, the detecting method only applies a narrow carbon contents range 0.1%-0.44%, and the explosion spark ratio is difficult to recognition accurately. Spark displays approximate self-similarity, and could be described by fractal dimension quantitatively. Box counting method is a typical method to calculate fractal dimension and widely used in measurement field, in recent years it was developed to determine the phase fraction [6] and evaluate surface quality [7]. The fractal dimension will change, along with the carbon content change. So it's feasible to measure carbon content by image processing and box counting analysis.
