Soil degradation is related to loss of vegetation and organic matter, soil compaction and increase in soil erosion by water or wind (Novara et al., 2011, Arjmand Sajjadi and Mahmoodabadi, 2015, De Oro et al., 2019). Wind erosion is a worldwide environmental concern (Furieri et al., 2013, Borrelli et al., 2014, Wang et al., 2015, Houyou et al., 2016). Therefore, study of these processes contributes to appropriate soil management and its adequate use in agriculture.
Wind erosion is the detachment, transport and deposition of particles by wind. An important part of our knowledge of this process comes from studies using wind tunnels, which are good tools for simulating movement of particles by wind. There are two main types: stationary and portable wind tunnels, which are used for working under laboratory or field conditions, respectively.
The measurement of soil wind erosion rates has always been one of the main objectives of environmental and agronomical studies on wind action. The systems employed have undergone profound changes over time, in general, because of progress in techniques and greater knowledge of the phenomenon. Thus, from Cornish studies in 1900 quantifying sand transported by wind, using visual estimates and formulating mathematical expressions to measure the erosive action of the wind, later studies focused on other types of experimentation. When the wind vector intervened, attention focused on fluid dynamics and its laws, and experiments with reduced models were addressed. These models reproduced the phenomenon by means of the movement of air, similar to nature. Researchers have had and will continue to have a great predilection for this type of work, which has led to the progressive development of wind tunnels. There are many other wind tunnels, such as the one used by Ferreira and Fino (2012), but few of them are portable for use in the field.
The first wind simulator designed to quantify soil wind erosion directly on the surface of the ground used an artificial air stream. A drawback of this simulation was that the air flow generated by the fan directly onto the study surface was basically laminar, while in the atmosphere, laminar and turbulent air flows coexist. Therefore, simulations carried out with them did not resemble real conditions closely enough.
Quirantes (1987) modified that simulator, changing it from a channeling system into a tunnel. This tunnel (Fig. 1) presented significant advantages over the methods indicated above, mainly regarding control of conditions and particle capture in the air stream. However, it also had some disadvantages, such as its heavy weight and volume, which hindered transfer and manipulation, and the end of the tunnel was made of a 1–mm–thick sheet which the wind could only act on in the study area. The problem arose when observing particle displacement over the metal base, which did not respect the natural roughness of the soil. The aspiration collection system, consisting of several nozzles connected by tubes to filter traps, also represented an important deficit, as it was only able to collect samples in suspension. Soil wind erosion not only suspends particles, but also drags them (saltation and creep), and this method could not capture them.Download : Download high-res image (274KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Wind tunnel proposed by Quirantes (1987).
Another well-known more recent wind simulator (Fig. 2) was designed by Fister and Ries (2009). In this case, wind speed was not regulated by varying the fan speed, as usual, but by adjusting the fan blades to different angles. The fan was connected to the tunnel through a stretched PVC tarpaulin and a honeycomb structure that simulated natural wind conditions (laminar and turbulent) quite well. However, the open sediment catching area was an ineffective sampling system. Moreover, it was difficult to transport and install. Other tunnels developed, like the one by Zhang et al. (2011), have sand traps, where the number of grains that have been moved to each of the sections is measured manually later.Download : Download high-res image (363KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Wind tunnel proposed by Fister and Ries (2009).
Our new prototype is designed as a simulator combining all the positive aspects above, while eliminating the negative ones. It also adds some new components to satisfy the requirements of adequate soil wind erosion field studies for improving environmental aspects related to soil degradation through the use of modern sensors. Thus, more accurate measurements and more reliable analyses are possible, and tests can be performed faster while facilitating trial comparison.
Raupach and Leys (1990) posited aerodynamic criteria which must be fulfilled for the air flow near the ground surface to reach a well-developed equilibrium boundary layer, sufficiently deep to contain particle motion in the inner region where the mean wind speed profile is logarithmic and uniform over the eroding area. Correct design of a wind tunnel for analyzing saltation mechanisms depends on a physical factor, the Froude number, which is a dimensionless value describing flow conditions in a spatially restricted environment. This is crucial in planning the wind tunnel dimensions, and was considered during the design of our tunnel, including another new consideration related to the sensor system and automation of analysis instrumentation.
Image analysis for particle counting and morphology is a recurrent process in such research. Ahlers and Alexander (1985) performed the first particle count and morphological analysis using image processing techniques for characterizing biological objects with ImageProplus by King et al. (2002). Woehrle et al. (2006) used a specific image package designed for nanoparticle analysis. Radice et al. (2006) used image analysis techniques and velocimetry to analyze and measure moving particles. Likewise, Scheres et al. (2008), using Xmipp software (X-Window-based Microscopy Image Processing Package). It is an open source program which has developed a particle analysis protocol in electron microscopy. Scheres used this software and refined techniques in a solution making use of self-organizing maps. In a study by Ishizu et al. (2008), image processing was used for particle detection by classifying image backgrounds by variation in color in the RGB space (the image sensor is composed of three different photo receptors acquiring Red, Green and Blue color components, Osroosh et al., 2018). Thus, although the use of image analysis for particle counting and morphological analysis is intensive in other fields of scientific activity, it is not in the field of soil transport and wind erosion research, where its use is much more unusual.
Our objective was to design an automated wind tunnel for studying soil wind erosion that is portable, easily transported by two people to the place of measurement, and set up quickly and easily, so that several different measurements can be made in different parts of the study area the same day. The design also had to be able to achieve the same wind conditions in all experiments to be performed.
