In the philosophy of science, there are discussions on knowledge transfer as a form of epistemic translation between science-theoretical abstract models and closed-system physical/simulated systems (Humphreys and Imbert, 2012, Morrison, 2015, Weisberg, 2013). However, there is not yet a knowledge transfer model describing the knowledge transfer of open-ended complex systems at a social-epistemological level, such as that of knowledge transfer involving polycentres of technoscientific actions spread over a longue durée of space and time. The attribution of longue durée is justified in terms of the recurrence of recognizable epistemic patterns even with the translation of that knowledge over rapidly evolving epistemic or non-epistemic circumstances (Grote, 2015). The specification of the longue durée is applicable to knowledge societies that have undergone periods of disruptions to, and ruptures in, their traditions of knowledge, usually because of colonialism, thereby resulting in truncated timelines for the development of intellectual events that would otherwise have had more time to take root and evolve over a timespan longer than a mere matter of decades.
At present, most discussions of macroscopic and complex forms of knowledge transfer in R&D (research and development), innovation, and science and technology studies are taken up, mainly, in management, policy, geographical, economics, and sociological studies (Böcher and Krott, 2016, Howlett, 2011, Lin, 2000, Nilsen and Anelli, 2016). Moreover, in knowledge transfer systems that consider the relationship between developed and developing nations, the focus has always been on inter-firm or inter-organizational (commercial or otherwise) forms of co-operations (Goel and Rustagi, 2006, Narteh, 2008). A knowledge transfer model that takes into account open systems operating across vast timescales, as well as epistemic, social and geopolitical inequality, is needed for a systematic and critical accounting of the historical and sociological development of knowledge systems such as that represented by the Malaysian nuclear science and technology programme discussed here.
Porous and ever-shifting political, economic, and epistemic boundaries inform the development of Malaysia's nuclear science and technology programme. These boundaries are illustrated in Harris's (2011) three concepts of knowledge geographies. The first concept concerns static knowledge. In Malaysia's nuclear case, static knowledge pertains to agricultural and industrial needs, hydrology, medical infrastructures, and the measurement of radioactive fallouts. The second concept governs “kinematic geography of movement,” which is represented by the transfer of resources (from grants-in-aid to books and training manuals), ‘portable’ experts (Mehos & Moon, 2011), instrumentation (research reactors and irradiating instruments), and standards for building research programmes. The third instance is represented by the “dynamics of travel” involving technical attachments to laboratories, research institutions or universities abroad; the periodic visits of experts sent via the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), submissions by Malaysia-based scientists to IAEA's online repository INIS; and presentations of technical progress at meetings.
However, the transfer of expertise between donor and recipient produces inequity because the knowledge remains coupled to the primary expert, and requires the latter's continuous management. Reinhardt (2011) discusses knowledge transfers from the perspective of service, training and collaboration; service involves the transfers of knowledge and information from entities producing that knowledge to external clients, training focuses on the expert training of peer scientists or technicians, while collaborations involve the establishment of mutual benefits, usually among actors located in different industries, but with a shared interest in deploying specific techniques or expertise.
While the framing of knowledge diffusion/circulation by Harris and Reinhardt are both applicable to the case considered here, the perspectives offered are only partial because neither of the frameworks could sufficiently explain how nuclear knowledge transfer contributed to instantiating the scientific values and practices of an emergent nation, nor how a recipient nation such as Malaysia, having entered late into scientific modernity, could catch up without sacrificing their intellectual independence while reclaiming epistemic agency in the process.1
The model of knowledge transfer that will be proposed is not concerned with the direct benefits of knowledge diffusion between parties and how to accrue these advantages. Rather, the model intends to address the transitional phases that influence and impact the epistemic attitudes of a state actor or institutional entity when the latter evaluates and re-evaluates its science and technology policies and knowledge process in relation to its identity and position within a global technoscientific exchange. Moreover, science and technology in service of bread-and-butter issues and the public good (Gwynne, 2011) or public interest (Carrier, 2011) will affect how science attains social legitimation and authority in developing nations such as Malaysia. Carrier points to two worries associated with the politicisation and commercialization of the scientific enterprise: the selection and establishment of a research agenda, and the testing and confirmation procedures of science. He is concerned with how short-term agendas driven by politics and commerce, rather than honest inquiry, could turn morally and epistemically repugnant.
In addition, the seeming preference for applications-based or development-driven research by developing nations was encouraged by the same developed nation waxing lyrical over the importance of basic research, as emphasis was put on transferring knowledge considered as fulfilling developmental goals rather than driving foundational inquiries (de Greiff & Olarte, 2006). The ‘imported’ science did not come pre-packaged with easily transferable scientific traditions; and the pressures of catching up in the age of globalization are greater than the ability to maintain a disinterested stance when funding is precarious and the timely production of results is required for the research to receive continuing support. One such compromise that Malaysia has to make is encapsulated in Carrier's suggestion that doing research in the context of science application does not diminish the epistemic quality of the science; what is required is the instituting of checks for maintaining accountability.2
Therefore, this article advances a model of knowledge transfer that represents how a still economically developing state actor, which is Malaysia in this case, could move from epistemic dependence to increasing independence in the production of technoscientific knowledge. Such a model is only applicable to epistemic state actors that have arisen as a result of 1) postcolonial reorganisation 2) enculturation of different epistemic systems, even if the state actor had neither undergone geographical reconfigurations nor been a recipient of colonial interventions, stemming from major epistemological (and intellectual) shifts as an outcome of the modernisation project.3
The generalizability of a model at a macro level does not preclude micro-level adjustments to fit the different narratives of entities sharing intersecting characteristics. Moreover, outright generalizability becomes difficult when one has to attend to a plurality of contextual circumstances evoked by a single concept. For instance, doing research in the context of application could just as much mean, within certain social contexts, the integration of native/indigenous knowledge with modern ‘western’ science in scientific research, as much as imply, a privileging of applied science over pure science or curiosity-driven research.
The most proximate knowledge transfer model (from a science policy perspective) that takes on a three-tier/three-phase structure is the RIU (Research, Integration, Utilization) model, referenced above (Böcher & Krott, 2016), that considers how science and policy stakeholders could interact, and what both sides could do to optimise and maximise communication and understanding to ensure the successful transfer of science and technological knowledge to political actors with the most power to deploy that knowledge towards public good. However, the model is limited to an examination of closed systems (such as knowledge transfers taking place among entities within the same nation state). Further, the model focuses on the pragmatic motivation behind knowledge transfer of states that are already scientifically well heeled, in contradistinction to the proposed model's intent at unpacking conditions that drive the pragmatic and utilitarian impetus of states that are still catching up scientifically, or lacking in scientific pedigree and capital.
Therefore, the proposed model, abbreviated to ETTLG: epistemic transition, epistemic transplantation and localisation, as well as epistemic generation, extends beyond the RIU model by scaling up the multiple forms of knowledge transfer between different categories of allies across international (and transnational) political and technoscientific timelines. These allies could be internal to the sciences (whether within the same or different scientific disciplines) or external agents (involving interactions between international agencies and state actors, different state actors, as well as individual communities and entities in governments).
The first phase, epistemic transition, began from the late 1950s until 1970; this phase was characterised by pre-industrial modernity and postcolonial reforms as Malaya (before it became Malaysia in 1963) wrested back control of a newly reconstituted state (previously made up of different Malay kingdoms); the nation went from epistemic exclusion to gradual inclusion through increasing epistemic autonomy and international political recognition. This period coincided with a global campaign for the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons (of which Malaya was actively involved via the United Nations), the establishment of the Atoms for Peace program and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as well as international expansionism through developmental aids and technical assistance. Technological infrastructures underwent consolidation for national development, and socio-economic collaborations were formed with the establishment of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The end of this phase was signalled by Malaysia joining the IAEA as a member state (Member States | International Atomic Energy Agency, n.d.), marking the start of its involvement in developing nuclear knowledge.
The second phase, epistemic transplantation and localisation, which developed from the 1970s until the late 1980s, represented knowledge transfer as a two-prong process: the transmission of blackboxed nuclear technological knowledge and other generic scientific knowledge through technical assistance and gifts-as-aids (in the form of books, journals, technical manuals, etc.) intended for local infrastructural and capacity building. The transmission of blackboxed knowledge, which is knowledge transmitted from donor to recipient without the latter having access to the mechanism that produced said knowledge, was through ‘approved’ technical information. In terms of nuclear technology, much of the knowledge transferred in the 1970s, and the first part of 1980s, could be conceived as operational knowledge since facilities for experimental research were not available until the early 1980s. Further, the transmission of nuclear technologies was proportional to the rate of economic development of the still industrializing states.
Nevertheless, these low level technological transfers were complemented by basic science research taking place in Malaysian campuses across the physical and life sciences; there were small-scale ventures into fundamental nuclear physics research by the early 1980s. Capacity building involved producing caches of local scientists with PhDs through the Malaysian government scholarships and Colombo plan.4 Technical assistance came not only from more developed countries but also from neighbouring ASEAN countries, such as Indonesia, who was one of the earliest adopters of nuclear technology in the region. A national agency was established to facilitate technology transfer at the level of inter-governmental agencies, with assistance from the IAEA.
The third phase, from the late 1980s until the present time, is a period when extant intellectual capital of the state is maintained while preparations are made towards the attainment of greater self-sufficiency. I refer to this phase as epistemic generation, although reliance on expertise for higher-order scientific knowledge transfer continues. This phase has increased peer-level bi-lateral collaborations (instead of unilateral transfers from more scientifically and technologically advanced donor states) between Malaysian and overseas scientific institutions; this is done by building up knowledge that draws on the affordances provided by the local landscape, and through the manufacturing of their own equipment for R&D. The national nuclear agency continues to mediate the transfer of nuclear technologies to industry. Projects with immediate practical utility are often preferred over riskier ones.
After decades of being non-committal, 2016 became the year when the Malaysian government was making serious efforts towards the appropriation of nuclear power; its nuclear power infrastructure development had already been assessed by the IAEA at the time of writing (Chatzis, 2016, Liew, 2016). How Malaysia might be a strategic and important polycentre of applied nuclear research remains to be seen, as are its attempts at contributing to epistemic generation. Moreover, there is need for further contemplation over whether Malaysia would continue with a mode-2 research programme driven by science in the applied context, although one could argue that the distinction from basic or mode-1 research is superficial (Nordmann, Radder, & Schiemann, 2011). The Institute of Physics Symposium in 1976, and the first Asia-Pacific Physics Conference in 1983 (Arima et al., 1984), both held in Singapore, saw Malaysian physicists presenting on their work in theoretical and basic science research in both nuclear and particle physics, regardless of the national emphasis on science for development (Alvares & Sachs, 2010, pp. 245–247; 250–252).
However, it must be noted that the three phases could not be parcelled out into neat timelines; overlaps are inevitable. The longue durée of Malaysian nuclear science and technological development is characterised by recurrent aspects of earlier phases within the later phases of its development since a transition requires one to revisit accumulated legacies prior to deciding on the next move. The development of the nuclear programme is an outcome of the evolution of Southeast Asia's nuclear technoscientific polycentres that have emerged out of several contingencies: the ‘superpowers’ desire to form alliances with, and gain political support from, emerging nations; anxiety over the future of energy resources to meet demands of national progress; as well as political survival and security. The transfer of nuclear technology for non-proliferation purposes into Southeast Asia forms the earliest instance of a large-scale technoscientific knowledge transfer from more developed states (of the North) to emerging and developing nation states (of the South) following the Second World War; such knowledge flows form the first recognizable instance of technoscientific diplomacy that configures the history of nuclear science and technology as one that is ultimately transnational and international. Therefore, technoscience in this case signifies the coupling between science as the knowledge source and technology as the harnessing of that knowledge for socio-technical engineering. The next section offers up three arguments on the rationale behind the technoscientific knowledge transfer discussed.
