Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) seems to have fully reached its integrative paradigm (Warschauer, 2002). This can be considered to occur when computer technologies are used in daily teaching and learning as naturally as a pen or a course book (Chambers & Bax, 2006), the computer becomes less visible yet ubiquitous, and new spontaneous and continuous ways of learning are generated through personal portable devices (Genc-Ersoy & Ersoy, 2017). According to OECD statistics (OECD, Stat. 2018), the average percentage of individuals with ICT access and usage in Spain increased from 69.48% in 2012 to 84.6% in 2017.
Fully online and hybrid or blended courses that integrate the use of ICT and complement traditional classroom practice are on the rise nowadays in the field of language teaching, and may even coexist within one single educational institution. Their aim is to offer flexible learning formats for learners of all ages in the way of tailor-made instruction. Thus, they appear to be suited to diverse educational and social needs and provide, as well as demand, active engagement. As an example of such educational institution, the Spanish Open University (UNED) has the largest student population in Spain, with more than 205,000 students in the Academic Year 2017–18, and is one of the largest universities in Europe. More specifically, nearly fourteen thousand UNED students (8.4%) chose its Language Unit (Centro Universitario de Idiomas Digital a Distancia) to enrol in a blended or fully-online language learning course that year.
Adults involved in lifelong learning programs who enrol in a language course, the focus of our study, may combine this experience with any other formal training or simply fill in their leisure time while being unemployed or in their retirement. This population accounts for a specific group of students, with varying learning profiles, goals and ICT skills. In Europe, nearly one in three adults have very low or no ICT skills, and almost half of them consider that their ICT skills do not fully meet current labour market requirements, as one of the latest European official studies on the subject reports (“Adult Education and Training in Europe: Widening Access to Learning Opportunities”, 2015).
With the growth of online education, students' computer self-efficacy, defined as the individuals’ beliefs, confidence, and expectations in their ability to accomplish a specific task with a computer, has been shown to impact motivation and learning outcomes positively (Liang & Tsai, 2008; Tsai, Chuang, Liang, & Tsai, 2011). Given that the adult population sector covers a wide life span, officially between 25 and 64, this fact presumably could entail clear differences regarding students' use and beliefs on technology. Thus, our aim in this study is to analyse Spanish adult students' attitudes towards the use of ICT and to explore any possible differences regarding the modality of their courses.
