Psychological science has long speculated about how human eyes display important emotional cues to transmit our state of mind. This subject has fascinated researchers for centuries, at least since the publication of The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals [1]. The human eye is made unique amongst primates by the amount of exposed eye white (sclera) in contrast to the pigmentation of the iris [2]. In fact, further studies found that human eyes had three times more visible sclera than in orangutans when looking straight ahead [3]. Researchers hypothesise that this unique colouration of the human eye is an evolving adaptation to enhance the gaze signal, making the human eye a tool for communication [4]. From an early age, the eye area is an essential means for human interaction [5]. We naturally expect a living human to display a variety of social and emotional information [6]. These emotions are grounded in the expressive visual cues of the eyes and the eye region [7], in fact, the eyes are an exceptionally accurate source of emotional information even without the context of other facial features [8].
With the technological progress that computer graphics (CG) and artificial intelligence (AI) has made over the last decade, it is predictable that virtual customer service agents with the ability to detect and react to human emotion will soon be commonplace. This will create a strong demand for expressive virtual eyes, an area which has received little attention from the CG community - research projects have tended to be directed towards other features such as hair, teeth, and skin [9, 10, 11]. If these digital avatars are to be accepted into our digital culture and enhance communication it is important to understand if humans could perceive emotion from within virtual eyes. Understanding gained from the experiment would have implications for the fields of CG and psychology. For example, if a notable level of emotional recognition can be shown within the virtual model, then this would indicate that CG could be a valid means of research for psychologists to study human eye expressions. Furthermore, knowledge gained from the development of the virtual model would help CG artists to create more technically realistic eyes and factors relating to the subtle visual cues which are present in each emotion may also help CG artists to generate more expressive CG eyes which in turn are more believable. The goal of this paper is to take a few small steps in demonstrating that virtual eyes outside of the creative industries can be used in psychological research to study the human perception of emotion through eye expressions.
