Cities affect people's lives: they face many challenges in fulfilling the basic requirements of their growing population due to the rapid urbanization process within the cities. According to the united nations world urbanization estimates [1], 68% of the world population will be living in the cities by 2050. Hence, it is more challenging to manage the existing infrastructure and resources to regale a viable urban living conditions of the urban population. Fortunately, the advancement in information and communication technologies (ICT), Internet of things (IoT) based applications, data mining, machine learning and pattern recognition techniques, and data fusion are the key factors for the emergence of smart cities [2]. Rapid growth of the intelligent transportation system is the key hurdle for the researchers, private companies, and public institutions to get accurate information about traffic flow in smart cities [3]. Additionally, the emergence of advanced ICT and transformation has raised a significant attention of the researchers for developing a very accurate traffic flow monitoring system in smart cities. During the big data processing field, it was suggested to use urban big data to efficiently control traffic flow congestion, air pollution, noise pollution, and many other common problems.
Nowadays, many researchers give a significant attention to use deep learning-based approaches to address the problems of urban air prediction and calculation [4], urban crowd flow predictions [5], urban water quality prediction [6] in the smart cities. These models are developed after accumulating data from multiple sources such as; online weather websites, meteorological stations, taxi detectors and many more. Moreover, urban big data consists in different formats, such as text, symbols, and numbers. Zhang et al. [7] categorized five main features of big data, that are, large variety, large volume, large velocity, veracity, and value. These features are also termed as 5V's features as depicted in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (574KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Big data 5V's structure.
The 5V's characteristics of the data secondarily represent a significant revolution in the data amount. Besides, a great challenge in the form of management, obtaining, and sensing this big data; another significant hurdle is in the form of extracting useful information, analyzing, and excavating the values of these big data. Apparently, the urban big data with 5V's attributes creates hurdles for the researchers in urban computing. However, a data set of only one source cannot give enough information producing a model with limited predictive capabilities. To address this problem, the proposed data fusion approach provides prominent results by combining data from two or more than two analytical sources that gives synergetic and complementary information, which consequently generates better estimations than a single technique [8].
Steinmetz et al. [9] categorized the data fusion into three different levels that are: low, mid, and high levels. In low level fusion process, the data from different sources combined in a single matrix before a multivariate system. The data fusion must be similar in variance and scale, otherwise one source of data may predominate over the other. In mid-level fusion process the relevant information from the data source is extracted first using principle component analysis. The extracted information is then concatenated together for later multivariate calibration. This technique is good in removing redundant information from data and reduces size of the required data [10], while in high-level fusion process, a prediction model is built first for each data source, and then the results are combined to develop a final decision model [10]. Their work mainly covers the security and privacy in IoT applications. Meng et al., [11] presented a survey paper on discussing different types of machine learning techniques followed for data fusion.
This paper presents a data fusion-based model to efficiently control the traffic in smart cities using hybrid deep learning architecture. This hybrid model consists of convolution neural network (CNN) and long short term memory (LSTM) architectures, where CNN is used for the classification of spatial data while LSTM is proposed for the classification of temporal data. The experimental results are generated using two different datasets named: CityPulse Traffic and CityPulse Pollution. After validating for varying training and test sets it was concluded that the proposed model results in higher accuracy rates for a limited volume of data. In particular, it can be used for solving the traffic control and management issues in the smart cities.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the literature work reported in the proposed field. Section 3 provides detailed information about the background information of the data fusion technique and its applications, and the type of data it can process. Section 4 presents the generic steps taken in order to develop an efficient data fusion-based model using deep learning strategies. It also outlines the different data fusion-based models developed for certain types of problems using deep neural network (DNN). Section 5 describes the proposed methodology for developing a region based traffic flow prediction model. Section 6 shows the experimental results of the proposed model generated based on fusing two different datasets: CityPulse Traffic and CityPulse Pollution. Section 7 mentions the conclusions and future research lines.
