Cybercrimes are considered global crimes; they transcend geographical boundaries and can be perpetuated from anywhere against any individual and any technology. While there is no single definition of the term “cybercrime”, the term is generally used to cover/describe a wide variety of illegal crimes or what is considered illicit conduct by individuals/groups against computers, computer-related and other devices, information technology networks; or traditional crimes, as well as actions targeting individuals, supported by the use of the Internet and/or technology. However, the International Telecommunications Union (2011) cautions that the fact that there is no single definition of “cybercrime” need not be important. According to the United Nations (2005), what is important is the alarming trends in the use of technology in the commission of illicit or illegal acts.
Recent reports note that cybercrimes will continue to be endemic in society, disrupting businesses, governments, damaging citizens' lives and having negative impacts on economies (e.g., Blythe & Coventry, 2018). The WannaCry ransomware attack demonstrates this claim. In May 2017 the WannaCry attack affected more than 300,000 computers in over 150 countries within less than 24 hours, with the software demanding US$300 or more in bitcoins (per device) to release encrypted files (McAfee Labs, 2017; United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, 2017). As reported by the Washington Post, WannaCry encrypted students' in Chinese universities graduation theses and projects, caused widespread disruptions and interruptions of medical procedures across hospitals in Britain; further, Russia's Health Ministry, the state-run Russian Railways, Russia's telecom company Megafon, Spanish telecom giant Telefónica, the French carmaker Renault, systems for Brazil's social security administration and FedEx were all affected (Dwoskin & Adam, 2017).
Moreover, the financial impacts of cybercrimes are considerable and is worsening. Cybercrimes cost organizations, on average, US$11.7 million in 2017, which represents a 23 percent increase over 2016, according to the Ponemon Institute and Accenture (Accenture, 2017). Trend Micro is predicting that global losses from business email scams alone will exceed US$9 million in 2018 (Trend Micro, 2017). Observers suggest that cybercrime is a problem of considerable magnitude and all the signs are that the situation will deteriorate even further. One country, in its National Security Policy, describes cybercrimes as Tier 1 threats, which “are clear and present dangers, and are therefore the top priority; they require an active response” (Government of Jamaica, 2014, p. 11). Europol has also described the WannaCry attack as one of the biggest cybersecurity attacks in recent history (Dwoskin & Adam, 2017) and Trend Micro reports that ransomware incidents like WannaCry are anticipated to make further rounds in 2018, even as other types of digital extortion become more prevalent (Trend Micro, 2017).
In response to these present and ever-increasing threats, governments worldwide have taken actions, such as enacting legal frameworks and establishing Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs, also commonly referred to as CERTs or CIRTs), to better respond to, investigate and prosecute illicit cyber activities involving the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) (Organization of American States, 2014). While these initiatives are important in the fight against cybercrimes, one important element remains outstanding; that is, a holistic and accepted cybercrime classification scheme. According to Ngafeeson (2010) the classification of cybercrime is one of three important elements (the others being, identification and effective counter-measures) for combating cybercrime, however, same has been grossly limited. Other scholars too advocate for agreed-upon definitions and a well-formed classification scheme to improve our understanding of cybercrimes. For instance, Barn and Barn (2016) argue that a better understanding of cybercrime is a necessary condition to develop appropriate legal and policy responses to cybercrime and for more accurate estimates of the economic costs of cybercrime on society to be provided. They argue further that “one possible factor leading to the difficulties of estimation is the lack of well-formed definitions and classification schemes able to account for the range of cybercrimes” (Barn & Barn, 2016, p. 1). Stabek, Brown, and Watters (2009) also propose that a consistent classification scheme is needed for cross jurisdictional cooperation, information sharing and for the successful prosecution of cybercriminals. Ngo and Jaishankar (2017), who in their recent cybercrime research agenda publication, indicate that a universally agreed-upon classification scheme is not only necessary to advance our knowledge and the scholarship of cybercrime, but is also needed to: i) facilitate effective collaboration and meaningful discussions between scholars and practitioners because agreed-upon definitions provide a common language for stakeholders; ii) help researchers and practitioners determine the scope of the problem to be addressed; iii) assist law enforcement to investigate, combat and prevent cybercrimes by improving their understanding of the different aspects of cybercrime; and iv) enable researchers and practitioners to predict the direction of future cybercrimes as well as formulate novel and timely solutions. Like others, we also argue that a consensual, holistic, accepted cybercrime classification scheme or ontology (e.g. Château, Boulanger, & Mercier-Laurent, 2012; Garbacz, Kulicki, & Trypuz, 2012; Miranda, Orciuoli, & Sampson, 2016; Ruiz-Martínez, Miñarro-Giménez, & Martínez-Béjar, 2016), specifically, a cybercrime classification ontology, is essential in the fight against cybercrime.
Despite the raisons d’être for a uniform cybercrime classification scheme, only recently/relatively recently has there been a push to develop any such classification schemes. However, the schemes are presented as taxonomies (see for example, Applegate & Stavrou, 2013; Donalds & Osei-Bryson, 2014; Kjaerland, 2005; Simmons, Ellis, Shiva, Dasgupta, & Wu, 2009) and not ontologies. Only the study by Barn and Barn (2016) presents an ontology for cybercrime classification. Albeit, the classification schemes in prior works are insufficient, narrow in scope as each addresses only few perspectives, fragmented and often incompatible since each focuses on different perspectives (e.g., role of the computer, attack, attacker's or defender's viewpoint), or use varying terminologies to refer to the same thing, making consistent cybercrime classifications improbable. Further, they are unable to effectively classify the range of and ever changing types of cybercrimes. However, we argue that consistent and repeatable classification is salient to the problem domain as the same cybercrime could be classified differently by investigators, resulting in inaccurate identification of cybercrime trends and patterns. This study aims to overcome these limitations by developing a comprehensive cybercrime classification ontology that incorporates multiple perspectives (e.g. Attack_Event, Attacker, Impact, Objective, Victim, Target, Complainant, Vulnerability, Tool and Technique, Location and Offence). These perspectives are included in the ontology as they would provide pertinent information that would be beneficial for police organizations to classify day-to-day cybercrimes, identify trends and patterns and issue releases for public education. In this paper we have designed a more complete cybercrime classification scheme. It should be noted that our proposed ontology integrates and extends prior cybercrime classification schemes by incorporating previously proposed perspectives as well as adding new perspectives, respectively.
Our work offers several contributions including:
1.An explicit integrated conceptualization of cybercrime classification for use by researchers and cybercrime investigators.2.A comprehensive and holistic, multi-perspective cybercrime classification and analysis model that involves a parsimonious set of relevant concepts and direct relationships.3.A flexible artifact that is better able to classify current and future cybercrime attacks.4.A formal Cybercrime Classification Ontology that could allow cybercrime agents (human or artificial) to share knowledge.5.An extensible artifact that can easily accommodate new concepts and potential new relationships.
The next section discusses cybercrime classification schemes, knowledge, knowledge-based system, crime and ontology. Other works related to this study are subsequently presented. The Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) is then described and its application to the study elucidated. Then, the conceptual model of our cybercrime ontology is presented. The following section presents our ontological representation and the demonstration and evaluation of our artifact by using it to classify and store two real world cybercrimes. The conclusion and future work section concludes the paper.
