Progress in medical imaging helps to make comprehensive investigation of human organs possible using enormous amount of medical image data generated during image acquisition. As the medical image data supplying techniques and hardware rapidly advance, another important research problem arises in the processing and analyzing of this data with computer aided diagnosis methodologies. Besides the challenges in other similar data analysis problems, this research area requires more accuracy and precision because the problems are related to the health of the patients.
There are various techniques used to collect medical image data and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is one of them. MR is a popular noninvasive technique which can be used to measure the neural activity in the human brain. The MR images have a great potential to provide valuable information about the physiology, histology, genetics, hemodynamics, and chemistry of various abnormalities present in the brain (Mabray & Cha, 2016). With the help of MR images, brain abnormalities can be easily detected and screened (Gudigar, Raghavendra, San, Ciaccio, & Acharya, 2019). To detect the various brain abnormalities, various MR data classification systems have been proposed in the literature. Typically, these systems have preprocessing, feature extraction and classification steps for separating normal images from the abnormal ones. Numerous methods have been proposed to employ classical machine learning algorithms on this problem (Chaplot et al., 2006, El-Dahshan et al., 2010, Mallat, 1989, Moritz et al., 2000). These early studies proposed hybrid solutions based on independent component analysis (ICA) (Moritz et al., 2000), wavelet transform (Chaplot et al., 2006, El-Dahshan et al., 2010, Mallat, 1989), support vector machine (SVM) (Chaplot et al., 2006) and principal component analysis (PCA) (El-Dahshan et al., 2010). In (El-Dahshan et al., 2010) features are extracted from MR images with discrete wavelet transformation (DWT). Then PCA is employed for feature reduction and finally feed forward backpropagation artificial neural network (FP-ANN) and k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) based classifiers are used to classify the normal and abnormal brain MR images. These early studies are important in terms of demonstrating the importance of computer-based processing of brain MR images.
More recent solutions have been developed to benefit from advanced machine learning techniques. Zhang et al. developed a classifier for brain MR images by combining kernel SVM with particle swarm optimization (PSO) (Zhang, Wang, Ji, & Dong, 2013). They used the wavelet entropy method instead of the kernel support vector machine (Zhang et al., 2015). Saritha et al. also employed the wavelet entropy method with probabilistic neural network (PNN) (Saritha, Joseph, & Mathew, 2013). Wang et al. used particle swarm optimization, artificial bee colony and feed-forward neural network (Wang et al., 2015). They have also used entropy in their study, Zhang et al. used Shannon and Tsallis entropies from DWT coefficients in their brain MR image classification work (Zhang, Dong, Wang, Ji, & Yang, 2015). Similarly, Nayak et al. used two-dimensional DWT for feature extraction, however, they employed probabilistic principal component analysis for feature reduction and AdaBoost algorithm with random forest classifier (Nayak, Dash, & Majhi, 2016). These researchers also used the Adaboost with SVM to increase their model’s accuracy up to 99.45% (Ranjan Nayak, Dash, & Majhi, 2017). Gudigar et al. compared the performance of wavelet, curvelet and shearlet transforms. They have used texture and entropy based features. Their model detected the brain abnormalities by using PSO-SVM classifier with radial basis function kernel (Gudigar et al., 2019).
Deep learning (DL) is one of the machine learning branches whose methods are used today to solve a wide range of problems (Pławiak, 2015, Pławiak, 2018, Rzecki et al., 2018, Yıldırım and Baloglu, 2017). DL describes the abstract concepts through several layers of data processing to discover better learning algorithms and representations which are less dependent on feature engineering (Bengio and Lee, 2015, LeCun et al., 2015). DL algorithms with their successful classification performances have gained popularity in the field of machine learning. Especially the amazing feature extraction capability of DL models widens their usage to an extensive range of research areas (Cao et al., 2018). These models already employed on several biomedical applications (Acharya et al., 2017, Acharya, 2017, Kiranyaz et al., 2016, Yildirim et al., 2018, Yıldırım et al., 2018, Yıldırım et al., 2018, Yildirim, 2018). However, there have been few studies to date on brain MR image classification based on deep learning models. The MR image examination consists of huge amount of image data and hence the computational complexity increases (McBee et al., 2018). The complexity problem in brain tumor segmentation is overcome using graphics processing unit (GPU) (Agravat and Raval, 2018, Saouli et al., 2018). DL algorithms run 10–100 times faster when GPUs are used instead of CPUs (Erickson et al., 2018). Although GPU-based solutions lead to performance improvements, they also increase the hardware cost. Another way to deal with the performance problems of DL models is the use of transfer learning. When the processed data is huge as in the case of MR images, two transfer learning strategies can be employed: (i) using a pre-trained network for feature extraction, (ii) fine-tuning a pre-trained network with the data (Litjens et al., 2017).
Using a pre-trained network is highly effective approach in deep learning field. Knowledge from pre-trained model that has been previously trained with a large-scale data can be used in a new model. It means transfer learning uses representations learned by a previous model and apply this knowledge to another domain. This is very important if we have a small dataset like in our case. When the number of data is relatively small, the model starts overfit after several epochs. If the previous dataset is large enough and general, the learned features can be used to classify different classes that do not exist in our original dataset. Another advantage of transfer learning is that, we don't need large computational power. The model uses weights of convolutional layers from pre-trained model and only trains the last dense layer.
In this study, a deep transfer learning-based approach is employed to classify a given MR image of brain as normal or abnormal. The ResNet34 (He, Zhang, Ren, & Sun, 2016) CNN architecture is selected as a deep convolutional network model for classification. The new constructed model is fully automated, and the details of this model are given in the materials and methods sections. One of the most important contributions of this study is to provide classification with an end-to-end structure on raw images without using any hand-crafted feature extraction. Besides, the Resnet34, the pre-trained CNN model yielded 100% 5-fold validation accuracy for classifying normal and abnormal MR brain images.
