Cut, copy, and paste are the universally recognised commands to transfer data within and between desktop applications; drag-and-drop provides a direct-manipulation equivalent. These commands significantly increase user efficiency and accuracy by allowing quick replication or transfer of data or objects. Typically, this data takes the form of text, images, or complete files. Despite their widespread adoption, there is no large-scale empirical characterisation of how these tools are utilised in everyday computing.
This knowledge gap means human-computer interaction researchers lack empirical evidence to direct and drive development of new data transfer tools and techniques. Specifically, we lack an understanding of these tools’ regularity and patterns of use, their use in different applications, and the types of data transferred. This work seeks to fill this knowledge gap. We see two core areas benefiting from this new understanding: (1) the improvement and development of novel data-transfer tools and; (2) the development of cross-application, task-centric interaction tools—data transfer creates an implicit link between source and destination applications. Improvements in these areas could have significant impact: data transfer is a ubiquitous action in all forms of desktop computing.
To improve our understanding of data transfer actions, this paper aims to characterise clipboard and drag-and-drop use with unmodified applications in a desktop computer environment. Previous work in this space focused on shorter periods of time (Stolee et al., 2009), specific user groups (Kim et al., 2004), or developing new interaction techniques (Chapuis, Roussel, 2007, Faure, Chapuis, Roussel, 2009). Our work goes beyond that in the literature by evaluating data transfer over a 3 month (90 day) period, includes the first characterisation of drag-and-drop behaviour, and assesses the changes in user behaviour since the last report of ‘in the wild’ data transfer from 2009 (Stolee et al., 2009).
To achieve this goal, we used the MultiLog (Woodruff and Alexander, 2016) software for data collection and undertook a longitudinal log study for a period of 90 days with 17 participants. This period allowed us to collect long-term behavioural data and everyday interaction with many applications: something not possible in short-term observations. Overall, we collected 31,567 cut, copy and paste actions and 3432 drag-and-drop actions across all of our participants. Our analysis of this data found that (1) Clipboard operations are used more frequently than drag-and-drop; (2) Most data transfers occur within a single screen, the choice of drag-and-drop vs. clipboard is application dependent; (3) Text was the most frequently transferred item on the clipboard; (4) Keyboard initiation is more frequent than mouse initiation for clipboard operations.
To summarise, this paper contributes: (1) A 90-day, 17 participant log study of data-transfer within and between desktop applications—the longest study of this type; (2) An empirical characterization of data-transfer in desktop applications (copy-and-paste, drag-and-drop), including the first published insights into how drag-and-drop is used ‘in the wild’; (3) An analysis and discussion of the implications of our findings, including changes in behaviours since previous studies. The paper proceeds to describe relevant related work, the longitudinal study methodology, the characterization, and finishes with a discussion of the implications of this work.
