Gender differences are prevalent in academia. Females study, lecture and research some fields more than males but are heavily underrepresented in most mathematically intensive areas (e.g., Holman, Stuart-Fox, & Hauser, 2018). The reasons for this imbalance are unclear. Explicit bias against women within academia and any gender differences in mathematical performance cannot explain much of the continuing inequality (Ceci & Williams, 2011; Justman & Méndez, 2018). Instead, differing career choices stemming from female people-related interests and male thing-related interests is a plausible partial explanation (Su, Rounds, & Armstrong, 2009; see also: Lippa, 1998; Lordan & Pischke, 2016; Lippa, Preston, & Penner, 2014). Thing and people dimensions do not fully account for the low numbers of women in engineering, mechanics and computing, or the high numbers of women in medicine (Su & Rounds, 2015). They also do not explain why women are over-represented in life sciences, which do not necessarily involve people, but under-represented in dentistry and surgery, which are people-based. Computer science, engineering and physics may be avoided by females because their male dominated cultures are (inadvertently) unattractive to women, they have “chilly climates” that alienate females (for other subjects, see: Britton, 2017; Stockard, Greene, Richmond, & Lewis, 2018), there is implicit bias within primary and secondary education (Robnett, 2016), girls lack necessary early exposure to the topics and females have lower self-efficacy for them (Cheryan, Ziegler, Montoya, & Jiang, 2017). Disciplinary cultures may therefore partly explain field gender compositions. Differing abilities of fields to satisfy personal goals for status or social impact is another likely influence (Yang & Barth, 2015). Nevertheless, a deeper understanding of gendered factors influencing academic career choices is needed if gender imbalances are to be redressed. It is also important to understand why females have successfully overturned male domination in some disciplines. A fine-grained examination of gender differences in research specialisms and topics within academia is a pre-requisite for any deeper investigation.
As reviewed below, previous research into the relationships between interests, gender and academic careers has relied on survey data from children and adults. It has several limitations that need complementary approaches to address.
aPrior studies have mostly relied upon survey data using interest categories that do not match the wide range of academic fields, each of which has its own peculiarities.bIt is not known whether there is a fundamental neurological or social psychological explanation for the people or things dimensions so that they could be aligned with more specific factors. More detailed evidence from the variety of academic specialisms may help with this.cMatching interests declared in surveys (e.g., things/people) to academic discipline gender makeup (Su et al., 2009) may obscure characteristics of female researchers that manifest themselves within fields rather than through field choice.
The current study uses a novel approach to assess whether academic publishing is consistent with current theories of gender differences. Although gender differences in academic publishing is an important issue (Aksnes, Rorstad, Piro, & Sivertsen, 2011; Ceci & Williams, 2011; Larivière, Ni, Gingras, Cronin, & Sugimoto, 2013), the primary goal is to gain insights into underlying career choices. This paper analyses the publications produced by working academics and uses the words in these publications as a proxy for their interests. It therefore takes a different perspective from the most insightful prior studies (Ceci & Williams, 2011; Cheryan et al., 2017; Su & Rounds, 2015; Su et al., 2009; Yang & Barth, 2015) by examining what researchers write and ignoring the social, biological and economic factors that shape career choices. Focusing on researchers’ outputs allows a data-driven analysis strategy that circumvents the constraints of surveys, allowing narrow academic fields and topics to be analysed. This approach cannot directly address cause-and-effect relationships, however, and cannot draw firm conclusions about underlying career choices. The goal is to analyse gender differences in academic publishing and look for insights into topic and method-based factors affecting underlying career choices, by describing current gender differences in topics and methods within scholarly publishing and assessing the extent that existing theories (e.g., people/things) can account for them. Thus, gender differences found in the data (research fields or topics) that are not consistent with prior theories would point to potential problems with these theories as explanations for career outcomes. Gender differences are discovered with a word frequency driven exploration of factors that associate with researcher gender across multiple narrow fields in the USA. The word frequency approach produces lists of terms that associate with one gender in articles from 2017 in many of the 285 Scopus narrow fields examined. These gendered terms are then investigated for agreement with previously hypothesised gender differences. Whilst text analysis has been used to deliver insights into individual behaviours (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010) and within individual fields (Elsevier, 2015; Nielsen et al., 2017; Vogel & Jurafsky, 2012), none have been peer-reviewed journal articles and this is apparently the first attempt to use it to gain insights into gender differences across academic publishing.
