One of the main skills that future generations must develop is Computational Thinking (CT). CT, a cutting-edge term defined by Wing (2006), is regarded as a cognitive ability that enables people to develop computational solutions for a current problem by applying computer sciences' reasoning processes. Application of CT has gone even beyond STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) domains, and according to several research, CT plays crucial roles in other disciplines as well, for example, medicine, digital humanities, computational finance, archaeology, economics, and so forth (National Research Council, 2010; Selby & Woollard, 2013; Wing, 2014). Multiple studies have reported that CT's integration into curricula would benefit both cognitive and non-cognitive aspects of learning (e.g., Brown, Sentance, Crick, & Humphreys, 2014, pp. 1–22; Haddad & Kalaani, 2015; Malva, Hooshyar, Yang, & Pedaste, 2020; Repenning et al., 2015, p. 11; Román-González, Pérez-González, & Jiménez-Fernández, 2017). Therefore, several countries all over the world have made reformation of educational programs on different educational levels in order to integrate CT into their official curricula (e.g., Brown et al., 2014, pp. 1–22; Carlborg, Tyren, Heath, & Eriksson, 2019; DR, 2018; Perković, Settle, Hwang, & Jones, 2010; Wing, 2011).
These rapid changes have resulted in some challenges, however. For instance, to keep up teachers with experience and knowledge within the area, to develop suitable methods paired with learning materials, and to properly manage limited resources to educate teachers in CT (Angeli & Giannakos, 2020; Brown et al., 2014, pp. 1–22; Färnqvist, Heintz, Lambrix, Mannila, & Wang, 2016). On the other hand, there are some other challenges in fostering CT in educational practice, including lack of motivation and opportunities to promote students' CT. For example, research conducted by Yardi and Bruckman (2007) reports that students often show negative attitudes toward learning CT, which could result in impeding its proper development. Therefore, different approaches have to be developed and applied to not only make CT more available and engaging to learners, but also assist teachers in promoting students’ CT. One prospective solution could be educational computer games.
Educational games, or game-based learning approaches, have gained researchers' attention as they have proven to be effective learning tools that engage and motivate students, and also improve their learning achievements (e.g., Hooshyar, Yousefi, Wang, & Lim, 2018; Pontes, Duarte, & Pinheiro, 2020; Zumbach, Rammerstorfer, & Deibl, 2020). Even though there exist several educational games aimed at promoting students' CT, to a large extent, they ignore fostering CT skills. Instead, they mostly support reinforcing CT's conceptual knowledge and students' motivation (e.g., Hooshyar et al., 2019; Kazimoglu, Kiernan, Bacon, & Mackinnon, 2012a; Kuruvada, Asamoah, Dalal, & Kak, 2010; Zhao & Shute, 2019). On the other hand, even more importantly, the existing CT games ignore providing adaptivity in the game. Despite several calls from researchers and practitioners to focus more on personalization and adaptation that would suit the individual needs of the player, the existing CT games mainly follow predefined and rigid computer-assisted instruction concepts. This could impede exploring their full educational potential (e.g., Hooshyar, Yousefi, & Lim, 2018; Kickmeier-Rust, Mattheiss, Steiner, & Albert, 2011; Ku, Hou, & Chen, 2016; Peirce, Conlan, & Wade, 2008).
Considering the importance and relevance of CT in society together with the existing gap in CT game research, an adaptive educational game was developed, called AutoThinking, for teaching CT (both learning CT conceptual knowledge and skills), while engaging students with individually tailored game-play (Hooshyar et al., 2019). To evaluate the effectiveness of the adaptive game compared to a conventional technology-enhanced learning approach (i.e., a lesson using a PowerPoint presentation with Multimedia delivered by a teacher), an experimental study on elementary school students was conducted. In line with this aim, our research questions were designed as the following:
(1)Does the adaptive game improve students' skills and conceptual knowledge in CT better than the traditional technology-enhanced learning approach?(2)What is the effect of different learning approaches on CT knowledge gain of the students with different prior knowledge?(3)What is the effect of different learning approaches on the learning attitude of the students with different prior learning attitudes?
The outline of this paper is as follows: Section 2 Related research, 3 AutoThinking review the related work and introduce the adaptive game, respectively. Section 4 describes the methodology, while Section 5 revolves around the results. Section 6 provides the discussion and conclusions.
