Travel time is often considered the most important variable in explaining the route choice behaviour of travellers (Bovy and Stern, 1990). From an individual point of view, routes with longer travel times result in higher opportunity costs, i.e., less time that the traveller could allocate into other activities (value of time), thus, decreasing the likelihood of being chosen. When studying traffic assignment, it is traditionally assumed that travellers are perfectly rational, in the sense that they know the travel times in all the alternative routes (perfect information) and he or she will always choose the one with the minimum travel time. As a consequence of this hypothesis, the traffic states in a transportation network must fulfil the User Equilibrium (UE) condition, originally stated by Wardrop (1952): “the journey times in all routes actually used are equal and less than those that would be experienced by a single vehicle on any unused route”. By relaxing the perfect information assumption (but not the rationality of users), Sheffi (1985) defined the Stochastic User Equilibrium (SUE). At the individual level, SUE means that users are still strict optimisers, i.e., they choose the minimum travel time alternative, but they have no perfect information from the travel times in the system. However, recent empirical studies have shown that travellers do not necessarily choose the minimum travel time route. In the study of Zhu and Levinson (2015), GPS itineraries were collected from 143 residents of the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area during a period of 13 weeks, finding that 40% of the trips followed the strict shortest-time path. More important, in almost 90% of the trips travellers chose routes no more than 5 min longer than the shortest time route, meaning that users may not be strict optimisers, but consider travel time as a key decision input. In a related study, Yildirimoglu and Kahraman, 2018a, Yildirimoglu and Kahraman, 2018b use GPS trajectories of taxi trips in the city of Shenzhen, China, to compare the actual followed paths to those implied by UE. The results show that 38.2% of the taxi trips followed the shortest-time path. Similar results can also be found in the work of Bekhor et al. (2006), who by analysing data of 188 participants in a survey consisting on the description of their habitual route to work, found that 37% chose a route that overlaps in 90% with the shortest-time alternative, or in the work of Papinski et al. (2009), who examined the GPS traces and survey answers of 31 individuals residing in Ontario, Canada. In the survey approximately 50% of the individuals stated that minimising travel is the most important factor in their route choices. These values, however, differ considerably from the results reported in other studies. Hadjidimitriou et al. (2015) analyse the GPS coordinates of 89 travellers in the province of Reggio Emilia, Italy, concluding that only 25% of the trips matched the shortest path route (considering a match to be the routes that overlap at least in 80% with the shortest route). The authors found that travellers selected routes on average 1.3 longer than the shortest path. By analysing the data from an experiment in Virginia, United Estates, involving 20 participants who completed trips on 5 OD pairs over a period of 20 days, Vreeswijk et al. (2014) found that in 74% of the cases the average shortest time route was chosen. However, this percentage varies from 63% to 90% depending on the OD pair. Thomas and Tutert (2010) used license plate observations in the Dutch city of Enschede to conclude that 75% of the trips followed the shortest time paths.
The fact that travellers not necessarily choose the fastest route is explained, on the one hand, by the presence of other route attributes that make some alternatives more desirable than the others. For example, distance, the number of intersections, traffic lights, complexity of the paths, the amount of freeway, aesthetics (Bovy and Stern, 1990, Ramming, 2002, Bekhor et al., 2006, Papinski et al., 2009) and travel time reliability (Avineri and Prashker, 2005, Abdel-Aty et al., 1997, Mahmassani and Liu, 1999). On the other hand, sub-optimal choices of travellers are explained by limitations in travel time perception and cognitive biases that cause deviations from perfect rationality (see Di and Liu (2016) for a review on cognitive biases in route choice behaviour). The cognitive limitations in human reasoning is the cornerstone of bounded rationality of decision makers. Under bounded rationality, decision-makers search a solution until a satisfactory (not necessary optimal) alternative is found, thus departing from perfect rationality. This idea was introduced by Simon (1957) as a model of decision-making process as an alternative to the classical utility maximisation assumption of expected utility or random utility models (Manski and McFadden, 1981, Train, 2003, Walker and Ben-Akiva, 2002). In the context of traffic, bounded rationality was first discussed in Mahmassani and Chang (1987) who introduced the notion of “indifference band” and studied network equilibrium under bounded rationality assumption (BRUE). The idea of indifference band is that travellers are only willing to switch their usual route when time savings are above a threshold. Or, to put it another way, a decision-maker is indifferent to the travel time of the alternatives when their difference is under a threshold (indifference band). The set of alternatives under this condition are called satisficing, a term coined by Simon (1957) to refer to alternatives that both satisfy and suffice. By modifying a random utility model to include this threshold, Watling et al. (2018) propose a bounded choice model and formulate the bounded stochastic equilibrium (Bounded SUE). Bounded rationality can therefore explain why travellers do not necessarily choose the shortest-time routes, but close alternatives that may have other appealing features while being considered equivalent from strict travel time point of view.
In the above-cited studies, there is no consent on the amount of travellers that follow the shortest time route, nor the size of the indifference band: the percentage of travellers that chose the fastest route ranges from 25% to 75%. Moreover, five of the six studies are revealed preference (RP), i.e., those based in GPS traces and license plate observations. While RP methods are not affected by validity issues, they have the disadvantage of low control of the experimental environment, meaning that the diversity of explored situations may be limited. In the context of route choice, the list of alternatives and, more important, the related travel times are not known, making it necessary to infer them. This could introduce some errors in the estimates of the proportion of route choices for the shortest time route. Additionally, in some of the experiments the number of participants is small (20 and 31) and thus the estimates may not generalise to the segment of the population under study. The objective of this study is to contribute to the understanding on how travellers process travel time when making route choices, to better quantify to what extent users are strict travel time minimisers, and if bounded rationality is observed, to narrow the estimation of the indifference bands. The question of whether travellers evaluate travel time differences in absolute or relative terms is addressed. Does a difference of 5 min weigh equally in a 10 min trip than in a 30 min trip? The answer to this question is necessary in determining the indifference band. To this purpose, the results of several stated preference route choice computer experiments, using a dedicated simulation game platform, are statistically analysed. Then, a Mixed Logit Model (MXL) (McFadden, 1984, McFadden and Train, 2000, Walker and Ben-Akiva, 2002), estimated considering only satisficing alternatives, is compared to the estimates of an unrestricted MXL model to assess the impact that the indifference bands may have on the route choice probabilities. These models are compared in terms of predictive accuracy for out-of-sample observations.
Computer-based experiments have been largely used to study the route choices of travellers, with particular attention to the study of how travellers learn from experience (Bogers, 2005, Selten et al., 2007), the impact of advanced travel information systems (ATIS) (Adler and McNally, 1994, Mahmassani and Liu, 1999, Ben-Elia and Shiftan, 2010, Abdel-Aty et al., 1997, Srinivasan and Mahmassani, 2000, Bifulco et al., 2014), the effect of travel time variability and risk attitudes on the travellers choices (De Moraes Ramos et al., 2013, Avineri and Prashker, 2005, Bogers et al., 2006), and the impact of human choices on network performance (Iida et al., 1992, Tawfik et al., 2010), to mention some. In this article, experiments focus on travellers’ route choices considering travel time information. Participants made choices over 41 OD pairs in the network of the city of Lyon, France, joined by three alternative routes and presented over a map representation of the city. The OD pairs and routes were selected such that the values of their physical attributes (length, directness, number of intersections, number of turns and freeway composition) show a significant variation, while the routes remain being plausible alternatives. Furthermore, the traffic conditions in the network, and thus the travel times in the routes, varied between and within the different experiments. The variability of the route attributes and travel times make it possible to study their joint effect on participants’ choices. In total, 496 participants recorded 5535 route choices. From the total number of participants, 71% received travel time estimates in the three alternative routes, eliminating the travel time perception bias from the analysis, and providing a common ground to study the (bounded) rationality in route choice behaviour in the presence of travel time information.
The rest of the article is organised as follows. In Section 2, the route choice experimental tool, the Mobility Decision Game (MDG) is described. The methodology to estimate the perfect and bounded rationality, as well as the size of the indifference band is introduced in Section 3. The specification of a Mixed Logit Model (MXL) that only accounts for satisficing routes is also presented in this section. In Section 4, the results are discussed. First, a global analysis on the travel time minimisation behaviour of travellers is done, including the heterogeneity of the travel time minimisation behaviour by OD pair and by participant. Second, the effect of the absolute (time) and relative (percentage) travel time differences in the travel time minimisation behaviour of travellers is studied. Third, the bounded rationality in the route choice behaviour is analysed, and the heterogeneity of the indifference band is addressed: the distribution of the indifference band is estimated. Finally, the results of the MXL model are analysed to study the effect of the indifference bands on the probability of route choice. This also permits to test the influence of the route attributes on the choices of the participants. A summary of the important results and the main conclusions are presented in Section 5.
