With rapid development of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technology, volumes of big data sets are accumulated and new analysis methods are proposed (Kulkarni et al., 2019, Liang et al., 2014). This provides a unique opportunity for the integrated approaches to learn across multiple data types, and it brings computational challenges as well (Han and Liu, 2019). Integrated analysis is able to discover relationships across cell patterns and learn a comprehensive representation of cell states. Reliable computational methods are needed for joint analysis across samples, to mine the underlying information of large scale data, and to dig deeper into the differences between single cell individuals (Kulkarni et al., 2019). Among them, single cell clustering is probably widely investigated but challenging one for its significance in deciphering transcriptomic dynamics and complex disease diagnosis (Gawel et al., 2019).
Clustering is a very effective method for analyzing scRNA-seq data. However, scRNA-seq clustering remains a challenge because the special characteristics of scRNA-seq data. First, it is high-dimensional data with built-in noise from sequencing. Secondly, a scRNA-seq dataset has a large number of zeros or near-zero values. The similarity between cells in traditional clustering is difficult to be defined by vector similarity simply for such high-dimensional sparse data (Peng et al., 2019, Han and Men, 2018).
The existing single-cell clustering methods are mainly divided into two categories: Dimensionality-reduction based clustering and similarity-learning based clustering or similarity-based clustering. The former seeks cell similarity in the subspace or embedding generated by dimensionality-reduction methods (e.g. NMF) (Kiselev et al., 2017). The final clustering is usually conducted by applying K-means to the projected data in the subspace or embedding. The latter clusters cells by inferring an effective similarity between cells from machine learning rather than using traditional similarity measures (e.g. Euclidean distance, cosine distance, etc.) (Wang et al., 2017). These methods bear the following limitations. The traditional similarity measurement becomes unreliable with the decrease of dimension. In addition, K-means clustering does have convexity requirement for data, but the projected data in the low-dimensional space can be an arbitrary shape. Alternatively, there is no guarantee that similarity-learning based clustering will gain an optimal distance for sample similarity discrimination via machine learning. Therefore, accurate calculation of cell similarity is the key to single-cell clustering.
It is desirable to seek appropriate similarity calculation by taking advantage of its high-dimensional sparse characteristics through a network biology approach. Traditional vector similarity may not evaluate cell similarity well because the sparseness of scRNA-seq data will bring noise in similarity calculation. If each cell can be modeled as a graph by integrating its associated biological information such as PPI networks, the vector similarity limitation can be overcome by exploiting the corresponding graph similarity of PPIs rather than only gene expression data with a high sparsity. Such a graph similarity will contribute to effective and robust clustering because it invites more biological relevant information in cell clustering. The graph similarity is a deep similarity encoding compared to the traditional vector similarity, a shallow encoding, because each vector is easily affected by built-in noise in scRNA-cell data. Such graph-based network analysis way actually solves many complex biological problems successfully. For example, Aibar et al. (2017) and Dong et al. (2019) fusion co expression analysis and gene regulation network cluster single cells by subgraph mining. In the field of disease classification, Matsubara et al. (2018) integrated protein network and expression profile data to classify lung cancer and achieved better classification results. Rhee et al. (2017) obtained the graph data by mapping the expression profile to the protein network, and then used the graph convolution network for subtype classification of breast cancer, which improved the classification accuracy. Deep learning usually plays an essential tool in this type of problem solving because it can encode complicate biological information and provide more meaningful graph-level knowledge representation. Graph neural network algorithm is a supervised task in most biological research, but our task is unsupervised clustering, The key is to design an unsupervised model.
We transform the vector similarity of cells into a graph similarity problem. The similarity of graphs is then calculated by using the recently popular graph convolution network method. Graph representation learning has achieved great success in node classification, graph similarity calculation and other fields. Graph kernel (Yanardag and Vishwanathan, 2015) and graph2vec (Narayanan et al., 2017) use embedding method to represent the whole graph as a graph. Deepwalk (Perozzi et al., 2014) and node2vec (Grover and Leskovec, 2016) first embed the nodes, then aggregate the node representation into a graph-level representation. The key is to adopt appropriate strategies to aggregate the node representation into a graph.
In this paper, we design a novel model that integrates graph neural network (GNN) and bag of feature (BOF) models to compute graph similarity via unsupervised learning and applied it to the problem of single cell clustering. Our main contributions are as follows:
First, we propose a new unsupervised graph similarity learning framework, which integrates graph neural network (GNN) and bag of features (BOF) models. This method can accurately measure the similarity between graphs.
Second, we redefine the similarity of cells in a systematic approach by considering cells as a complex system. Cells are not only measured by their gene expression profile vectors but also represented as corresponding protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks. Our method transforms cell similarity from vector similarity to more representative and biologically meaningful graph similarity by representing a cell as a graph. The experimental results of multiple data sets prove that such an approach can fuse multiple omics data to explore the differences between cells in a more comprehensive and efficient way.
Third, we apply bag of feature (BOF) to the process of aggregating node representation into graph-level graph representation, and this method achieves better results in unsupervised graph-level representation.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces GNN and BOF models briefly. Section 3 presents our methods to compute cell similarity by evaluating graph similarity in the graph embedding and following clustering. Section 4 compares the results of the proposed method with those of the existing scRNA-seq clustering techniques on benchmark datasets. In the end, we discuss parameter sensitivity and conclude our paper.
