Education is a long-term endeavor directed at distal outcomes. The career-oriented utility of a college education is a primary reason students choose to attend college and select a specific major (Bui, 2002, Montmarquette et al., 2002). Despite this long-term nature of post-secondary education, there has been little research in educational psychology examining how students’ career aspirations may relate to motivation and achievement in their courses. Within educational psychology, motivation for distal outcomes has been understudied relative to more proximal motivational constructs such as interest, self-efficacy, and achievement goals. In fact, many theories of motivation such as self-determination theory, intrinsic motivation, mindfulness, and flow, while perhaps recognizing that there might be meaningful distal outcomes, emphasize focusing on the immediate experience of the current task for optimal motivation. The two studies reported in this paper were designed to address this gap in the research literature using the lens of Future Time Perspective theory (Husman et al., 2015, Husman and Lens, 1999, Kauffman and Husman, 2004a, Kauffman and Husman, 2004b, Simons et al., 2004, Zimbardo and Boyd, 2015).
Colleges and universities have been increasing their focus on students’ post-graduation employment (Calderon & Jones, 2017), suggesting that institutions recognize the relationship between post-secondary education and career options. At the individual level, many students choose to go to college to prepare for a future in a desired or desirable career, even if they have not identified a specific career when beginning their college education. Preparation for a future career is especially salient for students in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields. In recent years, STEM fields have received a great deal of attention from educators, education researchers, and policy makers. This attention is due in part to the recently documented and projected above-average growth rates for jobs in STEM fields and the necessity of post-secondary education for most of these STEM jobs (Carnevale et al., 2013, Langdon et al., 2011). Post-secondary STEM degrees require completion of a lengthy sequence of coursework over many years. Motivation toward the ultimate career must be maintained for many years of difficult, demanding coursework with rigorous technical content that requires considerable effort and persistence.
Our objective in these studies was to utilize the Future Time Perspective theory constructs of value and connectedness to enhance understanding of how distal career outcomes affect computer science (CS) students’ motivation for their course-work. Specifically, we examine how change in CS students’ career aspirations across a semester long course is associated with changes in students’ perceived instrumentality for the course and how changes in aspirations and perceived instrumentality are related to students’ learning outcomes.
1.1. Future time perspective theoryThe umbrella term time perspective encompasses a broad set of theories about how an individual’s perception of time influences his or her psychological functioning, motivation, and cognition (Husman and Lens, 1999, Nuttin and Lens, 1985, Zimbardo and Boyd, 2015). Within time perspective, particular focus has been placed on the role of future thinking. As a psychological theory, Future Time Perspective (FTP) concerns the extent to which individuals integrate an envisioned future with the present (Husman & Lens, 1999). FTP is conceptualized as a multi-faceted, hierarchical construct (Hilpert et al., 2012, Husman et al., 2016, Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman and Shell, 2008, Simons et al., 2004). FTP consists of four constituent constructs: connectedness, valence/value, distance, and speed (Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman and Shell, 2008). Although research supports that all of these constituent constructs have important influences on future thinking (Husman & Lens, 1999), in academic settings, emphasis has been placed on connectedness and valence/value (De Volder and Lens, 1982, Husman and Lens, 1999, Shell and Husman, 2001, Shell and Husman, 2008).1.1.1. Connectedness and perceived instrumentalityFuture outcomes and goals are only motivating in the present if persons perceive that present actions can influence the attainment of those outcomes and goals. FTP Connectedness reflects the extent to which persons see future outcomes as contingent or dependent on present behaviors or actions (Hilpert et al., 2012, Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman and Shell, 2008, Husman et al., 2015, Husman et al., 2016, Shell and Husman, 2001). Connectedness is similar to other beliefs that outcomes are contingent or dependent on personal actions such as Locus of Control (Rotter, 1966), outcome expectancies (Bandura, 1977) or utility value (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). What distinguishes connectedness from these similar contingency beliefs is that connectedness is about contingent connections between the present and outcomes occurring in the distant future.Connectedness is hierarchical (Hilpert et al., 2012, Husman et al., 2015, Husman et al., 2016). General connectedness is a global belief that future outcomes are or are not contingent on or connected to present behavior and actions (Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman and Shell, 2008, Husman et al., 2016, Shell and Husman, 2001). Domain connectedness is a more focused belief that outcomes in a specific domain, such as one’s career or one’s personal life, are or are not contingent on present actions and behaviors (Hilpert et al., 2012, Husman et al., 2015, Husman et al., 2016). Perceived instrumentality (PI; De Volder and Lens, 1982, Greene et al., 2004, Husman et al., 2004, Husman and Hilpert, 2007, Miller et al., 1999, Simons et al., 2004) reflects the contingency between specific actions, behaviors, or activities and attainment of future outcomes. In the academic domain, PI reflects contingencies between behaviors such as studying or taking specific courses and attainment of future academic, personal, or career goals or outcomes.In FTP theories, both general and domain specific connectedness are seen as dispositions that reflect a person’s general tendency to connect the future to the present. Although not viewed as a personality or temperament characteristic, general and domain connectedness, like Locus of Control (Rotter, 1966), are seen as relatively stable in the short term (Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman et al., 2016).PI, however, deals with the contingent connection of specific behaviors to future outcomes. PI, like other contingency beliefs, is derived primarily from experience, both personal and vicarious (see discussions of underlying neural and cognitive mechanisms in Shell et al. (2010) and Shell and Flowerday (in press)). This makes PI, like specific outcome expectancies, considerably more malleable and changing. If studying does not lead to better grades, the PI of studying will soon decrease. Within the general hierarchical structure of connectedness, persons with a high level of general and domain connectedness perceive more and stronger instrumentalities between their behavior and future outcomes (Hilpert et al., 2012, Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman et al., 2016). These higher levels of general or domain connectedness can insulate PI from declining rapidly for specific non-contingent incidents, but connectedness cannot keep PI from declining if contingencies are not maintained. A student with high general or academic connectedness may still believe that studying is instrumental to grades even if that was not true in one course. However, if it is not true in most courses, connectedness will not be enough to maintain PI for studying. PI requires that experience confirms the instrumental connection.Because PI is anchored in experience, it is subject to change as environmental conditions and context change. In the academic setting, studies have found that PI is influenced by classroom context (Greene and DeBacker, 2004, Husman et al., 2016). Theoretically, PI would be expected to change within an academic class as students assessed the instrumentality of classroom content and activities as they experience it. However, studies of the extent to which PI changes during specific courses are lacking.1.1.2. Value and valenceValence and value refer to the importance of future outcomes. From a motivational perspective, it is not enough to know that an outcome is contingent on some behavior; one has to see the outcome as valuable or important enough to pursue. Generally, within FTP theories (see Husman & Lens, 1999), valence is seen as a disposition to ascribe a high value to goals that can only be attained in the distant future. Husman and her colleagues (Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman and Shell, 2008, Shell and Husman, 2001, Shell and Husman, 2008) operationalize this disposition as the general tendency to more highly value future goals relative to short-term immediate goals. This general FTP valence will strengthen the motivational impact of any specific future goals; persons with high valence will derive more motivation from any future goal than a person with low valence who has the same goal. But, FTP valence is not itself a specific goal or desired outcome.The future, however, consists of specific goals. At the highest level, value concerns the ability to conceptualize a personal future life course. FTP theory (Husman & Lens, 1999) views future life goals similarly to Markus’ (Markus & Nurius, 1986) conception of future possible selves. A future possible self is a potential life path or outcome that could be personal, such as being a good spouse or parent; academic, such as attaining a college degree; or career, such as becoming an engineer. Markus and Nurius (1986) argued that future possible selves can have a motivational function by providing “incentives for future behavior” (p. 955). From the perspective of FTP, future possible selves and other types of life outcomes are motivational to the extent that they are valued (Shell et al., 2010). This value must then lead to a specific commitment or aspiration to pursue that future self. This is the difference, for example, between knowing that an engineer is something one could possibly become and saying, “I am going to be an engineer.” This type of career aspiration means that the person values this future career highly enough to want to attain it. Commitment to this aspirational career is evidenced both by the expressed aspiration to pursue the career and by taking concrete steps and actions to realize this career goal.Although FTP valence is seen as more dispositional, specific future goals or future possible selves are theoretically viewed as quite malleable (Husman and Lens, 1999, Husman and Shell, 2008, Husman et al., 2015, Markus and Nurius, 1986). To have a future possible self, one must know that the possible self exists (Markus and Nurius, 1986, Shell et al., 2010). Providing students with knowledge of possible academic and career selves is a critical component of future-self interventions for adolescents (Oyserman, Terry, & Bybee, 2002). Oyserman et al. (2002) have shown that knowledge about and valuing of future possible academic and career paths can be changed through specific intervention. But, according to FTP theory, valuing and choice of future goals to pursue are malleable when any new information is obtained whether that information is obtained from formal intervention or informal sources (Husman et al., 2015). As potential future goals and possible selves shift, commitments or aspirations to pursue specific goals also change. Change in future goals and aspirations will subsequently produce changes in what specific courses, behaviors, or actions are perceived as instrumental for attaining these goals.
1.2. The present studiesShell et al. (2010) have noted that for future valued goals to be motivating there must be an instrumental path that connects these future goals to the present. For future selves, the future self must be valued enough to be pursued. This value must then lead to specific aspiration to pursue that future self. Finally, the person must develop the concrete series of steps or path to get from where they are today to that future self. In relation to academic and career future selves, this instrumental path will include specific courses in specific relevant subject domains and attainment of short, medium, and long-term benchmark goals such as grades and degrees. It is this instrumental path that establishes what courses and actions are high in PI for attaining the desired future academic or career self.College students, especially those in the STEM fields, already have expressed some career aspiration and commitment to the career through their enrollment in college and choice of major. Within their major, they have a proscribed instrumental path established by the course requirements of their major. That said, although presumably all courses in the students’ proscribed program of study are in some way instrumental to their major field, the strength of PI can differ from course to course. As shown by Shell and Soh (2013) and Nelson, Shell, Husman, Fishman, and Soh (2015), students have differing motivation, including PI, for courses depending on whether they are directly in the major sequence or are required, but non-major foundational courses, such as CS courses required for engineering majors.Despite their initial career aspirations, college students are still in the early stages of their instrumental path to that career. They have many specific courses to take and possibly multiple undergraduate and graduate degrees to obtain. Each course taken has the potential to provide information that might alter a students’ assessment of the value of their chosen career and subsequent aspiration and commitment to attaining that career, as do other academic and non-academic experiences during college. It is well documented within STEM fields that a large number of students do not continue to pursue their initial STEM major and shift to a different career path (Watkins & Mazur, 2013). Retention and dropping out of the major has been a particularly critical issue within the field we are studying: computer science (Giannakos, Pappas, Jaccheri, & Sampson, 2016). Because the instrumental path is tied to specific future career aspirations, changes in career aspiration would be expected to impact what is or is not in the instrumental path. Those changes would shift the PI of courses within the instrumental path as specific courses become more or less important within the path. Even more impactful would be shifts to aspiring to an entirely different career, which could remove a course completely from the new instrumental path.Despite the strong theoretical argument for these connections between change in career aspirations and change in PI for specific courses, there has been little empirical investigation of these theoretical linkages. Our purpose in the studies reported in this paper was to examine how changes in career aspirations are associated with changes in PI during a semester long CS course and how these changes are associated with students’ achievement and learning in the course. The following sections provide a more detailed examination of the research base on PI, career aspirations, and their intersection.1.2.1. Perceived instrumentalityPI has been operationalized as a task-specific evaluation of how a current learning activity connects to future goals (Husman, 1998, Husman and Lens, 1999, Miller et al., 1999). It is a type of outcome expectancy where the relevant outcome will not be immediately realized (Shell et al., 2010). Research suggests that motivation and achievement on learning tasks are enhanced when students see an instrumental connection between present academic tasks and their future goals (e.g., Greene et al., 2004, Simons et al., 2004).Researchers have proposed two types of instrumentality: endogenous and exogenous instrumentality. Endogenous instrumentality is the perception that mastering new information or skills is important for achieving distal goals (Husman & Lens, 1999). An example of endogenous instrumentality is an aspiring software engineer trying to master the concepts taught in her introductory computer programming course because she sees them as essential for her future career. Exogenous instrumentality refers to the perception that obtaining an external reward or outcome is essential for obtaining future goals (Husman & Lens, 1999). Course grades are a common example of external rewards/outcomes that are perceived as exogenously instrumental. For example, a political science major may be motivated to earn an A in a biology course because a higher grade point average (GPA) increases one’s chances of getting into graduate school (exogenous instrumentality), but that student may see no connection between mastering biology concepts and achieving future goals (endogenous instrumentality). The distinction between endogenous and exogenous instrumentality makes it possible to differentiate between perceived connections between (a) the content of a course and the future and (b) the outcomes of the course (i.e., grades) and the future.Researchers have studied the associations among PI and self-regulated learning (Simons et al., 2004, Tabachnick et al., 2008), the use of various learning strategies (Hilpert et al., 2012, Husman et al., 2000, Miller et al., 1999), motivation (Nieswandt and Shanahan, 2008, Simons et al., 2004), and goal orientation (Simons et al., 2000, Simons et al., 2004). Perceiving current course content as instrumental for obtaining future goals has been associated with adaptive motivational patterns, including an increase in mastery orientation and a decrease in performance orientation (Simons et al., 2000) and increased internal regulation over external regulation (Nieswandt & Shanahan, 2008). Further, PI is associated with the use of deep processing strategies while studying (Greene et al., 2004) and self-regulation strategies (Tabachnick et al., 2008).There is evidence that PI is positively associated with achievement (Greene et al., 2004, Malka and Covington, 2005, Ozcetin and Eren, 2010). For example, Malka and Covington (2005) found a positive relationship between college students’ PI and achievement that was separate from other motivational constructs, including self-efficacy and performance-approach achievement goals. Greene et al. (2004) studied the relationships among classroom perceptions, several aspects of motivation, and achievement in a high school setting. Their path analysis revealed that PI was positively associated with strategy use which was positively associated with semester course grades. However, Greene et al. (2004) and Malka and Covington (2005) measured PI with a single scale and, thus, did not differentiate between endogenous and exogenous PI.1.2.2. Career aspirationsAs noted by Plucker (1998) and others (Wang & Staver, 2001), life course and career aspirations have a long history in psychology. Formalization of the construct is relatively recent, however. Within FTP theory, career aspirations are a substantiation of a valued future career goal or possible self that one has committed to pursuing (Shell et al., 2010). Compatible with FTP theory’s conceptualization of career aspirations is the career aspirations for the future perspective taken by Nagengast and Marsh (2012). This perspective places career aspirations within a general socio-cognitive theoretical formulation as a form of future goal that one desires to attain. This is highly similar to the FTP theory position of career aspirations as future possible careers to which one has committed. Notably, this perspective has been incorporated into the survey portion of the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) survey, an international survey of education systems and students that has been conducted every three years since 2000 (Organisation [sic] for Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD], n.d.).Within the broad FTP perspective, career aspirations are a multifaceted latent construct. In addition to measuring career aspirations through self-report scales like the Career Aspirations Scale (O’Brien, 1996) and the career aspirations for the future subscale within the PISA (Nagengast and Marsh, 2012, OECD, 2009), career aspirations can be inferred from more objective data sources. Specifically, steps taken along the instrumental path to realizing a career such as going to college and choosing to major in the domain related to the career indicate aspirations to that career. Therefore, self-report indicators of career value and commitment and the major one has declared in college can provide convergent information about one’s aspiration to a long-term instrumental path leading to a specific career.1.2.3. Connections between perceived instrumentality and career aspirationsFTP theory posits PI as the motivational link between one’s day-to-day scholastic activities and career aspirations (Shell et al., 2010). There is only limited empirical research on these connections, however. Existent research has shown a connection between students’ perceptions of the utility of current learning tasks and career aspirations or possible future selves (e.g., Alpay et al., 2008, Hilpert et al., 2011, Leonardi, 2007). A small number of studies have examined the connection between career aspirations, as conceptualized in FTP, and PI. In one such study, Hilpert et al. (2011) asked 347 undergraduate engineering students to list ten salient events they imagined in their future and surveyed these participants about their use of learning strategies, PI, and motivation for engineering coursework. Responses were used to explore the relationship between future aspirations and PI of current tasks. Hilpert et al. (2011) found that participants who listed more professional engineering aspirations reported higher use of adaptive learning strategies, greater motivation, and higher perceptions of endogenous instrumentality for their coursework than participants who listed fewer professional goals. Additional literature has supported the notion that students experience increased motivation towards current tasks and subsequently experience higher levels of academic achievement when they make a connection between current learning tasks and their possible future selves (e.g., Greene and DeBacker, 2004, Lens et al., 2001, Leonardi, 2007).1.2.4. Changes in perceived instrumentality and career aspirationsPI and career aspirations are the most malleable of the FTP components. Markus and Nurius (1986) noted that possible selves are particularly sensitive to new information. Career aspirations are malleable when changes or feedback from the environment provide new information. In an education setting, feedback about one’s competence is a familiar instance of information that might change one’s career aspirations. Although course performance and other information about a career are obtained during a class, there is sparse research on how this information might be impacting change in career aspirations. Alpay et al. (2008) found that nearly all engineering students began their academic career with high professional aspirations (e.g., motivation to make a “high impact” in the field of engineering), but many adopted more financially oriented goals over time. However, those students who maintained high future career aspirations tended to view their engineering coursework more favorably than their peers.Although PI for specific educational contexts is posited as a rather dynamic construct affected by aspects of the classroom context, longitudinal research on how PI might be changing during a course is limited (Husman et al., 2016). PI involves the perception of a connection between present activities and future goals, especially future career goals. A change in the present activity, the perception of the activity, or the future career goal should lead to a change in PI. On one hand, students might enter a class with an idea of what they will learn, but then find out the course content is different from what was anticipated. The result could be either an increase or decrease in PI, depending on whether the actual content is more or less related to students’ interests or long-term goals (Coertjens, Vanthournout, Lindblom-Ylänne, & Postareff, 2016). On the other hand, it is possible that a student’s long-term goals will change during a class, especially given how common it is for undergraduate students to change majors and revise career goals. In either case, PI can be expected to change. Furthermore, one would expect exogenous PI to be more stable than endogenous PI, because the PI of a high grade for attaining future goals is likely to hold, regardless of the future goal or one’s feelings about the course topic. However, the connection between the content of a course and future goals depends heavily on both the future goal and the topic. That is, if long-term goals change, endogenous PI is likely to change too.Research has shown that PI is malleable. In a study of undergraduate engineering students, Puruhito, Husman, Hilpert, Ganesh, and Stump (2011) found that students’ PI of course material could be changed by 5-min videos about the utility of course concepts. These researchers found that students who viewed 5-min videos of former students advocating the benefits of the course concepts reported higher levels of PI of the course concepts than students who did not view such videos.Research exploring changes in PI across time without the presence of an intervention has provided mixed and inconclusive findings. For instance, Husman et al. (2000) asked 103 undergraduate students taking a three-week long introductory human development course to self-report their PI of course concepts and use of volitional learning strategies at the end of each week. Although these researchers did not find a significant difference in students’ PI of the course material from the beginning until the end of the course, the relationship between volitional strategy use and students’ endogenous PI did increase across time. This finding suggests that use of volitional learning strategies is associated with higher perceptions of the importance of mastering course content to reach future goals. In contrast, Eren (2009) found that undergraduate students’ PI for concepts learned in an educational psychology course did increase across the semester, but these changes were not associated with course achievement. Because of the sparse and inconclusive literature related to change in college students’ PI without the presence of an intervention, one goal of the studies reported here is to help fill this gap in the literature by exploring how the PI of undergraduate students taking CS courses changes across a semester.
1.3. Research purpose and hypothesesThe previously reviewed literature indicates PI and career aspirations are likely related, and both constructs may change. However, the specific nature of these changes and the extent to which changes in career aspirations and PI are associated are unknown. As we interpret the relationship of career aspirations and PI through the lens of FTP theory, changes in career aspirations should precede and be predictive of changes in PI, because the career aspiration establishes what is or is not in the instrumental path.The purpose of these two studies was to investigate (a) how CS students’ PI and CS-related career aspirations change while taking CS courses, (b) the relationship between change in CS-related career aspirations and change in PI, and (c) the influence of PI and CS-related career aspirations on students’ learning outcomes. The following general research questions guided both studies:1.How do students’ career aspirations and endogenous and exogenous PI of computer science courses change during a single semester?2.How are changes in career aspirations predictive of change in PI?3.How do changes in career aspirations and PI across the semester relate to students’ CS learning outcomes?The sample in Study 1 consisted of undergraduate students enrolled in introductory CS courses. The sample in Study 2 consisted of undergraduate students enrolled in introductory, intermediate, and advanced CS courses. In both studies, PI and career aspirations were measured at multiple points during a single semester, and end-of-semester achievement measures were obtained.
