Social change in gender relations is slow in Australia. Positive signs include the first season of the Australian Football League (AFL) women's competition in 2017; 57.9% of university students are female (Universities Australia, 2017); workforce participation by women has increased to 46.2%; and women currently comprise 32% of the Federal Parliament (Hough, 2016). Less encouraging is that the gender pay gap sits at 15.3% and has remained between 15% and 20% for twenty years (Workplace Gender Equality Agency, 2017), and only 25.4 percent of Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) 200 companies have female board members when a critical mass of 30% is needed for the benefits of gender diversity to be realised (Australian Institute of Company Directors, 2017). Data from the Global Institute for Women's Leadership (2018), based in King's College, London, and chaired by Julia Gillard, former Prime Minister of Australia (2010–2013), shows that Australia is not unusual. Across the globe, women comprise just 23% of politicians, 26% of leaders in the media industry, 27% of the judiciary, 25% of senior executives, 15% of company board members, and only 9% of the leadership of the Information Technology industry.
This slow social change is reflected in the gender divide in enrolment trends in Digital Technologies courses. In 2014 the Australian Federal Government introduced its first national Digital Technologies curriculum, an initiative which complements significant work by universities and industry leaders over many years to grow the number of domestic student computer science enrolments. While the investment has paid dividends with an increase of 67.9% in enrolments between 2008 and 2015, the percentage of domestic female enrolments has declined from 17% of the total in 2008 to 14% in 2015 (Falkner, 2017; Falkner, Szabo, Michell, Szorenyi, & Thyer, 2015; Rosa & Tudge, 2013) and women continue to be underrepresented in the computer science industry across Australia (Zagami, Boden, Keane, Moreton, & Schulz, 2015).
Because the under-representation of women in computer science reflects the under-representation of women at the highest levels of government and business in Australia (Australian Institute of Company Directors, 2017), in this paper we argue that change is going to require a cohesive multi-level analysis and intervention approach. To illustrate how such an approach might look, we draw on social psychologist Uri Bronfenbrenner's socio-ecological systems theory to analyse a national survey with secondary school computer science teachers we conducted in 2017. Bronfenbrenner's theory breaks human development into four key systems—the macrosystem, the exosystem, the mesosystem and the microsystem—where each system is connected and the macrosystem is the key influencer. It is an especially useful method for examining the “nested and complex relationships among the various systems of human development” (Basham, Israel, & Maynard, 2010, p. 11). From analysis of the data we can see that student interest and engagement in computer science is impacted by their teachers, peers and parents (microsystem) who sit within a wider community, educational and industry network (mesosystem) which in turn is influenced by their access to relevant human and physical infrastructure (and the policies that shape it) in their school and social environments (exosystem) and by the broader values and rhetoric around gender and Digital Technologies in the wider Australian community (macrosystem).
Australia is far from the only country where women are under-represented in computer science (Zweben & Bizot, 2014). As pointed out above, across the globe women represent only 9% of senior leaders in the Information Technology industry (Global Institute for Women's Leadership, 2018). Therefore the paper begins with an overview of the many attempts that have already been made to address this imbalance. We then examine Bronfenbrenner's theory in more detail and demonstrate how a multi-level analysis draws attention to where interventions are most needed and how all system levels must make an investment in increasing gender and other forms of diversity in Digital Technologies.
