In this paper we celebrate Edward (Ed) K. Blum and his vision and hard work in founding the Journal of Computer and System Sciences (JCSS) and establishing it as one of the leading journals of theoretical computer science from its origin through to today. Included are memories from his devoted daughters, who all worked on the Journal at some part of their childhood, whether it was licking envelopes, typing up letters, or actually working as the secretary for the editor. Also included are some examples shared by colleagues who have had the privilege of knowing Ed personally, showing that Ed was “intensely curious intellectually and stubbornly persistent in his professional work”. This article will use the familiar name “Ed” (instead of only the surname “Blum”) as an acknowledgment of the friendliness and kindness of this amazing scientist.
At the time of Ed's passing in 2014, of natural causes following a bout with cancer, the University of Southern California (USC) Dornsife published a beautiful Memorial [5] which contains the following facts about his life. He was born in Brooklyn, N.Y., in 1923, to Jewish immigrant parents, and grew up loving books and mathematics.
In 1944, Blum graduated from Cooper Union in New York with a bachelor of science degree in mathematics. During World War II he served in the United States Navy as an Electronic Technician Mate 2nd Class. After the war, he received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from Columbia University in New York. Edward Blum's adviser at Columbia was Edgar Lorch. His dissertation title was “The Theory of Analytic Functions in Banach Algebras.”
His first job was in a government laboratory in Washington, D.C., where he met his wife Dolores “Lori” Shaw. They married in 1953 and three years later, moved to Los Angeles, California. Blum had accepted an engineering post at TRW, an American automotive and aerospace corporation (acquired by Northrop Grumman in 2002) where he worked on rocket thrust trajectories for travel to Mars.
Ed joined the faculty of the University of Southern California (USC) Dornsife in 1966 as Professor of Mathematics, with a joint appointment at USC Viterbi School of Engineering. He was 43 years old and already had academic experience as an Instructor at the University of Maryland, in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cooperative Program, and at UCLA Extension. He had also served as Professor of Mathematics and Director of the Computer Center at Wesleyan University, Ohio. While at USC, Ed supervised six students of his own. A search on MathSciNet showed a publication list of 43 items. The earlier papers were in the general areas of functional analysis, operator theory, calculus of variations and control theory. Later papers were primarily in numerical analysis and computer science. Although Ed was a mathematician, his avid intellectual curiosity drew him towards the new field of computing.
