Medical simulation has become a necessary learning methodology for healthcare professionals who can simulate cases they cannot always find during real-life patient care (Lavoie and Clarke, 2017). The learning technology used in the simulation process has improved through time, starting from a doll-like manikin with simple functions to a realistic manikin which is enhanced by new advanced technologies including robotics, embedded systems, and virtual and augmented reality. Some of these systems are hybrid systems to simulate a real patient or hospital environment. Some of the advanced technology is developed through university research, especially from engineering schools, to enhance and push the limits of these simulation tools. At the same time, several companies developed products based on these research technologies to create a comprehensive environment for realistic medical simulation.
Although there is a general agreement that integrating simulation technology into nursing curriculum is essential, there is currently no documented educational approach for preparing faculty to expertly operate and manage the differing types of simulation technology. Many faculty state they did not receive training in their graduate programs and most of the learning is achieved on their own (Roney et al., 2017). Additionally, the technological complexities have become a barrier for nurse educators to operate human patient simulator manikins (HPSMs) in the clinical laboratory setting and overshadow the attractiveness of this technological learning tool. Simulation based-education (SBE) is growing rapidly and is an expensive educational offering that millennial learners are preferring as a learning strategy and have come to expect this state-of-the-art technology in their nursing programs (Parker and Myrick, 2009).
In order to deliver a successful SBE program, a team of professionals knowledgeable in business management, education, and technical skills must work collaboratively in the simulation center (INACSL, 2017). Based on this knowledge, we hypothesized that the incorporation of on-site technological expertise that allows for the facile navigation of HPSM's in the School of Nursing will lift barriers that interfere with the maximization of the intended educational experience.
