Academic publications may serve as a measure of individual accomplishment, but academic text production is a networked activity (see Lillis and Curry, 2010, Belcher et al., 2016). Particularly, writing for publication relies on a range of different actors (e.g. peer reviewers, proofreaders) who influence the text production but who may not have an ‘authoring’ role in the traditional sense. These various ‘literacy brokers’ (Lillis and Curry, 2010) are relevant for all research writers, but perhaps even more so for those writing in their L2 (see e.g. Flowerdew, 2008). This paper aims to shed light on this networked, social nature of text production by focusing on the ‘text history’ (Lillis and Curry, 2010) of a research paper written by a team of computer scientists to be presented at an international conference. My focus, in particular, is on the role of digital writing and social media tools in the networked text production.
While the research paper has been a popular research topic, much of the research conducted on this genre has either dealt with the finished product (e.g. Samraj, 2005, Lin and Evans, 2012), or specific aspects of the text production trajectory, particularly different brokering activities (e.g. Flowerdew, 2001, Mur-Dueñas, 2013, Lillis and Curry, 2015). Much of the research on literacy brokers has been concerned with the English-medium writing of L2 English users (for the term ‘L2 user’, see Mauranen, 2012), and what role the brokering plays in shaping their writing for publication. These studies often approach writing as a trajectory, highlighting the social nature of academic text production (e.g. Mur-Dueñas, 2013, Lillis and Curry, 2015), but collaborative writing is typically not a concern for them.
Research that sets out to address issues related to collaborative writing in academia, then again, has tended to focus on student writing (e.g. Bremner et al., 2014; papers in Van Steendam, 2016), often from a language learning perspective (e.g. Shehadeh, 2011, Storch, 2005, Storch, 2013). Some work, though, has been conducted particularly from the perspective of novice academics. For instance, Li’s (2006) work sheds light on a physics PhD student’s publication-navigation process, and Armstrong (2015) focuses on the role of peer feedback in the research paper writing of a PhD student in computer science. In addition, Gimenez and Thondhlana (2012), with both students and professionals as study participants, provide empirical evidence for collaborative writing practices in engineering. However, professional academics’ collaborative writing practices in general have received relatively little attention. In fact, it has been stated that “publication practices within research groups are still under-examined” (Belcher et al., 2016: 510; see also Van Steendam, 2016). With this study, I seek to provide some answers to what these practices may be like.
A notable exception to the limited attention on professional academics’ colloborative writing practices is McGrath’s (2013) study on the online co-authoring of a research article in pure mathematics. McGrath’s research is important not only in its focus on collaborative writing, but also in that it highlights the effects that digital tools, in this case an open-access research blog that enables the participation of professional mathematicians and non-specialists alike, may have on research writing practices. In general, “academic writing has been reshaped in many ways with the rise of new technologies” (Barton and Lee, 2013: 2), and research is being conducted on the changing writing practices of contemporary academics also from the perspective of digital media use (e.g. Tusting et al., 2017). New genres and forms of writing have become relevant for researchers, among those blogging (see e.g. Mauranen, 2013, Myers, 2010, Myers, 2013), tweeting (see e.g. Gillen and Merchant, 2013) and wikis (see e.g. Myers, 2010; for an overview of all three, see Kuteeva, 2016), and for instance, Barton (2015) has considered the centrality of technology in contemporary academic writing practices.
However, questions still remain in terms of what roles digital tools play in the still prominent research paper writing for publication (see Belcher et al., 2016), particularly considering the full trajectory of the produced text and the steps writers take in planning, drafting, evaluating and advertising their research papers. The questions I seek answers to in this paper are:
(1)In what ways are digital writing and social media tools utilised in the writing of a research paper for publication?(2)How do researchers view the role of such tools in the text production process?
To answer these questions, I explore the trajectory of a particular research paper written by a team of computer scientists, and analyse research interviews with the authors and their colleagues from the same field regarding their use of digital tools, particularly collaborative writing tools and Twitter, in their research writing.
The findings shed light on the use of different digital tools for academic text production. While the end-product may be in more or less the same recognisable format of the research paper, there is more that goes into the writing, evaluating and advertising of the paper that digital tools enable, and possibly compel, scholars to do. The paper suggests that even if the research paper genre seems to be ‘intact’ – for now, at least (cf. Pérez-Llantada, 2013) – digital tools influence the writing process and particularly what happens after the paper has been accepted. The promotional aspect is central in making (or at least attempting to make) a research group’s work heard in a world of high-speed publishing, where publications from two years back may be old. This is an important aspect to take into account in engaging novice scholars into academia, that they are made aware of different aspects of academic text production and what it makes to increase chances of being heard and read in their field.
