Computer virus is a program which malignant for computer systems and disrupt the normal functionalities of the system and damages data files. Computer virus act like biological viruses which connects itself to a host computer, damages a program file, data file and operating system of that PC. It has the capacity to reproduce itself by attaching to other programs like epidemic disease. A virus will continue spreading the infection to other files and programs and affect the performance of any system. Viruses can be transmitted from computer to computer in many different ways and reproduce by mailing themselves to dozens of people in the inbox of host's mail address. It can also transmit by downloading any file from internet, network connections, floppy disk, and universal serial buses or by CDs. To study the prevention and control of the spread of virus in computers, epidemic models for computer virus dynamics are established in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. The spread of virus can be controlled by isolating the highly infected nodes. The isolation of infected files is a remedy to reduce the rapid transmission of virus in other computers.
In this work, we solved numerically the quarantined epidemic model with latent and breaking-out over the internet [1]. The term latent is referred for the infected computers with latent period to become infectious. The breaking-out are the infectious computer which are effected by the virus and are needed to be recovered. The quarantine is referred to the isolation method in which highly infected nodes are isolated from the network. This method helps to slow down the spread of virus. The main purpose of this article is to develop a numerical scheme for susceptible-latent-breakingout-quarantine-susceptible (SLBQRS) computer virus model which preserves the structure of continuous model. It is necessary for a numerical method to preserve all the necessary conditions possessed by the continuous model. For example, numerical scheme cannot justify negative values for the solution of computer virus epidemic model because negative value of susceptible computers is meaningless. Therefore, in order to study the actual behavior of epidemic computer virus dynamics at all points of the domain, it is necessary to solve continuous system with structure preserving numerical method. Nonstandard finite difference (NSFD) method introduced by Mickens [5] is an efficient structure preserving numerical method to solve dynamical systems [5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. This technique has also become a reliable technique to solve epidemic models [5, 12, 13, 14]. Because of reliability, efficiency and capability of preserving the structure of continuous system, we develop a NSFD scheme for the numerical solution of SLBQRS computer virus model.
The main motivation of this research is to develop the reliable positivity preserving numerical schemes for the continuous model for virus propagation in a computer network. In Section 2, stability of the model and its bifurcation analysis has been performed. Moreover, three finite difference numerical schemes for the continuous model are also presented and stability analysis of proposed NSFD scheme has been discussed. In Section 3, numerical experiment for all the FD schemes is performed, spectral radius has been calculated and effect of quarantine strategy has been observed. Sections 4 and 5 constitutes the relevant discussion and conclusion.
