The use of technology has become more and more common as people are constantly being exposed to novel technologies and unfamiliar technologically-enhanced situations. It comes as no surprise that the area of personnel selection is no exception. With the objective of screening the best possible applicants, applicants might soon undergo employment interviews with virtual characters (Langer, König, Gebhard, & André, 2016). Compared to more classical technology-mediated selection interview procedures like videoconference interviews, these novel technologies would lack any interpersonal interaction in the interview. However, former research implies that applicant reactions (i.e., how do applicants react to a personnel selection situation) can be detrimentally affected by novel technologies (e.g., Blacksmith, Willford, & Behrend, 2016). Consequentially, some applicants might self-select out of the application process if they experience distinct negative feelings towards technologically-advanced selection procedures (cf., Uggerslev, Fassina, & Kraichy, 2012). In particular, less computer-experienced applicants might be more prone to negative reactions towards novel technologies for personnel selection (e.g., Bauer et al., 2006).
According to previous research, negative applicant reactions can be mitigated by providing information (Lahuis et al., 2003, McCarthy et al., 2017, Truxillo et al., 2009). Information provided could include diverse topics, but applicants are generally given information focused on uncertainty reduction, guarantees of respectful treatment, increasing transparency, and pronouncing job validity of the selection procedure (McCarthy et al., 2017, Truxillo et al., 2009).
The first goal of this study was therefore to examine the relationship between computer experience and applicant reactions to novel technologies for personnel selection. The second goal was to test if procedural information (i.e., information about what is happening during the procedure and justifying the use of this procedure) improves applicant reactions in the context of novel technologies for personnel selection.
The section background and hypotheses development is structured as follows: We start by introducing the evolution of the use of technology in personnel selection and by providing an overview of research about the relation of technology and applicant reactions. Following, we describe the importance of the variables computer experience and information and their interplay in the context of novel technologies for personnel selection. We then develop hypotheses regarding applicant reaction variables (i.e. job relatedness, information known, open treatment, transparency, consistency, interpersonal treatment, opportunity to perform, fairness, creepiness and privacy concerns) that are likely affected by our independent variables and propose that these variables will mediate the relationship of computer experience and information on organizational attractiveness.
