In recent years, bioinformatics has undoubtedly become a ‘Big Data’ area of science, requiring increasingly larger computational platforms, known as supercomputers, to extract knowledge from raw data. Such is the case of several fields, for instance in medical [1], comparative genomics [2], molecular biology [3] or chemistry [4]. This scenario has led to an enormous footprint being left in the academic and industrial domains, mostly by influencing institutions to adopt and implement expensive computing centers [5] that are able to process such large amounts of data in shorter running times. Furthermore, this supercomputing trend has even reached out to the political arena, where actions are being taken by international and governmental agencies in order to standardize and promote centralized High Performance Computing in the form of accessible and shared infrastructures (e.g. the European Union, see [6] and [7]).
However, it is estimated that less than 1% of computer scientists have strong expertise in the programming of these massively parallel architectures [8]. This number drops even lower when researchers have no background in computer science, which then introduces an additional obstacle for these platforms to be fully exploited by different domains. Bioinformatics, however, is one of the fields that is able to make use of this supercomputing power, particularly for processing the huge amounts of data generated in genomics and metagenomics studies [9]. Consequently, ELIXIR, the European platform leading the coordination of Life Science resources throughout Europe [10], has been supporting the emerging HPC trend by offering a series of HPC courses targeted specifically at bioinformatics researchers [11]. Such instructive courses are part of the ELIXIR-EXCELERATE [12], Work Package 11 Training Programme, which aims to deliver and improve researchers' skills to effectively exploit data, tools, standards and the computing infrastructures.
Generally, HPC is taught in a computer scientist-based environment [13], with trivial and numerical use cases that exemplify the benefits of parallelism in terms of increased performance, reduced complexity, higher efficiency, etc. However, such use cases do not represent a ‘real-life’ outcome for researchers from other domains. For instance, from a comparative genomics perspective, it would be interesting to provide domain-related metrics such as how many genomes can be compared at once, of which size and how long it will take to compare them (as opposed to illustrating parallelism with improvements in e.g. throughput). Hence, it is of interest for the researching community to be able to adapt and design HPC courses specific to other domains, facilitating comprehension through illustrative, domain-related use cases.
In this document, we describe and discuss the deployment, methodology, results and outcomes of the HPC Train-the-Researcher course1 that was held in the University of Malaga, which addressed the complexities of parallel programming, with emphasis on genome-scale sequence-comparison algorithms use cases. Furthermore, we present this manuscript as a description of the bridging between two distant disciplines from the perspective of teaching a mixed-background audience. We conclude the report with several recommendations and hints obtained through instant and post-course feedback that aim to enhance the outcomes of future training courses from both an organizational, teaching and learning perspective.
