During the past few decades, the recommendation systems (RSs) have received an ever-increasing interest from various communities such as computer science, engineering research and medical applications [1], [2], [3]. Owing to their outstanding performance in providing users with product or service recommendations, the RSs have found successful applications in a variety of domains including e-commerce, music, movies, news and so on [4], [5], [6]. In order to recommend goods and services that users are interested in, the RSs mainly employ information filtering technology to analyze users’ requirements by mining user behavior data.
Collaborative filtering (CF), as one of the most successful recommendation techniques, has been receiving considerable attention ever since the mid-1990s with fruitful applications in the development of various RSs by Amazon, YouTube, Netflix and so on [7]. Generally speaking, the well-known CF-based recommendation algorithms (RAs) include the user-based CF (UBCF) algorithms and the item-based CF (IBCF) algorithms. The main idea of the UBCF algorithms is to analyze the user behaviors to find similar users (named as neighbors) in the communities. In this case, the items are recommended to a target user based on his/her neighbors’ interested items. Similarly, the IBCF algorithms make use of the similarity between the items rather than users. The items that are similar to those in which the target user is interested are recommended to the concerned user.
It should be noticed that the similarity measures play a critical role in the CF-based RAs. Some commonly used similarity measures in the UBCF and IBCF algorithms include the adjusted cosine (AC), cosine, and Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) measures. Nevertheless, in the case that the user behaviors are complicated, the performance of the CF-based RAs which use the PCC, cosine or AC as the similarity measure cannot be always guaranteed. As such, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the design of more comprehensive similarity measures [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. For example, the Shannon entropy has been employed to quantify the users’ rating habits [10], [11], where the difference of entropy between users has been utilized as the weight to adjust the result of similarity.
While the state-of-the-art similarity measures have helped improving the prediction accuracy of the RAs, most of the measures take either users or items to predict the missing values. It has been shown in some literature that the combination of the UBCF method and the IBCF method could effectively improve the performance of the RSs [3], [13], [14], [15], [16]. In [13], the confidence weights, which use the degree of similarity of the neighbors as a reference, have been utilized to balance the predictions obtained by the UBCF method and the IBCF method. In the typical RAs, only positively correlated neighbors are utilized to compute the similarity between the users/items. Nevertheless, the negatively correlated neighbors are also useful in predicting the missing values from another perspective [17]. In this context, a seemingly natural idea is to combine the UBCF and IBCF methods by developing a new prediction model where the positively and negatively correlated neighbors in both methods are taken into account.
To balance the impacts from the UBCF method and the IBCF method, a typical approach is to introduce the weighting parameters to predict the missing values, where the weighting parameters are utilized to make an adequate tradeoff between the positively and negatively correlated neighbors in the UBCF/IBCF methods. It is worth mentioning that, in the literature, such weighting parameters have been manually selected according to engineering practice by means of certain rules on an ad hoc basis [3], [13]. Clearly, manual selection of the weighting parameters requires in-depth domain knowledge and specific fine-tuning techniques, which is not always possible in practice. As such, it makes practical sense to automate the parameter selection algorithm with locally optimized performance.
In search of an effective algorithm capable of locating optimally weighted parameters in terms of improving the prediction performance, the Evolutionary computation (EC) algorithms appear to be an ideal candidate. EC algorithms have shown distinguished advantages in solving optimization problems in a diverse range of real-world applications including telecommunication, signal processing, system science and so on [18], [19]. An effective yet popular EC algorithm is the so-called particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm that owns the distinctive advantages of easy implementation, quick convergence and great competence in effectively searching the global optimum. So far, the PSO algorithm has gained much attention from both academia and industry with successful applications in solving various multi-objective optimization problems, see e.g. [20], [21]. Owing to its particular suitability, the PSO algorithm is exploited in this paper to optimize the weighting parameters in order to achieve an adequate tradeoff between the positively and negatively correlated neighbors in terms of predicting the rating values.
Motivated by the above discussions, we propose a modified CF (MCF) algorithm in this paper by combining the merits of UBCF and IBCF methods. Through the utilization of the information from both the positively and negatively correlated neighbors, the proposed algorithm is capable of predicting the missing values in multi-aspects with satisfactory accuracy. In particular, the PSO algorithm is dedicatedly exploited to determine (locally) optimized weights of our proposed MCF algorithm so as to further improve the prediction accuracy. To illustrate its application potential, our proposed algorithm is applied to assist with the baseline data collection for Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) patients. The main contributions are summarized as follows:
1)An MCF algorithm is proposed which not only combines the merits from the UBCF and IBCF methods but also makes full use of the positively and negatively correlated neighbors in predicting the missing values.2)The PSO algorithm is utilized to optimize the weights in the MCF algorithm so as to achieve a) an adequate tradeoff between the user-based and the item-based similarity measures; and b) a proper balance between the positively and negatively correlated neighbors.3)The developed algorithm is successfully applied to the FRDA assessment system to assist clinical sample collection for FRDA patients who are unable to attend the tests in the study sites.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The detailed introduction of the proposed MCF approach is presented in Section 2. The performance of our proposed MCF approach is evaluated in the case of a real-world neurological disease in Section 3. Finally, conclusions are drawn in 4.
