As in any dynamic and relatively new field, Computer Graphics benefits from new knowledge being published every day. Considering only six well-known journals in the field (ACM TOG, Comp. Graphics Forum, IEEE TVCG, IEEE CG&A, Computers & Graphics, and The Visual Computer), we as a community published an average of 2.73 papers a day in the last two years (in Appendix A we present this data). This high level of production also means pressure on curricular development to cope appropriately and respond to continuing advancements in the field. Therefore, as teachers and professors of Computer Graphics, we are always striving for the balance between breadth of coverage against depth, between a more hands-on approach versus a more theoretical perspective, and other balancing decisions. Within the Bachelor of Computer Science at UFRGS, we started a discussion on the pros and cons of introducing modern OpenGL in the undergraduate introductory course and the best way of doing so. This question motivated us to consider how our peer colleagues around the world were approaching the same issue. With this initial idea in mind, we thought further that it would be worth seeing what content was being taught and use this knowledge to help redesign our course.
We surveyed 28 introductory undergraduate courses in Computer Graphics from universities distributed on three continents (North America, Europe, and Asia) selected according to their publication records. We gathered data on the topics being taught according to the list of topics publicly available – typically on web pages. We also collected data on textbooks and whether or not modern OpenGL is already part of the curriculum. We hope our study will be helpful for institutions which are or will be redesigning their curricula in the near future.
This paper is an extended version of an earlier conference paper [1]. Based on feedback from the conference paper and a more thorough analysis of our data, we have extended the original research: we have updated and expanded related work; we have surveyed 28 institutions (instead of 20 from the previous paper), with confirmation about the collected data for 71.14% of the courses; for the final list of topics and percentages we have included a second scenario including two more learning topics; and finally we have assessed, for all universities, how much coverage each learning topic is receiving. More details about these extensions are given in appropriate sections below.
