Commodity Single Board Computers (SBCs) are now sufficiently powerful that they can run standard operating systems and mainstream workloads. Many such boards may be linked together, to create small low-cost clusters that replicate features of large data centers, and that can enable new Fog and Edge Compute applications where computation is pushed out from the core of the network towards the data sources. This can reduce bandwidth requirements and latency, help improve privacy, and decentralize the architecture, but it comes at the cost of additional management complexity. In this paper, we investigate use cases driving the growth of SBC clusters, examine the trends in future hardware developments and cluster management, and discuss the potential of SBC clusters as a disruptive technology.
The introduction of the Raspberry Pi has led to a significant change in the SBC market. Similar products such as the Gumstix have been available since 2003 [1], however, the Raspberry Pi has sold in much higher volumes leading to the company behind it being the fastest growing computer company in the world [2]. This has led to a dramatic increase in the number of SBC manufacturers and available products, as described in Section 2. Each of these products has been subject to different design decisions leading to a large variation in the functions available on the SBC. The low price point of SBCs has enabled clusters to be created at a significantly lower cost than was previously possible. We review prototypical SBC clusters in Section 3.
SBC clusters can be created simply to gain an understanding of the challenges posed by such developments, but can also have practical uses where a traditional cluster would not be appropriate. The first SBC clusters, e.g., IridisPi [3] and the Glasgow Pi Cloud [4], were created primarily for education. Since then, SBC clusters have been created for many reasons including to manage art works [[5], [6]], and to provide disposable compute power in extreme environments where node destruction is likely [7]. Section 4 highlights classes of use cases for this technology, including emergent fog and edge compute applications.
The purchasing of a multi-node cluster has been made significantly cheaper by the developments of SBCs, but the challenges of setup and ongoing maintenance remain. Some of these challenges are also experienced when running a standard cluster, but issues such as SD card duplication and low-voltage DC power distribution are unique to the creation of SBC clusters. Our contribution is to identify these differences and show where existing cluster management techniques can be used, and where new techniques are needed. Management tasks are further complicated by the fact that, unlike traditional clusters which are located within data centers due their high power demands, it is feasible for an SBC cluster to be geographically distributed. Section 5 discusses the major challenges.
This paper provides a survey of current achievements and outlines possible topics for future work. It concludes by looking forward, and discussing future applications for SBC systems in Section 6.
