Bi-Directional Brain–Computer interfacing (BBCI) is a developing technology that has many potential applications for restoring motor control for paralyzed patients as well as providing tactile feedback to the brain. However, current technology uses a wired connection between implanted electrodes and an external device which processes and transmits the information. This wired connection makes creates a great risk of infection making it significantly less viable for use in human subjects. Additionally the implant being wireless allows the operating field to fully heal post surgery. The early studies was targeting battery-free sensors with arrange of 1 m or more which sensing a simple quantities such as temperature or light intensity [1], or neural signals [2] or specific motion [3]. The new electronic neural or the efficacy of electronic neural implant which developed later has been enabled previously impossible brain-research experiments [4], and main improvement has been made toward neutrally controlled Prosthesis [5]. Near-field inductive link to transmit power and data has been introduced and achieved wireless operation [[6], [7]]. However this technique required the external coil be placed within a few centimeters of the internal coil.
In this paper we present a wireless Identification sensing platform (WISP5) which is a fully-passive UHF–RFID tag that uses an ultra-low power, micro-controller for sensing and RFID communication by harvesting power from RF energy provided by a radio frequency identification (RFID) reader. WISP5 technology based on backscatter modulation, each tag responds with a unique identification number by reflecting energy back to the reader, the more power that is transmitted the longer the read range of the tag.
To insure safety [[8], [9]], The Federal Communication Commission (FCC) in the United States limits the power transmitted in the Industrial, Scientific, and Medical (ISM) radio band (902 MHz–928 MHz) to 4 W (EIRP) [10]. UHF–RFID is one of the best options for wireless communication inside of the human body due to its extremely low transmission power requirements. If the transmission power requirements are too high then the system cannot be charged wirelessly requiring repeated surgeries to replace batteries. There are no realtime UHF–RFID communication channel models designed to examine transmission of signals using multiple transmitters. Implementation of multiple transmitters in the brain requires a suitable medium access control (MAC) protocol to support maximum throughput [[11], [12], [13]]. The purpose of this study was to investigate the feasibility and application of multiple implantable UHF Passive RFID transmitters inside the brain for capturing multi-channel ECoG signals at high data transfer rates. This paper is organized in six sections. Section 1 introduces the current scope of BCI and the purpose of our study. Section 2 related works. Section 3 BCI applications. Section 4 describes the need of multiple transmitters in brain. Section 5 describes the experimental components. Section 6 experimental setup and methods. Section 7 presents the results. Section 8 compare and discuss the effect of using different number of transmitters. Section 9 we summarize our work in the conclusions.
