Fetal biometrics have a strong diagnostic and prognostic role in the evaluation of fetal growth [1]. Fetal biometrics are commonly measured in the clinical practice from obstetric ultrasound (US), which is a non-invasive, low-cost imaging modality that allows real-time image acquisition. Among fetal biometrics, head-circumference (HC) length is often measured by clinicians to estimate gestational age and fetal weight, especially when abnormal head growth is suspected [2]. In the clinical practice, HC-length measurement is performed manually, either overlaying an ellipse on the fetal skull or identifying landmarks on the skull that delimit the head main axes.
The manual delineation, however, poses issues related to both measurement reproducibility and time consumption [3].
A possible solution to attenuate these issues would be to develop an algorithm for automatic HC delineation. However, this is not a trivial task: challenges that have to be addressed include presence of shadows in the images and signal dropout and speckling, which cause fake or missing edges [4]. As a further challenge, the HC only covers a small portion of the image, which moreover varies among the trimesters (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (176KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Samples of ultrasound images acquired at the (a) first and (b) second trimester. The head-circumference annotations in shown in light blue.
Recently, researches in closer fields (e.g., [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]) have pointed out the benefits of modeling edge-delineation problems, such as HC delineation, as heatmap regression tasks. Following such a modeling, a convolutional neural network (CNN) is trained to directly regress a distance-field from the edge of interest.
Thus, guided by the research hypothesis that regression CNNs may allow accurate HC delineation, the contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
1.A new framework for HC delineation, which consists of a region-proposal CNN for head location and centering, and a regression CNN for accurately delineate the HC2.A new strategy to train the regression CNN that is based on distance fields
