1.1. Background and motivationDebris disks around stars other than the Sun, sometimes referred to as exozodi or exozidacal dust due to the similarity to the solar system’s zodiacal cloud, are of interest to scientists as they are essential to understandthe foundation of planetary systems (Morales et al., 2009). These disks are believed to have been formed by collisions between planets and planetsimals, remnants of the planetary formation process (Backman and Paresce, 1993b). Multiple circumstellar debris disks have been directly imaged with high spatial resolution using the Hubble Space Telescope, such as the circumstellar disks around Fomalhaut shown in Fig. 1.Debris disks have gained significant interest among astronomers due to their importance in exoplanet detection. Stars with circumstellar debris disks are often promising candidates for exoplanet discovery due to the common origin of debris disks and planets as well as their interactions Janson et al. (2013), Kóspál et al. (2009). Debris disks structures often have gaps and cavities, revealing the possible existence of exoplanets along with constraints on their properties Janson et al. (2013), Greaves et al. (2005). Multiple exoplanet discoveries have been made around stars with debris disks in recent years Lisse et al. (2007), Marois et al. (2008), Liseau et al. (2010), Dodson-Robinson et al. (2011), Moór et al. (2013). Positive correlation has been suggested between the presence of exozodi and exoplanets Kóspál et al. (2009), Raymond et al. (2011). These findings provide information for future surveys dedicated to high-resolution imaging of debris disks to further understand the interaction and correlation between exoplanet and debris disks (Janson et al., 2013). In addition, understanding the properties of extrasolar debris disks is essential for the target selection process of future exoplanet direct imaging and spectroscopy missions due to the dominant photon-noise produced by exozodiacal light Beichman et al. (2006), Weinberger et al. (2015), Kennedy et al. (2014).Download : Download high-res image (549KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Debris disk around Fomalhaut as captured by the Hubble Space Telescope. Credit: NASA, ESA, and P. Kalas (University of California, Berkeley and SETI Institute).A common technique used to identify the existence of debris disks around stars is based upon the detection of infrared-excess caused by circumstellar disk’s infrared emission in the stellar photosphere, sometimes referred to as the “Vega Phenomenon” Backman and Paresce (1993a), Dodson-Robinson et al. (2011). The “Vega Phenomenon” was first observed using the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) (Aumann et al., 1984) and has since been observed by the Spitzer Space Telescope Su et al. (2005), Chen et al. (2006), Morales et al. (2009). A recent all-sky mid-infrared survey was conducted by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) mission. The WISE observatory is a NASA-funded medium-class Explorer mission managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and launched in 2010. The WISE payload consists of a cryogenically cooled 40-cm diameter telescope and a 4-Mpixel detector array, providing a field-of-view of 47 arcminutes. WISE provides higher sensitivity and resolution than previous comparable missions such as IRAS (Wright et al., 2010).As debris disk detection is difficult to automate due to a variety of artifacts causing false positive identifications, NASA has explored a crowdsourced effort in the Disk Detective project Kuchner et al. (2016), Kuchner (2016). It was developed to leverage the visual perception of participants going through catalogs of stellar targets and identifying potential disk candidates using image data from the WISE survey, with additional cross-checking from the 2 Micron AllSky Survey (2MASS) in optical wavelengths, the Digitized Sky Survey (DSS) in primarily optical and some near-IR wavelengths (Kuchner et al., 2015). To use Disk Detective, users access a Web environment, look at a slideshow of the available images for a given target of interest with an overlaid red diffraction-limited circle at 22 μm. There are six options to describe each image, of which users can choose all that apply: “Multiple objects in the Red Circle”, “Extended beyond circle in WISE images”, “Not round in DSS2 or 2MASS images”, “Object moves off the cross-hairs”, “Empty circle in WISE images”, “None of the above/Good candidate” (see Kuchner (2016) for details). The citizen science approach has been able to identify a number of good candidates for follow-up studies with ground and space telescopes. The closest, brightest candidates are being used to search for exoplanets in the disk region while other targets are helping astronomers to better understand the distribution and characteristics of disks in the galaxy.The citizen science approach has led to interesting detections but inevitably suffers from inherent scalability drawback because the number of participants and their productivity are limited. In addition, Daniel (2015) describes that the distribution of work and productivity is unequal among participants: about half of the online work was done by 30 “superusers” out of a pool of 30,000 registered participants. Many of these superusers had science degrees and were described to be very enthusiastic about this particular project topic. The experience report reveals additional “soft” scalability biases in citizen science data analysis, such as the enthusiasm of a group of people and their perceived interests in the project that keeps them engaged. As data volumes from surveys and exoplanet imaging missions continue to increase, it becomes apparent that the data analysis stage can turn into a bottleneck with unpredictable performance if it relies on citizen science alone.Addressing these problems, we propose a novel approach that builds on the success of citizen science while achieves scalability by integrating crowdsourced data in a machine-supported search for astronomical phenomena and objects, inspired by the computer-aided discovery approach of Pankratius et al. (2016). In our process model, we include (1) confirmed citizen science classification results which are the outcome of meticulous WISE data inspections and (2) algorithmic detection. We utilize citizen science classification results to train and validate our machine-based debris disk classification algorithm, which enables scalability and parallel operation on large data sets. In addition, our process facilitates the creation of a feedback loop to iteratively improve search parameters by taking result samples from the trained algorithm and presenting them to citizen scientists for validation.
1.2. ObjectivesThis article presents a computer-aided approach to identifying circumstellar debris disk candidates through the detection of infrared-flux excess in the WISE catalog database. The work presented here focuses on demonstrating the feasibility of automated debris disk detection leveraging existing crowd-sourced data and basic image processing and machine learning techniques. The method presented in this article is designed to be scalable and re-configurable, providing a time-efficient and agile software platform for the detection of astronomical phenomena and objects, specifically debris disks in this case study.The case study used in this work utilizes the input target list of all confirmed planet–hoststars, acquired from the NASA’s Exoplanet database, and citizen science results from NASA’s Disk Detective crowdsourcing project. In Section 2, we provide detailed descriptions of the data discovery and processing pipeline, including data query, image processing, and robustness benchmark for the techniques. In Section 3, we describe the training and classifying process. In Section 4, we present the automated debris disk detection case study intermediate image processing results as well as final candidate selection results. We provide additional development, including a candidate ranking mechanism along with input target list expansion and an intuitive graphical user interface for scientists in Section 5. Lastly, we provide a conclusion and outlook in Section 6.
