In a previous work (Red’ko, 2017) the mechanisms of interaction between learning and evolution were investigated by means of computer simulation. That investigation was based on the quasispecies model (Eigen, 1971, Eigen and Schuster, 1979) and the estimations of the evolutionary algorithms (Red’ko & Tsoy, 2005). The mechanisms of the main properties of the interaction between learning and evolution were analyzed (Red’ko, 2017). That work considered the processes of learning and evolution for the population of modeled organisms that have genotype and genotype. Genotypes are modified during evolution, phenotypes are optimized by means of learning. At the end of the generation, organisms are selected in accordance with their final phenotype. The main properties of the interaction between learning and evolution are the following: 1) the genetic assimilation, 2) the hiding effect, 3) the influence of the learning load on the interaction between learning and evolution. The genetic assimilation means that the acquired features of organisms obtained by means of individual learning can become inherited during many generations of Darwinian evolution. The hiding effect means that learning can suppress the evolutionary optimization of genotypes: the optimal phenotype can be found by means of learning for a rather large set of different genotypes, so there is no need to find the optimal genotype. The learning load means that the fitness of an organism can be reduced due to learning because the learning process needs some energy and time. The results were obtained for the case of the finite size of the population.
Fortunately, there is possibility to analyze the same properties analytically for the case of infinite size of the population (Saakian and Hu, 2006, Park and Deem, 2006, Saakian, 2007, Saakian et al., 2008, Huang et al., 2016). The analytical results can be obtained in certain approximation: N >> 1 (N is the length of genotype). The current work characterizes these analytical results as well as the results of computer simulations, which were obtained for sufficiently large size of the population. At such large population size the results of computer simulation coincides with the results of analytical estimations. The main attention is paid to the hiding effect. The hiding effect is analyzed by both computer simulation and analytically.
The structure of the current article is the following. Initially we describe the considered model. In order to characterize the main features of the interaction between learning and evolution, we consider the simple formal model in which symbols of genotype and phenotype take two values (+1 or −1). Then we characterize the genetic assimilation for the special modification of the model (possible random modifications of the environment are taken into account in this modification). After this we describe the main results of computer simulation. Further we describe results of analytical analysis. Finally, we compare the results of computer simulation and analytical results for the hiding effect.
