Representing control engineering data and knowledge in the computer has always been a concern in CACSD (Computer-Aided Control System Design) software [1], [2]. The growing complexity of the systems, projects and tools related to control engineering makes it necessary to study and find knowledge representation schemas that can face the current software demands and the future trends of the discipline. This work studies the application of knowledge modeling techniques, for addressing these challenges. This approach is based on the use of explicit, computable knowledge models called ontologies [3] which are conceptual structures existing on their own, independently of any specific application.
In order to clarify and study the benefits of this approach, an ontology and a practical application have been developed. The application is devoted to the design of lead/lag controllers by using the root locus method. This application is able to perform a design based on the knowledge that has been previously built into the ontology, storing a data record containing all the concepts, tasks and values involved in the design process carried out, in such a way that it is able to present this information to the user with a level of detail that has not been achieved in any previous application of this kind. The tool is also capable of reacting to user interaction, offering explanations about any of the concepts or steps involved in the process.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the different activities within control and systems engineering where data and knowledge representation is a concern, showing the usual approaches and developments that have been used to cope with this problem. Section 3 introduces the knowledge modeling techniques based on the construction of ontologies, showing how they are already being used in many fields relating to systems engineering. Section 4 briefly describes the domain being modeled, while Section 5 gives an overview of the general architecture of the system. Section 6 presents the ontology about the design of lead/lag controllers that has been developed, including the rationales of its design and giving examples of some the conceptual structures that are built inside. Finally, Section 7 is devoted to show and describe the graphical CACSD application by which the user is able to interact with the application and Section 8 contains some discussion relating this work to previously existing ones and stressing the advantages of the approach which has been presented here.
