Computer and technology advancements have been influencing everyday lives through communication, education, and recreation. It has been reported by the National Statistical Office that in Thailand, there are 22.2 million computer users with 18.3 million Internet surfers in 2013 (Electronic Transactions Development Agency, 2013). The age groups of users who mostly spend time online using entertainment and games has been analyzed and it is estimated that 2.5 million Thai children had game addiction problems increasing from 13.3 percent in 2002 to 14.4 percent in 2012 (National Health Commission Office of Thailand, 2012). This situation is widespread. It has been demonstrated that American children and adolescents spent 20 h a week on computer games (Anderson et al., 2010). In Australia, 90–94 percent of 6–25 year olds played computer games daily (Brand, 2012). In China, 10.3 percent of children and adolescents have become game addicted (Peng & Li, 2009). In South Korea, a death was reportedly caused by acute heart failure due to 80 h of continuous playing online games (Lee, 2004). Some kinds of computer games can lead to aggressive behavior and diminished empathy and altruism (Johnson and Scholes, 2013, Krahe and Moller, 2010). Game addiction is displayed by several types of behavior; obsessing on a game, demanding spending time on games daily, increasing desire, and anger from being obstructed. These behavioral types affect routine life and physical and mental health. Children can use the gaming to escape from unpleasant truths and to compensate for their perceived disabilities and non-acceptance of their real life. The fact is that game addiction is somehow similar to drug addiction even if there is no chemical intake (Hongsangaunsri and Kateman, 2013, Kuss and Griffiths, 2012).
Accordingly, there is huge interest in dealing with game addiction problems. Myriad research studies have endeavored to create alleviation, identify preventative action, and find solutions. In particular, children and adolescents are exposed to online gaming via several gadgets or even through internet cafe access in the community (Usman & Inam, 2013).
Previous research mostly aimed at identifying the cause and effect of game addictive behavior. Earlier findings demonstrated mostly negative consequences were associated with negative perspectives of the people toward game playing (Connolly et al., 2012, Paul and Willoughby, 2012). It seemed that state organizations emphasized initiating legislation and regulations to handle game addiction problems in children and adolescents. However, these regulations have been called into question, with critics arguing that people should be allowed freedom of choice. Furthermore, the fact that games have been invented to make children happy in the first place is equally important as the fact that playing games at home is safer than committing harmful acts in the broader community (Usman & Inam, 2013). It has also been recognized that some negative consequences of game addiction might be the impacts of predisposed factors, such as social and economic differences, capitalism, poverty, and domestic violence (Johnson and Scholes, 2013, Nielsen and Smith, 2003). On the other hand, playing games can develop intelligence, and help with critical thinking, decision-making, problem-solving, creativity, self-esteem, altruism, and a feeling of liberty (Nielsen and Smith, 2003, Paul and Willoughby, 2012, Przybylski et al., 2009). This has resulted in a myriad of studies focusing on positive consequences (Johnson & Scholes, 2013). Thus, instead of concentrating on the negative side of some computer games, the challenge is to re-design a game to teach and develop positive characteristics; creativity, self-esteem, problem-solving flexibility, problem management, and emotional control in children and adolescents (Adachi & Willoughby, 2012). Associations have been identified between computer game playing and positive variables in previous studies that suggest game playing could lead to several psychological strengths (Johnson and Scholes, 2013, Przybylski et al., 2009, Russoniello et al., 2009). However, it is not always clear at what stage playing games can lead to proper and constructive behavior (Boyle, Connolly, Hainey, & Boyle, 2012). Given that computer games offer fun and enjoyment leading to repetitive behavior and addiction, it is necessary to examine the optimal levels of game playing resulting in good conditions and non addiction (Johnson and Scholes, 2013, Yuksel, 2012).
Flow theory has been considered as a comprehensive theory to explain both sides of the impact from computer game playing because the state of flow refers to what happens when children are playing computer games that involve enjoyment, challenging, reacting, active thinking, feeling, and behaving (Voiskounsky, 2010).
Flow theory was developed by Mihaly Csikszentmahalyi, and describes a state of concentration or complete absorption with the activity at hand and the situation (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997). The flow state is an optimal state of intrinsic motivation, where the person is fully immersed in what he or she is doing. However, too much involvement in flow by being over absorbed and engaged for example, can harm children, since they might obsess with the state of enjoyment but ignore self-care and interpersonal relationships (Chiang, Lin, Cheng, & Liu, 2011). Therefore, flow is considered as the state leading to either positive or negative consequences in computer game playing.
Research ObjectivesThis research examined the structure of flow experience in the context of computer game playing and explored how the state of computer game playing can cause constructive and addictive behavior through the theory of flow. The components of flow were further examined to determine the impacts (positive or negative behavior) while playing computer games.
