Although the returns to education have been studied extensively, the labor market returns to computers and the skills acquired in using them are not as well understood. A few recent studies find higher wages among workers with computer skills, but the evidence is not as clear as the evidence of positive returns to formal schooling (Card, 1999, Dickerson and Green, 2004, Falck et al., 2016, Hanushek et al., 2015, OECD 2015).1 Similar to concerns regarding estimating the returns to education, identifying the causal effects of computer skills on labor market outcomes is difficult because of unobserved heterogeneity.
This study takes a novel approach to estimate the labor market returns to computers and the acquired skills from using them by exploiting a randomized controlled trial (RCT) providing free personal computers for home use. The field experiment was conducted with entering community college students in Fall 2006, following them through their educational and early career labor market experiences. Previous findings from the experiment indicate that the treatment group receiving home computers had substantially better computer skills than the control group (Fairlie, 2012), and that the randomly provided home computers were found to have small, positive, short-run (1.5 year) effects on educational outcomes (Fairlie & London, 2012).2 In this study, we collect new administrative data from three sources for all study participants, and build on these findings by examining short- to medium-term effects on earnings, employment and college enrollment. To analyze earnings and employment effects, we obtained confidential administrative earnings data collected by the California State Employment Development Department (EDD) through the Unemployment Insurance (UI) system for all study participants.3 We also obtained restricted-access administrative data on college enrollment from the California Community College System and the National Student Clearinghouse for all study participants. The data on earnings, employment and college enrollment cover nearly a decade after the computers were randomly distributed, allowing for a rare analysis of medium-term experimental effects in addition to short-term effects. Furthermore, the use of administrative data eliminates concerns over follow-up survey attrition and item non-response, which are often problematic in RCTs and especially problematic for capturing longer-term outcome effects.
From the experiment and administrative data on earnings and college enrollment, we do not find evidence that computer skills have a positive effect on earnings. We do not find evidence of positive effects on the extensive or intensive margins of labor supply. We also do not find evidence that computers have a positive effect on college enrollment, which could explain the null effects on earnings if students delayed entry into the labor market. The findings across many different specifications, measures and subgroups are consistent in finding null effects. Although the results consistently show null effects, one limitation is that the estimates are not precisely estimated. In contrast, a supplementary, non-experimental analysis of CPS data suggest large, positive, and statistically significant non-experimental relationships between home computers and earnings, employment and college enrollment. These findings raise concerns about positive selection bias in non-experimental studies even including those using nearest neighbor and propensity score matching models.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the random experiment in detail. Section 2 reports estimates of treatment effects on earnings, employment, and college enrollment. Section 3 reports non-experimental estimates from the CPS. Section 4 concludes.
