Self-efficacy is an important theoretical framework that can be used to understand students' confidence and beliefs with respect to their capabilities to perform specific tasks or activities (Bandura, 1986). To our knowledge, only a few international studies on self-efficacy have analysed students' confidence using Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in relation to their digital literacy. In this regard, the recent International Computer and Information Literacy Study (ICILS) (Fraillon, Ainley, Schulz, Friedman, & Gebhardt, 2014), commissioned by the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA), represents a unique source of information to compare students' ICT self-efficacy with their actual Computer and Information Literacy (CIL). According to Fraillon, Schulz & Ainley (2013, p. 17), CIL refers to ‘an individual's ability to use computers to investigate, create, and communicate in order to participate effectively at home, at school, in the workplace, and in the community’.
To date, empirical work related to lower secondary students’ self-perceptions of ICT skills compared with their actual skills is sparse. Rohatgi, Scherer, and Hatlevik (2016) analysed Norwegian data from ICIL 2013 and found a positive relationship between ICT self-efficacy and CIL achievement. This topic is addressed herein by exploring ICILS student data from all participating countries (Australia, Chile, Czech Republic, Croatia, Denmark, Germany, Republic of Korea, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Russian Federation, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Thailand, and Turkey). Thus, the present study represents an extension of prior research.
Our objective is twofold. First, we examine how personal characteristics and background contextual variables may affect students' ICT self-efficacy and CIL. Second, we investigate how students' ICT self-efficacy and CIL are related after controlling for relevant personal characteristics and background contextual variables. It is of particular interest to explore student characteristics, home environments, and students’ use of and experiences with ICT as factors affecting the results in different countries. This will be further elaborated in the next two sections.
