Currently, digital human-computer interface in most control rooms has brought operators great challenge. Once an accident in digital system occurs, the aftermath could be very serious, For instance (Carvalho et al., 2006) the accident at Three Mile Island (TMI) in 1979, the nuclear accident at Chernobyl in 1986. Although the reliability regarding hardware and software system has been improved with technique progress, human beings has many uncertain features, then the accidents caused by human error are very easily to occur. Just data showed that 60–90% accidents are caused by human error.
On the one hand, digital human-computer interface has many advantages, for instance (Lewis and Persensky, 2002): (1) there are navigation systems that can instruct operators to get into and recover graphic interfaces; (2) it has powerful query function; (3) it has many shortcut ways that can easily manage interface tasks. On the other hand, it has brought operators new challenge, which mainly reflects the change of cognitive behavior. Thus, traditional models are not appropriate for cognitive reliability evaluation of digital human-computer interface. Further, traditional reliability theories are based on binary logic, such as, Fault Tree Analysis (Weber and Jouffe, 2006) (FTA) generally viewed object as only two states (absolute failure or absolute reliability), and neglected the degree of systematic performance influenced by mutual factors and failure systematic components. In fact, system and each component have many states. Then, reliability model built by traditional way differs from realistic situation, and that cannot meet current systematic performance analysis. Many scholars proposed some methods for multi-states systematic reliability and dynamics (Kohda and Cui, 2007, Barrientos and Vargas, 1998, Labatut et al., 2004, Chevrolat et al., 1998), but the methods have some limitations to analyze the multiple states of human. Recently, Bayesian method has successfully been applied to fault diagnosis, data mining, artificial intelligence and reliability analysis research fields. Bayesian Networks can easily show randomness, uncertainty and relevance between variables. Taking a nuclear power plant as research background, the authors in this paper propose a cognitive reliability model for digital human-computer interface based on Bayesian networks.
