Recently, the digital circuit innovators and designers utilize the parallelism techniques in their up-to-date digital circuits by increasing the width of data bus to carry out and transfer large number of bits simultaneously. Therefore, their designed digital and computer applications transfer and manipulate data through concurrent number of logic gates simultaneously.
The digital and computer systems' designers are implementing their applications based on millions of logic gates by using the ASIC and FPGA technologies and through the electronic circuit makers and simulators. The logic gates are the foundation stones in all digital systems from simple logic components (such registers, decoders…etc.) to the complex multicores microprocessors (like i3, i7…etc.). The logic gates are recognized by their standard symbols.
From the last century until now, the inventors have been increasing the data width that transferred or carried out simultaneously through their digital circuits. For example, Intel has been begun by the 4-bit microprocessor “4004” and followed by 8-bit like microprocessors “8080” and “8085”, followed by 16-bit such “8086” and “80186” and followed up by 32-bit microprocessors such as “80586” and “Pentium II”. Since 2001, it produced 64-bit processors like “Pentium IV” and followed by multicores and multithreads microprocessors such as “i5” and “i7”.
Nowadays, the microprocessor i9 from Intel Corporation can manipulate and transfer data width up to 512 bit concurrently. Its instruction set that include operation code (op-code) for 512 bits is labeled by “AVX-512” [1]. For instance, the newly Single-Instruction-multiple-data (SIMD) that has mnemonic “VANDPD” can carry out logical operation between two 512-bit (64 bytes) data and can be written in assembly program code as follows:
VANDPD ZMM1 {K1}, ZMM2, ZMM3
It performs the bitwise AND-operation between two data; each data has width 512 bits. Each 512 bit data divides into eight double precision (64 bit) floating-points (FP). The “VANDPD” is associated with four registers; three 512-bit data-registers called “ZMM1”, “ZMM2” and “ZMM3”. Besides one 8-bit control-register called mask-register “K”. It carries out the AND-operation between the data in the first source operand “ZMM2” and the second source operand “ZMM3” thus return the results in the destination operand “ZMM1”. Each source operand can load by 8 double precision FPs. The mask-register “K1” acts on the stored results in the destination. Each double precision FP has control bit of the register “K“. For instance, The result of FP0 is controlled by bit K(0), the result of FP1 is controlled by bit K(1) and so on. If any bit of register “K” is cleared, then its corresponding FP's result will clear in the destination register “ZMM1”. In addition, when any bit of register “K“ is set to logic one, thus its corresponding FP's result will appear and load into the destination register “ZMM1”. This means that each packed double precision (64 bit) FP is controlled by one bit of register “K”. Substantially, each AND-operation between 2 FPs (64 bit) needs 64 individual AND gates and 64 Tristate buffers. By reverse engineering, we can imagine and deduce the Intel's execution unit of the mentioned instruction. However, this execution unit contains at least 512 AND gates, 512 Tristate buffers and intensive bit-lines but it can symbolize and draw by only 8 AND gates, 8 Tristate buffers and little number of buses as shown in Fig. 1. All their buses are attached with labels to indicate their widths (number of bit lines). This block diagram considers as hardware module inside the “i9” capable for executing the instruction “VANDPD“. In the mentioned block diagram, each AND-gate with Tristate buffers represent a logical model (abstraction of a particular system or module but its irrelevant details are eliminated and concentrated on their important aspects to understand and analyze it). Despite, these logical models simplify the complex design (in our case modules in i9) but they doesn't reflect any information about them such as the total number of gates inside the model (No. of gates/model) or the nature of their data-bits (individual bits, bit vectors or bit matrices… etc.). Besides, they doesn't reflect their data resources (alike single row matrix, single column matrix, multiple bit-vectors, single bit-matrix, multiple bit-matrices… etc.).Download : Download high-res image (162KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The deduced logical models for 512-bit instruction “VANDPD“ of “i9”.
On other hand, all this information can recognize implicitly form the attached labels of their input and output buses. For example, the mentioned Fig. 1 involves 8 gate models. Each model is connected with 64-bits data lines, so each model includes 64 gates implicitly but the packet of these data-bits (bytes, words …etc.) still unknown exactly. Therefore, innovators must invent new technique or create new method to identify all possible and needed information that can attach with any gate model.
This technique or method should useful for designers to construct and modify their complex digital application by simplifying both the logic circuit schematic and the computer architecture block-diagrams. In addition, it must easy for instructors to teach it through the hardware courses.
Consequently, the computers systems' innovators must do best efforts to discover technique(s) for supplementing the gate models by additional useful readable details. They must rely on a creative idea to motivate the circuit designers to utilize their new technique. The challenge here, is adapting this new technique for manipulating the intensive data in the 3-D format. The new idea must depend on the computational theories that deal with computer problem to solve it by the computation models in algorithms [2]. Substantially, the algorithm in the computer sciences (and mathematics) is sequence of steps to solve problem(s). The deterministic algorithm has a distinctive feature. It reflects unique value for any input values. It relies on a model with mathematical function that can accept any different values as inputs (its domain) but it hasn't range of outputs (its co-domain), it has only one solution. Therefore, this function always produces and returns the same particular value. Either the hardware or the software applications can be constructed based on the deterministic algorithm to attain confirmed results. Thus, this type of algorithm is more suitable for developing and checking the performance of the computer systems or measures the accuracy of its outputs empirically.
Always the models in the algorithm are an abstract description of a particular problem of a real system to understand, analyze and try to find a solution for its problem. The mathematical model represents the abstraction of this system from the mathematical science point-of-view. The logical model is a special case of the mathematical model that concerns and describes the Boolean expressions. The computer model is the representation of the different model types (like mathematical, logical model) in the software domain using suitable programs and computer devices.
Mainly the logical models are built based on the Boolean algebra that considers as the principle of the most computational theories. They benefit in developing and checking both the hardware digital circuits and the software programs [3].
Formally, the applications of the computer sciences can be expressed as a sequence of Boolean expressions [4]. Such applications can be tested and checked by the equivalent of two or more terms of the assigned variables in the Boolean expressions. A Boolean expression is satisfied when possible to design elaborated model satisfies it in true [5]. The algorithm needs computer language to realize its models to either hardware module or software module.
On other hand, the hardware module is a compact unit includes digital circuit to perform specific task(s) or process(s). It's designed to interface with other units of a computer system. In other hand, the software module is part of a program. It designed to carry out specific operation(s) or function(s).
The VHDL is a very attractive computer language because it can construct both the hardware and software modules [6]. It is similar as any computer high-level language, thus it can realize software module. However, it can be synthesized and burn into the FPGA to configure the hardware module.
Recently, the electrical digital innovators utilize the VHDL techniques to enhance the efficiency and increase the speed of processing of their systems. There are different levels of computer parallelism. For instance, the Bit-level parallelism concerns by the widths of the manipulated data in the digital systems. The Data-level parallelism interests in performing the same functions for a number of elements of a dataset. Furthermore, the Task-level parallelism concerns by performing different functions in the same or different data sets.
The data set can be represented in the form of the bit-vector (bit-array) or bit-matrix (binary-matrix). The Bit-Vector is a set of finite number of bits. It uses in the computing systems or mathematics as binary data. Each bit has magnitude according to its order-arrange in its array. The most famous standard Bit-vectors are the Byte (set of 8 bits).Bit_Vector=10⋯⋯⋯⋯011The other form of the data sets is the bit-matrix. It is a rectangular array of data-bits. It usually represents as a two-dimensional grid of a finite number of rows and columns.Bit_Matrix=110001010Mainly, utilizing the matrices and vectors lead to enhance the parallelisms in the computer systems. Both the bit-vector and the bit-matrix are effectively exploiting the bit-level, data-level and the task-level parallelisms to improve the computer performances. Both the bit-vector and the bit-matrix can be declared in the software programs as one-dimensional and two-dimensional array respectively. In addition, they can be implemented as hardware modules as concurrent of lines and gates.
In the next paper-section will introduce our methodology to modify the logic gate symbols rely on the deterministic algorithm and shall express their benefits relative to the conventional gates.
