Since Feynman's cerebral exposition, in 1982, regarding the use of quantum mechanical systems to accomplish information tasks [1], the resulting computing model, quantum computation, has become a cynosure among computing paradigms. Today, this exciting new computing model offers “exquisitely sensitive, fast, and ultraprecise devices” that promise to outperform the best available classical (i.e. digital or non-quantum) technologies [2]. In attaining this enviable status, the potency of the quantum computing model has been validated via its parallelism capability [3] as well as its use in advanced algorithms for integer factoring [4], database searching algorithm [5], and many more.
Among others, the ubiquity of image and video based applications has made its integration into quantum computation an interesting research undertaking. An image is a common artifact that depicts visual perception, which makes its realization and handling on the quantum computing framework an alluring pursuit. Attempts to undertake image processing based on quantum mechanics started in 1997, while those efforts were inclined towards quantum optics and physics [6], [7], recent developments in quantum image processing (QIP) research; notably, proposals of quantum image representations [8], have led a rise in QIP with more computer science flair or inclination. Following this, the geometric transformations to realize the flipping and swapping operations [9] and histogram-based segmentation for separating the regions corresponding to objects of interest [10] were proposed. In addition, the security technologies such as watermarking and authentication [11] were implemented.
Motivated by the utility and dominance of TV and movies in today's societies, the huge revenues accruing from the industry as well as the inevitable role quantum mechanics will play in future computing technologies [12] and some of the earlier highlighted gains recorded in the QIP sub-discipline, in 2011, Iliyasu et al. explored a conceptual framework to represent and produce movies on quantum computers [13]. Although it was conceived to withstand the sensitivity and intricacies permeating the quantum computing paradigm, at best, Iliyasu's movie framework resembles early developments in contemporary movie production. Essentially, this theoretical quantum movie framework suffers from two major shortcomings that are related to its visual cum aesthetical perception as well as auditory acuity. Until recently, there was no such thing as a quantum audio signal and, so Iliyasu's movie framework would produce silent or mute quantum movies. This study is primarily focused on extending the potential capabilities of quantum information processing by concretizing discussions pertaining to audio information-carrying medium and its related manipulations, i.e. quantum audio processing.
Classical audio processing may arise in either digital or analog domain, however, most modern audio systems prefer to digital representations because the techniques of digital signal processing are much more powerful and efficient [14]. To process and transmit digital audio on the quantum computing framework, it is necessary to explore a flexible and efficient quantum representation for storing and representing digital signals. In digital signal processing domains, theoretical analyses and derivations are typically performed on discrete-time signal models created by the abstract process of sampling [14]. Inspired by similar methods, in [15], a quantum representation of digital audio (QRDA), which uses the tensor product of two qubit sequences to store the audio amplitude and time information, was proposed. While QRDA extends audio processing into the quantum computing domain, its numerical representation of amplitude values is tightly-bounded offering an encoding method only for unipolar (viz. non-negative) numbers which lead to operations that are susceptible to errors.
In order to develop quantum algorithms tenable in the field of audio signal processing, a set of basic signal operations must be developed. Focusing on amplitude transformations required to process audio signals on quantum mechanical computers, we analyze the numerical representation of amplitude values and describe a flexible representation of quantum audio (FRQA) signals. The FRQA encodes the amplitude component of an audio signal in two's complement notation and integrates the time component to form a normalized quantum state, which is more flexible and better suited to be the fundamental protocol for quantum audio processing. Based on the FRQA state, audio signal operations including addition, inversion, delay, and reversal are proposed in this study. These operations are implemented by using the quantum circuit model, where algorithms are compiled into a sequence of common gates acting on one or more qubits, such as NOT, Hadamard, CNOT, and Toffoli gates [16].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start by highlighting some background on digital audio signals as a prelude to formalize our FRQA representation for quantum audio signals and present the requirements for the preparation and retrieval of the FRQA state in Section 2. Following this, in Section 3, we present various definitions for signal operations including addition, inversion, delay, and reversal, along with their validation via quantum circuit constructions.
