Ubiquitous internet access has opened the door for the biomedical researchers to obtain the dataset as well as the latest techniques available online and use them for developing improved health care-systems. Health-related Internet of Things (H-IoT) [1] is advancing by each passing day and innovative ideas are surfacing more frequently, targeting the health sector especially the detection and diagnosis of disease. Recently the advancements in IoT technology have made it a popular multidisciplinary research topic both in academia and industry particularly in healthcare sector [2], [3], [4]. Previously the usage of Information and communication technologies in healthcare sector was limited and often considered as a risk but nowadays ICT is offering promising medical services to patients, mostly referred to as e-health which includes electronic record systems [5], personalised devices for diagnosis, etc. Traditional healthcare systems are frequently being replaced by the coherent and ubiquitous ICT enabled solutions mainly because they are able to deliver high quality patient-centred healthcare services. Rapid proliferation of smartphones and wearable devices based on IoT enabled technology [6], [7] are evolving healthcare from conventional system towards personalised healthcare system. Successful utilisation of IoT enabled technology in (H-IoT) will enable efficient and reliable preventive care, low cost, enhanced patient-related practice and improved sustainability [8], [9].
Pulmonary cancer (commonly known as lung cancer) is one of the most aggressive cancerous disease which results in mortality of over 70%, roughly one quarter of the deaths caused by all types of cancers. Pulmonary cancer is considered to be difficult to cure as the early diagnosis is crucial to save the patient. Most of the lung cancer patients are diagnosed when the disease is at an advanced stage. However, an early detection of pulmonary cancer could increase the chances of cure. Detection of pulmonary cancer in early stages is difficult mainly because there is lesion growth which is of dime-size within the lung called nodule. The first step towards the cure of lung cancer is detection of lung nodules in its early stage thus the treatment could be started before it becomes malignant. Conventional method for detection of lung cancer is mass screening process by using X-ray films. Small lung cancer nodules are not easily detected using X-ray at early stage because of organ’s shadow and the bone’s overlapping. Therefore, these lung nodules remain undetected by X-rays and are detected only by Computerized Tomography (CT) Scan. CT-Scan revolutionized medical image processing by presenting 3D imaging. In the beginning CT-Scan slices were obtained and reconstructed to be further imaged on film. Recent CT scanners are able to reformat this large amount of volumetric data in various planes as well as visualize using high resolution volumetric (3D) representations. These technological innovations improved lung cancer detection and diagnosis, using CT images, by the help of various computer assisted detection systems (CADe). With the advancement in the field of internet-of-things (IoT) [10], the medical imaging equipment is also accessible through remote sensors over the internet. The remote connectivity of these CT-Scan imaging devices has enabled the health sector to introduce new methods for the diagnosis and detection of lung cancer.
Internet of Things technology used in the field of healthcare is often termed as medical Internet of Things (mIoT). To address the challenges encountered in medical and health care information, mIoT provides advantages in the recording of patient data, its analysis and use of acquired information for diagnosis [11]. Revolution in mIoT is redesigning health care sector with promising state-of-the-art IoT-based health care solutions [12]. With the use of IoT-based health care methods, the diagnostic and monitoring functions performed by physicians today can be offset to computation methods and algorithms. Improvement in diagnostic accuracy by physicians could likely be assisted by use of different deep learning models [13]. In case of pulmonary cancer, the follow-up check-ups of the patients are mandatory. These follow-up check-ups comprised of CT-Scan of the patient and the physiological information. Deep learning model are trained using these CT image data to get the characteristics of pulmonary cancer nodules, and then screen the images for nodules using the trained model. The obtained results are provided to the radiologists to make a decision for the diagnosis of the patient [14], [15]. The conventional diagnosis process is time consuming as the radiologist marks the location of the lung nodule on the other hand the automation of this nodule detection using different computer assisted detection (CADe) tools enable fast diagnosis with higher accuracy. The radiologists use CADe as a second opinion for decision on the pulmonary cancer stage diagnosis.
Our proposed technique is based on the deep fully convolutional neural network (FCNN) for initial classification into normal CT-Scan image and patient’s CT-Scan image. Nodules are detected by using the pre-processed input images for the training of the deep FCNN. Afterwards each detected nodule is classified into four cancer stage based on the malignancy of the detected nodule and the metastasis information recorded by using various sensors. The performance of proposed work is evaluated on six different datasets with heterogeneous scan parameters. The performance of proposed technique was evaluated by comparing the results with the existing state-of-the-art CNN technique TumorNet [16]. Experimental results showed that the proposed technique can be used for the detection as well as classification of lung cancer nodules. Section 2 describes the related work. Section 3 presents the proposed method in detail and based on experimental results (Section 4), the conclusion is presented in Section 5.
