Group work is held as one of the foremost activities through which students can develop problem–solving skills, conceptual understanding of mathematics, and positive identities as mathematics learners (Esmonde, 2009a). In mathematics education, as in many other disciplines (e.g., Quinn, Schweingruber, & Keller, 2012), learning standards and professional guidelines call for students to have opportunities to interact with peers for the purpose of learning to formulate arguments and to make sense of others’ reasoning, and more generally to participate in the practice of doing mathematics (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 2000; National Governor’s Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers, 2010). Although group work is not synonymous with collaboration, through which students jointly construct ideas (Staples, 2007), many of the advantages of group work stem from the opportunity to promote collaboration among teachers and students. An important area of research, both in mathematics education as well as more generally, has been in understanding the skills and resources students need to establish collaborative practices through group work (Cohen, 1994a; Horn, 2012; Webb, 1989). This research has illustrated, for example, the importance of asking questions, the types of explanations that are most productive, and the importance of students challenging their peers, for students to equitably contribute to a jointly constructed solution.
With the increasing integration of technology in mathematics classrooms, there is an opportunity to consider how the use of technology tools can shape or change the nature of students’ work together (e.g., Ares, Stroup, & Schademan, 2009; White, Wallace, & Lai, 2012). Group work, as a general term, can refer to many different types of student interactions. For example, problem-based mathematics textbooks typically call for students to work in groups of 3–4 (e.g., Dietiker et al., 2006). In some networked environments, as many as four students can share a single technology tool at one time, with each person maintaining control over some aspect of the tool (White et al., 2012). Computer–supported collaborative learning spaces may allow for several students to view and interact with a single environment through the use of large monitors and touchscreen technology (Mercier & Higgins, 2013). Finally, when working together at the computer, research from computer science education suggests that students may be most productive in pairs (Braught, Wahls, & Eby, 2011). Because of the increasing prevalence of technology tools in mathematics classrooms, and the diversity these tools bring to students’ interactions, there is a need for more investigations of how students work together in these settings. This paper presents a methodological approach towards identifying units of collaboration through students’ interactions while working in pairs at the computer. I pose the question, how can students’ collaboration be operationalized through individual utterances and actions at the computer? I illustrate a method that uses techniques from Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL; Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014) to analyze how collaboration becomes instantiated in cases where students use a computer environment for doing mathematics.
