Child friendly software applications are now commonplace. As well as providing learning and entertainment, they have opened an exciting avenue for research to help children with social and cognitive difficulties via intervention and clinical assessment. Research in this field tends to integrate computer technology with real world-based activities, as a means to carry out research with children in a safe, controlled and ethical environment.
The most popular areas of research in this area tend to be interventions to improve social skills, cognitive skills, and learning (Beals, 2016; Vannini et al., 2011; Wass & Porayska-Pomsta, 2013). By contrast, our research reported in this paper uses this technology for psychological and behavioural assessment in children. Clinicians who assess children who are diagnosed with developmental disorders and/or whom display problem behaviours, report that children often do not present their problem behaviours in the clinic. Indeed, these children can give socially appropriate answers when questioned, but do not conduct themselves in a “socially desirable” manner in the real world (Minnis et al., 2010). Certainly, some children can be very socially aware, particularly if they have experienced a difficult upbringing; while others may not have the verbal sophistication required to describe their experiences in an interview, questionnaire or person-centered role-play task (Minnis et al., 2010). Therefore, accurately assessing social behaviours in children can be difficult. So, there is a need for measurement tools that are more representative of real life environments that can be reliably and consistently administered by researchers and clinicians alike, in a manner that children can engage with. At the same time as this need for appropriate assessment, there is a burgeoning interest in serious gaming. Here, video game elements are used in nongaming systems to improve user experience and engagement, at face value these can be perceived to be games for entertainment, but in the development of serious games the designers will have disguised an education or training purpose (Stokes, 2005; Vannini et al., 2011).
Although the measures used in this reported study can be used as a general measure of social vulnerability in middle childhood, they were initially created with a more extreme clinical population of vulnerable children in mind (in order to capture the nature of vulnerable behaviours more accurately), specifically, Disinhibited Social Engagement (DSE or indiscriminate friendliness IF) is a highly prevalent trauma and stressor related disorder. Described in the DSM-V, (APA, 2013) as a pattern of behaviour in which a child actively approached and interacts with unfamiliar adults, DSE is a tendency to be unduly affectionate and disinhibited towards others. This can result from or leave children vulnerable to child abduction and/or abuse, which are among the most common offenses committed against children. Currently, our knowledge on children's’ disinhibited social behaviour is largely derived from observational and qualitative research (Bennett, Espie, Duncan, & Minnis, 2009; Bruce, Tarullo, & Gunnar, 2009; Lawler, Hostinar, Mliner, & Gunnar, 2014). This research generally focuses on DSE in infants and adolescents because measuring this level of social behaviour accurately in middle childhood has proved challenging for both clinicians and researchers (Minnis, Read, Connolly, Burston, Schumm, Putter-Lareman & Green, 2010).
Until 2013, DSE was classified as a sub-type of reactivate attachment disorder (RAD). Therefore, questionnaire measures of DSE/IF tend to be a sub-scale in measures of RAD. For example, Millward et al. (2006), Minnis, Rabe-Hesketh, and Wolkind (2002), & Minnis et al. (2007) assessed RDA & DSE behaviours using the relationships problems questionnaire, which are parent and teacher checklists for RDA that includes a sub-scale measure of DSE/IF. This measure is widely used to assess children's DSE/IF behaviors in research and clinical settings. However, this questionnaire does not give the clinician or the researcher the ability to witness the child's behaviors. So, there is much need for measures that focuses on the ‘real world’ DSE/IF behaviors in middle childhood. We employed the RPQ as an additional measure of DSE/IF in this research.
As well as measuring DSE/IF, we argue that for a typical population of children, our computer role-play task is a valid measure of social vulnerability. We propose that computer role-play technologies, as opposed to traditional ‘paper and pencil’ measures, offer a valuable method for measuring social behaviours in clinical settings and controlled research environments that can provide a ‘more real to life’ or fidelity of assessment of children's social behaviour – because of the interactive participation that the children have to take. Here, we highlight the potential benefits of computer role-play technologies as psychological measurement tools for assessing children's social behaviour in a more ecologically valid way.
1.1. Measuring children's social understandingSince Wimmer and Perner's (1983) seminal work, measuring children's social understanding has come from a theory of mind tradition (ToM: An understanding that another's mental state/intentions may be different from your own): From using dolls (e.g. Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985), to advanced theory of mind measuring story vignettes (e.g. Happé, 1994; see Rajendran & Mitchell, 2007, for a historical review). Happé’s ‘Strange Stories’ are simplified narratives of everyday scenarios followed by questions that assess the participants understanding of nonliteral language short stories (included measures of sarcasm, figures of Speech, white lies, etc.). Versions of these stories have been shown to even discriminate developmental stages (e.g. O'Hare, Bremner, Nash, Happé & Pettigrew, 2009) and between those who do and do not have ASD (Happé, 1994) and disinhibited attachment disorder (Kay & Green, 2016). Even those who passed 2nd order ToM tasks gave incorrect responses to some of the strange stories (Happé, 1994; Jolliffe & Baron-Cohen, 1999).Despite the popularity of story vignettes, it is argued that most of the experimental paradigms designed to assess ToM abilities involve fairly well developed expressive and receptive language skills, which can cause issues, since many groups of children have poor verbal abilities (Colle, Baron-Cohen, & Hill, 2007). Thus, failure on such tasks may in fact reflect participants' inability to comprehend task instructions, nearly as much as deficits in mental-state understanding (Astington, 2001; Frye, Zelazo, & Palfai, 1995). As such other novel approaches have been suggested, for example; Sivaratnam, Cornish, Gray, Howlin, and Rinehart (2012) successfully validated a colorful comic strip ToM measurement tool that better relies on non-verbal abilities to facilitate children who suffer from language related impairments. The success of this type of task relies on clear visuals such as the characters changing emotions and changing scenes presented in each scenario to help the children follow the story with ease in a non-verbal way.However, Rajendran and colleagues (Rajendran & Mitchell, 2000; Rajendran, Mitchell & Rickards, 2005) argued that such tasks (Verbal or nonverbal) measure children's reflective rather than working understanding and that computer-role play offers a truer indication of children's understanding. Computer-role play offers the chance of putting ‘oneself in another's shoes' and potentially having to simulate (Harris, Kavanaugh, Wellman, & Hickling, 1993; Jones, Price, & Selby, 1998), what a character might do in a hypothetical situation. This is in contrast with the story vignette paradigm in which a child might feel under pressure to give the correct or most appropriate answer (Siegal, 2004) or have to work the correct answer in a more abstract or ‘theory theory’ type way (e.g. Chapman, 1988).Another advantage of using computer-role play technology is that it is immersive – that is it can give players a sense of “psychological presence” of being there (Tamborini & Skalski, 2006) and identity (Gee, 2014). Presence is important because the greater the degree of presence, the more chance that participants will behave in a virtual environment, in a manner which is comparable to their behaviour in the “real world”. Arguably, presence brings into play “natural” responses to a situation (e.g. Slater & Wilbur, 1997).
1.2. Technologies in research with childrenRecent research from a range of disciplines including psychology, psychiatry, education and computer science (e.g. Fletcher -Watson et al., 2014; Hall, Woods, & Hall, 2009; Minnis et al., 2010; Porayska-Pomsta et al., 2012; Rajendran et al., 2005) have highlighted the potential benefits of utilising technologies in the measurement and intervention of social behaviour in various groups of children, particularly those with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) who seem to display an affinity with these technologies (See Rajendran, 2013; Wass & Porayska-Pomsta, 2013 for reviews).Despite research that focused on the negative impacts of playing video games (Anderson & Bushman, 2001), serious games can contribute to knowledge and skill acquisition (Boyle et al., 2016). Furthermore, both typically and atypically developing children play video games for pleasure. They will immerse themselves in these games and increasingly, interact with peers for hours through online gaming, despite perhaps having cognitive or social issues which cause them difficulties with other everyday “real world” tasks (Durkin, 2010).At present the vast majority of the research on technology-based measurement and intervention tools are largely focused on facilitating children and young people with ASD, (e.g. Fletcher-Watson, Pain, Hammond Humphry, McConachie, 2016; Parsons, 2016; Wass & Porayska-Pomsta, 2013). Although there are many similar research endeavors aimed at supporting children with other developmental and psychological disorders e.g. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Specific Language Impairment (LI: Fletcher-Watson & Durkin, 2014).Some examples of research with a focus on children and young people with ASD includes, Beaumont and Sofronoff (2008) ‘Secret Agent Society’ which aimed to improve emotional and behavioural skills in individuals with High-Functioning Autism. Beaumont and Sofronoff carried out a randomised control trial which included a range of individual computer-based training in social skills, with some group work and some parental input. The researchers found that post intervention resulted in improvements in social skills in the playground and classroom. However, because these skills were not directly observed, it has been argued that future research should aim to directly measure social skills in children and, so, focus on the process as well as the outcome (Golan, Sinai-Gavrilov, & Baron-Cohen, 2015; Whalen et al., 2010). Social stories software, such as Story Maker ™ (Kokina & Kern, 2010), offer a way to directly measure the process by shifting away from “paper pencil” outcome measures to computer role play. These digital measures also mean that hundreds of social stories can now be stored on a single device. Despite this methodological advantage, convenience and portability, there have been – to date – no direct comparisons between performance on social story computer games and traditional “paper pencil” formats.The utility of storytelling apps and computer games seems especially beneficially for understanding children's social development. For example, Happé and Frith (2014) highlighted there are a number of developmental disorders which are primarily characterised by social cognitive atypicality other than Autism Spectrum disorders e.g. Williams Syndrome, Downs Syndrome, ADHD and Specific Language Impairment (SLI). So, along with attachment-related disorders such as Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder, this gives measures of social cognition wide scope for validation.Extant research suggests that individuals treat computerised objects and space just as they do when interacting in “real-world” social situations and relationships (e.g. Reeves & Nass, 1996). So, this social interaction with computers facilitates a safer environment in which to assess children and young people's behaviours in social relationships and environments – but without losing real-world engagement. Using computer-mediated role-play, therefore, provides a more ‘person-centered’ approach to understanding children's social behaviour rather than from a third person perspective. Indeed, there is increasing appreciation of the potential of computer-assisted role-play environments as effective, appropriate, engaging, tools (Imholz, 2008). These platforms provide virtual learning environments (VLEs) populated by synthetic/digital characters engaged in role-play scenarios that can offer users safe and compelling access to real-world social and emotional experiences (Dautenhahn, Bond, Canamero, & Edmonds, 2002).Recent interdisciplinary work has produced prototype tasks for measuring children's social understanding, e.g. using a virtual role-play program called ‘FearNot!’ (E.g. Hall et al., 2009). Here, ToM methods were used to gain insights into children's (N = 345) abilities to correctly attribute beliefs, desires, goals and precepts to others, through a virtual role-play task about bullying in which the participants were ‘synthetic characters’ (i.e. computer generated), rather than actual children undergoing a real bullying experience. The children who took part role-played a third character that played a “friend” who gave the victim advice after they had viewed the bullying scenario. This advice was then used to measure the child participant's social understanding and Theory of Mind. Thus, it is clear to see that computer role-play is a fruitful tool for assessing children's social understanding.As well as computer role-play being a useful tool for assessing children's social understanding, it can be utilised to measure other social behaviour in children, for example attachment issues. In infants, attachment issues are most commonly measured using the ‘Strange Situations’ procedure (SSP: See Ainsworth, 1979). However, the SSP is not appropriate for measuring attachment difficulties in older children, which has proved to be notoriously difficult (e.g. Minnis et al., 2010). One task that does reliably measure attachment issues in middle childhood, however, is the ‘Manchester Child Attachment Story Task’ (MCAST: Green, Stanley, Smith, & Goldwyn, 2000). This is a representational procedure for assessing attachment patterns of young school aged children. The task is based around a doll's house and after hearing a story from the task administrator the child participant then takes on the role of a doll to complete the scenario (i.e. the child represents themselves through the doll).Minnis et al. (2010) developed a computerised version of the MCAST (the CMCAST), that can be used on any standard computer. Story stems are represented on the computer by the movement of two-dimensional ‘dolls’ narrated by a generic voice. Children then take control of the task and complete each story by speaking into the computer; the audio-visual data produced by the child can be downloaded for later rating. The findings revealed that the CMCAST had similar reliability and validity as the MCAST and yielded further benefits. For example, it is easier to administer for large sample epidemiological studies, reduced reliance on trained researchers in task procedures, less exhaustive involvement of the researcher, has the potential to yield truer more ecologically valid responses, and is slightly cheaper to administer than the MCAST.
1.3. The present studyHere, we investigated a) age-related developmental differences in DSE in middle childhood and b) potential advantages of computer mediated role-play tasks as measures of DSE over a “paper pencil” tasks. We also investigated the relationship between DSE, Theory of Mind (ToM), and parent and teacher ratings of the child's quality of relationship (RPQ). Children were, therefore, asked to comprehend vignettes and role-play various characters in a variety of scenarios to investigate their DSE.
