As a result of urban-biased policies, an urban-rural income gap broadly exists in developing countries and undermines social stability and sustainable development. In China, although this gap has decreased since 2009, after years of pro-rural policies at the central government level since 2004, the disposable income of urban and township residents remained 2.73 times the net income of rural residents in 2015 (NBSC, 2016). Agricultural technological progress is an important driving force of raising rural productivity, increasing rural residents’ income, and narrowing the urban-rural income (Fan & Pardey, 1997; Gao, Zheng, & Bu, 2014; Huang & Rozelle, 1996). During past decades, the diffusion of the Internet and communication technology (ICT) in rural areas has provided new opportunities for rural dwellers to increase their income and thus reduce sectoral income gap. Although ICT cannot be considered as a pure agricultural technology, rural residents are using it to distribute and share information, advertise and sell agricultural products, learn new skills and knowledge, and purchase qualified agricultural inputs.
Mobile phones and computers are two terminal devices used to connect to the Internet. Compared with using a mobile phone, using a computer requires more skills and knowledge, and it is for diversified needs other than communications and amusements. If one wants to engage in e-business, he/she needs a computer. Like rural residents in Taobao villages who sell rural products through China's largest C2C online platform, Taobao.com, they need computers to distribute product information and process online orders.1 This paper tries to estimate the effect of rural computer penetration on rural residents' income.
Because a computer costs on average much more than a mobile phone, for rural households purchasing a computer is more likely a real need for rural business or agricultural activities. It does not exclude, however, the reverse causality that rural households own a computer resulting from an increase in income. To address such endogeneity, this paper use the change in Internet penetration rate caused by an exogenous policy shock, the Cuncun Tong (CT) Project, which aims to connect each village with modern facilities including broadband Internet, as the instrument variable of rural computer penetration. The two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimation with the provincial panel data finds that the income-increase effect of rural computer penetration is very small but statistically significant and increases over time. A 10% increase in rural computer penetration leads to a 0.43% increase in rural residents’ income growth, which increased to 0.74% after 2007.
To further investigate the digital-divide constraints of rural computer penetration, we further use the dynamic panel threshold effects model (DPTEM) which allows for both the threshold variable and other covariates to be endogenous. The two-step first-difference generalized method of moments (GMM) estimation from DPTEM shows that the income promotion effect of rural computer penetration is constrained by the level of rural computer penetration itself, rural residents' education, economic development, and rural public infrastructures. Removing such constraints will increase the contribution of computer penetration to rural residents’ income growth 2 to 4 times its average contribution estimated from 2SLS.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review on extant literature based on which the contribution of this paper is introduced. In section 3, we introduce the CT project and its effect on Internet penetration rate, which provide exogenous shock on rural computer penetrations. The empirical strategies are specified in section 4 where we introduce the empirical models, the variables, and the data, and test the validity of the instrument variable. Section 5 reports the empirical results, and section 6 concludes the paper.
