Highway-railroad grade crossings are intersections where a railroad line crosses a highway. According to US Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) in 2015, there were approximately 210,000 highway-rail grade crossings in the nation, of which 61% were publicly approachable (FRA, 2017a). Each highway-rail grade crossing presents a potential hazard to highway users and train crews. The possible dangers, such as collisions between highway vehicles and trains, can result in property damage, casualties, or even the release of hazardous materials (Chadwick et al., 2014). Collisions between highway vehicles or pedestrians and trains have been the greatest source of injuries and fatalities in the railroad industry since 1996 (FRA, 2017a). From 2006 to 2015, there were over 22,000 highway-rail grade-crossing incidents, resulting in 2717 highway-rail deaths and 9595 highway-rail injuries (FRA, 2017b). Therefore, there is a significant need for safety advancements of highway-rail grade crossing.
Considerable research has been conducted on highway-rail grade-crossings accidents, most of them aiming to reduce accident frequency and/or severity (e.g. number of fatalities and injuries). Observed accident data is useful for safety research; however, a far greater number of risk-prone events (near misses or precursors) occur in which there is no collision or loss of life but which might possibly have contributed to such accidents. These events did not result in fatalities, injuries, or property damage to either highway users or trains, but had the propensity to do so if they repeatedly occur. This paper focuses on the near misses due to trespassing at highway-rail grade crossings, which are defined as those incidents where roadway users are found to be in violation of existing laws related to grade crossings. Grade-crossing near misses may precede costly accidents but are not well documented because they did not result in immediate harm. The analysis of near misses can provide additional insight that may contribute to grade-crossing safety improvement. However, very little prior research has focused on near-miss-based grade-crossing data collection and corresponding safety analysis.
This knowledge gap motivates the development of this paper, which aims to develop an adaptable Artificial Intelligence (AI) framework for automatically collecting near-miss data based on surveillance video data. Surveillance cameras are currently deployed at many grade crossings in the United States. The existing video data can be used to track various objects such as pedestrians and wheelchairs that cannot be detected by conventional photoelectric, ultrasonic, and loop coil systems (Fakhfakh et al., 2010). In this study, closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras are placed at railway grade crossings to monitor real-time activities. Due to limited storage capability, most railroads delete the raw video data every one or two months after relevant data has been collected. To preserve useful near-miss information from these unused big data sources, we collaborated with one rail agency in New Jersey to develop an AI-aided analytic platform for extracting near-miss information from video data. Ultimately, our aim is to build a unique, expanding near-miss database for proactive risk management at grade crossings in the future.
