Learner's attention and mental effort are the primary factors for acquiring knowledge in an educative context. Hence, estimating mental efforts of learners in real time can help designing adaptive learning techniques, especially for disabled people (Anderson, Betts, Ferris, & Fincham, 2012). Previous researches showed that various physiological factors co-vary with mental effort levels (Healey, 2005). Among these factors, we distinguish Heart Rate Variation (HRV), Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) and the Electro-encephalogram (EEG) activity (Wobrock et al., 2015). In recent years, more and more researches have been focused on the development of automatic systems to assess mental effort and the quantity of engaged cognitive sources during a cognitive task (Huang et al., 2016, Röy et al., 2016, Spüler et al., 2016, Zammouri and Ait Moussa, 2016). These works are based on the physiological information associated with brain activity, here in EEG. Relying on EEG is justified by the visible effects induced by changes in cognitive state. The increase and decrease in the level of cognitive load is the result of many complex factors interacting together. The user's workload can be defined either as the imposed load of working memory or the number of works to perform concurrently. More generally it is defined as the measurement of the amount of mental resources involved in a cognitive task. The use of the EEG measurements to assess the mental workload takes advantage of the spectral aspect of the electrical brain signal. According to Başar et al. (2001), the electrical brain activity generates different rhythms. These rhythms represent a continuum of waves: Delta [0.5–3 Hz] (δ), Theta [4–7 Hz] (θ), Alpha [8–11 Hz] (α), Beta [12–30 Hz] (β) and Gamma [> 30 Hz] (γ). For Klimesch (1999) and Andreassi (1995) θ and α oscillations are sensitive to task difficulties. According to Holm, Lukander, Korpela, Sallinen, and Müller (2009) the increase of activity demands increases the θ oscillations in the frontal brain area (electrode Fz) and decreases the α oscillations in the parietal brain area (electrode Pz). Apart from brain rhythms, some works used Event Related Potentials (ERPs) as indicators of mental states. These potentials represent specific responses to cognitive events called stimuli. Amongst the widely known evoked potentials, P300 evoked component has justified its robustness to assess mental states and workload through its sensitivity to the brain processing competencies (Holm et al., 2009, Röy et al., 2016, van Dinteren et al., 2014).
Through works from the literature, the development of a brain-computer interface (BCI) provides a system with possibility of communication based only on brain signals. Hence, in the context of assistance and rehabilitation, BCI systems can be a reliable tool to assist, improve or repair some of the human cognitive functions (Bell et al., 2008, Pires et al., 2012, Wang et al., 2014, Wolpaw et al., 2002, Yasui, 2009). Amongst the recent innovative tools designed in the realm of estimating mental states and workload, passive Brain-Computer Interfaces (pBCI) exploit spontaneous brain activity for implicit brain-machine interactions. While most researches in BCI are designed for direct control with disabled people, pBCI use brain measurements as an additional input in order to reflect information about the user's cognitive state (Farwell and Donchin, 1988, Leeb et al., 2013). This term, passive BCI, was introduced for the first time by Cutrell and Tan (2008) and refers to an implicit interaction with a computer based on brain activity. The term implicit brain-computer interface reveals the relationship that exists between implicit interactions in general and interactions based on brain activity. Current brain activity measurements allow accessing to different types of implicit informations on the user's mental state such as the cognitive workload.
In this work, and in relation to the pBCI context, we aim at developing a BCI to assess and estimate learners’ mental states and workload based on EEG signals. The approach presented in this paper exploits two experimental protocols. The first protocol aims at measuring the EEG signals from four subjects while solving matrices products using pen and paper. In the second protocol eight subjects answered multi-choices questions of mathematical logic using a computer-based learning environment. In this investigation we try to address the issue of estimating workload changes and to highlight brain regions that interact during a learning process. The proposed solution is based on a combination of power spectral density analysis and the Student's law applied to θ and α brain rhythms. Through our designed classifier we demonstrate how EEG data could be used for distinguishing different levels of an individual's workload especially in the context of a learning process. The developed classifier was tested using EEG data from the first protocol and validated on the data set from the second one. The major faced difficulty in estimating and classifying levels of the cognitive workload was related to the fact that there are many states and not a few wholly states.
In relation to the expert systems, this work results, in terms of an individual's mental effort levels classification, allow to introduce a new aspect of intelligence which improves the human operator's activities in general. Indeed, in the context of road safety, the proposed classifier can be used to identify and detect the departure in a state of falling asleep or drowsiness. Unlike the currently existing systems (such those based on movements detection in the car or those based on eyes closure detection through a camera), the use of the proposed classifier makes it possible to detect pre-sleep mental states. Such an approach will make it possible to design alert systems or remediation systems before going in a sleep state.
On the intersection of biotechnologies, health care and Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS), the proposed classifier, allows to design new ITS whose expert module intelligence derives its robustness from the learner's current mental effort consideration. Such an intelligence enables the ITS expert module to accurately select and adapt the learning content for the learner based on his current mental state. Such an expert and intelligent system is of a crucial importance and of an immediate demand in the context of physiotherapy and rehabilitation especially when it concerns a disease of cognitive disorders as in the case of Cerebral Palsy (CP). Such an ITS enables the concerned specialists to create adapted learning scenarios in order to properly evaluate their reeducational therapies according to patients.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a background of works in relation to mental states and workload recognition. In Sections 3 and 4, we present the adopted model for estimating the workload. Experimental results are presented and discussed in Sections 5 and 6. Finally conclusions are drawn in the last section.
