Arrhythmia, or heart rhythm disorder, is a common manifestation of heart disease [3], [74]. An arrhythmia is said to occur if the heart beats too early, late, slowly, quickly, or at irregular intervals. This happens because there is a dysfunction in the electrical conduction pattern of the heart. Among the many different forms of arrhythmias, atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common. AF induces varying and often very fast or slow heartbeats. In AF, the electrical impulses in the atria (upper chambers of the heart) are disorganized and are unsynchronized or out of coordination with the ventricles (lower chambers of the heart). Examples of signals from a normal and a heart with AF are seen in Figure 1. It can be observed that the electrical impulses in the normal heart proceed in an orderly flow, but the electrical impulses in the AF heart are chaotic. In AF, due to the irregular heart rhythm, the heart may pump over 150 times per minute. In a healthy heart, the heart pumps approximately 60 to 100 times per minute. During AF, the multiple ectopic foci in the atria discharge at an extremely fast rate resulting in multiple irregular stimulations. As the atria cannot respond mechanically to the disorganized electrical signal stimulation, the atria end up twitching rather than contracting properly.Download : Download high-res image (335KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Representations of a healthy heart (A) and heart with atrial fibrillation (B).
AF is categorized into paroxysmal, persistent, or permanent forms (longstanding persistent AF) [76]. In paroxysmal AF, the ECG signals exhibit irregular heartbeats (AF) that return or spontaneously cardiovert to regular heartbeats (sinus rhythm) within a short time (minutes to a few days). In persistent AF, the AF returns to sinus rhythm only if the patient receives electrical or pharmacological cardioversion treatment to abolish the AF. Lastly, in permanent AF, there is no intention to cardiovert the AF, and the irregular heartbeat is left untreated.
As reported by the World Heart Federation, AF has become a global health interest as the prevalence and associated mortality have grown exponentially in the past decade [77]. According to a study published in Circulation [23], it was reported that 33.5 million people globally have AF. It was also mentioned in the study that in 2005, 3 million Americans are afflicted by AF and the number is expected to increase to 8 million by 2050. Even though AF per se is not a life-threatening condition, it is a critical medical condition that calls for medical attention. This is because the progression of AF can lead to stroke, with its potential for long-term paralysis and disability, congestive heart failure and even death [24]. Typically, the irregular heartbeats in AF do not manifest any symptom until a later stage, when cardioversion success becomes more limited. Consequently, early diagnosis of AF is crucial to halt the further advancement of AF to other heart and stroke complications.
The diagnostic approaches for AF include clinical examination, electrocardiogram (ECG), Holter monitor, an event monitor, stress test, and echocardiogram [95]. Clinical examination to detect AF comprises auscultation, and manual pulse assessment [95]. However, clinical methods are neither adequately sensitive nor specific to secure an accurate diagnosis. The ECG machine is commonly used to confirm the diagnosis. The ECG is a tool that records the electrical activity of the heart. Healthcare professionals often assess the cardiac condition of the patient based on the ECG signals. Similarly, the Holter monitor, event monitor, and stress test produce ECG signals that are recorded over an extended period of time, or when the subject is under physical stress (for example, when running). On the other hand, the echocardiogram utilizes sound waves to construct images of the heart [52]. It can provide an overall visualization of the heart structure. The images are displayed in real-time on a video monitor and these images are recorded for analysis. Still, the gold standard to test for AF is ECG analysis [62].
