In contemporary society, computers play an important role in the teaching and learning of languages, rendering them an essential part of the teaching and learning process (Chen et al., 2011, Kay, 2007, Selwyn, 2007). The efficacy of technology for EAL learners' writing skills has been confirmed not only in relation to grammar comprehension but also with regards to the quality of writing tasks. Zaini and Mazdayasna (2015) revealed that those who receive automatic feedback in comparison to those who receive feedback from teachers are more successful in improving their writing skills, particularly in terms of the correct use of articles, plural forms, spelling, and verbs. Moreover, the results of their study confirm the positive effects of MWO™ on the quality of individuals’ writing. The findings of their study are significant, as they simultaneously focus on the effects of computer-generated feedback on the structure and quality of writing. However, they applied an instrumental approach to the study of technology that measures technology as a tool designed to serve the needs of users (Warschauer, 1998).
Similarly, AbuSeileek (2013) compared the effects of three forms of computer-mediated corrective feedback (track changes, word processors, and a combination of track changes and word processors) on EAL learners' writing skills. He measured the performance of his participants while considering 11 common writing errors (e.g., capitalizations, fragments, run-on sentences, and so on). The results of his study show that while all the students meaningfully improved upon their writing skills over time, the participants who benefited from both tracked changes and word processors outperformed the other participants. The results of his study are important, as AbuSeileek found that receiving a combination of feedback from both sources is more influential than receiving feedback from only one source. Likewise, de Smet, Broekkamp, Brand-Gruwel, and Kirschner (2011) studied the influence of electronic outlining on the writing quality of a group of Dutch pre-university students. The findings of their study show that their participants decreased levels of mental effort exerted and improved upon their writing skills while completing argumentative writing tasks. The results of their study are significant, as the researchers analysed the influence of Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) on learners' cognitive processes. However, most studies of this field (e.g., Limbu and Markauskaite, 2015, Wang, 2017), including the abovementioned ones, have analysed the effects of CALL on EAL students’ final products while they complete writing tasks. In other words, much research in this field has focused on instrumental aspects of educational technology, while the critical approach to CALL which considers “technology as a scene of struggle between social forces” (Warschauer, 1998, p. 758) has not received as much attention.
To the best of my knowledge, few studies have been conducted on the social aspects of CALL. Of the studies conducted on this issue, those by Assodar, Vaezi, and Izanloo (2016) and Lee, Yeung, and Ip (2016) illustrate the importance of and need for more research in this area. Assodar et al. (2016) analysed users' levels of satisfaction among 600 undergraduates enrolled in an English for Academic Purposes (EAP) course given at an Iranian University. The results of their study reveal six general dimensions (i.e., learners' attitudes towards e-courses, instructors, courses, technologies, designs, and environments) that influence successful e-learning and that ensure user satisfaction. Their study successfully identified and categorised factors that influence learners’ satisfaction. Likewise, Lee, Yeung et al. (2016) analysed the relationship between learning styles (visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile) and technology. They also explored the roles of gender and age. Their participants were asked to complete a questionnaire examining learning styles, motivations and autonomy levels. The results of their study show that visual and kinesthetic learning styles are meaningfully related to language learning during the use of technologies for educational purposes. Nevertheless, they report that age and gender do not play significant roles. The authors suggest that further studies that consider the roles of sociocultural factors should be conducted in this regard.
Although these studies present valuable results in terms of users' attitudes, genders, ages, and learning styles, they did not explore potential power relations between word processors and language learners. In other words, we do not know much about the factors that may influence learners' identity representations while completing writing tasks on a screen. Such an analysis in the subfield of CALL is important, as on the one hand, the use of technologies for teaching/learning language skills is becoming more prevalent around the world (Cheung & Slavin, 2012), while a deeper exploration of different aspects of CALL is required (Selwyn, 2010). On the other hand, language learning is closely related to identity construction and representation (Norton & Toohey, 2011), power relations (Arber, 2008), and learners’ attitudes and feelings (MacIntyre & Gardner, 1991). As Twining, Heller, Nussbaum, and Tsai (2017) note, the use of technologies for pedagogical purposes is interdisciplinary, and high-quality research that analyses different aspects of this is required.
In view of this, the findings of the current study will prove significant in several ways. First, the analysis of the interaction between MWO and Grammarly and EAL learners as they perform writing tasks is important, as it will help EAL teachers gain a further insight into the automatic feedback that their students receive. Lee, Leong, and Song (2016) believe that teachers' perceptions of such feedback will help them foster learning and to understand the rational for their practices in the classroom. Second, EAL learners' perceptions of the nature of feedback and errors can be used to develop their writing skills, as such knowledge bolsters their motivation and linguistic accuracy (Ellis, 2009). Although previous studies have established the effectiveness of automatic feedback (e.g., in writing cohesive texts (Lancher, Burkhart, & Nückles, 2017) or in terms of the mechanics of writing (Zaini & Mazdayasna, 2015)), the nature of automatic feedback and the ways it may influence learners' identities remains unknown. The results of this study will help learners understand the nature of feedback. Third, the analysis of power exercised on learners and on the ways it influences learners is significant, as it is related to learning, teaching, education, and student performance (Ball, 2013). Therefore, the findings of this study, which analyses the existence/influence of power relations in interactions between EAL learners and word processors, can be effective for educational purposes. Finally, as Ivanic (1998) believes, the analysis of factors which influence students' identity representations is important, as the act of writing is influenced by writers' identities. Writers consciously or unconsciously convey an impression of themselves in a certain written text. This impression is influenced by their values, attitudes, power relations, and feelings. As Mazdayasna and Zaini (2015) put forward, as EAL students engage in writing tasks, they represent identities in their writing that they developed in educational environments. Accordingly, it is important to analyse the factors that influence writers’ identity representations while writing on computers. Thus, this study addresses the following research question:
How do computer-generated feedback and potential power relations influence EAL learners' identity representations as they write on computers?
In the following subsections, I discuss the existence of power relations in social life and the ways in which power can be related to computer technologies for educational purposes. Next, the conceptual framework pertinent to issues of power and technology is explained.
1.1. Power relations, multimodality and CALLPower is necessary in all aspects of life in that energy is essential for the body (Russell, 1938). Nevertheless, power should not be merely considered a political force. As Simon and Oakes (2006) assert, power can be studied and discussed from several viewpoints such as those of social psychology, social theory, sociology and philosophy. In view of this, power in this study is defined as a productive and simultaneously destructive force that causes its subjects do things in an orderly manner (Foucault, 1980). Foucault believes that power relations are interactive and dynamic networks of social relations involving members of groups and institutions. In fact, every interaction involves relations of power.Power relations are ubiquitous in our lives (Foucault, 1979, Foucault, 1982) in that there can be an association between power relations and computers as multimodal devices. To illustrate this relationship, I start with the notion of ‘mode’. Kress (2000) notes that modes are means of representation and communication that are uttered semiotically. This means that a mode can be defined as anything that creates meaning. More precisely, Kress and van Leeuwen (2001) define modes as semiotic resources that allow individuals to realise and make meaning of actions and interactions. Modes are dispersed through media and technologies. They include a broad range of entities, such as colours, texts, sounds, and so on (Kress & van Leeuwen, 2002), which replace language as the centre of communication with images, sounds, designs, colours, page layouts, and so on (Iedema, 2003, Kress and van Leeuwen, 2001, van Leeuwen, 2005). In this way, computers are multimodal machines that apply different modes of representation to communicate, and every communication/interaction conveys power relations (Motion, Heath, & Leitch, 2016).Second, proponents of multimodality and social semiotics (e.g., Hull & Nelson, 2005) shift their focus to modes as entities that construct meanings. Such thinkers consider human beings as free agents at the centre of meaning-making processes who are able to make selections from semiotic resources (i.e., pens, ink, computer software programs, etc.) based on their interests (Stein, 2008). From a social semiotic lens, power relations can influence communication, which is dependent on available semiotic resources and modes (van Leeuwen, 2005). Hence, the present study seeks to investigate potential power relations between computers and human beings as well as the effects of computers on human beings’ identity representations.Meaning is conveyed via communication (Stein, 2008) and in a multimodal approach to teaching and learning (Computer-Based Instruction, CALL, and so on); communication is not limited to language but is extended to other modes of communication, including images, space, colours, sounds, and movements that influence meaning construction and conveyance (Stein, 2008), identity (Gee, 2003), and power relations (Unsworth, 2008). Therefore, the red, green and blue lines given in MWO and Grammarly feedback become important because they serve as modes of communication between computers and users.
1.2. Conceptual frameworkTo analyse the interaction between users and MWO/Grammarly as processors, I introduce related concepts and outline associations between them. The identity representation of users is considered the final product influenced by power relations that are subsequently related to processes of multimodality and intertextuality and to learners’ attitudes (see Fig. 1).(a)Norton (2013) defined identity as the ways in which people understand their associations with the world and as the ways that such relationships are found within time and space. This post-structural view considers identity, as being discursively constructed and represented at every moment (Weedon, 1997) of its formation and representation, can be influenced by any semiotic behaviour regarded as the manifestation of a subject's position on a certain discourse (Block, 2007). This view, which considers identity not as stable but as being constructed every given moment, is important because this study analyses writers' identity representations during users' interactions with computers and finds a potential association between these interactions and users' identity representations. Identity from this perspective is closely related to writing. To demonstrate the association between writing and identity, I draw on Ivanic (1998), who proposed ‘discoursal self’ (p.26) as a manifold concept that represents a writer's conscious or unconscious identities illustrated in a given piece of writing. Ivanic named this aspect of identity ‘discoursal identity’ (p.24), as discourse features of text, including values, opinions, and power relations of a given context, create it. She views writers as performers of every text, while social interactions influence their identity representations. In fact, they represent their unique identities as they are illustrated in a specific text. Writers are influenced by the contexts and interactions that impact text production. When the roles of contexts and interactions become prominent, issues pertaining to relations of power are unavoidable.(b)At first, power relations in social life influence identity construction, which successively impacts language, writing, semiosis, and literacy (Ivanic, 1998). Interactions with computers constitute an aspect of social life, and the use of technology for educational purposes represents a kind of interaction between users and computers that can influence learning and the cognitive development of users (Zaini & Mazdayasna, 2015). Second, to elucidate potential power relations between computer-generated feedback and users, as mentioned above, I stress that in every interaction there are power relations (Benwell & Stokoe, 2006). Accordingly, as users write on computers, the existence of power relations becomes possible. As individuals write, they reflect on their interpretations of the world (Fairclough, 2015) as influenced by interactions with their environment (Ezer, 2015). These interactions influence writers' identity representations (Ivanic, 1998). As this study stresses the role of interactions between users and MWO/Grammarly, power relations are sought while learners face computer-generated feedback that may impact their voice (Bakhtin, 1984) or that may act as semiotic modes (Kress, Jetwitt, Ogborn, & Tsatsarelis, 2001) and shape their attitudes (Foucault, 1997). These concepts form the next components of the conceptual framework.(c)Bakhtin (1984) defined ‘intertextuality’ as a concept associated with language production when producers utter something that reflects neither their original words nor their own ideas. In fact, Bakhtin believed that in every produced text there is a degree of intertextuality as people use the voices of others. He considered intertextuality as not only associated with the content of language production but as also bearing on lexico-grammatical aspects of language, indicating that people may use the voices of others when they use the words and grammatical structures of others. The analysis of intertextuality is important, as MWO and Grammarly provide users with lexico-grammatical suggestions. In drawing on intertextuality, I seek to determine whether any power relations are exercised on EAL writers' voices when they use word processors to write on computers. Moreover, this notion is related to principles of multimodality because computers provide feedback to learners in the form of coloured lines.(d)Kress et al. (2001) suggested that semiotic modes create meaning and that the meaning of written language is similarly tied to communicative contexts and to other available modes. This means that the meaning produced by existing/surrounding modes, which writers interact with, interrelates with the written language. This interaction creates meaning and influences writers' identity representations. Based on this idea, the corrugated green, red, and blue lines of MWO, along with the coloured feedback given by Grammarly, serve as modes of communication that interact with users. In other words, computer-generated feedback as a semiotic mode is able to interact with users, and this interaction can involve power relations that successively influence users' attitudes and their identity representations.(e)The final component of the conceptual framework is the notion of “attitude”. To illustrate the association between attitudes and relations of power, I draw on Foucault's (1997) views. He argued that individuals represent themselves by the problems that they fight with. In this sense, he used the term ‘manner’ to emphasise individuals' experiences that make it difficult for them to remain the same in accordance with themselves. In other words, he argued that identities are formed by trajectories and not by the positions that people take. Foucault (1997) defined attitude as follows: “… by 'attitude', I mean a mode of relating to contemporary reality; a voluntary choice made by certain people; in the end, a way of thinking and feeling; a way, too, of acting and behaving that at one and the same time marks a relation of belonging and presents itself as a task” (p. 309). Accordingly, people act, behave and interact with others based on their attitudes, which are based on power relations. As people interact with others, they either accept or exercise power relations (Foucault, 1997), which influence language production and identity representations (Ivanic, 1998). In this study, users' attitudes towards MWO, Grammarly and the given feedback are important, as users' attitudes should influence their interactions with computers, which consequently impact acts of writing and identity representation.Download : Download high-res image (230KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The conceptual framework.Hence, in considering the aforementioned conceptual framework, the following methodology will be employed to find answers to the research question.
