The design of mechanical networks has gained tremendous attention in the past decade due to the rise of microfluidics technology. Microfluidics, a subclass of Micro-Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), is an exponentially growing field with applications ranging from biological research [1] to quantum physics [2]. This field deals with precise manipulation of fluids at a Nano-liter scale in pressure-driven micro-scale networks of mechanical channels [3]. Particularly, control of fluid velocity in individual segments within a complex microfluidic network is a challenging and highly desirable task [[4], [5]]. It may be of use to a wide spectrum of applications: from the generation of chemical gradients for cell migration analysis in chemotaxis studies [6] to precise control of mixing ratios of fluids for surface modification of Nano-particles [7]. One paradigm for such control suggests a design of resistance microfluidic circuits in which velocity flow, or solution concentration, depends on the resistance profile of the network [8]. This paradigm relies on the ‘the hydraulic–electric circuit analogy’, which states that like in electrical circuits, fluid flow depends on the relation between the potential drop (pressure difference) and the resistance of the transmitting conductor (hydraulic resistance). We have recently described this analogy in-depth in [9].
The design process of a microfluidic network is illustrated in Fig. 1. The design starts with system specifications and concludes with a topological graph that describes the network’s two-dimensional architecture [10], which can then be prototyped for fabrication. Currently, most microfluidic designs are manually drawn using vector-graphics editors such as AutoCAD. Subsequently, system specifications should be iteratively compared with the system design using design rules, physical knowledge, fabrication constraints, materials’ properties, and numerical models. Finally, the assembled device is evaluated and tested experimentally [11]. This design streamline relies on numerical analysis and experimental results. It is therefore computationally intensive, not cost-effective, and rarely suitable for model validation of resistance-based microfluidic circuits [12]. Moreover, since the fabrication stage is usually based on soft-lithography, the design-to-production transition is not straightforward, requiring manual intervention and operation throughout the process. Aside from being long and inefficient, this design paradigm is not aimed toward optimizing footprint (compact in terms of 2D dimension and minimal number of layers) or satisfying physical and fabricational constraints.
In this work, we present a computational design algorithm that, given a resistance profile of a microfluidic circuit, outputs a fabrication-ready circuit model. We suggest a parameter guided approach for microfluidic design. For example, it enables the designer to set a specific flow rate in one section of the fluidic network, forcing all other parameters to realign with this requirement. Once the specifications are converted to an equivalent electrical model, it is introduced as a parameter to our algorithm. The algorithm converts the electric specification back to fluid channels by replacing the resistors with channels of respective lengths, which are folded to form a “snake” shape, and connecting them into a network based on the circuit topology. We use a microfluidic design model that comprises of a flow layer and connecting layers. The flow layer contains the folded mechanical channels, and the connection layers are bonded on top of it, connecting the different channels in correspondence to the prescribed circuit topology. The folded snake-shaped channels ensure that the design will not collapse while allowing for smaller footprint.Download : Download high-res image (229KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Design streamline of microfluidic circuits. During the design process system specifications are iteratively compared with the system design using design rules, physical knowledge, fabrication process, materials, numerical models and finally, the evaluation and testing of the assembled device. The conceptual design can be drawn and tested using numerical simulation packages or/combined with analytical models for optimization. The design can be built as a prototype and experimentally tested.
The main challenge in converting the abstract channel network to a geometric design is to create a low footprint layout that can be robustly physically fabricated. Our algorithm first discretizes the problem by using a 2D grid for the flow layer and placing each folded-channel in one grid cell. Then, it optimizes the positions of these channels inside the grid to reduce the number of intersections of the connecting channels realizing the topological description of the network, and minimize their total length. Consequently, the connecting channels are clustered into non-intersecting channel groups that can be fabricated one layer per group. We reduce the clustering problem to a graph-coloring problem and use an approximation algorithm to solve it. Finally, a vector-graphics model for 3D printing is automatically generated. Our approach can significantly reduce the design time of microfluidic circuits, allowing a seamless computer-aided transition from concept to production.
Our main contribution is utilizing microfluidic design rules, physical constraints, the electric–hydraulic analogy and optimization algorithms to present an end-to-end framework for the design of resistance microfluidic circuits. We discretize the problem to a grid of cells and present a novel algorithm that minimizes the channel lengths and number of intersections so that smaller number of layers are used and map the layer clustering to a graph coloring problem.
