In the case of systems where there is no possibility to manage their resources according to deterministic rules, but we are forced to focus on statistical properties of random variables due to the fact that such systems are complex and work in interactive mode, the knowledge about statistical properties of variables distributions is very important in order to guarantee an acceptable level of performance. Because in each living (natural) and artificial (human made) systems we have energy flow, it is natural that the science about heat – thermodynamics – plays a crucial role. Statistics used for system variability description has very strong connections with physics; moreover, in last two decades the description of many systems behaviour in terms of complexity has been in the scope of physicists [1]. They introduced into non-physical sciences (economy, sociology, psychology, etc.) many terms typical for physics like: power-laws, long-range and long-term dependencies, scaling, non-extensivity, volatility, etc. Many scientists are looking for common denominator that will help in better understanding of these considerations and it seems that this could be the complex systems approach. But on the other hand theoretical considerations proposed by physicians may lead to some engineering misunderstandings, for example the power-law behaviour of probability distribution of any variable X cannot exist for all x∈X in real systems. There is a need to have a cut-off to avoid infinite variance and have a finite size. There are many examples where the power-law behaviour of systems is well-visible only in selected parts of probability distributions and does not always exist for all extreme values [2].
In this paper we show how this problem is visible in the case of management of cache memory system in Windows Operating Systems during human–computer interaction. The presented results are based on experiment where one of operating system counters in computer system was traced for a long time. Obtained experimental result are related to proposed analytical model showing interesting results that can be further developed.
Paper is organized as follows: Section 2 shows a proposal of statistical model that makes a connection between Tsallis thermostatistics with power-laws and long-range dependencies and classical approach of finite variance statistical models with exponential decays. Section 3 depicts a view from the queuing theory with relation to non-extensive statistics. Results of experiment are shown in Section 4, whereas conclusions and further work is shortly presented in Section 5.
