Improper management of BMW is not only hazardous to environment, but it may also affect the people working in the hospital. It is significantly essential to manage the waste generated within the hospitals properly so as to avoid health problems and environmental risks. BMW includes soil, water, and air pollution, it is mandatory to manage the biomedical waste properly as human beings fight with infectious diseases like HIV, hepatitis etc. The hospital waste management involves management of lots of activities, such as collection, transportation, treatment, and disposal of wastes. The variety of waste is generated in the hospital which is hazardous and needs to be transported and disposed properly.
In last few years, many researchers worked on issues related to biomedical waste and they focused on collection, separation, treatment of biomedical waste in hospitals by using bins. But there is also a need to focus on safe transportation of biomedical waste. In the recent years, many authors worked on network optimization in the field of BMW. In 2018, modified Multi-Objective Ant Colony System (MOACS) [1] technique was introduced which is facilitated by clustering algorithm to attain safe and optimum routes for Biomedical Waste Complex Transportation (BMWCT) problem. These optimization techniques are used to minimize the route, cost related with the transportation and collection. While transporting the waste from hospital to disposal site, there is risk associated with the transportation. So, there is a need to have short distance between disposal site and hospital. The risk related with transportation and collection of BMW is of two types: risk associated with humans and risk associated with the environment [2].
In this paper, BMW management problem is solved by using newly emerging cohort algorithm. Cohort Intelligence (CI) algorithm is evolutionary algorithm which shows positive results in various fields. The main problem related to BMW management is to provide the safety for people while transporting the waste to disposal site. So, there is a need to focus on waste management problem using route optimization techniques. These optimization techniques are used to optimize the distance between collection point and the disposal site using vehicle routing problem and optimization techniques. The main objectives considered for this problem are: determination of possible routes, study of the risk associated with collection and transportation of disposal and calculation of the optimized route length.
The outline of the paper is as follows: Section II discusses about the literature survey of the different optimization algorithms which are used to solve waste management problems such as municipal solid waste, hazardous waste. Section III describes the proposed idea and the methodology. Section IV and V discusses about the result and comparative analysis and the last section discusses the conclusion and future scope of the work.
