X-ray diffraction is a widely-used technique for high resolution structural investigation, which is utilized in numerous areas including physics, chemistry, biology, and other subjects [1], [2], [3], [4]. In the traditional Bragg–Brentano geometry X-ray diffractometer, the incident beam on the sample is divergent. As a result, a sample with slight misalignment will cause severe line broadening, line shift, and intensity loss in the diffraction pattern [5]. The application of a parabolic cylinder laterally graded multilayer reflector, to collimate the divergent X-ray beam significantly reduces the effect of sample misalignment on the measured result [6], [7], [8].
Although the use of this component can improve the quality of X-ray diffraction results, perfect performance of the reflector is primarily based on the quality of the assembly. The traditional assembly process is a qualitative procedure that is highly reliant on experience, and is therefore user-dependent and time-consuming. From the 1970s onwards, computer-aided assembly processes have been applied to the adjustment of optics in the optical path of systems. The approach is a combination of optical measurement and computer simulation technology and has achieved notable advancements in the field of precision optical system assembly [9], [10], [11], [12]. Generally, the main steps involved in the computer-aided assembly process are as follows: (1) simulation of the optical performance and evaluation of the influence of assembly errors prior to assembly, (2) installation of the optics system using coarse adjustment, (3) measurement of the image quality and a direct comparison of the measurement result with the theoretical result, (4) utilization of the simulation program to analyze the adjustment direction and to compute specific values, and (5) repetition of steps 3 and 4 until the performance of the optical system is close to the theoretical design target.
In the area of equipment assembly in X-ray diffraction and particularly for X-ray parabolic cylinder laterally graded multilayer reflectors, computer-aided design is always used to simulate the reflector’s performance in the design process and to evaluate assembly errors. Rio simulated the influence of the reflector–source distance deviation on the degree of collimation of the beam, but did not calculate the reflectivity of the reflector [13]. Toraya simulated the effect of the incident angle deviation and reflector–source distance deviation on intensity, but not describe the details of the approach during the adjustment process [14]. Gobel considered that the incident angle error affected the parallelism of the collimated beam and limited this parameter according to the Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) of the multilayer [15]. Michaelsen established a simple formula to analyze the relationship between the divergent angle of the collimated beam and the incident angle error [16]. In a previous study, we simulated the influence of the assembly errors, and limited the maximum value of the incident angle deviation and the offset of the source–reflector distance [17]. These published reports examined the effects of assembly errors on the collimating beam before assembly, thereby providing qualitative results or identifying experimental limitations that can guide the assembly process. However, computer simulations with resetting values during assembly were not performed. As such, the assembly is time-assuming, and precision adjustment is difficult to achieve.
 In this paper, we present a computer-aided assembly process for the assembly of an X-ray parabolic cylinder laterally graded multilayer reflector for divergent beam collimation, to quantitatively guide the adjustment procedure. A high efficiency setup is proposed to facilitate both collimation and the evaluation of the collimated beam. Then, the performance of the reflector used in the experiment is simulated according to the size of the source, the surface topography of the parabolic cylinder reflector substrate, and the period thickness distribution of the laterally graded multilayer coating on the reflector. Each unit is then adjusted by analyzing each essential adjustment step and quantitatively computing the adjustment value to guide the adjustment. Finally, an effective reflector is assembled with a divergent angle of less than 0.004 deg, which is significantly smaller than the 0.02 deg that is typically required in X-ray crystallography.Download : Download high-res image (189KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Setup of the experiment, with a Cu kα X-ray tube as the source, a slit to control the flux, the reflector to collimate the divergent beam, a CCD camera to generate a digital intensity image of the reflected beam and position stages to adjust the relative position of each unit.Download : Download high-res image (339KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. (a) Sketch of the pinhole imaging (b) Pattern and profile of the pinhole imaging accepted by CCD camera.
