The issue of parking has been discussed in the literature for more than 40 years. The first studies concerned the principles of correct on-street parking [1,2], and were followed by empirical studies on the factors that determine the choice of a parking space [3,4], the impact of parking fees on travel costs [5], and the stochasticity of vacant parking spaces [6]. Unfortunately, urban traffic is becoming more and more intensive, and many motorists have problems finding an unoccupied on-street parking space, particularly in the vicinity of shopping centres or office buildings. The conclusions derived from [7] indicate that, apart from being a comfortable solution, on-street parking is one of the best ways to ensure a possibility to park.
Discussions regarding on-street parking are ongoing, and consensus remains far away [8]. These discussions revolve around questions such as whether on-street parking should be allowed or prohibited, and how to ensure appropriate on-street car parks [9]. Therefore, it is important to point out various problems related to on-street parking and the impact of such parking on urban traffic flow.
The main purpose of this article is to observe how traffic flow changes near on-street car parks. Various drivers exhibit different behaviour during parking (described in more detail in Section 3.1: Research problem). Attempts have been made to understand how this behaviour affects road traffic. In order to grasp the basic features of the problem, a mathematical model was developed on the basis of cellular automata and agent-based technology, which allowed us to describe on-street parking dynamics, depending on several specified characteristics of motorists such as the use of direction indicators, perceptivity and patience. Traffic flow is analysed in various simulation scenarios, conducted using specially designed and implemented simulation software. The obtained results may help improve our understanding of the interaction between on-street or curb parking manoeuvring and vehicle flow.
