Yuval Noah Harari, in his popular book Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind,1 brings forward a new narrative of humanity's creation and evolution. A central argument of his analysis focuses on the power of human beings to create fictions that later become real-life structuring elements of human societies. In order to draw a powerful, and elucidating, picture on legal fiction, he gives the example of Peugeot SA, the automobile industry company:

Modern business-people and lawyers are, in fact, powerful sorcerers. The principal difference between them and tribal shamans is that modern lawyers tell far stranger tales. […] It all revolves around telling stories, and convincing people to believe them. […] In the case of Peugeot SA the crucial story was the French legal code, as written by the French parliament. According to the French legislators, if a certified lawyer followed all the proper liturgy and rituals, wrote all the required spells and oaths on a wonderfully decorated piece of paper, and affixed his ornate signature to the bottom of the document, then hocus pocus – a new company was incorporated. When in 1896 Armand Peugeot wanted to create his company, he paid a lawyer to go through all these sacred procedures. Once the lawyer had performed all the right rituals and pronounced all the necessary spells and oaths, millions of upright French citizens behaved as if the Peugeot company really existed.2
Harari continues to explain that “Peugeot is a figment of our collective imagination. Lawyers call this a “legal fiction”. It can't be pointed at; it's not a physical object. But it exists as a legal entity. Just like you or me, it is bound by the laws of the countries in which it operates. It can open a bank account and own property. It pays taxes, and it can be sued and even prosecuted separately from any of the people who own or work for it”.3 He considers “the idea behind such companies among humanity's most ingenious inventions”, providing Sapiens’ with immense power, that ultimately was proven key to humanity's contemporary success.4
Harari's vivid illustration is basically correct. Modern life is indeed built upon the dichotomy between a natural and a legal person. In fact, any actor in a human society can be either one. Anybody that is permitted to execute an action, carry rights and obligations and incur liabilities may either be a natural person (meaning, a living human being) or a legal person (an organization recognized as such by law). Variations within the above two categories may well exist (for example, an individual may carry limited ability to enter into contracts or an organization may be anything from an international organization to a commercial enterprise), nevertheless the fact remains that anything different is, simply, inconceivable. This is the way the legal world, and thus human life, is structured today.
Obviously, as correctly noted by Harari, this is essentially an artificial construction.5 Only natural persons exist in the real world. Legal persons are a theoretical device. It was, however, conceived to better cope with reality.6 The background of legal persons, explaining their raison d'etre and their historical evolution, is well catalogued by now. Their roots are traced as back as in Roman law or, at the latest, in church history and persona ficta. Their contemporary form has taken form almost a hundred years ago.7 It was at that same time when the last objections to legal persons, representing a group of humans in transactional life, were last expressed8 - and subsequently silenced forever.9 Since then corporate vehicles have been taken for granted by legal theory and philosophy.
Notwithstanding Harari's enthusiastic analysis above, that is pursued in his sequel, Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow,10 where he claims that humanity is on its way to divinity, the truth is that humanity's legal imagination stopped working ever since. Legal persons are among last pieces of legal fiction developed by humanity,11 and this happened hundreds of years ago. We suggest in this paper that maybe, in order for Homo Sapiens to continue living successfully in the future and perhaps fulfil its destiny for becoming Homo Deus, we may now need to create one more piece of legal fiction, that of the digital person.
