Brain computer interface is a system that enables the interface between brain activity and electronic device. Moreover BCI system generally takes bio-signal as an input and predicts a state of action. Traditional BCI enabled system is designed aiming at assisting sensory motor functions where primary aspect is classification of bio-signals. In last few decades various schemes have been proposed for bio-signal processing and classification some of which will be discussed below.
Filter bank common spatial pattern algorithm to optimize the subject-specific frequency band on datasets 2a and 2b of the BCI competition IV is suggested in [1]. Combining information coming from multiple sources and reducing the existing uncertainty in EEG signals using stack generalization is proposed in [2]. Methods based on statistical models that take into account the temporal changes in the electroencephalographic (EEG) signal for asynchronous brain–computer interfaces (BCI) based on imaginary motor tasks are proposed in [3]. A spatio-spectral filtering network for BCI to classify motor imagery data is suggested in [4]. A self-paced BCI based on a robust learning mechanism that extracts and selects spatio-spectral features for differentiating multiple EEG classes is proposed in [5]. BCI issues on hand movement using discrete wavelet transform is discussed in [6].
Different soft computing based methods such as artificial neural network, fuzzy-artificial neural network are also applied for BCI systems. Sub-band classification of decomposed single event-related potential co-variants for multi-class brain–computer interface is proposed in [7] which have an accuracy of 70%. Recurrent quantum neural network (RQNN) filtering procedure has been applied in a two-class motor imagery-based brain–computer interface is proposed in [8] where the objective was to filter EEG signals before feature extraction and classification to increase signal separability. Convolutional neural network (CNN) for the detection of P300 waves in time domain is suggested in [9]. Here seven classifiers are proposed from which four are single classifiers with different features set and three are multi-classifiers. An algorithm based on neural networks and fuzzy theory to classify spontaneous mental activities from EEG signals is suggested in [10] to operate a non-invasive BCI. A three-class mental task-based BCI that uses the Hilbert–Huang transform for the features extractor and fuzzy particle swarm optimization with cross-mutated-based artificial neural network for the classification is proposed in [11]. Recurrent self-evolving fuzzy neural network that employs an on-line gradient descent learning rule to address the EEG regression problem in brain dynamics is proposed in [12]. Brain dynamics of driver or the cognitive states of drivers affect driving safety endangering both the individual and the public. A block sparse Bayesian learning algorithm for EEG-based driver’s drowsiness estimation is proposed in [13]. All the above described methods have accuracy that can be enhanced ultimately improving the performance of the BCI system.
In this paper, a feed-forward back-propagation neural network (FFBPNN) based algorithm is proposed for motor imagery classification. The paper is organised as follows – Section 2 describes the basic concept of motor imagery, Section 3 contains the proposed method using FFBPNN, Section 4 describes the results of the proposed method, Section 5 contains the comparison of the different methods with proposed method, Section 6 contains the conclusion.
