Building a partnership with business communities has become a challenging task for universities worldwide (Etzkowitz, 1998; Siegel et al., 2001; Sauermann and Stephan, 2013). Many initiatives have aimed to investigate the inter-organizational issues, specifically with respect to how members of both types of organizations overcome the conflict of two institutional spheres, that is, between science and business practices (Cyert and Goodman, 1997; Elmuti et al., 2005; Jones, 2009; Bjerregaard, 2009; Lind et al., 2013). For instance, continuous learning and restructuring processes on both sides are the essential factors needed to narrow the chasm of cultures and norms between academic researchers and business professionals (Elmuti et al., 2005). Similarly, Bjerregaard (2010) suggests that both academic scientists and industrial researchers should use their (social) skills purposively to bridge these institutional gaps.
Based on these studies, examining the attitudes of academics dealing with these institutional demands is become crucial. This is due to that individual academics have been exposed with new societal pressures such as new public management in the science system, in general, and in the higher education, in particular (Ferlie et al., 2009). Such new policy relates to the attempt to increase the role of science in industries (Hoarau and Kline, 2014) and relates to the significant impact of industry fund that increases the number of academics to work with business (Bozeman and Gaughan, 2007). Moreover, academics will be exposed by two cultures and norms, science and business, as universities worldwide have endeavoured to ‘valorise’ and ‘transfer’ research to industrial applications (e.g., Mitev and Venters, 2009) of which scholars often label this as research commercialization (e.g., Lam, 2011). Academics may find this problematic because these values and practices are contradictory and divergent to each other (Jones, 2009; Bjerregaard, 2009; Evans, 2010; Murray, 2010). To successfully participate in UBC, individual academics should create hybridity in these (two) contradictive logics (Murray, 2010) which imply that they should able to diminish this institutional barrier (Bjerregaard, 2010). Additionally, the “Mode 2” of research may vary across scientific fields (Whitley, 2000) suggesting academics in different field may react differently for UBC.
UBC is a framework that represents a complex interaction among institutions – between science and business, organizations – between universities and firms, and among individuals – between academics and business professionals. Out of many variations for discussing the interrelationships among these entities, the discourse on the role of individuals in the transformation of organizations and institutions is among those variations that have received less attention from institutional scholars (Thornton et al., 2012; Pache and Santos, 2013). For example, Lee and Lounsbury (2015) emphasize the importance of organizational actors in which they can shape the organizational responses toward institutional complexity, both directly and indirectly. These authors suggest that organizational actors may indirectly respond to the first order of logics or field-level of logics e.g. state and market logic. Instead organizational actors may directly respond to the second order of the logics named community logics such as political conservative and pro-environmental.
Accounting for individual actors in our study is important because they may shape or reshape the micro-foundation of institutional logics (Thornton et al., 2012); they play crucial roles in the forming of hybrid organizations (e.g., Pache and Santos, 2013; Murray, 2010); and they contribute significantly to institutional changes and praxis (Friedland and Alford, 1991; Townley, 1997; Seo and Creed, 2002; Battilana, 2006; Binder, 2007; Montgomery and Oliver, 2009; Reay and Hinings, 2009). Several studies of UBC have attempted to explain the role of individual academics in the on-going ‘production’ or ‘reproduction’ of new values and practices. Shane (2004) and Lam (2011), for instances, argue that the commercialization of research results has become the main ‘business logic’ for academics to collaborate with industries and to create spin-offs. Following this direction, Greenwood et al., (2011) argue that academics may recognize ‘business logic” as “commercial logic” and the authors describe “business logic” as the ‘propriety retention and commercial exploitation of research results’ (p. 318). These studies suggest an interesting insight in which individual academics are varied in their respond to business logic, suggesting some may cope working with business successfully and others may be not (e.g. Sauermann and Stephan, 2013). Nevertheless, few studies have aimed to expose the strategies and response of individual academics towards the contradiction between business and science logics.
Our current study aims to respond to this dearth of research by providing empirical evidence on how macro-actions influence micro-actions (Coleman, 1990), particularly in a case in which individual academics are exposed to business logic, resulting in a competing institutional logic (Pache and Santos, 2013). The long term and the structured UBC programs in Indonesian universities provide us with an empirical site to study and advance this knowledge. Under a framework of the “third mission” of universities and the industrial research collaboration, a growing number of UBC projects have been initiated in recent decades by government agencies (and stakeholders) and universities to stimulate the academics’ engagement. Given this point, Indonesian universities and their academics have been ‘exposed’ to the logic of business for decades, and they simultaneously attempt to ‘develop’ such logic. Thus, this paper seeks to answer the following research questions: How do academics cope with competing institutional logics as being exposed or participated in UBC? And what are the academics’ roles and responses under the complexity of UBC? We structure the remainder of the paper into four sections. The first section is a conceptual framework that describes the concept of the institutional logics and the operationalization of the science and business logics. The second part presents the data collection and method consisting of the selection of research sites and cases. The third part is the results’ section and describes the data collected. The last part constitutes discussion and an implication for future studies.
