In Australian universities, the use of computers and electronic administration systems has increased exponentially in the last decade (National Tertiary Education Union (NTEU), 2009) leading to a marked increase in the number of hours academics and administrative staff spend on computers. Academic core activities of teaching and research are increasingly being conducted using computing software and the internet, and academics, as well as administrative staff, are sitting for long hours with potentially deleterious health effects. Prolonged computer use is recognised as an occupational risk factor for musculoskeletal disorders (Gerr et al., 2004). Whilst the association between musculoskeletal symptoms and increased hours of computer use, including mouse use has been previously studied within the general office environment (Klussmann et al., 2008, IJmker et al., 2007), there is very limited research specifically related to musculoskeletal symptoms associated with computer based tasks undertaken by academics in context with an extended range of operational environments. Academics are more likely to work in diverse operational environments, and therefore the relationships between their musculoskeletal symptoms and computer use may be different to what is observed in standard office environments (Gornall and Salisbury, 2012). Prolonged sitting at computers has also raised concerns about the impact of a lack of variation in working postures and activity on worker health and wellbeing (Straker and Mathiassen, 2009).
The rapid development in communication technologies, including the availability of smart phones, tablets and laptop computers, has provided opportunities for working away from the office workstation. This is increasingly commonplace among office workers (Ciccarelli et al., 2011). Academics have very variable work environments and use computers within offices, laboratories, at home and when travelling. They are expected to be ‘mobile’ and available to respond to queries, regardless of location. The expectation of availability outside of office hours has been identified as a concern for many professionals and a range of reasons for completing work at home has been identified, including working unpaid overtime to complete the demands of the job (Ciccarelli et al., 2011). In many instances academics therefore may not be working at designated workstations purposely set up for them. Potentially they are less likely than university administrative staff to use single fixed workstations designed to minimise ergonomic risks and the extent to which academics apply design recommendations to alternate workstation and equipment configurations is also unknown.
Numerous studies have investigated methods of reducing musculoskeletal pain associated with using computers. Prevention strategies found to be effective include adjusting equipment to individual requirements, using ergonomic keyboards and taking regular breaks (Schlossberg et al., 2004, Levanon et al., 2012). Data on the prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders among computer users are published (Gerr et al., 2002). However, the data are largely self-reported, with few clinical diagnostic data available and there is a paucity of government-reported lost time injury data specifically related to computer use (Straker and Mathiassen, 2009). Although there has been considerable interest in the health effects of computer work on office workers (IJmker et al., 2007), findings relating work posture to upper limb and neck symptoms have been inconsistent (Jensen, 2003, Juul-Kristensen et al., 2004).
The Australian academic population is changing and academics are leaving the profession (National Tertiary Education Union (NTEU), 2009). In Australia, academics include all research, teaching and clinical educator staff who are involved in a range of teaching and research activities. There are however, differences in the naming and definition of academic staff in other countries (European Universities Institute, 2015). Workload has been cited as a possible reason, but the development of musculoskeletal symptoms and/or other health concerns may also be contributing factors. Whilst there is little published research investigating potential health effects of computer use specifically in academics, one study on academics in a university in Hong Kong did demonstrate a significant association between head posture and neck pain when computer processing (Chiu et al., 2002). However, it is unclear whether these findings can be generalised to other musculoskeletal symptoms. The Australian academic profession is also rapidly ageing (Bradley et al., 2008) and with symptoms such as neck pain being more prevalent in older Australians (Blyth et al., 2001), the potential problem of musculoskeletal disorders is likely to worsen.
The aim of the current study is to determine the prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms in university academic and administrative staff and to investigate the relationships between these symptoms and workstation configuration, working postures and ergonomic training.
