Advanced fission and fusion energy systems are envisioned to operate at high burn-up and high temperatures, with severe neutron irradiation and in corrosive environments. The major challenge in developing advanced reactor technologies is the demand for high-performance materials that can tolerate extreme nuclear environments with irradiation doses as high as >200 dpa (displacement per atom) [1]. Such a high irradiation damage level is outside of current knowledge, and no existing neutron irradiation facility allows for such high dose experiments to be conducted in a practical time frame. Predictive capabilities are essential to extrapolate current experience with confidence to extreme conditions anticipated in next-generation nuclear energy systems.
Radiation damage is a classical multiscale physical problem [2]. Irradiation by high-energy particles creates atomic-scale defects such as vacancies and interstitials at sub-picoseconds. These cascade defects develop with time into larger defect structure, e.g. dislocation loops, extended dislocation segments and network, voids and bubbles, resulting in material damage that impact the long-term performance and integrity of reactor components, and, ultimately, the safe and economical operations of nuclear reactors. It is essential such structural evolution initiated by irradiation damage can be quantitatively understood and predicted and its impact on materials properties and component life can be accurately evaluated. Traditional approaches for prediction of high-dose, long-term behavior of materials largely rely on empirical rules established by collecting a large amount of neutron irradiation data and statistical analysis. A more rigorous approach is made possible with recent advance in computational material science to develop computer models based on detailed knowledge of the entire process of damage formation and evolution under irradiation, and prediction of the material behavior can be done in a quantitative way.
Microstructural evolution under irradiation has been modeled successfully using two major classes of model schemes: discrete atomistic simulations and continuum theory. Atomic-scale MD simulations have been successfully applied to study the primary damage stage in displacement cascades, defect interactions, etc. [3], [4], [5], [6]. It is particularly useful to investigate small scale (<100 nm) and extremely fast (<200 ns) processes. The continuum approach, e.g. the reaction rate theory, has the advantage of simulating all the stages of microstructural evolution, and the simulation results can be directly compared with experiments. The rate theory can handle complex microstructural features simultaneously, e.g. free surfaces, dislocations, grain boundaries, precipitates, etc, and the parameterization of the model can be directly supported by well-designed experiments [7], [8].
The development of physical models for radiation damage evolution requires highly accurate experimental data for quantitative calibration of key material parameters. Experiments must be designed to investigate a specific mechanism and test specific elements in a computer model, such as effects of various metallurgical (chemistry, processing, microstructure, etc.) and irradiation (temperature, dose, dose rate, recoil energy spectrum, etc.) variables. Ideally, neutron irradiation data should be used, but a number of complications with reactor irradiation experiments have limited their use in systematic studies and model development (e.g. activated material handling, cost, less well-controlled irradiation conditions, etc.). TEM with in situ heavy ion irradiation can be a useful tool in validating physics-based computer models.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with in situ heavy ion irradiation is a valuable technique for understanding physical processes of radiation damage [9]. Well-controlled irradiation experiments can be conducted to examine the effect of a number of variables including ion type and energy, irradiation dose, dose rate, temperature, specimen orientation, etc. Irradiation dose rates can be varied over several orders of magnitude, and high fluxes (e.g. 1016 ions/cm2/sec) allow high doses (e.g. 200 dpa) achieved in hours. Another important advantage of this in situ irradiation tool is real-time observation of dislocation loop formation, motion and evolution in a single specimen area. An often important characteristic of TEM with in situ ion irradiation is the defect sink effect of free surfaces in a thin foil specimen. Specimens observed under TEM are thin foils with a typical thickness of ∼100 nm. The surfaces of a TEM thin foil can act as effective sinks for point defects of interstitials and vacancies and small mobile dislocation loops, and thus significantly change defect diffusion kinetics and distribution profiles at sufficiently high temperatures. The surfaces of thin foil specimens are traditionally viewed as the limitation or complications of TEM with in situ ion irradiation experiments. Our recent work has successfully demonstrated that surfaces of thin films provide unique opportunities for the study of defect kinetics in support of development of a physical model [10]. In this study, in situ ion irradiation experiments of molybdenum were performed at Argonne's IVEM-Tandem Facility. The experiments took advantage of thin film specimens, and used the thickness of a thin film as an important variable in describing the depth distribution of dislocation loops by both plane-view TEM images and three-dimensional diffraction contrast electron tomography. An MD informed cluster dynamic model explicitly simulates the surface effect in ion-irradiated thin films as infinite sinks for defect absorption, such that the boundary conditions at the surface set the concentrations of defect clusters to zero, as illustrated in our earlier work [8]. The model calculations were made for the irradiation conditions matched exactly with the in situ TEM ion irradiation experiments. Experimental data were compared in detail with computer modeling results and used to refine model parameters until a reasonable agreement of dislocation loop densities and sizes was achieved. The additional spatial dimension (foil thickness) allowed rigorous testing of defect reaction kinetics under irradiation.
The development of defect contrast in TEM under the diffraction conditions employed (weak-beam dark-field, or bright field kinematic) is most consistent with the defect structure of a dislocation loop, even down to the smallest resolved at 1.5 nm. Defect mobility infers a dislocation loop structure, and the use of “cluster defect” is common in the modeling literature. Based on the irradiation temperature of 80 °C (below stage III, vacancy migration) and the MD cascade calculations, it is likely the cluster defects or dislocation loops are interstitial in nature.
This paper presents the prediction of neutron damage in Mo bulk specimens using the experimentally-validated damage model of ion-irradiated thin films, adjusted for neutron irradiation conditions in bulk material, and compared with the neutron irradiation data of the identical material. A number of critical issues were considered in correlating damage between in situ ion irradiation of thin foils and neutron irradiation of bulk specimen, including primary recoil energy spectra, calculation of dpa values, determination of volume number density of dislocation loops, and effects of dose rates. These critical factors were treated carefully both in the experiments and computer simulations. This study demonstrates a promising direction in understanding and predicting neutron damage in bulk with in situ ion irradiation of thin films closely coupled with computer modeling.
