Concept mapping, a way of representing knowledge as a set of concepts and the relationships between the concepts in graphical formats (Novak & Musonda, 1991; Cañas, Reiska, & Möllits, 2017), has been widely used as a teaching and learning strategy. Concept mapping supports the understanding and communication of complex ideas and enables effective cognitive processes by organizing pieces of knowledge into a schematic structure. Concept mapping is supported by Ausubel's (1963) theory of meaningful learning, which claims that meaningful learning occurs when learners deliberately seek to relate and assimilating new concepts with prior knowledge into a systematic structure.
Concept maps have been increasingly used in educational practice, where teachers present them to facilitate learning, learners create them to facilitate and demonstrate their understanding of complex issues, and teachers use them again to assess students' understanding. Nesbit and Adesope (2006) meta-analysis of the literature reported the effects of concept mapping in fostering in-depth understanding, knowledge construction, and higher-order thinking by enabling learners to construct communicate their understanding and manage cognitive processes. In particular, concept mapping activities were found to be effective in improving knowledge retention with effect sizes varying from small to large depending on how concept maps were used, the type of comparison treatment (such as reading text, writing summaries, participating in discussions), and learners’ prior knowledge or verbal ability.
Concept mapping is mainly used to support conceptual learning. Its effects on learning in problem-solving contexts was investigated only in a few studies. Engelmann and Hesse (2010) reported that sharing individual concept maps within group members improved collaborative problem-solving performance. Gijlers and de Jong (2013) found that students who constructed concept maps performed better on knowledge tests in a simulation-based inquiry learning program. Hwang, Kuo, Chen, and Ho (2014) found that integrating concept mapping into problem-solving-based learning may improve students’ problem-solving performance and subject knowledge. However, concept mapping alone is inadequate in supporting complex problem-solving tasks, particularly in eliciting and representing the process of applying knowledge to practice (Wang et al., 2017, Stoyanov and Kommers, 2008). Learning in problem-solving contexts often involves a complex cognitive process such as searching for problem information in multiple aspects, integration of problem information and domain knowledge, and reasoning with intertwined elements. The complex and tacit nature of such processes place high cognitive demand for novices, making them unable to accomplish the task and achieve desired learning outcomes (Kirschner et al., 2006, Patel et al., 2001, Zeineddin and Abd-El-Khalick, 2010). The literature has discussed the importance of scaffolding or guiding students through the complex process and helping them to become accomplished problem-solvers (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007, Kim and Hannafin, 2010).
Recent research has highlighted the importance of making thinking visible in complex problem or task situations to foster deeper learning (Wang, Derry, & Ge, 2017; Wang, Kirschner, & Bridges, 2016). Meanwhile, computer-based cognitive mapping approaches have been increasingly promoted to facilitate thinking in complex situations. By representing cognitive structures and processes in visual formats, cognitive mapping approaches may amplify, extend, and enhance human cognitive functions and engage learners as they represent, manipulate, and reflect on what they know (Cox, 1999, Jonassen, 2005). Among various cognitive representations, concept mapping has been widely employed and shown its advantages in enhancing conceptual learning. There is however, inadequate knowledge of how the complex cognitive processes in problem-solving contexts can be externalized and facilitated in a way that leads to improved performance and learning outcomes.
This study examined the effects of a computer-based cognitive-mapping approach that extends traditional concept mapping by allowing learners to capture the essence of problem-solving experience in a visual format. Medical education was selected as the domain for the study, as problem-solving experience is regarded as crucial to learning and expertise development in this field. Students used the computer-based cognitive-mapping approach to elicit complex thinking and actions when working with simulated clinical diagnostic problems in a computer-based learning environment.
1.1. Problem-solving performanceIn externalizing the complex problem-solving process for effective learning and practice, it is important to focus on the essential aspects of problem-solving performance. Research on problem solving and expert-novice difference reveals that problem-solving performance is mainly influenced by two factors: problem-solving strategy and subject-matter knowledge, in addition to self-regulation or metacognitive ability (Bransford et al., 1999, Mayer and Wittrock, 1996, Patel et al., 2001, van de Wiel, 2017).The first factor “problem-solving strategy” concerns the cognitive process of applying subject matter-knowledge to solve a problem by using relevant methods. Among various problem-solving strategies, the hypothesis-driven method is most widely used to solve a problem by collecting relevant data, generating hypotheses, and using data to test hypotheses. In other words, the cognitive process of solving a problem in most situations consists of three key elements: (1) exploring problem information in multiple aspects which can be associated with problem representation, (2) generating solutions or hypotheses to solve or explain the problem, and (3) reasoning with intertwined variables/elements to analyze the problem and justify or reject solutions, in addition to follow-up activities such as evaluation of the solutions and reflection on the performance (Ge and Land, 2003, Jonassen, 1997, Kim and Hannafin, 2010).The second factor “subject-matter knowledge” concerns domain-specific concepts or principles related to a problem or task to be solved. Research shows that experts' ability to solve problems heavily depends on their well-organized knowledge reflecting an in-depth understanding of the subject, while novices usually lack sufficient or systematic knowledge (Bransford et al., 1999). In addition to the acquisition of specific concepts and principles, it is even more important to organize knowledge into a systematic structure for meaningful understanding and flexible application as well as assimilate new ideas from practice to extend prior knowledge (Ausubel, 1963). In other words, the organization or construction of knowledge into systematic structures is crucial to learning in problem-solving contexts. The cognitive process of knowledge construction consists of two elements: (1) the acquisition of related concepts and (2) the connection of concepts based on their relationships. Organizing knowledge into a systematic structure is also supported by Mayer's (1996) Select, Organize, and Integrate (SOI) model, which describes the cognitive process of constructing knowledge by selecting relevant information, organizing information into a coherent representation, and integrating information with prior knowledge.Based on the above discussion, the process of solving a problem in most situations involves the (1) capture of problem information, (2) generation of hypotheses, and (3) justifications of hypotheses, which reflects the most widely hypothesis-driven method for problem solving. In addition to the general method, one's problem-solving performance is heavily influenced by his/her subject knowledge, in particular knowledge-construction performance, which mainly involves the (4) acquisition of related concepts and (5) connection of concepts based on their relationships. Putting together, the five elements are crucial to problem-solving performance.The above-mentioned elements are aligned with formative assessment of learning in problem-solving contexts. In addition to traditional knowledge tests, performance-based assessment (e.g., case-based examination and interaction with simulated problems) has been increasingly promoted in learning with problems (Kreiter & Bergus, 2009). These instruments focus on formative assessment of learners’ problem-solving performance in multiple aspects such as collection of important information for analysis, the integration of problem information and subject knowledge in the reasoning process, coherent argument, and generation of plausible hypotheses. Moreover, the assessment of subject-matter knowledge acquired in problem-based contexts concerns not only specific concepts or principles, but also the organization of knowledge into a systematic structure (Gijbels, Dochy, van den Bossche, & Segers, 2005).
1.2. Representation of complex ideasExternalizing problem-solving experience requires the use of language or other forms of representation for effective communication of complex ideas. Related work can be referred to thinking-aloud scripts that allow people to explain their thinking and actions when they work with tasks (Ericsson and Simon, 1980, Kuusela and Paul, 2000) or learning journals that uses narrative as the natural framework for representing the world of action in a variety of forms (McDrury and Alterio, 2003, Schön, 1988). The literature shows that verbal text alone is limited in representing the understanding of complex issues, and a diagram is sometimes worth a thousand words (Larkin & Simon, 1987). Graphical formats and visual representations, if used appropriately, can reduce people's cognitive load by meaningful representation of complex ideas (e.g., grouping together relevant information, representing information verbally and spatially, and reduce ambiguous expression) and by virtue of the brain's capacity to process visual images rapidly (Scaife & Rogers, 1996).Computer-based cognitive mapping approaches have been increasingly recommended to represent complex ideas in graphical formats and visual representations to support learning and cognition in complex situations (Jonassen, 2005, Kirschner and Wopereis, 2013, Shute et al., 2009, Spector and Anderson, 2000). They can be referred to as a variety of applications such as concept maps, causal maps (Slof, Erkens, Kirschner, Janssen, & Jaspers, 2012), evidence maps (Suthers et al., 2008, Toth et al., 2002), and integrated cognitive maps representing the problem-solving process and the underlying knowledge (Chen, Wang, Dede, & Grotzer, 2017; Wang, Wu, Kinshuk, Chen, & Spector, 2013).Cognitive mapping approaches can foster high-order thinking and meaningful learning by externalizing complex cognitive structures and processes (Cox, 1999, Jonassen, 2005). They have a high potential to improve students’ subject-matter knowledge by representing complex ideas for effective communication and in-depth thinking, as well by connecting separate pieces of knowledge into coherent structures for meaningful understanding and flexible application (Novak & Musonda, 1991). As mentioned, the meta-analysis of the literature has shown that concept mapping is more effective than traditional learning activities in improving knowledge retention (Nesbit and Adesope, 2006).Meanwhile, external representations of complex cognitive processes may influence students' motivational experience. Motivation refers to the psychological characteristics that drive students to persist in working toward their learning goals, which have been shown to be significantly related to learning achievements (Pekrun, Goetz, Frenzel, Barchfeld, & Perry, 2011). Motivation mainly involves beliefs and attitudes such as interest, value, confidence, self-efficacy, enjoyment, and satisfaction (Pekrun et al., 2011, Ryan and Deci, 2000). Of these, confidence appears to be particularly salient to learning because it influences the degree to which learners engage and persevere when facing challenging tasks (Jones & Issroff, 2005). Also, the anxiety experienced by learners in the learning process may influence their motivation to learn. If a learning task is too complex, students may feel frustrated, which in turn increases their anxiety and reduces their motivation (Schutz & DeCuir, 2002). Cognitive mapping approaches were found to be able to increase students' motivation to learn (Bahr and Dansereau, 2001, Sung and Hwang, 2013) and lower learners’ anxiety (Czerniak & Haney, 1998).As mentioned, concept mapping has been mainly employed in conceptual learning contexts, and there are only a few studies reporting its effects in inquiry or problem-solving contexts (Engelmann and Hesse, 2010, Gijlers and de Jong, 2013, Hwang et al., 2014). While concept maps can support problem solving by helping students to organize important concepts related to a problem (Hwang et al., 2014), concept mapping alone is limited in eliciting and representing the complicated process of applying knowledge to solve a problem. Learners' construction of external representations related to a problem and its solution has received increased attention. For example, causal maps representing the relationship of cause and effect (Slof et al., 2012), evidence maps linking evidence with claims or hypotheses (Suthers et al., 2008, Toth et al., 2002), and integrated cognitive maps connecting the problem-solving and knowledge-construction processes (Wu, Wang, Grotzer, Liu, & Johnson, 2016) have shown their promising effects in improving knowledge and performance in problem-solving contexts. Moreover, causal loop diagrams were used to represent one's understanding of problems in a complex dynamic system (Spector, Christensen, Sioutine, & McCormakc, 2001). More research is needed to explore how concept mapping can be extended for example by the inclusion of heuristics and techniques (Stoyanov & Kommers, 2008) to make it more effective in supporting problem-solving.
1.3. The present studyThe present study proposed a computer-based cognitive-mapping approach that extends traditional concept mapping by allowing learners to capture the essence of problem-solving experience in a visual format. The approach enables learners to visualize a set of key elements of cognition in problem-solving contexts: namely critical information, generated hypotheses, justifications of the hypotheses, identified concepts, and relationships between the concepts. The first three elements reflect the problem-solving performance and the latter two reflect the knowledge-construction performance. By eliciting a set of key cognitive elements of problem-solving experience and representing them in a computer-based cognitive map, this approach aims to foster deeper learning in problem-solving contexts via making complex cognitive processes accessible for effective thinking and practice.The implementation of the proposed approach has been investigated in a pilot study, where a cognitive-mapping tool was developed and used by students for initial evaluation (Wang, Wu, Kinshuk, & Spector, 2013; Wu & Wang, 2012). The preliminary results showed that students found the computer-based cognitive-mapping tool useful and innovative. After using the tool for a four week's study, students made a moderate pre-post improvement in their problem-solving and knowledge-construction performances and in subject knowledge tests.Built on the pilot study, this study aims to further examine the effects of the cognitive-mapping approach by comparing it to a note-taking approach. By representing ideas both verbally and pictorially, the cognitive mapping approach has a higher potential to foster effective thinking and practice in problem-solving contexts than the note-taking approach that represents ideas in verbal-text only. To examine the difference in the effects of the two approaches, a control group design was adopted in this study. The experimental group used the cognitive-mapping approach, while the control group used the note-taking approach, to capture the complex process of working with simulated clinical diagnostic problems in a computer-based learning environment. Students in both groups employed the same structure (i.e., the five key elements) to capture the essence of problem-solving experience. The study aimed to answer the following research questions (RQs).•RQ1: Will learners using the cognitive-mapping approach and those using the note-taking approach differ in problem-solving performance? If so, how do they differ?•RQ2: Is there a difference in subject-matter knowledge of learners using the cognitive-mapping approach as compared to those using the note-taking approach? If so, what's the difference?•RQ3: Is there a difference in intrinsic motivation of learners using the cognitive-mapping approach as compared to those using the note-taking approach? If so, what's the difference?
