1.1. Research objectivesSocial media is a widely spread phenomenon that has taken a large part of our lives. One of the major uses of social media is self-presentation (Kim, Kim, & Nam, 2010). Users can tweet and/or retweet on Twitter, build and manage friendships on Facebook, and/or post photos with hashtags on Instagram; each of these different services with different functions has its own strength in how users can share information about themselves.As of 2018, Instagram is one of the social media services that have grown rapidly. It is a photo-centric social media which is easy to use and has a convenient photo modification function. Instagram is suitable for sharing information about what users see and how they want to be seen thanks to the diffusion of smart phones and improved camera performance. Accordingly, there has been considerable research on Instagram and its users despite its relatively short history (Döring, Reif and Poeschl, 2016, Fatanti and Suyadnya, 2015, Geurin-Eagleman and Burch, 2015, Latiff and Safiee, 2015, Moreno, Ton, Selkie and Evans, 2016, Sheldon and Bryant, 2016).Since social media posts including Instagram photos can be regarded as a product of self-presentation (Kim et al., 2010), it is proper to consider them as the reflection of users’ characteristics. Many studies have investigated this reflection. Gosling, Augustine, Vazire, Holtzman, and Gaddis (2011) suggested the connections between personality and Facebook-related behaviors including the extraverts’ higher frequency of Facebook usage. Seidman (2013) also reported the link between Facebook users’ higher extraversion and more frequent use of Facebook. This leads extraverts to post status and photo updates more often than introverts (Lee, Ahn, & Kim, 2014). Chen and Marcus (2012) found that Facebook users with higher extraversion disclosed more honest information about themselves. Winter et al. (2014) got similar results: Facebook users’ extraversion was associated with the number of status updates and the depth of self-disclosure. Furthermore, Ferwerda, Schedl, and Tkalcic (2016a) suggested that Facebook users’ personalities can be predicted by examining whether particular sections are disclosed in their profile. Other studies have delved further into Social Network Services (SNS) posts in detail. Sorokowska et al. (2016) paid attention to selfies (self-taken photos) and found that extraversion predicted the frequency of selfie posting on SNS. Kern et al. (2014) showed that Facebook users’ personalities were revealed through not only behavior but also word choice and linguistic styles. Concerning photo content, Liu, Preotiuc-Pietro, Samani, Moghaddam, and Ungar (2016) demonstrated that more positive emotions were displayed in agreeable and conscientious users’ profile photos on Twitter, while users with the higher level of openness selected more aesthetic photos for their profiles.Although existing studies have provided much knowledge about the relationship between user characteristics and SNS content, some limitations still remain. First of all, the majority of relevant studies primarily examined text content, less so photo/image content. While some studies analyzed photos or non-text posts (Eftekhar, Fullwood and Morris, 2014, Ferwerda, Schedl and Tkalcic, 2016b, Liu et al., 2016, Sorokowska et al., 2016), many more pieces of literature analyzed social media texts such as tweets and Facebook posts. Furthermore, existing studies focusing on photos were often limited to certain kinds of photos such as profile photos (Back et al., 2010, Liu et al., 2016, Quercia, Kosinski, Stillwell and Crowcroft, 2011) or selfies (Ghaznavi and Taylor, 2015, Ridgway and Clayton, 2016). Finally, the way many previous studies have analyzed photo data was confined mainly to content analysis by human coders. This limitation became a barrier not only in analyzing a large number of photos but also in examining the low-level features that come from information contained in pixels which are the principal element of digital photos.In line with the literature about the relationship between SNS user characteristics and the content, this study tries to overcome these limitations, especially the limitations of human judgements in terms of quantity and non-semantic (low-level) features. This study uses photo content on Instagram, specifically analyzing all photos rather than just profiles or selfies, uploaded by a given user and investigates how user characteristics are reflected in their photos. It employs computer vision techniques as an alternative to content analysis by human coding. Computer vision is a branch of computer science; its goal is to extract useful information from visual contents such as photos and movies (Prince, 2012). Many computer vision techniques achieve their goals by performing calculations using basic information contained in pixels. Their applications range from basic works such as determining the major and minor colors in a photo to advanced works such as detecting human faces in a photo. Employing computer vision techniques required professional skills by the mid-2010s, but as of 2018, many free, open-source libraries and online services have appeared and lowered this barrier.This research aims to explore how Instagram user characteristics and photo features are associated. For user characteristics, the Big Five personality traits were utilized. These traits have been widely used in previous studies about SNS use, which are briefly reviewed below. Gender, which has been also widely adopted for researching SNS use, was utilized as a user characteristic as well. For features of a given photo, the content category was determined, the number of faces on the photo was counted, and the emotion on each face was identified. For the pixel-level features of a given photo, RGB (red-green-blue) color, saturation and value (i.e., brightness), affections based on PAD model, and peak number in hue histogram were all calculated. In addition to their associations, it was also explored whether user characteristics could be predicted by photo features.
1.2. Literature on personality and social media contentThe Big Five personality model (a.k.a. Five Factor Model of Personality; Digman, 1990, McCrae and John, 1992) has been employed for the analysis of social media users (Al-Samarraie, Eldenfria and Dawoud, 2017, Celli, Ghosh, Alam and Riccardi, 2016, Eftekhar, Fullwood and Morris, 2014, Ross et al., 2009). It states that the human personality consists of five traits—extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, neuroticism, and openness— and represents personality by the degree of each trait.The model has been widely adopted to investigate online human behavior. Past studies focused on the differences in social media content according to user personality. Winter et al. (2014) revealed that the users with a high level of extraversion updated their status more frequently and with more detail than others. Kern et al. (2014) investigated the difference in word usage on Facebook by the level of each trait. For instance, high neuroticism was related to the usage of negative words such as depression, lonely, and kill. High extraversion was reported to be associated with the usages of action-related words such as party. Mairesse, Walker, Mehl, and Moore (2007) also found a relationship between personality traits and text features extracted by LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count) software. In a similar vein, Celli (2012) showed that not only the topics but also the words used in posts were associated with the personality traits.Liu et al. (2016) explored how Twitter profile photos differed by personality. Highly agreeable and conscientious users displayed more positive emotions in their profile photos and users with high openness posted more aesthetic profile photos than others. Sorokowska et al. (2016) investigated the relationship between the level of extraversion and the frequency of selfie posting. Females posted more selfies than males did. Extraversion was also positively related to the frequency of selfie posting. Eftekhar et al. (2014) analyzed Facebook photos and showed that features like the number of photos and the number of albums were associated with personality traits. They reported that extraversion and neuroticism were positively associated with the number of photos uploaded.These studies indicate that the personality of social media users is related to the features of posts. With the understanding of existing studies, the present research investigates the relationship between user characteristics (including the Big Five traits) and the features of photos posted by the users.
1.3. Literature on gender and content of social media photosSince photos on social media have been the major form of self-presentation that reveals user personality, orientation, and/or interests (Kim et al., 2010), the focus of previous studies has been placed on grasping the content of photos using human coding. In those studies, content analysis was one of the major methodologies used, especially for selfies and profile photos.Hum et al. (2011) examined how Facebook profile photos differed by users’ genders. They reported that, while users mainly posted photos with artificial poses and physical activities for their profiles, gender did not make a significant difference in the content and amount of photos posted. Geurin-Eagleman and Burch (2015) analyzed the content of Instagram photos of male and female sports players who participated in Olympic games. According to them, female athletes tended to post selfies and photos in private settings more than male athletes did. Döring et al. (2016) conducted content analysis of 500 selfies on Instagram. Their aim was to investigate how strong the gender stereotype was in the selfies posted on Instagram and printed in magazines. Thus, the variables they used were gender-related; feminine touch, lying posture, withdrawing gaze, sparse clothing, kissing pout, muscle presentation, and faceless portrayal (Döring et al., 2016, p. 955). They found that selfies of males and females on Instagram were more gender-stereotypical than photos in magazine advertisements.Besides these profile and selfies studies, Ghaznavi and Tayler (2015) observed the phenomenon on photos idealizing thin body shape spreading on social media. They analyzed the content of photos hashtagged with #thinspiration in terms of the purpose of the photos (to encourage weight loss or to arouse disgust towards overweight bodies), the content of photos (comparison before and after losing weight, description of exercising, etc.), the body part described, the degree of exposure, and the degree of sexual appeal. They reported that #thinspiration hashtagged photos were ``sexually suggestive and objectifying with a focus on ultrathin bony and scantily-clad women (p.54).”Past studies have suggested that gender-related issues have been the central concern in analyzing social media photos. Therefore, the present research employs gender as a user variable; it is hypothesized that the content and pixel photo features would be different according to gender.
1.4. Literature on pixel features of photosThe pixel features of photos can be used for photo data analysis. There are two kinds of features; the high-level features that are related to the content of a photo (e.g., facial expressions, emotions revealed) and the low-level features that are related to the information in pixels (e.g., brightness or colors of the pixels). Every pixel has one or three elements (numbers) and represents a color by the combination of them. Pixels in grayscale photos have one element whose value ranges from 0 to 255, and pixels in color photos have three elements according to the way of color representation (e.g. RGB or HSV). If represented by RGB format, each of three elements (red, green, and blue) has a value in a range of 0 to 255.1Color has been one of the major interests of color psychology studies. Extant studies have assumed that the color of paintings or photos would be deeply linked to human mind, and they have investigated the way that color and mind influence each other (Liu et al., 2016, Wexner, 1954). The work of He, Qi, and Zaretzki (2014) began with the assumption that a particular color or colors would evoke a particular kind of emotion. They demonstrated that, if a particular emotion is desired, a photo's colors can be modified so that the photo is consistent with the desired emotion. Chung and Chung (2014) indicated that such color-emotion links can be used for emotion-based image indexing. In other words, the emotion expressed in photos can be indexed based on the colors extracted. In addition, the color psychological approach has been employed to explore the relationship between the colors and the features of characters and/or story telling in a video (Han and Kim, 2014, Lim and Youn, 2009). It is also used to heal the psychological wounds of children who are unskilled in expressing their exact emotions through verbal expression (An and Shin, 2012, Lee and Lee, 2007).Other than color, value (i.e., brightness) and saturation have been examined in regards to their relationships with social media user characteristics. Skowron, Tkalcic, Ferwerda, and Schedl (2016) investigated how value and saturation, along with other low-level features, of Instagram photos were related to user personality. They reported that a user's Instagram and Twitter posts, if analyzed together, could contribute to predict one or more personality traits. Also, Ferwerda et al. (2016b) explored how the mean and variance of value and saturation of Instagram photos were related to user personality. They found that image traits (value), personality traits, and emotion revealed were related in part.Meanwhile, several studies have used the value and saturation of photos to calculate emotional salience. Valdez and Mehrabian (1994) suggested that each value of the PAD (pleasure, arousal, dominance) model, which has been widely used for describing affection, can be obtained through a formula using the value and saturation of a photo (see Method section for details). This formula has been used in many studies (Ferwerda, Schedl and Tkalcic, 2016b, Hanjalić, 2006, Machajdik and Hanbury, 2010).Composition of pixels has been used to analyze photos in terms of its relationships to the human mind. Cho (2013) showed that the color histogram can be employed for psychological analysis; major and minor colors extracted from the color histogram of a photo can reveal the status of the human mind. Also, Mao, Chen, and Muta (2003) suggested that the affective properties of a photo can be extracted from the HSV histogram; human affective reaction can be categorized based on the structural property of the HSV histogram. Further, the number of peaks in the hue histogram of a photo was reported to be related to the affection that one might feel when one looks at the photo (Ke, Tang and Jing, 2006, Mao, Chen and Muta, 2003); a photo with a small number of peaks in its hue histogram might be viewed as monotonous/repetitive, while a photo with many peaks might be viewed as disorganized/varied.In line with these previous studies, this research examines the low-level features of Instagram photos. Some features are extracted from the pixel level and their relationships with user characteristics are explored.
