Tolerance in mechanical product development is defined as the permissible variation limit of the dimensions and geometric parameters of parts. It is the concrete reflection of product precision, the outcome of the coordination of product requirements and development costs, and an important technical indicator in the processes of product design, manufacturing, verification, assembly, and testing. Tolerance design (or tolerancing) is the design of the dimensions and tolerances of parts in the process of product development. Its purpose is to develop products which can satisfy functional and assembly requirements with minimum development costs [1], [2]. Since the advent of the theory of geometric dimensioning and tolerancing (GD&T), tolerance design has been broken down into three major parts that of tolerance specification, that of tolerance allocation, and that of tolerance analysis, where:

•Tolerance specification mainly considers identifying toleranced features from each part of a product, establishing a datum reference frame for each part, selecting tolerance types for each toleranced feature, and using tolerance principles under the prerequisite of satisfying the functional and assembly requirements of the product.•Tolerance allocation focuses on determining the values of all selected tolerance types through refining the empirical values or optimizing the empirical values based on the functional and assembly requirements of the product and specific cost-tolerance functions.•Tolerance analysis put emphasis on evaluating the accumulation of errors that are allowed by the determined tolerance values and comparing such accumulation to the functional and assembly requirements of the product.
So far, semi-automatic or automatic tolerance allocation and analysis have become a reality in a number of computer-aided design (CAD) systems, while tolerance specification is still manually carried out by mechanical designers according to specific tolerancing standards (e.g. ISO 1101 [3] and ASME Y14.5 [4]) in CAD systems [5]. In such situation, the quality of the designed tolerance specification schemes is largely depended on the judgment and experience of the designers. Different designers may opt for different tolerance specification schemes for an identical nominal geometry under the same circumstance. This may not make much difference when designing a simple product. But for a complex product (e.g. automobile, manufacturing machine, airplane), this situation will directly increase the uncertainty in product tolerance design and eventually have a negative effect on the quality of the product [6]. Besides, tolerance specification information is represented as the symbol annotations of CAD models in most of the current CAD systems. Although using such representation form is capable to establish a syntactically correct representation model of tolerance specification information, it cannot represent the semantics of tolerance specification information explicitly [7]. For this reason, tolerance specification information is not really computer-interpretable in most of the current CAD systems, which impedes the implementation of automatic tolerance specification in these systems.
To make tolerance specification information really computer-interpretable in CAD systems and to reduce the uncertainty of product tolerance design, the technologies of ontology and case-based reasoning (CBR) in the area of artificial intelligence are simultaneously introduced to computer-aided tolerance specification and an ontology-supported CBR approach for computer-aided tolerance specification is proposed in this paper. CBR [8], a powerful technology for computer reasoning and problem-solving, is well-known for providing an effective mechanism for solving new problems based on the solutions of similar past problems. It has been formalized with the purposes of computer reasoning and problem solving as a process consisting of four steps: case retrieval, reuse, revision, and retention, where case retrieval is the basis of other three steps [9]. To implement case retrieval, the first thing to do is to represent the cases. The proposed approach uses web ontology language (OWL) ontology [10], which is well-known for having a capability to represent information semantics explicitly and make information computer-interpretable, to represent the past tolerance specification problems and their schemes and considered them as previous cases and to represent each new tolerance specification problem and considered it as a target case. The represented cases have rigorous computer-interpretable semantics because of the mathematical logic-based semantics of OWL [11]. As the benefits of such representations, semantic similarity assessment can be performed on the OWL ontology, which provides an effective mechanism to implement case retrieval [12], [13]. Based on the OWL ontology representations of previous and target cases, an ontology-based similarity measure with high accuracy is then designed to automatically retrieve similar previous cases for a target case. The tolerance specification schemes in some of these similar previous cases may provide auxiliary information in solving the new tolerance specification problem in the target case. By reusing or reusing and revising these schemes, designers can carry out tolerance specification for the new problem more easily.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. An overview of related work is provided in Section 2. The details of the proposed approach are explained in Section 3. Section 4 reports a prototype implementation of the approach, presents an example to illustrate how the approach works, and evaluates the approach through theoretical and experimental comparisons. Section 5 ends the paper with a conclusion.
