In the European Union (EU), the Ecodesign Directive [1] requires product manufacturers to improve the environmental performance of their products by meeting minimum energy efficiency requirements, as well as other environmental requirements such as water consumption, emission levels or minimum durability of certain components. The Energy Labelling Directive [2] is a ‘sister’ directive which complements Ecodesign and enables customers to identify the better-performing products [3], by grading them into one of seven classes on a well-known A-G/green-to-red label [2]: the improvement in products efficiency, year after year, is reflected in an increasing number of products classified in the top classes and in less and less products classified in the lowest ones [4]. The legislative framework, which builds upon the synergic effect of the two aforementioned directives, is of paramount importance for several aspects. First of all, it pushes industry to improve the energy efficiency of products by standing out the most efficient ones, and removes or keeps out the worst-performing ones from the market. Moreover, this framework helps households and companies to reduce their utility bills. In the industrial and service sector, this results in support to competitiveness and innovation. Finally, it ensures that suppliers (typically manufacturers and importers) placing products on the EU market only have to comply with a single EU-wide set of rules and standards, thus further reducing burden and costs on consumers (whereas in the case of different regulations an national level, the supplier should comply with possibly 28 different rules and standards). It is estimated [5] that by 2020 the Ecodesign and the Energy Labelling directives will deliver around 175 Mtoe (i.e. about 2035 TWh) of energy savings per year in primary energy, roughly equivalent to Italy's primary energy consumption in 2010, close to half the EU 20% energy efficiency target by 2020 and about 11% of the expected EU primary energy consumption in 2020. It will also reduce emissions by 320 Mt of CO2-equivalent, i.e. about 25% of the EU green-house reduction target by 2020. Moreover, the average household saves annually on energy bills an amount growing to about €500 by 2020 whilst for industry, service and sale and retail sectors it will result in €55 billion per year of extra revenue. This legislative framework benefits from a broad support from competitive European industries, consumer organisations and environmental NGOs (non-governmental organisation), as the transparent and regular consultation process in establishing implementing measures is largely appreciated. A number of countries in the world have been inspired by the Ecodesign and the Energy Labelling directives [6]. Moreover, this legislative framework is line with the so called ‘new approach’ (policy approach in the European Union according to which the content of legislation is focused on the prescription of the essential requirements, leaving the elaboration of the technical details, such as testing methods, to standards developed by the ESOs (European standardisation organisations [7]). Therefore it is fundamental that a strong cooperation occurs between policy makers in charge of the implementation of the Ecodesign and the Energy Labelling directives and the members of the three ESOs.1
In the domain of information and communication technology (ICT), Ecodesign implementing measures already cover electronic displays [8] and computers [9]. The latter, in particular, represented a first attempt of setting ecodesign requirements on computers and SOHO (small office home office) servers, products traded world-wide and using “universal” software. Its review now offers an opportunity for timely alignment of requisites and coherence with respect to the ongoing work on computer servers (named as servers in the remainder of the text).
A further group of ICT products is currently being investigated as part of the Ecodesign Working Plan 2012–14 [10]: servers and data storage products. The market figures related to these products are expected to continuously increase: trends such as the Internet of Things (objects and people interconnected through telecommunication), the Industry 4.0 (the trend of automation and data exchange in manufacturing technologies) and Cloud Computing (distribution of computational work and data storage on a number of sites connected in the Internet) are growing at a very fast pace [11] and require more and more computing power and storage capacity. Electricity consumption related to data centres in the EU is expected to increase from 52 TWh in 2011 to 70 TWh in 2020 [12], with around 50% of this consumption due to ICT equipment: servers, data storage products and networking equipment. The ongoing activities, the findings so far and the next steps will be described in the detail in the present paper, with a specific focus on the activities aimed to establishing a metric for the energy efficiency of servers. Energy efficiency, and in general environmental impact of ICT products, are addressed at EU level not only by Ecodesign and Labelling, but also by complementary legislative and policy tools at the level of organisations [13]. In the framework of EMAS (eco-management and audit scheme) [14], research activities are being performed, with the aim to develop a sectorial reference document on the best environmental management practices for the telecommunications and ICT services sector; among other products, servers and data storage products are investigated, with regard to the identification of reference values concerning the average server utilisation, the virtualisation level and the features at data centre level [15]. The paper is organised in five sections. After the introduction to the procedural steps for Ecodesign measures and to the preparatory work on servers (both in the remainder of this section), it presents (Section 2) a methodology for deriving a metric for the energy efficiency of servers. Then, the results of this analysis are shown (Section 3). The paper follows with the discussion of the results (Section 4), and finally Section 5 summarises the main findings.
1.1. Procedural steps for Ecodesign measuresThe preparatory work prior to any Ecodesign policy measure is a complex yet interesting activity, entailing technical as well as procedural and legal steps, according to a well-defined procedure. Potential candidate products, for which the feasibility of proposing Ecodesign (and/or Energy Labelling) requirements are to be investigated in detail, are normally listed in the Ecodesign Working Plan, a document prepared by the European Commission every three to five years. Products listed in an Ecodesign Working Plan are first generally analysed in a preparatory study, which provides the necessary information to guide more in depth analyses. Once the conditions for a specific product group are deemed to be met,2 an impact assessment takes place: various policy options are analysed, in particular from the perspective of cost competitiveness and impact on SMEs (small and medium enterprises), of technological development and innovation, of competition, of end-user affordability and of product functionality. During the impact assessment phase, potential draft implementing measures are discussed with stakeholders (EU member states, industrial organizations, ESOs, consumer organizations and environmental NGOs) in the context of a Consultation Forum. Subsequently, consultations with experts internal to the European Commission take place, a notification of an advanced draft is provided to the World Trade Organisation for comments and, finally a Regulatory Committee vote (for Ecodesign) or an Expert meeting (for Energy Labellign) further amends the draft, before a formal adoption by the Commission and a scrutiny by EU Parliament and the Council. The Ecodesign Directive [1], in its article 17, also offers the opportunity to manufacturers to sign voluntary agreements, with the commitment to reduce the energy consumption of their products. When appropriate,3 the Commission formally recognises such agreements and monitors their implementation, and abstains from regulatory measures.Servers, like all ICT products, are characterised by very fast technological progress, when compared to traditional domestic products. As an effect, short redesign cycles are characteristic of these products: this clearly represents a challenge from the regulatory point of view. Approaches to tackle this issue can be found in literature, e.g. the concept of the ‘‘policy action window’’ [16], i.e. the maximum allowable timeframe to develop Ecodesign requirements.Ecodesign Regulations normally stipulate requirements which gradually enter in force following a scheme comprising two to three progressive levels, or ‘tiers’. The first tier is usually between one and three years after publication; the second tier usually applies after 3–5 years. Timing and stringency of each tier take into account the design cycle and the typical life-span of a specific product model, which is crucial to keep the improvement of energy efficiency costs at marginal level. Ecodesign Regulations are typically reviewed within a certain number of years to cope with technology, market or legislative evolution.As it happens in other jurisdictions and for other ICT sectors [17], [18], there is a strong link between regulatory work and standardisation. The effectiveness of the implementation of the Ecodesign Directive strongly relies on appropriate compliance test and measurement standards, to ensure transparency and repeatability.The type of conformity assessment procedure to be applied is related to the risks of products once they are in use; a self-declaration of conformity by the manufacturer is the preferred procedure for low to medium risk products, which is normally the case of those subject to Ecodesign requirements. Suppliers are allowed to self-certify the compliance of their products with regard to relevant requirements, and national market surveillance authorities perform product compliance controls. Where there is a lack of relevant standards for the assessment of parameters for which Ecodesign requirement are set, the European Commission usually issues standardisation mandates for the ESOs. During the period where standards are not available, transitional methods are used instead. The standards developed by the ESOs in the framework of the activities related to a standardisation mandate from the European Commission are denominated ‘harmonised standards’.4 From the above, the importance of the availability of measurements and calculation standards is evident, including conformity assessment control of the requirements laid down in the legislative measures.
1.2. The preparatory work on serversAn Ecodesign preparatory study on servers was concluded on September 2015 [19]; the study also investigated data storage products, not discussed in this paper. Several policy recommendations were formulated, including information requirements, quantitative requirements at hardware level (in particular on the efficiency of internal power supply units), on the product operating conditions (mainly: higher temperature to save on cooling costs), and on product software components and configuration, such as virtualisation. The preparatory study also proposed requirements on product materials efficiency, such as extraction of key-components and of critical raw materials, availability of built-in data deletion tools (while not jeopardizing data privacy) and of firmware updates. The study concluded that, for the time being, it was not possible to outline requirements based on the energy performance at server level, given the lack of a metric for the evaluation of this parameter. It was also concluded that any proposal for an energy label on servers was premature, mainly because of the lack of a well-established metric.Following the conclusions of the preparatory study, a dedicated impact assessment was started [20], due to end in 2017. It aims to identify the best regulatory solution for server products, by assessing different policy options: ‘‘no action5’’, voluntary agreement, Ecodesign requirements at various levels of stringency or other alternative policy tools.6 The options are compared across different impact dimensions (economic, occupational, social and environmental aspects, on top of energy savings) in order to identify the best one [21]. Specifically concerning a potential energy label for servers, the preliminary findings in the context of the impact assessment (the analysis is still ongoing) show that this label would be influenced by the specificities of the server market. More in detail, servers are business-to-business products, and buyers usually have high level of technical knowledge and very peculiar needs [22]. Therefore, in order for the label to be a relevant tool for an informed choice when buying the product, it should be carefully designed in order to provide concise but at the same time relevant and effective information (and this can be a difficult task). There would also be some clear benefits when proposing an energy label for servers, in particular because it could serve as tool to decrease green public procurement evaluation costs, by providing a ready-made, relevant and non-controversial comparison tool.7 In any case, the lack of a metric for the energy efficiency of servers would be the main obstacle for the existence of an energy label for servers.
