Nonpharmacologic interventions that can improve the lives of people with dementia are keenly sought across the world. To date only one nonpharmacologic intervention—group-based cognitive stimulation—has been recommended for dementia by the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. This is based on the work of Spector et al. [1] who demonstrated that cognitive stimulation therapy (CST) brought an improvement in cognitive function and quality of life comparable to existing dementia drugs in a study with 97 people with dementia living in care homes. In their study they reported a 0.9 increase in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, with 50% of participants showing improvement in cognitive function. The success of CST has created a demand for scalable nonpharmacologic approaches targeting cognitive function.
Computer Interactive Reminiscence and Conversation Aid (CIRCA) is an interactive multimedia (photographs, video, and music) application developed to support and promote communication between people with dementia and caregivers [2]. CIRCA was developed to enhance speech production and recall from long-term memory, while minimizing the impact of working memory impairment [3]. It is delivered on a touch screen to avoid the need for a mouse, keyboard, prior experience, or intensive training. In dyads comprising a person with dementia and a caregiver, CIRCA provides the opportunity for people with dementia to make independent choices, lead the conversation, and engage as an equal partner [4]. The validation of CIRCA–British Columbia demonstrated the utility of this approach across cultural and geographic boundaries [5].
Shared CIRCA sessions encourage caregivers to view people with dementia in a new light [6] and increase their feelings of competence in caregiving [7], while improving caregiving relationships [8].
This study set out to test the impact of CIRCA as a group-based activity for people with dementia. As the only current recommended nonpharmacologic intervention for dementia, a key aim was to compare the effectiveness of CIRCA as a group intervention with CST. The design [9] was therefore informed by the Spector et al. [1] study of CST, which used a program of 14 × 45-minute sessions, twice per week for 7 weeks. A subsequent cost-effectiveness review of CST suggested it could be more cost-effective than treatment as usual [10]. In addition to the systematic study of CIRCA as a group intervention, the present study was also designed to compare a new, web-based version, CIRCA-WB, against the existing stand-alone version.
