Nowadays, mobile devices are used to carry out activities that use sensitive personal information that should be accessed only by the legitimate device owner. To protect such information, most of mobile devices support PINs as a way to allow a quick, but weakly secure, user’s authentication mechanism. PINs are both easy to use and time-savings as they require users to remember and digit a very short number sequence, made by four to six digits at most. The key space of these PINs could be still adequate for humans, but not for malware, since they can easily carry out brute force attacks to PIN-based authentication mechanisms, by pretending to be the legitimate user that taps the PIN on the virtual keyboard.
The awareness of this problem has lead some researchers to introduce a new dimension to the authentication taxonomy. This new dimension adopts Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA) as an additional preliminary step to recognize the human user before allowing her to insert the PIN digits. The rationale for this additional security step derives from the observation that PIN-based mechanisms, as well as other mobile authentication approaches (i.e., Unlock patterns), have been devised to perform a human vs. human selection; hence the need to cull automated programs (or bots) before they may be able to perform the actual attack while being confused with human users by the system. Nonetheless, even if the idea to filter out automated attacks before using a traditional authentication mechanism is effectively targeting the actual nature of the threats, the root of the CAPTCHA concept, that is, the Turing test, targets the difference in cognitive capabilities between humans and computers. Therefore, even if the CAPTCHA concept introduces a new class of authentication methods that is orthogonal to all the ones previously defined (i.e., authentication methods capable of performing a human vs. automated system separation), the discerning factor adopted (i.e., a cognitive task) makes CAPTCHAs very often inconvenient and hard to solve even for human subjects. This inconvenience is quickly turning into a lack of usability as the sophistication of programs and the computational power of computers allows them to tackle more and more complex cognitive tasks.
To tackle the open issues related to CAPTCHA, we propose to adopt as the discerning factor telling computers and humans apart not intelligence or cognitive capabilities in general but the physical nature. In the past, computers input from the users was limited to keyboard and mouse, hence the measurement of physical parameters was not convenient; however, the current generation of mobile devices is endowed with a number of sensors capable of capturing several different kinds of physical interaction. For this reason, we argue that it is possible to leverage these sensors to simply tell human and computers apart on the basis of their capability (or inability) to physically interact with the device.
Leveraging smartphones and tablet computers sensors to devise new security mechanisms capable of separating humans from computers is not new; however, in all the past cases, the mechanisms required the users to perform some sort of cognitive task that actually made it an implementation of the traditional Turing test (CAPTCHA). We claim that, in order to tell humans and computers apart, it is possible to leverage the mere physical nature of human subjects without requiring them to tackle a complex cognitive task. Such a test can be defined as a Completely Automated Public Physical test to tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPPCHA). An example implementation of CAPPCHA  [1] requires the user to arrange the mobile device in a specific position for being recognized as a human. The rationale is that malware cannot physically move the device. For this reason, if the sensor that recognizes the position (e.g., the accelerometer) is secured (e.g., it is hosted in a Secure Element (SE)), a malware can neither simulate a fake position for the device, nor it can physically move the device.
We claim that CAPPCHA is able to separate humans from computers while maintaining a high level of usability and guaranteeing resilience to automated attacks. Furthermore, CAPPCHA can be used in a twofold mode: (1) in combination with a PIN authentication scheme to allow only human to access the PIN challenge, or (2) it can be used alone, acting as a standard CAPTCHA (e.g., before posting comments on a blog, voting or sending an email).
To prove the efficacy and ease of use of CAPPCHA, we have devised two practical implementations of a sensor-based CAPPCHA and we have combined them with a simple PIN based authentication. Here, our contribution is the discussion of the feasibility of CAPPCHA and a comparison in terms of performance and usability with Password-based authentication methods and CAPTCHA schemes available in literature. Regarding performance, we compare existing mechanisms with CAPPCHA in terms of test completion times and error rates. In terms of usability, we carry out and discuss an extended study (based on more than 200 actual users) of the CAPPCHA scheme. Our findings show that CAPPCHA is a promising solution as it is extremely easy to understand and use, and it shows a high acceptance rate by the users. Furthermore, it provides very high resilience to automated attacks and it does not introduce cognitive overload on the users.
The paper is structured as follows: in Section  2 we provide an overview of the related work; in Section  3 we describe the CAPPCHA scheme; in Section  4 we provide a security analysis of the proposed scheme against some well-known types of attacks; in Section  5 we describe the experimental procedure, the questionnaire we proposed to the users and we discuss our findings; finally, in Section  6 we draw our conclusions and point out potential directions for future work.
