A smiling curve shown in Fig. 1 which was originally proposed by the founder of Acer-Stan Shih (1992) provides a good way to visualize the value chain in a personal-computer (PC) industry. A graph looks like a “smile” with a vertical axis for added-value (profit margin) and a horizontal axis for the stage in the value chain. It indicates that the upstream (design & patent) and the downstream (marketing & service) contribute higher values to the product than the middle part (manufacturing & fabrication). Based on this concept, ACER adopted a business strategy to recreate itself from an original equipment/design manufacturing (OEM/ODM) company to an original brand company (OBM). On the one hand, ACER invested aggressively in product design, R&D and intellectual patents (the upstream). On the other hand, ACER also allocated its resources on global marketing and services (the downstream) to enhance its branding synergies. Thereafter, the smiling-curve concept has been widely adopted to describe the distribution of value-adding potentials in various industries (Chen, 2004, Shin et al., 2009, Shin et al., 2012, Yu and Shih, 2014). Similar to Michael Porter’s generic strategies (Porter, 1985), cost-leadership, differentiation and focus are typically adopted for a firm to accommodate different business scenarios.Download : Download high-res image (104KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A smiling curve to characterize added value for business functions (Shih, 1992).
To explore the distinct business models existing in a smiling curve, this study illustrates three types of computer companies: industrial PC (IPC – low volume but high varieties), fabrication PC (FPC – high volume but low varieties), and commercial PC (CPC – high volume with medium varieties). Simply speaking, IPC characterizes the ODM sector, FPC resembles the EMS (electronic manufacturing service) sector and CPC belongs to the OBM sector. On average, the overall profit margin for IPC more than 30%, for CPC between 10% and 20% while for FPC only 5%. The overall profit margin of a firm depends on management of product portfolios and the degree of customization (Schoenherr & Swink, 2015) and it is highly related to extra-value in a smiling curve. In fact, FPC’s and CPC’s production process is the “assemble line” (so-called product focused because of building a special product by going through a series of sequential steps) while IPC’s process follows a “manufacturing cell” (by allocating dissimilar machines to cells designed to work on similar products) or a “workcenter” (so-called process focused because of developing a particular facility layout in a way that optimizes the movement of materials).
Referring to Gregg (2016), Fig. 2 gives a quick overview of the PC industries. Shipments of PCs dropped 10.3% in 2015 and it declined by 9.1% in 2013. The significant shrinkage in PC shipments can be due to many reasons, such as lacking killer applications like virtual reality or augmented reality and the emerging popularity of portable smartphones or tablets. In contrast, an estimate of CAGR for the IPC is stably about 7% since 2017. Demand for the IPC largely comes from the underlying growth in industrial robots, material-handling equipment, medical instruments, transportation carriers, infrastructure and gaming machines (gambling machines). The IPC is quite different from the CPC in many respects (i.e. reliability, compatibility, expansion options and the degree of customization). IPC is primarily designed in a distributed processing environment for process control and data acquisition. Moreover, it needs to be normally operated and perform well in a tough environment (extreme temperature, high pressure, dust, humidity, etc.). Hence, IPC’s installed components should be able to withstand tough operating conditions.Download : Download high-res image (128KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Commercial PC’s shipments and CAGR (Compound Annual Growth Rate) (Gregg, 2016).
In brief, a couple of market trends in the PC industries have been observed: (1) shifting from mass production to mass customization, (2) shifting from supply push to demand pull and (3) shifting from big volume to high value. Although a smiling curve has been viewed as a powerful metrics to visualize a firm’s corporate strategy along the value chain, it was rarely quantified and measured in practice. To survive in an intensively competitive environment, PC companies need to rapidly identify key performance indicators (KPIs) for conducting efficient performance measurement and effective performance management (Rodriguez-Rodriguez et al., 2009, Wang, 2015, Wang, 2016).
To survive in a dynamically changing business environment, a firm should not only think about effective product strategies but also learn efficient ways to keep pace with paradigm shift, as indicated in Fig. 3 (Jacobs and Chase, 2014, Mortenson et al., 2015). Over the past four decades, the main paradigms in POM (production and operations management) have been dramatically changing: starting from JIT (just in time) production, the philosophy of TQM (total quality management), operational ERP (enterprise resource planning), collaborative SCM (supply chain management), mobile e-commerce, service science & engineering and now shifting to business analytics. To respond to the paradigm shift in POM, this paper presents a data-driven framework to assist computer companies in accomplishing the following goals:•Significant predictors (key performance indicators) are systematically identified with regard to various business models (i.e. ODM, EMS and OBM),•The intricate dependences among the KPIs are effectively captured for developing strategic maps and conducting stochastic simulation,•The temporal causalities between leading predictors and lagging outcomes are efficiently incorporated into the process of performance forecasting.Download : Download high-res image (276KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. A paradigm shift in production & operations management (Jacobs and Chase, 2014).
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews business intelligence and analytics. Section 3 presents the proposed framework. Experimental results are demonstrated in Section 4. Discussions are described in Section 5. Conclusions and future studies are shown in Section 6.
