1.1. Objective and rationaleConsider a learning situation in which a sixth-grade student reads an expository text such as shown in Fig. 1 and then takes a test on the material. Previous research shows that students often take a linear approach to reading expository text, in which they read the words in order without much effort to mentally organize the material and integrate it with their prior knowledge (Fiorella & Mayer, 2015). When students take a linear reading approach their eye movements do not show many transitions between paragraphs and their posttest scores of reading comprehension are not as high as they could be (Ponce & Mayer, 2014a, 2014b). Given the renewed emphasis on helping students learn to make sense of expository text (Porter, McMaken, Hwang, & Yang, 2011), how can we prime students to take a generative approach to reading expository text as reflected in more eye movement transitions between paragraphs and higher posttest scores?Download : Download high-res image (445KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The Changos and Rapa-nui passage in the read-only condition.In the present study, we explore the value-added of asking students to engage in various learning strategies during reading an onscreen text—electronically highlighting parts of an onscreen text with a yellow background (highlighting), typing notes into a text box (notetaking), filling in an interactive graphic organizer (graphic organizer), or using two of these learning strategies (highlighting and notetaking or highlighting and graphic organizers). Previous studies using an eye-tracking methodology have explored the effects on learning outcomes and observed eye movement patterns fostered by the use of single learning strategies such as highlighting text, notetaking, and filling in graphic organizers while reading texts (Ponce & Mayer, 2014a, 2014b). Our primary goals in this study are to determine whether adding one or two learning strategies improves learning processes and outcomes as compared to reading only, and to determine whether using two learning strategies can be more effective than using one.
1.2. Research on highlighting, notetaking and graphic organizersA learning strategy can be defined as an intentional activity carried out by a learner during learning with the intention of improving the learning outcome. Some well-known learning strategies for learning from text include taking notes, highlighting important ideas in the text, or filling in a graphic organizer during reading a text (Dole, Nokes, & Drits, 2009; Dunlosky, Rawson, Marsh, Nathan, & Willingham, 2013; Fiorella & Mayer, 2015; Miyatsu, Nguyen, & McDaniel, 2018; Ponce & Mayer, 2014b). These learning strategies were selected for the present study because they are commonly used and vary in the degree to which they are intended to foster generative processing, with graphic organizers seen as most likely to promote generative processing (Fiorella & Mayer, 2015).Highlighting is a basic learning strategy in which readers mark those elements in the text (e.g., words, phrases, or sentences) that they consider important (Ponce, Mayer, Figueroa, & López, 2018). It helps to direct attention to important information and facilitates storing the highlighted information in working memory for further processing (Weinstein & Mayer, 1986). The most consistent finding with highlighting is that it mainly improves memory or recall of information, which leads to superficial learning (Dunlosky et al., 2013). In a study conducted by Hartley, Bartlett, & Branthwaite, 1980, a group of sixth graders was asked to study a text that was already highlighted and another group was asked to study the same text but without highlighting (i.e., plain text). They found that the group that read the highlighted text outperformed the plain text group on immediate and delayed cloze tests, indicating that highlighting improves rote memory for the highlighted material. Similarly, a study conducted by Ponce and Mayer (2014b) found that when college students were asked to highlight online text or were provided with highlighted text on the screen they scored significantly higher on a memory test on the highlighted material but not on a comprehension test compared with a group that only read the text.Notetaking is a learning technique extensively used by students either during lectures or when studying texts. It is intended to direct the reader's attention to relevant information, resulting in encoding it in working memory and storing it in long term memory (Kiewra, 1985; Reimer, Brimhall, Cao, & O’Reilly, 2009; Weinstein & Mayer, 1986). The drawback with notetaking is that learners may pay attention to irrelevant aspects of the learning material, take incomplete notes, or create verbatim records from lectures or textbooks. The most consistent finding is that notetaking tends to improve memory or recall of information, and that only in special circumstances (e.g., when training is provided) notetaking will improve comprehension of the learning material (Kiewra, 1985; Peper & Mayer, 1978). A study conducted by Ponce and Mayer (2014a) found that when college students were asked, without previous training, to take notes on the computer from an onscreen text they scored significantly higher on a memory test but not on a comprehension test compared with a group that only read the text.Graphic organizers involve creating a spatial arrangement of verbal material (such as a matrix), and thereby represent a type of generative learning strategy that Fiorella and Mayer (2015) refer to as mapping. Creating graphic organizers involves not only selecting relevant verbal material but also organizing it into a coherent spatial structure (Beyer, 1997). Graphic organizers can be associated with the development of cognitive skills, such as being able to categorize elements, make comparisons, identify sequences or define concepts (Kauffman & Kiewra, 2010; Ponce, López, & Mayer, 2012). If such schemas are understood as a general mechanism, then they will be stored in long-term memory. For example, if learners are confronted with a text that compares two or more elements (as shown in Fig. 1) then they can mentally use a matrix for selecting information (e.g., the elements being compared), organizing the information (e.g., using attributes of comparison), and integrating it with previous knowledge (e.g., assess whether the values of the attributes are similar or different). Studies have shown that graphic organizers tied to specific rhetorical structures (e.g., compare-and-contrast, sequence, cause-and-effect) improve memory and comprehension of the learning material (Kauffman & Kiewra, 2010; Ponce, Mayer, & Lopez, 2013; Robinson & Kiewra, 1995).
1.3. Research on eye movement during readingIn research on eye movement during reading, it is useful to distinguish between fixations, which are defined as the eye coming to rest on part of the text (e.g., a word or part of it), and saccades, which correspond to rapid movements of the eye from one fixation point to another. Fixation duration and direction of saccades are influenced by word and sentence difficulty. Readers usually make more regressions (i.e., backward saccades) and show longer fixations as texts become more difficult (Rayner, Chace, Slattery, & Ashby, 2006).An important advance involves examining the role of integrative saccades or transitions between areas of interest (also called inter-scanning count) as an index of meaningful learning (Holmqvist et al., 2011; Lai et al., 2013). For example, Mason, Tornatora, & Pluchino, 2013 used integrative saccades (i.e., readers' transitions between text and corresponding illustrations) to measure the degree of cognitive integration of text and pictures, which is thought to be a fundamental cognitive process in multimedia learning (Mayer, 2009, 2014). In another eye-tracking study, Ho, Tsai, Wang, & Tsai, 2014 found that high prior knowledge learners were more likely than low prior knowledge learners to make inner-scanning transitions (also called integrative saccades) between words and corresponding graphics in viewing a web-based science report. Johnson and Mayer (2012) found that students made more integrative saccades and scored higher on posttests from multimedia lessons that adhered to the spatial contiguity principle (by placing words next to corresponding graphs rather than presents words as a caption at the bottom of the graphic). In addition, Tsai, Huang, Hou, Hsu, & Chiou, 2016 identified qualitatively and quantitatively different patterns of visual attention transitions based on sequences of eye fixations to distinguish between high and low achieving players in game-based learning. Overall, researchers have shown the utility of examining integrative saccades between areas of interest during learning in addition to fixations on key areas of interest as an index of the depth of cognitive processing during learning.Although, there is a long research tradition on eye movement during reading (Lai et al., 2013; Liu, 2014; Rayner, 1998), few studies have investigated eye movement patterns while learners read a text and process it with a learning strategy such as highlighting or graphic organizer (Lou, Peteranetz, Kiewra, & Flanigan, 2017). For example, a study conducted by Ponce and Mayer (2014a) used an eye-tracking methodology to infer cognitive processes primed by notetaking and filling in a graphic organizer. College students read a passage on the screen that compared eastern steamboats (top section of the paragraph) and western steamboats (bottom section of the paragraph) and were asked to either read it twice (control group), type notes into a textbook next to the text (notetaking group), or fill in a graphic organizer that was presented next to the text (graphic organizer group). Fixations and transitions (i.e., saccades between the top and bottom sections of the text) were recorded while learners executed the tasks, and memory and comprehension tests were administered after they completed the task. Eye-tracking measures indicated that different learning strategies produced different patterns of saccades and fixations. Learners in the graphic organizer group made more transitions from one part of the paragraph to another than learners in the notetaking and read-only groups, indicating that different cognitive processes were involved. The graphic organizer groups scored significantly higher than the read-only group on both memory and comprehension tests. The notetaking group improved only on memory but not on comprehension compared with the read-only group.In a follow-up study, Ponce and Mayer (2014b) examined how highlighting and graphic organizer strategies affected cognitive processing. College students were randomly assigned to five experimental conditions: one group read a plain text (control group), a second group read the same text with key words colored, a third group read the same text along with a filled-in graphic organizer; a fourth group was asked to highlight key words in the text; and a fifth group was asked to fill in a compare-and-contrast graphic organizer. The first three conditions were regarded as behaviorally passive and the last two as behaviorally active. The experimental material was the same as in the previous study. Eye-tracking measures showed that participants in the graphic organizer conditions made more transitions between the top and bottom sections of the text than the highlighting conditions in both the behaviorally passive and active conditions. Furthermore, learning outcomes showed that the groups that either filled in the graphic organizer or were presented with the filled-in graphic organizer outscored the read-only group on both the memory and comprehension tests; whereas the groups that either highlighted text or read the text with highlighted words outscored the read-only group on the memory test only. These results suggest that learning strategies involving graphic organizers are more effective in priming integrative (or generative) learning processes than are learning strategies involving highlighting.
1.4. Theory and predictionsAccording to the cognitive theory of multimedia learning (Mayer, 2009, 2014), learners engage in some amount of each of three kinds of cognitive processing when confronted with a lesson: extraneous processing, which is cognitive processing that does not serve the instructional objective and is caused by poor instructional design; essential processing, which is cognitive processing needed to mentally represent the essential material and is caused by the complexity of the material; and generative processing, which is cognitive processing aimed at making sense of the material and is caused by the learner's motivation to exert effort to understand the material. These three processes correspond to extraneous cognitive load, intrinsic cognitive load, and germane cognitive load, respectively, in cognitive load theory (Sweller, Ayres, & Kalyuga, 2011). In particular, generative learning theory focuses on techniques for fostering generative processing (or germane cognitive load).It should be noted that some theorists (Kalyuga & Singh, 2016; Kalyuga, 2011) have argued for combining intrinsic and germane load, thereby yielding just two types of cognitive load: cognitive load that is irrelevant to accomplishing the learning objective (i.e., extraneous load) and cognitive load that is relevant to accomplishing the learning objective (i.e., intrinsic and germane load). However, others (Ayres & Paas, 2012; DeLeeuw & Mayer, 2008; Korbach, Brunken, & Park, 2017) have argued for retaining the triarchic conceptualization of three types of cognitive load, and shown how eye-tracking measures can be useful in contributing to the debate.Generative learning theory states that the learner's cognitive processing during learning plays a vital role in explaining the quality of his/her learning process and outcome (Fiorella & Mayer, 2015; Mayer, 2009; Wittrock, 1989). Consistent with the generative processing in the cognitive theory of multimedia learning (Mayer, 2009, 2014), this theory indicates that meaningful learning occurs when a learner engages in three cognitive processes that operate in working memory—selecting, organizing and integrating. Selecting involves learners paying attention to relevant information in the learning material, such as distinguishing important ideas. Organizing involves learners building a coherent structure of the information selected, such as using a comparison schema to connect different pieces of information. Integrating involves learners relating the incoming information with previous knowledge activated from long-term memory, such as spatially relating the incoming information with known concepts and ideas.Generative learning implies that learners engage in generative processing as opposed to linear processing. Generative processing is a process that arises when learners engage in selecting, organizing, and integrating information during learning. Generative processing leads to deep learning which is characterized by making sense of the learning material. Linear processing, on the other hand, is a process that arises when learners mentally represent the material as presented during learning without further elaboration. Engaging in linear processing leads to superficial learning, which is mainly characterized by memorizing information. This may occur when the learner focuses principally on selecting information but fails to organize it through an appropriate schema or model. Learners may also lack knowledge of appropriate schemas or strategies to process information leading to difficulties in engaging in generative processing.If learners engage in generative processing while reading the material in Fig. 1, then it will be reflected in more eye movements between paragraphs 1 and 2 (i.e., up-down transitions) because it reflects that learners are selecting information from both paragraphs and organizing it into a coherence structure such as a compare-and-contract schema. On the contrary, fewer eye movements between paragraphs 1 and 2 reflect linear processing characterized mainly by selecting information in the same way as presented in the text and storing it in long-term memory without further elaboration. Based on the up-down transition measure, we predict that learners in the graphic organizer group will make more up-down transitions than the learners in the read-only group, indicating generative processing; however, the highlighting group and notetaking group will not differ from the read-only group in up-down transitions showing linear processing (hypothesis 1).A new issue addressed in this study concerns whether asking students to process the text with two strategies can lead to generative learning. Our hypothesis is that learners in the highlighting + notetaking will engage in generative processing and consequently outperform the read-only group in up-down transitions. Although highlighting and notetaking strategies working separately prime linear processing, by working together they can prime generative processing. In other words, asking learners to highlight the text first helps to free up working memory capacity that can be used more effectively in the organizing and integrating processes during the notetaking strategy. Likewise, we predict that the highlighting + graphic organizer group will outperform the read-only group on up-down transition indicating generative processing (hypothesis 2). Highlighting, in this case, should have a similar effect of freeing up memory capacity that can be used during filling in the graphic organizer. Additionally, we predict that adding a second strategy will result in more up-down transitions than the use of a single strategy. Thus, the highlighting + notetaking group will produce more up-down transitions than the highlighting group or the notetaking group, and the highlighting + graphic organizer group will produce more up-down transitions than the highlighting group or the graphic organizer group (hypothesis 3).Engaging in generative processing leads to meaningful learning whereas engaging in linear processing leads to superficial learning. Meaningful learning is reflected by better test performance on retention (e.g., a memory test) and transfer (e.g., a comprehension test) whereas superficial learning is reflected by better performance on retention tests but not on transfer tests (Mayer, 2009, 2011). Consequently, we predict that the read-only group will be outperformed on memory and comprehension tests by the graphic organizer group, the highlighting + notetaking group, and the highlighting + graphic organizer group (hypothesis 4). On the contrary, we predict that the read-only group will be outperformed only on the memory test but not on the comprehension test by the highlighting group and the notetaking group (hypothesis 5). Finally, we predict that using two learning strategies will generate better learning outcomes than using one strategy when they involve only the least effective strategies (i.e., highlighting and notetaking), but not when they include the effective one (i.e., graphic organizer) (hypothesis 6).Finally, asking students to use one or two leaning strategies to process a text takes naturally more time. One may expect that more time studying a text could lead to better learning outcomes; however, previous research on single learning strategies demonstrates that more time spent reading the text, taking notes, or highlighting main ideas on the text does not necessarily lead to an increase on learning (Ponce & Mayer, 2014b). As Mayer (2009) indicates “meaningful learning depends on the learner's cognitive activity during learning rather than on the learner's behavioral activity during learning” (p. 22). Therefore, we do not expect to observe that more time spent performing the tasks involved for each strategy will necessarily lead to better performance on the learning measures (hypothesis 7).
