Virtual agents refer to humanlike synthetic characters. They have been widely used in interactive systems such as games and e-learning systems to make certain kinds of interactions easier and more natural. Endowing virtual agents with a clear, consistent and appealing personality is one of the premises to guarantee believable interaction (Isbister and Nass, 2000). Color, as the most striking characteristic of appearance, not only has aesthetic value but also can evoke personality impression (i.e., color personality) (Stephen et al., 2012; Wu and Lin, 2017; Wu et al., 2017). Furthermore, such impressions have long lasting effects on observers’ subsequent attitudes, expectations, and behavior (Koppensteiner and Stephan, 2014; Riggio and Friedman, 1986). For example, users tend to reject the agents with unfavorable impressions and refuse any further interaction with them after the first encounter (Bickmore and Picard, 2005).
Although our previous studies have, to some extent, revealed the relationship between color appearance and the evoked personality impression (Wu and Lin, 2017; Wu et al., 2017), how to endow agents with desired personality impressions through well-designed color appearance is still a challenge, especially for inexperienced designers. This is due to the fact that the inexperienced designers usually have no or little information on how color evokes personality impression; moreover, the design of color appearance becomes more difficult when more design goals (e.g., aesthetics and designers' preference) need to be considered simultaneously.
Some efforts have been made to help designers (especially the inexperienced designers) decide on the color scheme by automatically generating color appearance. For example, Zhang et al. developed a tool that could automatically color complex layouts that meet aesthetic requirement using the genetic algorithm (GA) (Zhang et al., 2009). Similarly, Tsai and Chou developed a tool using a GA to automatically generate the color schemes for the three-dimensional model of two colored products based on color emotion and color harmony scales (Tsai and Chou, 2007). Gonsalves and Kawai developed a tool to create designer preferred color combinations using the interactive genetic algorithm (IGA) (Gonsalves and Kawai, 2014). The main idea of these efforts is to consider color planning as single-objective or multi-objective optimization problems. GAs and IGAs are widely used color planning methods which transform design objectives into fitness functions and search the color appearance with high fitness value. In previous studies, color harmony was the most commonly used objective; the designer preference and the emotion evoked by color appearances were also considered when generating color schemes. However, the personality impression evoked by color has not been considered when developing computer-assistant color planning tools, although the importance of endowing agents with desired personality impression has been emphasized in prior research (Isbister and Nass, 2000; Stephen et al., 2012; Wu and Lin, 2017; Wu et al., 2017).
Our study proposed an automated planning method for color appearance of two-dimensional agents based on a multi-objective IGA, which can help designers easily create the color appearance of agents that has harmonious color combinations, evokes the desired personality impression and expresses designers' preference. Specifically, our method considers the color planning as a multi-objective optimization problem and three design objectives (i.e., obtaining desired personality impression, harmonious color combinations and expressing designer preference) are addressed simultaneously. In addition, an automated color planning tool was also developed based on the proposed method. With the help of the tool, designers can easily create the color appearance of agents by taking the following steps: first, the image (color appearance) of the virtual agent is imported into the tool and is divided into different components automatically; then, designers choose the components to be colored from the image and determine the parameters of design requirements (i.e., desired personality, the weights of personality and designer preference, and the lower bound of color harmony); finally, designers select the preferred ones from the color appearances generated by the multi-objective IGA iteratively until their design requirements are satisfied. The validation experiments show that the tool is easy to learn and designers can easily and quickly obtain the desired color appearance with the tool.
