In the manufacturing industry, managers and engineers are seeking to find methods in order to eliminate the common problems in production lines such as bottlenecks and waiting times. This is because all these kinds of problems impose an extra cost on companies (Zahraee et al., 2014b). In addition, manufacturing companies are striving to sustain their competitiveness by improving productivity, efficiency, and quality of products. It can be acquired by finding ways to deal with various industrial problems which have affected the productivity of manufacturing systems such as high lead time and Work in Progress (WIP) (Zahraee et al., 2014d). Moreover, some parameters, such as machine capacities and availability of resources have significant effects on aspects such as throughput, cycle time and average delay in a continuous production system. Some of them may have more considerable effects on the system performance compared to the others (Zahraee et al., 2014a). On the other hand, limitations of the use of one or two machines or resources can lead to bottlenecks that cause delays in the whole operation chain. Therefore, it is necessary to handle the bottlenecks in order to enhance the system performance by assessing different parameters that have considerable effects on it. In this regard, it is difficult to find the root of the problem if the production line is plagued with difficulty related to resource availability (Hatami et al., 2014). This can be achieved by finding a suitable and cost-effective way to improve productivity as well as to decrease the occurrences of bottlenecks (Jahangirian et al., 2010). In recent years, big efforts have been done to show the different bottleneck definitions, results and detection approaches. However, there is still no commonly accepted definition or detection method. This is principal because of the diversity of the bottlenecks in different application scenarios. This proves to create challenges and problems in implementing the theoretical results in real life applications. There are some investigations which suggest that approaches, such as DOE help engineers to deal with these problems by recognizing the important factors affecting system productivity (Zahraee et al., 2015a). By conducting experimental designs, engineers are able to predict how changes in input factors affect the responses of an experiment (Barton, 2013). Computer simulation is another suitable and popular approach for estimating the performance of complex systems with complicated processes, especially systems that involve random phenomena. Due to these reasons, simulation experiment plays a leading role in projects that are done within time and budget limits. This is because, in these projects, a considerable amount of effort is allocated for developing and validating the model. Hence, within a limited time or budget constraint, simulation will help decision makers to simulate projects in a cost-effective and timely manner (Sargent, 2005). According to a previous study (Hatami et al., 1990), the applications of experimental designs and simulation to improve productivity can lead to significant savings. Additionally, the result will be more credible and reliable as all possible combinations of factors are examined. Furthermore, it is easier to justify the recommendations because the verification runs have validated the result of the model (Hatami et al., 1990).
RSM is another novel statistical method, its combination with computer simulation and DOE can be applied to develop a model that can assess the impact of important factors on manufacturing system. Suggesting a simulation-RSM model for the goal of evaluating production line and productivity rate can be useful and advantageous because; (1) Making key decisions is a significant issue to top management in any manufacturing industries, (2) Productivity of manufacturing industry should be exactly evaluated because of major limitations in labor, time and cost, and (3) Applying different techniques to improve processes deprived of interrupting the operations of the system as well as to assess their effect before implementation (Kouritzin et al., 2014). So in this paper, computer simulation is developed to propose different scenarios as the inputs of DOE. This paper aims at presenting a new idea for using response surface methodology along with the computer simulation experiment to fill the gap in order to improve the productivity of a selected paint production line with a continuous and complex process in Iran’s paint industry in a cost-effective and timely manner.
