Extra virgin olive oil (EVOO) is highly prized for its flavour as well as its healthy characteristics, but a high EVOO recovery also has to be sought. Hence, it would be desirable to strike a balance between oil yield and oil quality characteristics in relation to the quality of olives and the type of olive extraction plant (Cecchi et al., 2013; Catania et al., 2016).
Since malaxation is one of the most important steps in the oil extraction process, studies are required that approach the phenomena involved in malaxation in a predictive manner (Zanoni, 2014). The malaxation stage consists of slow and continuous kneading of the olive paste to induce physical phenomena (i.e. oil droplet coalescence, oil rising to the surface) that improve the oil process yield (Espinola et al., 2011; Migliorini et al., 2011; Leone et al., 2015).
The phenolic profile of olive oil fruits is not the same as the phenolic profile of extractable EVOO, since numerous transformation phenomena occur during the oil extraction process. Secoiridoids and, particularly, the dialdehydic form of decarboxymethyl oleuropein aglycone (3,4-DHPEA-EDA) are often EVOO's most abundant phenolic compounds (Migliorini et al., 2012; Klen et al., 2015; Trapani et al., 2016). During malaxation the secoiridoid profile depends on a combination of the following three kinds of contrasting phenomena: (i) enzymatic oxidative degradation catalysed by polyphenol oxidases (PPOs) and peroxidases (PODs), which cause a decrease in the phenolic compound content; (ii) enzymatic (i.e. β-glucosidase activity) and non-enzymatic hydrolytic phenomena that transform oleuropein and ligstroside into their respective aglycones and decarboxymethylated forms, especially the 3,4-DHPEA-EDA compound; (iii) physical and enzymatic (i.e. pectinase and cellulase activities) phenomena which promote the release of phenolic compounds from cellular tissues and then cause an increase in the phenolic compound content (Clodoveo, 2012).
In two previous studies (Trapani et al., 2017a, Trapani et al., 2017b) a time-temperature kinetic approach was applied to both the phenolic compound transformation phenomena and the oil extraction yield, expressed as an apparent Extractability Index, during malaxation under exposure to air.
The aim of this work was to set up a computer program in Fortran language to solve the abovementioned kinetics in different olive paste malaxation time-temperature conditions. The program had to (i) predict the effect of malaxation in isothermal and non-isothermal conditions; (ii) design optimal time-temperature conditions to both maximize oil extraction yield and minimize phenolic compound degradation.
