Epilepsy is the fourth common neurological problem (after migraine, stroke, and Alzheimer's disease) (Fisher et al., 2014), which affects about 1% of the population worldwide (Browne and Holmes, 2008). Epilepsy may have significant impacts on people's lives as it is reported (Klenerman et al., 1993) that the rate of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy is two times higher than that in the general population. A large number of epilepsy patients suffer from physical injuries including cuts, bruises, burns, head injury, broken bones and others. Furthermore, people with epilepsy are more likely to have mood (such as depression) and sleeping problem. Although most of the causes of epilepsy are still unknown, some epileptogenic lesions are typically found in images obtained by brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). An important epileptogenic lesion is cavernous malformation or cavernoma that arises due to vascular abnormality involving a cluster of abnormal vessels in brain (Porter et al., 1997). MRI is a frequently used imaging method to diagnose cavernomas in hospitals because of the high image quality of soft tissues in the brain. Fig. 1 shows three T2-weighted (T2W) image with cavernous malformations surrounded by square boxes. In a T2W image, a cavernoma typically looks like a popcorn with black surrounding due to the presence of hemosiderin. In typical brain lesion detection, the task is to detect the presence of a malformation and determine its location (Bauer et al., 2013). However, visual identification of cavernomas in a large set of MRI slices is a tedious and time-consuming task that may result in a slow diagnosis and even misdiagnosis. Therefore, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) that can process the input MRI images using a computer to generate diagnosis results is highly desirable to improve the efficiency and accuracy of diagnosis.Download : Download high-res image (232KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Three examples of cavernous malformations in T2W images. Top row: original images with cavernomas in yellow boxes. Bottom row: enlarged cavernoma regions. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
To the author's knowledge, there is no CAD technique in the literature specifically for the detection of cavernous malformations. However, several CAD systems for other brain diseases have been proposed by researchers, such as those for brain tumor (Anitha and Murugavalli, 2016, Saha et al., 2012, Ambrosini et al., 2010, Farjam et al., 2012), Alzheimer's disease (Beheshti et al., 2016; Klöppel et al., 2008; Colliot et al., 2008), vascular dementia and multiple sclerosis (Wang et al., 2016a, Zijdenbos et al., 2002, Khayati et al., 2008). Anitha and Murugavalli (2016) proposed a CAD system for brain tumor using a two-tier classification technique. The brain MRI is first preprocessed to remove noise and skull area followed by a K-means clustering method for brain segmentation. Discrete wavelet transform coefficients are then used to calculate the feature vectors for classification. Finally, the self-organizing map neural network and K-nearest neighbor classification are used for the brain tumor classification. Saha et al. (2012) proposed a brain tumor diagnosis system using the dissimilarity measurement of two brain hemispheres to locate candidate tumor bounding boxes, and mean shift clustering to segment and quantify the tumor. Ambrosini et al. (2010) proposed a template matching technique to detect metastatic brain tumors by using 3D sphere templates, and thresholding normalized cross-correlation between templates and candidate regions. Farjam et al. (2012) proposed a method similar to Ambrosini et al. (2010) for detecting brain tumor but used the size, shape and brightness information of lesions to further improve the detection performance.
Beheshti et al. (2016) proposed a CAD system for Alzheimer's disease (AD) using 3D T1-weighted (T1W) brain images. First, voxel-based morphometry is applied to gray matter to obtain the volume of interests (VOIs). After extracting the intensity value of VOIs as the raw feature vectors, seven feature ranking methods are used to obtain the optimized features that can minimize the classification error. Finally, the optimized feature vector and the SVM classifier are used for the detection of AD. Klöppel et al. (2008) also proposed an AD detection technique using SVM to classify T1W gray matter segments. In this method, brain images are segmented into gray matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid using statistical parametric mapping (SPM) (Wellcome, 2014). Colliot et al. (2008) proposed an automated classification method for AD, mild cognitive impairment, and aging based on the difference of hippocampal volumes in T1W brain MRI images.
Wang et al. (2016a) proposed a CAD system for multiple sclerosis (MS) using biorthogonal wavelet transform to extract features, RBF kernel principal component analysis to reduce the size of the feature vector and logistic regression to classify the image as MS or non-MS. Zijdenbos et al. (2002) proposed a voxel-wise classification framework for MS lesions using a three-layer artificial neural network classifier based on multi-model intensity and spatial priors. Khayati et al. (2008) proposed an automated method to detect MS in brain FLAIR images using an adaptive mixture method and a Markov random field model. Each voxel is modeled as a combination of normal and abnormal parts, and it can be further classified into chronic, early and recent acute lesions by optimal thresholding.
In this paper, we propose a CAD system to detect slices with cavernous regions in T2W brain MRI images. It is an extension of our previous work (Wang et al., 2016b), in which we proposed to use skull stripping and template matching to detect cavernous malformation. This paper improves (Wang et al., 2016b) in two aspects: (1) An atlas-based skull stripping technique is used instead of the morphology-based method to obtain better brain area extraction; (2) After template matching, SVM models are used to classify candidate regions to cavernomas or non-cavernomas based on texture, histogram of gradient and local binary pattern features with principal component analysis, instead of using size, shape and brightness information of candidates for classification in Wang et al. (2016b). The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the materials; Section 3 explains the proposed method; experimental results are presented in Section 4, while Section 5 concludes the paper.
