Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) investigates the use of technologies in collaborative learning contexts for the promotion of students' interaction and collaboration, and maximization of their learning achievement (Stahl et al., 2006, Tchounikine et al., 2010). To obtain positive results from collaboration in CSCL environments, researchers, such as Dillenbourg (2002) and Isotani et al. (2013), present some aspects that should be considered to better understand: (a) How students should be grouped, (b) How to improve learners' engagement and interaction in group work, and (c) What activities should be carried out by students to solve a problem. Examples of such aspects include: composition/size of a learning group, allocation of roles and resources, interaction patterns, tasks distribution, among others. Several studies have shown the benefits of their use for the creation of effective collaborative learning situations (Isotani et al., 2010, Kobbe et al., 2007, Strijbos and Weinberger, 2010). Nevertheless, Calvo (2009) highlights the lack of studies that investigate the impact of affective states to improve the potential benefits of educational collaborative environments mediated by technologies.
Jones and Issroff (2005) discussed the role of affect in three main areas of collaboration, namely collaborative learning setting, online communication, and development of socio-emotional skills. Feidakis and Daradoumis (2010) addressed the design of learning systems and environments as a path to better understand student's emotion/affection. In this context, Affective Computing investigates the way affective states are considered in computational systems for the detection, representation and expression of the user affect in machines (Picard, 1997). Detection recognizes the student's affective state through, for example, psychological questionnaires (e.g., Big Five) and automatic sources of inference (Picard, Vyzas, & Healey, 2001), such as facial expressions (e.g., video) and physiological signals (e.g., heartbeat). Modeling regards the development of techniques to be implemented in machines (e.g., affective models), so they can “understand” what is affect; and expression represents the way affective states can be used by computer applications (e.g., affective agent) for improvements in the interaction of students with the environment or adaptations of the interface according to a particular affective state.
Regarding the different definitions of affective state, emotion and related terms, occasioned by their application in different knowledge areas, such as Psychology, Neuroscience, Education and Computer Science, in this paper affective state will employ the Scherer (2000) definition which includes: emotion, intense affective state of short duration, and activated by evaluation of an event; mood, affective state which tends to be long and has no apparent cause; and personality trait, affective state relatively stable, predictable and is intrinsic to a person. In addition to Scherer's (2000) affective states definition, other factors, denominated socio-emotional, will be considered in this paper, aiming to analyze the emotional aspect of the social interactions among students in a group work (Kwon et al., 2014, Oksanen and Hämäläinen, 2012).
Although there are several findings related to affective computing, there is a lack of research that analyzes and summarizes their impacts, contributions and applications in CSCL environments. Most of literature reviews carried out to date on the field of CSCL focus on gathering evidences about: (i) the benefits of specific social interaction skills (Nussbaum, 2008, Scheuer et al., 2010); (ii) how users' interaction/participation can lead to better learning (Malinen, 2015, Tenório et al., 2016); (iii) how learning scenarios and pedagogical approaches have been designed to improve collaboration in small and large scale (Hei et al., 2016, Manathunga and Hernández-Leo, 2015); and (iv) the role of computational technology to better support collaborative learning (Cruz and Isotani, 2014, Resta and Laferrière, 2007). The findings presented by these literature reviews show the maturity of several topics related to CSCL. Nevertheless, none of them focus their attention specifically to the role of affective computing in CSCL. An exception is a work that briefly summarizes how affective states are used in collaborative learning environments (Reis et al., 2015a). However, even in this work a more comprehensive understanding about the impact of affective computing on CSCL was not explored.
Thus, in order to contribute with the field, this paper presents a systematic mapping of the literature that investigates the affective states and socio-emotional factors used in CSCL. We are particularly interested in gathering evidences about what kind of affective states or socio-emotional factors are used to improve or understand collaboration; which instruments/methods are used to help the detection and expression of affect in CSCL; how technological approaches have been incorporated in CSCL environments to offer affective support; how much empirical evidence is available showing the benefits of affective computing in CSCL. Furthermore, we intend to analyze and categorize our findings to show some trends and challenges that can be used as an incentive for future research in an underexplored area to develop methods and intelligent CSCL environments that consider the affective states and/or socio-emotional factors to improve learning benefits and students' motivation.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 addresses the importance of elements related to affect (e.g., emotion, mood, among others) in the learning context; Section 3 describes the development process of systematic mapping; Section 4 presents and analyses the results; Section 5 discusses the challenges and trends; finally, Section 6 provides the conclusions.
