The concept of smart sustainable cities is gaining increasing attention and prevalence worldwide as a response to the imminent challenges of sustainability and urbanization. It became widespread during the mid–2010s (e.g. Al-Nasrawi, Adams, & El-Zaart, 2015; Bibri and Krogstie, 2016a, Bibri and Krogstie, 2017a, Bibri and Krogstie, 2017b, Bibri and Krogstie, 2017c; Höjer & Wangel, 2015; Kramers, Höjer, Lövehagen, & Wangel, 2014; Kramers, Wangel, & Höjer, 2016) as a result of several intertwined global shifts at play across the world, namely the diffusion of sustainability, the spread of urbanization, and the rise of ICT (Bibri, 2018). As echoed by Höjer and Wangel (2015), the interlinked development of sustainability, urbanization, and ICT has recently converged under what is labelled ‘smart sustainable cities.’ The basic idea is to leverage the potential and ubiquity of advanced ICT in the transition towards the needed sustainable development in an increasingly computerized and urbanized world. Therefore, smart sustainable cities are rapidly gaining momentum as a holistic urban development approach, thereby becoming an academic pursuit and evolving into a realist enterprise across the world, not least within ecologically and technologically advanced nations (Bibri and Krogstie, 2016a). As an integrated framework, they combine the strengths of smart cities in terms of the innovative solutions being developed for sustainability and those of sustainable cities in terms of the design and planning concepts and principles of sustainability (Bibri and Krogstie, 2017a, Bibri and Krogstie, 2017b). Especially, smart cities have recently been criticized for their lack of explicitly incorporating the goals of sustainable development (e.g. Ahvenniemi, Huovila, & Airaksinen, 2017; Bibri & Krogstie, 2017a; Höjer and Wangel, 2015; Kramers et al., 2014) and sustainable cities for facing difficulties in translating sustainability into the built form and for evaluating the extent to which they contribute to the goals of sustainable development (e.g. Bibri and Krogstie, 2017b; Jabareen, 2006; Kärrholm, 2011; Neuman, 2005). Adding to these issues is the weak connection between smart cities and sustainable cities (e.g. Bifulco, Tregua, Amitrano, & D'Auria, 2016; Kramers et al., 2014), despite the great potential and proven role of ICT in supporting cities in moving towards sustainability through enhancing their operational functioning, management, and planning processes in line with the goals of sustainable development (Bibri & Krogstie, 2017a).
Bibri & Krogstie (2017a) describe smart sustainable cities as a social fabric made of a complex set of networks of relations between various synergistic clusters of urban entities that, in taking a holistic perspective converge on a common approach into using and applying smart technologies to develop, use, disseminate, and mainstream innovative solutions and sophisticated methods that help provide a fertile environment conducive to advancing sustainability by strategically assessing and continuously enhancing the contribution to the goals of sustainable development. As such, smart sustainable cities are complex systems par excellence, more than the sum of their parts. They are inherently intricate, dynamically changing environments, and developed through a multitude of individual and collective decisions from the bottom up to the top down. They are becoming even more complex through the very technologies being used to monitor, understand, and analyze their underlying physical structures, spatial and temporal scales, operational functioning, and management and planning processes, with the aim of improving their sustainability performance and increasing their ability to mitigate the multidimensional effects of urbanization (Bibri, 2018). Indeed, they should rely on sophisticated technologies and their novel applications to realize their full potential and thus to respond to the challenges of sustainability and urbanization.
In the subject of smart sustainable city development, the underlying theories constitute a foundation for action—urban practices. For example, the theories of sustainability and ICT have become influential in many aspects of urban life, whether in the built environment, urban systems, urban domains, urban services, or urban forms. The main premise is that the development of smart sustainable cities as a form of practice is undermined by complex interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary knowledge. In more detail, smart sustainable cities as a holistic urban development approach involves a range of theoretical perspectives and scientific and technological foundations drawn from a variety of academic disciplines and discourses converging on a common techno–urban vision of the future and the immense opportunities and fascinating possibilities such future will bring that are created by amalgamating innovative solutions and sophisticated approaches enabled by ICT of pervasive computing with the design concepts and planning principles of sustainable urban forms (Bibri & Krogstie, 2016a).
Furthermore, scholarly research in the field of smart sustainable cities operates out of the understanding that advances in the underlying knowledge necessitate pursuing multifaceted questions that can only be resolved from the vantage point of interdisciplinarity or transdisciplinarity. Research problems in this field are indeed inherently too complex to be addressed by single disciplines, thereby the appropriateness of espousing an interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary approach to the study of smart sustainable city development. This pertains to the world’s most pressing problems with long–term wide–area impact (Max-Neef, 2005). The growing interdisciplinary movement in scholarly research continues to seek a holistic understanding of phenomena in the pursuit of a common purpose or task. Interdisciplinarity involves the integration of two or more academic disciplines into research endeavors. Urban sustainability requires understanding of diverse academic disciplines to solve complex problems. Interdisciplinarity can best be applied to complex subjects that can only be understood by combining the perspectives of two or more academic disciplines. An interdisciplinary field is an organizational unit that crosses boundaries between academic disciplines, as new needs emerge. Seeking to provide a holistic understanding of the techno–urban phenomenon of smart sustainable cities for the purpose of policy or in the pursuit of normative actions associated with implementing sustainability, the interdisciplinary approach insists on the mixing of academic disciplines. Thereby, it crosses boundaries between such disciplines to create new perspectives and insights based on interactional knowledge beyond these disciplines (Bibri, 2015b). To put it differently, interdisciplinarity is about creating something new by thinking across boundaries. Its prominence lies in that it enables to interlink different analyses and spill over disciplinary boundaries to achieve a deeper level of understanding and thus enhance practices. However, multidisciplinary efforts remain limited in impact on theory building for coping with the changing human condition (Morinière, 2012).
Whereas a transdisciplinary movement insists on the fusion, rather than the mixing, of academic disciplines with a result that exceeds the simple sum of each (e.g. Bibri, 2015b; Lawrence & Després, 2004). Transdiciplinarity lends itself most readily to the exploration of complex problems. Transdisciplinary research denotes research efforts conducted in light of different academic disciplines in a joint endeavor to create new conceptual, theoretical, and methodological innovations that integrate and move beyond discipline–specific approaches to address a common problem. Transdisciplinarity concerns that which is at once between the disciplines, across the different disciplines, and beyond each individual discipline. Its goal is the understanding of the present world, of which one of the imperatives is the overarching unity of knowledge. Aiming for a transdisciplinary perspective, the analysis in the PhD study draws on several theories and academic disciplines and discourses. Understanding the tenets of many pertinent theories permits a more complete understanding of the development of smart sustainable cities as a set of future practices. Starting with the most holistic, these theories are drawn from urban design, urban planning, sustainability, sustainable development, sustainability science, data science, computer science, complexity science, systems thinking, systems theory, and ICT. The intent is to set side–by–side elements of a few theories that have clear implications for the development of smart sustainable cities of the future. In this field, the tension is between scientific, environmental, social, institutional, and political practices and the development and performance of urban systems and technological applications.
In light of this, it is deemed of high significance to devise a multidimensional framework consisting of relevant theories and academic disciplines and discourses that underpin the development of smart sustainable cities as a set of future practices. This framework in turn highlights the interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary nature and orientation of the topic of smart sustainable cities and thus the relevance of pursuing an interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approach into studying this topic. Therefore, this paper endeavors to systematize the very complex and dense scientific area of smart sustainable cities in terms of identifying, distilling, and structuring the core dimensions of a foundational framework for smart sustainable city development as a set of future practices. In doing so, it focuses on a number of fundamental theories along with academic disciplines and discourses, with the aim of setting a framework that analytically relates city development, sustainability, and ICT, while emphasizing how and to what extent sustainability and ICT have particularly become influential in city development in modern society. In addition, this paper offers an in–depth interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary discussion covering topics of high relevance to the PhD study and at the heart of the very synergic relationship between the theoretical, disciplinary, and discursive dimensions of the foundational framework underpinning smart sustainable city development. These dimensions thus form the basis for the framework for strategic smart sustainable city development that is under investigation and will be developed based on a backcasting approach to strategic planning. This study provides an important lens through which to understand a set of influential theories and established academic disciplines and discourses with high potential for integration, fusion, and practicality in relation to the practice of smart sustainable city development.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces and describes the concept of smart sustainable cities, as well as highlights and discusses some key aspects of its interdisciplinary and transdsciplinary orientation. In Section 3, a detailed account of the context and background of the multidimensional foundational framework for smart sustainable city development is provided. Section 4 addresses the theoretical dimension of the foundational framework for smart sustainable city development, focusing on the theoretical framework and its conceptual constructs. Section 5 looks at the disciplinary dimension of the foundational framework for smart sustainable city development, focusing on the main academic disciplines associated with smart sustainable city development. Section 6 delves into the discursive dimension of the foundational framework for smart sustainable city development. In doing so, it discusses different aspects of discourse and its relation to the practice of smart sustainable city development, as well as identifies the main discourses shaping this practice. Section 7 offers an in–depth interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary discussion covering topics at the heart of the very synergic relationship between the theoretical, disciplinary, and discursive dimensions of the foundational framework. This paper ends, in Section 8, with concluding remarks along with some reflections.
