Respirators offer protection for men and women who need to work in the atmospherically hostile environment [1,2]. While major advances have been made in recent years with respect to improved protection capability, there has been a little effort directed toward the effects of respirators on human performance and well-being [3]. Up to now, the filter quality factor is the sole indicator of filter media performance considering both aerosol penetration and breathing resistances [4]. A higher expiratory and inspiratory resistances reduces the ease of breathing and thus causes discomfort [1]. Breathing discomfort due to increased breathing resistances is known to be the main problem with the use of respirators [1]. How to balance barrier property and breathing resistances needs human factors/ergonomics (HFE) to get involved [3].
Breathing resistances can be assessed subjectively and objectively. Although the method of subjective evaluation is simple and easy to use, it is difficult to ensure the accuracy and internal consistency of the experimental data because of the individual differences among subjects and the lack of a unified psychological index and general subjective scale [5]. Thus, some researchers pointed out that quantitative objective evaluation should be prior to the subjective opinions, comments and ratings [6].
Unfortunately, there currently exist two main problems in the methods to objectively assess the breathing resistances of wearing respirators. Firstly, the breath resistances measured by the physical and objective method is always based on simulators or human surrogates [7]. For example, breath resistances can be measured by pressure drop using a manikin-based protocol with respirators sealed on manikins [8]. The simulators are difﬁcult to completely replace the actual human, whose breathing system is far more complicated than we can imagine [9]. Secondly, some researchers tried to assess the breathing resistances of wearing respirators on actual human subjects instead of simulators or human surrogates [1]. In that study, the authors measured nasal airflow resistances during inspiration and expiration using a standard rhinomanometry and nasal spirometry to assess objectively the increased breathing resistances with the use of N95 respirators on actual human subjects. However, their method not only interferes with the breath of subjects but also costs too much.
In order to solve these two problems, we proposed a human-in-the-loop method to evaluate the increase in breathing resistances of respirators objectively based on computer vision. Recently, computer vision technology has been developed and widely used, and has gradually been the focus of many researchers, because it has many advantages, such as flexible, low cost, non-contact, easy to get large amount of information, long distance, beneficial to achieve intelligence and automation [10,11]. In this study, we conducted a series of pilot experiments using the self-developed nasal airflow monitor to assess objectively the breathing resistances of wearing respirators on actual human subjects.
