Parental substance abuse is associated with a range of negative child outcomes, including increased risk of child maltreatment (Besinger et al., 1999; Hanson et al., 2006b; Ondersma, 2002; Wells, 2009), violence exposure (Hanson et al., 2006a; Ondersma et al., 2006), and behavioral problems (Manly et al., 2013). Substance use tends to decrease during pregnancy and increase following childbirth (Office of Applied Studies, 2009), suggesting that the immediate post-partum period may be an opportunity to encourage maintenance of natural change. Notably, computer-delivered, brief interventions with postpartum women are associated with reductions in drug use (Ondersma et al., 2007, Ondersma et al., 2014).
However, under-reporting of drug use during the perinatal period is well documented (Beatty et al., 2014; Ondersma et al., 2012a; Ostrea et al., 2001). In one study with postpartum women, only 20.3% of participants testing positive for drug use in the last trimester of pregnancy admitted to use of drugs in the past year (Grekin et al., 2010). This underreporting makes identification a challenge.
Although direct disclosure of drug use may be limited, a great deal is known about correlates of drug use. This allowed construction of an index consisting of items that are associated with drug use but which individually are less likely to be under-reported, i.e., indirect measurement (Ondersma et al., 2012a). The Wayne Indirect Drug Use Screener (WIDUS) consists of six true-false items such as “Most of my friends smoke cigarettes,” “There have been times in my life, for at least 2 weeks straight, where I felt like everything was an effort,” and “I get mad easily and feel a need to blow off some steam,” answers to which are summed to create an index of indirect risk ranging from 0 to 6. These six items were derived from a longer list of items using a rigorous and objective item selection process. In a cross-validation sample, the WIDUS predicted a positive urine or hair test with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.74 (Ondersma et al., 2012a). In that same study, sensitivity and negative predictive value (NPV) for the WIDUS (0.88 and 0.83) were substantially higher than for direct measurement of drug use in identifying the results of hair and urine analysis. Specificity of the WIDUS in the cross-validation sample (0.42) was poor, but was improved by introduction of an additional item regarding drug use prior to pregnancy (yielding sensitivity, specificity, and NPV of 0.77, 0.71, and 0.92, respectively).
Indirect identification of risk is only useful if tied to an effective response. This raises a unique challenge: how to intervene regarding drug use without presuming its existence. Two lines of research suggest possible responses. First, there is growing awareness of the extent to which non-treatment-related activities can facilitate change. For example, Epstein et al. (2005) found that drinking among alcohol-dependent women decreased dramatically before the treatment phase of a randomized trial even began, such that 44% of participants became abstinent without treatment. Epstein et al. further showed that this decrease in drinking was associated with each successive step of the pre-treatment research process. Kypri and colleagues (Kypri et al., 2007) randomly assigned problem drinkers to either a screening only or a screening plus 10-min assessment condition, and found the assessment process itself to affect drinking one year later. Ondersma et al. found a significant pre-treatment decrease in substance use among pregnant women following the study baseline session (Ondersma et al., 2012b). Such findings suggest that perhaps mere attention to drug use and its consequences, even if not directly targeted at the individual, may promote change.
Research also suggests that human behavior change may be less linear than previously thought. For example, spontaneous change attempts appear more likely to succeed long-term than planned change attempts (West and Sohal, 2006), and the majority of persons who do successfully change an alcohol use disorder do so without professional help (Bischof et al., 2003; Burman, 1997; Sobell et al., 2000). In studies randomly assigning persons with substance use disorders to either brief or extended interventions, the extended intervention condition often shows no added benefit (Burke et al., 2003; Kaner et al., 2007; Moyer et al., 2002).
These lines of research suggest that even brief, oblique approaches to drug abuse could potentially serve as a trigger for self-directed change. Further, by identifying and engaging a higher proportion of individuals with drug use disorders, such an approach could have a meaningful population impact with even a small effect size (defining population impact as the product of effect size and proportion receiving the intervention; e.g., Smeeth and Ebrahim, 2000). Further, the indirect intervention approach may be more acceptable than typical brief interventions, in that it carries no stigma and requires no willingness to directly discuss drug use.
This study evaluated a single-session, computer-delivered, brief intervention for use with WIDUS-positive postpartum women in three areas. First, we evaluated feasibility and acceptability of this novel intervention approach. Second, we evaluated the extent to which exposure to the intervention was associated with immediate changes in state motivation. Third, we evaluated intervention effects on drug use at 3- and 6-months. We predicted that the brief intervention would be associated with reductions in drug use as measured by self-reported days of use in the past 90 days and by urine drug screen results. We also predicted that HIV risk behaviors would be lower among participants who received the intervention.
