Nowadays electronics production and assembly is the world’s largest and fastest growing manufacturing industry. With the worldwide development of advanced electronics devices and rapid product obsolescence, the problem of electronic waste (e-waste) generation and management has become increasingly severe and challenging. The exponential growth of e-waste became further aggravated as rapid technological advancements shorten the lifespan of electronic devices driven by the even faster time-to-market of new products (Balde et al., 2015). Generally speaking, “e-waste” refers to waste electronic appliances such as personal computers, laptops, TVs, DVD players, mobile phones, MP3 players and tablets which have been discarded by their original users (Wath et al., 2010, Baxter and Gram-Hanssen, 2016). Aside from glass, steel and plastics, e-waste contains a variety of precious metals such as silver, gold, platinum and palladium, which could be recovered and reused for their potential value. Meanwhile, e-waste also contains various hazardous substances such as lead, cadmium, beryllium, mercury and brominated flame retardants that have high potentials for polluting the environment if not managed properly (Ravi, 2012). Except in a few developed countries, a large amount of hazardous e-waste material still poses serious threats for both the ecological environment and public health (Qu et al., 2013, Song and Li, 2014, Zeng et al., 2015).
Reverse logistics for product take-back is a potential option for efficient management of e-waste through design for de-manufacturing, recycling, and proper disposal of products (Klausner and Hendrickson, 2000). Even so, understanding the consumers’ recycling attitude and behavior to e-waste is still worth a study. The major problem of e-waste management is the collection of the waste in such a substantial volume, followed by proper treatment and disposal with environmental-friendliness. Recycling involves product recovery associated with techniques to create reusable materials from waste. The recycled product has a beneficial effect on the reduction of carbon dioxide emission in comparison with the raw materials used to produce finished products. At present, large amounts of e-waste, due to obsolete features or functional capabilities, are piled in offices and households and not effectively used or recycled because of a lack of environmental awareness and reclaiming channels. Even worse, improper processing and disposal (e.g., disposal with municipal solid waste, in landfill, incineration, or by illegal peddlers) of e-waste lead to irreparable damage to the environment. Factors affecting the recycling infrastructure include the amount of waste in the waste pipeline, the recycling technology available, government policy, and the economics of end-of-life (EOL) products (Kang and Schoenung, 2005).
Based on previous studies, reluctance to engage in pro-environmental behaviors and informal/inappropriate recycling are the most puzzling environmental issues associated with e-waste recycling (Williams et al., 2008, Saphores et al., 2012, Zhang et al., 2016). In Sidique et al. (2010), the influence of socioeconomic, demographic and behavioral factors on drop-off site visits was analyzed. The behavioral factors include environmental affiliation, perception and attitudes concerning drop-off recycling. Recycling behavior has been largely ignored by academics. In practice, drop-off recycling is much easier to implement than take-back or other recycling programs involving manufacturers. Also, the required facilities are typically less expensive to operate than curb-side collection programs.
Taking into account the foregoing concerns, a proper understanding of recycling behavior will help in designing and improving the effectiveness of recycling policies and programs. However, there have been surprisingly few studies in relation to modeling computer recycling behavior in the literature. In the context of recycling behavior, this study aims to characterize the impacts of various computer recycling sources on the potential recycling quantity. The “system dynamics” approach was employed to model and predict the recycling behaviors of various user groups, namely government, community, private sector and academic, using the e-waste recycling in Taiwan as an exemplary illustration. Systems thinking, the main part of all system dynamics simulations, is at the core of describing the forces and inter-relationships of activities that constitute the major behavior of the system under investigation. This discipline may be helpful to decision-makers in improving the recycling system more effectively. In the next section, e-waste management, computer recycling and system dynamics are briefly reviewed.
