The need for cybersecurity appeared in the early years of the digital era, when the first mainframe computers were developed. As networked computers and systems have progressively come to dominate computing and communication platforms, the volume and severity of cybercrimes have increased to an extent that cybersecurity is now an underpinning area of computer systems. Owing to the huge impact cybercrime has in the economy and safety of organisations and countries, the importance of cybersecurity has grown to such a level that it is now considered an independent discipline.
Currently, there is a growing concern among governments that the cyberspace will become the next theatre of warfare. Despite the disparate increasing prominence of the discipline, the existing cybersecurity workforce cannot satisfy the increasing demand for qualified cybersecurity professionals. While the number and sophistication of cyberattacks increase, the shortfall is expected to worsen in the next years—‘the demand for the (cybersecurity) workforce is expected to rise to 6 million (globally) by 2019, with a projected shortfall of 1.5 million’—stated Michael Brown, (former) CEO of Symantec (Cisco, 2015, Frank, 2016, Setalvad, 2015, Randstad Technologies, 2016). Aware of this problem, several academic institutions worldwide have started to define and offer cybersecurity programs to address the shortage of cybersecurity professionals. In particular, ACM has undertaken special initiatives to develop educational programs in cybersecurity on the post-secondary level.
This paper aims at framing the requirements for cybersecurity master studies facing present security challenges as well as providing foundational and technical knowledge for future security professionals. The paper starts by reviewing the progression and maturation of the cybersecurity discipline to envisage a framework for the required analysis. This review focuses on the ACM efforts, which include the early addition of the Information Assurance and Security (IAS) Knowledge Areas (KAs) to the computer science curricula and, more recently, the promotion of the Joint Task Force (JTF) on Cybersecurity Education to advance curricular guidelines supporting the definition of cybersecurity post-secondary programs (JTF on Cybersecurity Education, 2017a, JTF on Cybersecurity Education, 2017b). We select a sample of cybersecurity master programs from top-ranking worldwide universities and proceed with the analysis of these programs, considering their formal requirements, educational contents, structure, and evolution.
The paper is organised as follows. After the introductory section that presents the motivation for our work, we give a brief presentation of related work concerning investigations on master study programs in cybersecurity. The third section describes the evolution of cybersecurity as a domain of education. The fourth section presents the analysis of selected master programs in cybersecurity. First, we list the selected universities and then we provide a comparative description of their master programs, including admission requirements, duration of studies, and description of the course of studies (such as the program structure and specific courses, requirements for completion, and evolution). The last section concludes the paper with a summary of findings.
