Soft computing is a sub-category of computational techniques concerned with approximate solutions to computationally intractable tasks, like problems that can be classified as Nondeterministic Polynomial (NP) hard which do not yield deterministic solutions in polynomial time [1]. Soft computing in its present form came after a degree of influence from fuzzy sets [2], complex systems and decision processes [3] and possibility theory and soft data analysis [4] etc. Later, evolutionary computing [5] and neural computing [6] were also added to it. Applied Soft Computing (ASOC) is one of the prominent international journals in the domain of soft computing research and applications. It is published by Elsevier Press. The scope of the journal covers soft computing techniques such as Fuzzy Logic, Neural Networks, Evolutionary Computing, Rough Sets and other similar techniques that address complex real-world problems [7].
Bibliometrics (also called Scientometrics) involves statistical analysis of written publications such as books or scientific articles. Typically, bibliographic data from citation indexes (viz., titles, abstracts, journal, author name, author addresses etc.) are statistically analyzed to determine the popularity and impact of specific articles, authors and institutions, or entire fields. Results are used in policy planning or performance evaluation, as well as to draw up a historiography of authors, journals, subject fields, institutions or countries. While individual and institutional output are required for performance evaluation and planning, country output can indicate strategic development of R&D in different countries. Scientometrics is widely used to support decision making and science policy today due to the vast increase in scientific research, and the near impossibility of evaluation that would require experts in many fields who could read and evaluate the literature. Scientometrics therefore gives an aerial view of scientific activity.
Several studies in the scientometrics of fuzzy sets and related soft computing areas have already been done. Studies on specific research areas are by Yu [8] on aggregation operator research (2015), Fuzzy decision making (2017) by Blanco-Mesa et al. [12], Ordered weighted averaging operators (2014) by Emrouznejad [14], Atanassov intuitionistic fuzzy sets (2015) by Yu and Shi [18], Fuzzy research (2015) by Merigo et al. [16], Linguistic decision making studies (2016) by Yu et al. [17], Real-time operating systems (2018) by Shukla et al. [81], and fuzzy theory research in China (2018) by Yu et al. [84]. In addition, some studies have looked at the development of journals in this research area. Cobo et al. [13] studied 25 years of the journal Knowledge Based Systems (KBS) (2015), Merigo et al. [15] studied the first thirty years of the International Journal of Intelligent Systems (IJIS) (2016), Xu et al. [9] examined the structure and citation landscape of IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems (TFS) (2017), Laengle et al. [11] looked at 40 years of the European Journal of Operations Research (EJOR) (2017), and Cancino et al. [82] studied the thirty years of Computers & Industrial Engineering (2017). Yu et al. [10] studied the publications of the Information Sciences (INS) 1968–2016 (2017), which was later extended by Merigó et al. [83] with a bibliometric overview of its fifty years of publications (2018).
The main aim of this paper is to create a bibliometric profile of the journal ASOC including its growth over the last 12 years (2004–2016), identify the most frequently published authors, the main subject areas covered, the institutions to which the authors were affiliated and the countries where they were located. The bibliometric analysis of a single journal creates a general picture of the journal and depicts the quality and productivity of the journal in a particular field, and this study can further include the contribution of a country, institute or author. Collaborations and co-occurrence of terms are explored through visualizations. A list of the most highly cited articles is also provided. In essence, the paper tries to provide a historiography of the development of ASOC and the highlights.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the data source and the methodology used for this study. Section 3 shows the publications and citation structure of ASOC. Section 4 depicts the authorship and institution analysis of the publications. Section 5 shows the country-wise analysis of ASOC publications. In Section 6, we have included the document co-citation analysis. The overall discussion and a concise conclusion is drawn in Section 7.
