Families of finite and discrete multivariate models have been extensively studied, including many different classes of graphical models [1], [2]. Because these families of probability distributions can often be expressed as polynomials – or collections of vectors of polynomials – this has spawned a deep study of their algebraic properties [3], [4], [5]. These can then be further exploited using the discipline of computational commutative algebra and computer algebra software such as CoCoA [6], [7] which has proved to be a powerful though somewhat neglected tool of analysis.
In this paper, we demonstrate how certain computer algebra techniques – especially the primary decomposition of ideals – can be routinely applied to the study of various finite discrete models. Throughout we pay particular attention to an important class of graphical models based on probability trees and called staged trees or chain event graph models [8]. These contain the familiar class of discrete (and context-specific) Bayesian networks as a special case. In particular, Görgen and Smith [9] gave a mathematical way of determining the statistical equivalence classes of staged tree models but did not give algorithms to actually find these. Here we use computer algebra in a novel way to systematically find a staged tree representation of a given family – if it indeed exists – and to uncover statistically equivalent staged trees in an elegant, systematic and useful way. This is an extensions of the techniques developed by Andersson et al. [2] and others to determine Markov-equivalence classes of Bayesian networks where, instead of algebra, graph theory was used as a main tool.
So our methodology supports a new analysis of a very general but fairly recent statistical model class in a novel algebraic way and serves as an illustration of how more generally computer algebra can be a useful tool not only to the study of conventional classes of graphical model but other families of statistical model as well.
