Falls from height is one of the main causes of fatalities in the construction industry [1]. According to the data provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, out of 937 fatal construction accidents in the United States in 2015, 350 of them were caused by falls [2]. According to the HSE's (Health and Safety Executive) summary, in Great Britain, falls from height also remained the biggest cause of injury in the construction industry during 2016 [3,4]. Similarly, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health suggest that fall accidents account for around 40% of fatal accidents and 30% of accidents resulting in injuries in Japan, and 40% of fatal accidents and 17% of non-fatal injuries in Korea [5]. In addition, fall protection remains at the top of the safety violations lists of OSHA's (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) reports since 2016 [6], where inadequate fall protection is one of the major causes.
Most fatal falling from height accidents are in fact preventable [1]. Plenty of standards and regulations about prevention measures have been implemented in various countries and regions to ensure the safety of steeplejacks. The Practical Guide to Working At Height, published by the Hong Kong Housing Authority [7], points out that appropriate implementation of barriers, fences, guard-rails and working platforms, as well as Personal Fall Arrest Systems (PFAS), are necessary measures to prevent falls. The Duty to Have Fall Protection [8] and Fall Protection Systems Criteria and Practices [9] standards of the United States specify how to construct safe platforms under various working environments at height, as well as a detailed description of how to use personal protective equipment (PPE) for the work. In Great Britain, The Work at Height Regulations stipulate that ‘every employer is required to carefully inspect the fall protection measures of the whole aerial workplace and steeplejacks shall select suitable PPE according to their trades’ [10]. In summary, necessary inspections and appropriate use of PPE assists in the development of a safe working environment at height.
In view of the high frequency and severe consequence of falling from height accidents, a lot of research has focused on searching for every possible way to avoid such accidents from happening, e.g. by removal of hazardous areas, use of guardrail or safety net systems, administrative controls or fall portents detection. However, due to various unexpected situations, steeplejacks are inevitably faced with the risk of falling so the use of the PFAS is the protection measure most likely to save their lives. OSHA pointed out that PFAS are only required to be used in the working environment at height of 6 ft or more [11]. In fact, in NIOSH FACE reports [12], it was found that at the time of the fall, 54.2% of the fall decedents did not have access to PFAS; 23.1% of the PFAS status is present but not in use; and only 2.2% of the decedents fall from height of <6 ft. In other words, a total of 75.1% of the fall decedents are required to use PFAS but fail to do so.
Meanwhile, in certain specific situations, especially when decorating exterior walls, workers are occasionally exposed to dangerous working platforms (e.g. edges without barriers, fences, guard-rails etc.). Therefore, a new automatic inspection method is urgently needed to protect steeplejacks by enhancing the supervision of PFAS use at height. However, two aspects challenge the application of the automatic inspection of a PFAS by computer vision methods. First, the usage of PFAS is conditional and is only used when workers are at a height of 6 ft or more [11]. The automatic supervision method is required to determine whether a worker is engaged in works at height before inspecting their usage of PPE. On the other hand, the supervision of the PFAS is not limited to harness wearing but also rope anchor checking and wearing hardhats [11,13].
The aim of this paper is to promote the use of the PFAS in working environments at height beside exterior walls, since falling accidents remain the leading cause for work fatalities in the construction industry in many countries, including the U.K. (44%) and the U.S. (35%) [[14], [15], [16]]. Supervision enhancement of the use of the PFAS in aerial work is one of the most effective ways to ensure the safety of steeplejacks. Few studies considered taking approaches to strengthen the inspection of the PPE use by steeplejacks and the existing studies on PPE monitoring are not yet applied to PFASs. Accordingly, this paper proposes a novel method, based on computer vision, to automatically inspect the appropriate usage of PFASs among steeplejacks before they enter an aerial working environment. The core of this paper lies in two parts as follows: First, considering the scope of usage of PPE, this paper proposes a method of scenario recognition for aerial working environments, which is used as the basis for judging whether PFASs are needed. Second, we have a trained deep learning model to identify multiple PPEs. And the inspection of PPEs includes not only harness checking but also webbing, anchoring and wearing hardhats. Our method can identify and distinguish multiple combinations of unsafe behavior.
