Note-taking, a common classroom practice and learning strategy, is both encouraged by educators and embraced by learners in various academic settings (Bonner and Holliday, 2006, Dunkel and Davy, 1989, Van Meter et al., 1994). According to a national survey of 5728 science and mathematics teachers across the United States, students took notes of lectures at least once a week in 54% of middle school science classes and 86% of high school science classes (Weiss, Banilower, McMahon, & Smith, 2001). Research has shown that taking and reviewing notes from lectures or texts are associated with positive learning outcomes (Armbruster, 2009, Kiewra, 1989, Peverly et al., 2007, Rickards and Friedman, 1978), with studies showing the importance of both the quantity and the content of notes (Bretzing and Kulhavy, 1979, Cohn et al., 1995, Fisher and Harris, 1973, Slotte and Lonka, 1999).
Many of these studies predate the rapid advancement of educational technology and the increasing use of computers in science education (Higgins & Spitulnik, 2008) and instead focus on the analysis of paper-based note-taking (e.g., Weiss et al., 2001). As more and more learning is happening through computer-based learning environments, researchers have begun to investigate the effects that computers have on students’ note-taking strategies and learning (e.g., Bauer and Koedinger, 2006, Bui et al., 2013, Crooks et al., 2007, Igo et al., 2005, McQuiggan et al., 2008, Mueller and Oppenheimer, 2014, Robinson et al., 2006). However, no study we are aware of has systematically and comprehensively investigated note-taking in science open-ended learning environments (OELEs) for middle school learners. This study explores the correspondence between note-taking within an OELE and success in scientific inquiry among middle school students.
1.1. Research on paper-based note-takingAs a popular, nearly ubiquitous academic strategy, note-taking has been thoroughly studied. In particular, there has been extensive research on traditional paper-based note-taking in the context of classroom lectures or learning from texts. Educational studies have long documented the crucial role of note-taking in facilitating academic success, especially for college students (Armbruster, 2009, Kiewra, 1989, Peverly et al., 2007). Researchers have identified two basic functions of note-taking that could explain its beneficial role in enhancing learning and performance – the encoding function (the process of recording information in notes supports the conversion of information to memory) and the external storage function (the use of notes as external memory storage that can be reviewed afterwards) (Di Vesta and Gray, 1972, Williams and Eggert, 2002).1.1.1. Encoding functionSeveral researchers have argued that the process of selecting and recording information in notes is, by itself, beneficial for learning and performance. They propose that taking notes promotes learning as it attracts learner attention to instructional content (Di Vesta and Gray, 1972, Einstein et al., 1985), facilitates translation of instructional content into text and one’s own understanding (Piolat, Olive, & Kellogg, 2005), enables better construction of deep-level mental representations of content (Bui et al., 2013, Slotte and Lonka, 1999), and empowers elaborative and generative processing by encouraging learners to connect new content with existing prior knowledge (Einstein et al., 1985, Peper and Mayer, 1978).Note-taking is cognitively demanding and requires high cognitive effort as students have to process information, make decisions on which information to record, hold information temporarily in working memory while recording it and even organizing, paraphrasing, and elaborating on it (Bui et al., 2013, Piolat et al., 2005). Cognitive load is the amount of mental effort and requirements imposed on students’ limited working memory capacity (Sweller, 1994). Learning is limited if learners have to use resources in working memory for tasks that are not related to schema acquisition (e.g., extraneous cognitive load caused by instructional design of learning environments). The learning contexts where students study and take notes (e.g., lectures or text reading) typically impose high cognitive load (Kobayashi, 2005, Peverly et al., 2007, Piolat et al., 2005). As the information that originally needs to be stored in working memory has been stored in external storage (e.g., notebooks) during note-taking, the process of taking notes also offloads extraneous cognitive load imposed on students during learning (Moos, 2009, Piolat et al., 2005).However, results of empirical studies on the benefits of encoding have been mixed (see Kiewra, 1985a, Kobayashi, 2005 for reviews). On the one hand, considerable research has indicated that students who took lecture notes (Barnett et al., 1981, Bretzing et al., 1987, Einstein et al., 1985) or text notes (Bretzing and Kulhavy, 1981, Lahtinen et al., 1997, Peverly et al., 2003, Rickards and Friedman, 1978) generally outperformed non-note-takers who merely listened to lectures or read texts on various tasks (e.g., comprehension, recall, retention) in the absence of reviewing notes, supporting the encoding function hypothesis with overall small to modest positive effects (Kobayashi, 2005). On the other hand, a number of other studies have shown no significant difference in performance between note-takers who did not review notes and non-note-takers (e.g., Howe, 1970, Kiewra et al., 1991), or have indicated that taking notes can even interfere with learning (e.g., Peck & Hannafin, 1983).1.1.2. External storage functionFindings of empirical studies testing the external storage function show higher consensus in favor of this hypothesis than research on the encoding function (Kiewra, 1989). In this context, notes produced by learners serve as “external storage” for subsequent review and study. According to a meta-analysis, reviewing notes produces overall large positive effects on performance (Henk & Stahl, 1984). Substantial evidence has demonstrated that students who reviewed notes (including notes provided to them) showed superior performance on measures of learning than students who did not review notes (Kiewra, 1985b, Kiewra et al., 1991, O'Donnell and Dansereau, 1993, Rickards and Friedman, 1978).1.1.3. Assessing quantity and content of the notes associated with successful and unsuccessful learningMore recently, research on note-taking has developed beyond experimental studies testing the relative importance of the encoding and external storage functions and has begun to delve into the quantitative and qualitative differences of notes taken by students that are associated with successful and unsuccessful learning.1.1.3.1. Note quantity and academic performanceMultiple studies have examined note-taking quantitatively, demonstrating that increased lecture note-taking (Cohn et al., 1995, Kiewra and Benton, 1988, Kiewra and Fletcher, 1984) and text note-taking (Slotte & Lonka, 1999) (e.g., measured by indicators like word count or number of important ideas in notes) are significantly positively associated with learning and test performance, whether or not students review the notes.In addition to the extensive research that examines the quantity of notes encoded and its importance for learning, some studies on the repetition effect have investigated whether increasing the quantity of reviewing episodes can boost performance or not (Annis and Annis, 1987, Bromage and Mayer, 1986, English et al., 1934). These studies suggest that reviewing instructional material multiple times improves performance over listening to or reading instructional material during one single period. However, it is worth pointing out that the review sessions of lectures or texts in these studies are somewhat different from reviewing notes. When reaccessing and reviewing this type of instructional content, students listen to the entire lecture or reread passages. During note-reviewing periods, students reaccess and restudy their notes, which typically have lower completeness and accuracy of information, but usually contain chunks of information that they regard as important and may include notes reflecting the students’ own understanding. Meanwhile, these studies on the repetition effect mainly focus on review sessions after the study is over while reviewing notes could occur during learning to assist with real-time problem solving, especially in computer-based learning environments. Therefore, more research should be conducted on the quantity of note-reviewing, including the frequency of reviewing notes as external storage and the amount of time spent on reviewing notes, not only after the study but also during study sessions. Further, it could be useful to explore how note-takers should distribute their time between taking and reviewing notes.Nevertheless, there is no direct measure of note-reviewing quantity as it is difficult for researchers to know whether students were reviewing notes when they accessed their notes or not. In the present study, we created a measure named note-reaccessing, representing actions where students reaccessed their notes, in many cases to retrieve information that was previously recorded in the notepad (i.e., external storage function). We studied reaccessing notes as external storage, and view this behavior as a precursor to note-reviewing since reviewing notes requires accessing them first.In this study, we aim to address these questions by exploring the relationship between the frequency and duration of note-taking and note-reaccessing actions and student performance in an open-ended learning environment.1.1.3.2. Note content and academic performanceIn addition to the quantity of notes, the content also influences academic achievement (Peverly et al., 2007). Content differences in notes may reflect different levels of cognitive processing (Craik & Lockhart, 1972), ranging from superficial verbatim copying of information to a relatively deeper level of cognitive processing that entails elaboration of instructional content (e.g., through inducing inferences, summarizing, generating hypotheses, constructing connections, self-questioning, concept mapping, etc.). Generative and elaborative note-taking (referred to as constructive by Chi, 2009) that involves deep cognitive processing in notes such as inference generation was found to predict superior performance than note-taking that involves a relatively shallower level of processing such as verbatim copying in both lecture note-taking (Armbruster, 2009) and text note-taking (Lahtinen et al., 1997, Slotte and Lonka, 1999). However, elaborative note-taking can be difficult and, as Kiewra and Fletcher (1984) have found, even undergraduate students can have difficulties in taking content elaborative notes despite being instructed to do so.These results on the advantage of elaborative note-taking are consistent with the well-documented literature on the generation effect (Foos et al., 1994, Peper and Mayer, 1978, Peper and Mayer, 1986, Richland et al., 2005, Wittrock, 1974), which indicates that having learners generate information and meaning during study leads to increased retention and learning, compared to merely passively processing the information without generation. For example, note-taking is a generative activity when note-takers relate instructional material to their prior knowledge and generate new information by making inferences or constructing connections. Thus, note-taking that involves generative strategies is more effective and instrumental in learning than non-generative note-taking. This finding is also included in Chi’s (2009) Interactive-Constructive-Active-Passive (ICAP) framework. In ICAP, Chi posits that constructive activities are superior to active activities, based on this earlier evidence, which in turn are seen as better for learning than passive activities. Accordingly, she points out that the active process of taking notes, which is at minimum an active activity, can be expected to be better in terms of learning outcomes than being passive and not taking notes. Elaborating on presented information and generating information and ideas that go beyond the meaning of the original content in notes, which constitutes a constructive activity, is therefore hypothesized to be preferable to reproducing instructional content while taking notes, which comprises an active activity. We test this hypothesis in our present study.
1.2. Computer-based note-takingCompared with the substantial literature on traditional paper-based note-taking that mostly predates the introduction of computers to science classrooms, computer-based note-taking is an emerging area of research with a growing number of studies (Bauer, 2008, Bauer and Koedinger, 2006, Crooks et al., 2007, Igo et al., 2005, Igo and Kiewra, 2007, Mueller and Oppenheimer, 2014, Robinson et al., 2006). Computer-based note-taking is different from traditional paper-based note-taking partly because typing speed on computers is typically faster than handwriting speed (Brown, 1988), probably resulting in a greater amount of information being recorded on computers. Previous research has found a positive relationship between transcription speed with lecture note-taking (Peverly et al., 2007) and text note-taking (Peverly & Sumowski, 2012). Additionally, the content and quality of notes recorded might also be different depending on how the notes are taken (Armbruster, 2009, Mueller and Oppenheimer, 2014). A few researchers investigated the effect of computers on student note-taking from lectures compared to paper-based note-taking (Bui et al., 2013, Mueller and Oppenheimer, 2014). Other researchers have studied note-taking of computer-based text content with online tools such as computer-based graphic organizers (Crooks et al., 2007, Igo et al., 2005, Igo and Kiewra, 2007, Igo et al., 2008, Katayama and Crooks, 2003, Robinson et al., 2006). Many of these studies involve exploring the effects of different designs of graphic organizers on learning and note-taking. For example, Igo et al., 2005, Igo and Kiewra, 2007, Igo et al., 2008 investigated how graphic organizers that allow different levels of copy-and-paste note-taking, which they claim link to different levels of cognitive processing, influence the learning of web-based text for different populations. Other studies (Katayama and Crooks, 2003, Robinson et al., 2006) found that the graphic organizers that provide partially complete information on instructional content and require learners to complete the remaining sections by note-taking are more effective than other graphic organizers in facilitating learning. However, note-taking in these contexts is different from our research, which focuses on plain text notes being typed in a notepad. Note-taking/reviewing of lectures or texts on computers is different from taking and reviewing notes from open-ended learning environments from multiple perspectives (discussed in detail in the following section).1.2.1. Open-ended learning environments for science inquiryOne of the important goals for K-12 science education is to help students develop the scientific knowledge and skills needed to actively and effectively engage in science inquiry (Kuhn & Pease, 2008). Over the past decade, open-ended learning environments (OELEs) have transformed traditional K-12 science classrooms by fostering learning of complex scientific topics and assessing science inquiry skills (Clarke-Midura and Dede, 2010, Land, 2000). OELEs are learner-centered, technology-based learning environments that support problem solving and inquiry by presenting learners with authentic contexts, complex and challenging learning tasks, and a set of tools and resources to explore and manipulate (Land, 2000, Segedy et al., 2015). In OELEs, learners set their own learning goals; generate, test, and modify hypotheses; utilize and manipulate tools and resources; construct solutions to problems and reflect on solutions and inquiry process (Kinnebrew et al., 2014, Land, 2000, Segedy et al., 2015). The open-endedness of OELEs is represented by the limited external directions provided in the environments, and the control and responsibility learners assume in their own problem-solving process — they pursue unique learning goals, create unique plans, and execute unique inquiry paths and learning sequences to accomplish learning goals (Hannafin, 1995, Hannafin et al., 1999).Accumulated evidence shows that OELEs provide an authentic learning context and are effective in enhancing science inquiry skills, boosting self-regulated learning, and preparing students for future learning (Jiang et al., 2018, Jiang et al., 2015, Land, 2000). Popular OELEs that have been found to assist science learning include virtual environments (e.g., Clarke-Midura and Dede, 2010, Scalise and Clarke-Midura, in press), science microworlds (e.g., Gobert, Sao Pedro, Baker, Toto, & Montalvo, 2012), teachable agents (e.g., Leelawong & Biswas, 2008), games (e.g., Shute, Ventura, & Kim, 2013), and hypermedia (e.g., Azevedo, 2005). Despite the learning opportunities, the non-linearity and open-endedness of OELEs also impose challenges on learners in terms of extraneous cognitive load and greater requirements for self-regulated learning (Azevedo, 2005, Moos, 2009, Moos and Azevedo, 2008, Jiang et al., 2018).1.2.2. Taking and reviewing notes in open-ended learning environmentsNote-taking in OELEs is different from note-taking from lectures or texts (on computers or by hand) in the following fashions. First, oral content or visual texts are delivered and notes are taken during lectures or text reading while the instructional information in OELEs is usually distributed over various representations (e.g., animations, texts, graphics, audios, videos, etc.). Second, the information students listen to and simultaneously take notes of during lectures is linear and transient. As such, lecture note-takers take notes under great time pressure. In this sense, taking notes from texts is more similar to taking notes from OELEs considering that neither texts nor the multimedia information in OELEs have the time restriction inherent to lectures. Students can select, process, and record the information at their own pace (Slotte & Lonka, 1999). However, the instructional information in OELEs is nonlinear while the texts are typically more linear. Third, learners explore open-ended learning environments actively and assume an active control of their learning and exploration. Accordingly, OELEs pose high demands on self-regulatory skills, which in turn imposes a high cognitive load on students (Moos, 2009; Jiang et al., 2018). The processing of a large volume of multimedia information from OELEs also has the potential to tax students’ limited cognitive processing capacity. Both of these processes may overload students and make note-taking in OELEs, which assumes cognitive resources, challenging. In contrast, texts or lectures entail reading or more passive listening of the linear content and less control by learners (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1993). Thus, note-taking in OELEs poses different challenges to learners from note-taking from texts or lectures. Fourth, lecture note-takers have to divide their attention among simultaneously listening to the lecture, selecting important information and taking notes. This places limitations on the opportunity to generate new semantic information and ideas in notes during lectures (Kiewra et al., 1991). Taking notes of texts with no time limitation allows learners more time to process information and take generative notes (Lahtinen et al., 1997). Further, the non-linearity and the open-endedness of OELEs result in more flexibility and time for students to connect and coordinate representations from multiple disparate sources or generate connections between information and prior knowledge and record them in notes. Last, reviewing notes in OELEs or texts is different from note-reviewing during lectures, where review of notes mainly takes place after class when all notes have been taken. In OELEs or while reading texts, note-reviewing can happen concurrently with note-taking during science inquiry, as students have access to their notes in real-time to support their problem-solving. A summary of these differences between note-taking in different contexts is shown in Table 1.Table 1. Differences and similarities between note-taking during lectures, note-taking from texts, and note-taking in open-ended learning environments (OELEs).Note-Taking during LecturesNote-Taking from TextsNote-Taking in OELEsMode of instructional contentOralVisualMultimedia information distributed over various representations (e.g., animations, texts, graphics, audios, videos, etc.)Linearity of instructional contentContent is delivered linearly and is transient.Content is usually organized linearly but does not have the time restriction inherent to lectures. Students can select, process, and record the information at their own pace (Slotte & Lonka, 1999).Content is nonlinear and students can select, process, and record the information at their own pace.Learner control of processingEntail more passive listening of the linear content and less control by learners (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1993)Learners assume a more active control of their learning than during lectures.Learners assume an active control of their learning and exploration. The high requirements on self-regulated learning and the large volume of multimedia information impose high cognitive load that may make it challenging to allocate cognitive resources to note-taking.Opportunities for generative note-takingLearners take notes while simultaneously receiving the instructional content, which reduces the opportunities to take generative notes that connect instructional information with prior knowledge or with information transmitted earlier.Learners have more time to process information and take generative notes.Non-linearity and open-endedness provide flexibility and time to connect and coordinate representations from multiple disparate sources or generate connections between information and prior knowledge.Timing of note-reviewingMainly takes place after class when all notes have been takenCan happen either after note-taking or concurrently with note-taking to support learners’ real-time problem-solvingHappens concurrently with note-taking during inquiry to support learners’ real-time problem-solvingResults from studies on computer-based note-taking in OELEs are mixed, sometimes agreeing and sometimes contradicting the results found in the literature on traditional note-taking. For example, undergraduate learners in Trafton and Trickett’s (2001) study who used a digital notepad to take notes while solving scientific problems in an OELE for science outperformed those who did not use the notepad. Students who had used the notepad performed better even later, when it was no longer available, a result comparable to previous findings on the positive effects of note-taking in traditional settings. No relationship between the quantity/content of notes and performance was explored in this study. On the other hand, results contradicting traditional note-taking literature have been found in other OELEs. For instance, McQuiggan et al. (2008) had students take and review notes while engaging in science inquiry tasks and solving a science mystery in an OELE called Crystal Island. They did not find significantly different performance and learning gains between note-takers and non-note-takers. Malmberg, Järvenoja, and Järvelä (2010) examined the use of study tactics among twenty elementary school students who interacted with an open-ended multimedia environment for science. They concluded that taking only a few notes was associated with better learning outcomes compared to frequent use of study tactics such as note-taking. However, the sample size is this study was small.A more recent analysis on note-taking in OELEs by Trevors et al. (2014) did not find any positive associations between the quantity and quality of notes and learning outcomes among college students. For example, they found that the frequency of note-taking actions was negatively associated with subsequent learning outcomes in a hypermedia learning environment, which contradicts the positive correlations between note quantity and performance found in previous research. However, in this study, note-reaccessing actions were not distinguished from note-taking actions. In addition, they coded notes qualitatively into content reproduction (notes where learners reproduce the instructional content through memorization or rehearsal strategies), and content elaboration (notes where learners elaborate on the underlying meaning and patterns of content). The number of content reproductive notes, which comprised the majority of the notes taken by students, was negatively associated with learning outcome. Meanwhile, no advantage of constructive and generative note-taking was found, as the number of content elaborative notes that involved a deep level of cognitive processing was not significantly associated with learning performance. The researchers argue that taking notes in OELEs is detrimental to learning and impedes performance because the cognitive overload caused by note-taking limits students’ exploration of the representations and the learning environment.In another study on the same OELE, Bouchet et al. (2013) applied clustering analysis to classify undergraduate learners based on their use of self-regulatory processes and strategies. Results suggested that students with higher self-regulatory skills and higher prior knowledge tended to take fewer notes and spend less time taking notes than students in the other clusters. Despite their tendency to take fewer notes, these students checked their notes more often. In contrast, Sabourin et al. (2013) analyzed the differences in inquiry behaviors utilized by learners depending on their level of self-regulation within the OELE Crystal Island and obtained different results. Their results suggested that highly self-regulated students made better use of the resources and tools in the environment by taking notes of relevant information in worksheets than students with lower SRL skills. Low-SRL students used information and resources presented in the environment less effectively and did not record the information in worksheets. On the other hand, Taub et al. (2014) did not find a difference in note-taking strategies between undergraduate students with high versus low prior knowledge as they interacted with an OELE that teaches science.With the lack of consensus in these studies, it is desirable for researchers to systematically probe into whether note-taking/reviewing is beneficial or detrimental for science performance in the context of open-ended learning environments and whether findings from classical paper-based note-taking literature can transfer to open-ended learning environments. Specifically, we extended the study by Trevors, Duffy, and Azevedo (2014) to investigate note-taking in an OELE for middle school science, and examined both the quantity of note-taking/reaccessing behavior and content of notes more comprehensively.
1.3. The present studyThe purpose of this study is two-fold, involving analyses that are intended to answer two research questions. First, are the quantity of taking notes and the quantity of reaccessing notes associated with student success at science inquiry within an open-ended learning environment for middle school science? To answer this question, we first created measures related to the quantity of note-taking and note-reaccessing behaviors from interaction data in the open-ended learning environment and examined their relationships with student performance on science inquiry tasks. Second, is the content of notes taken in digital notepad related to student performance on complex science inquiry tasks within the open-ended learning environment? This question is addressed by coding the content of notes produced by students from multiple perspectives and examining their relationships with performance.
