At your foot you see the ball. You are in possession though several opposing players are blocking your way to the goal. You hear the stadium roaring in the background as you evade an opponent and move past him … all the while focusing your gaze on the ball and your feet. From the corner of your eye, you see that the goalkeeper is poorly positioned. You take a deep breath, aim, and shoot. It is a goal! The stadium goes wild and you feel amazing. Then everything goes black. Next, you see the shoes you were wearing, right in front of you—they are Nike shoes.
This is an outline of a person’s experience when playing the popular virtual reality (VR) game ‘The Neymar Jr. Effect’. In this game, a player is immersed in a multi-sensory VR experience and takes the perspective of a soccer player who scores a goal all the while wearing a pair of Nike shoes (AdAge, 2015). It is a gamified consumer experience designed by the sports brand Nike to promote their shoes and an example of a branded VR game.
An increasing number of companies currently use VR marketing practices such as branded VR games to promote their business (Boyd and Koles, 2019, Jung and Tom Dieck, 2017). In their recent review of the VR-marketing literature, Alcañiz, Guixeres, and Bigné (2019) suggest that VR marketing is particularly effective because of its ability to enrich consumer experiences. Flavián, Ibáñez-Sánchez, and Orús (2019) further conceptualize the enhancing nature of VR by integrating it into the consumer hierarchy framework. This framework, which was originally proposed by Neuhofer, Buhalis, and Ladkin (2014), postulates that technology can be used to enhance ‘consumer core experiences’ (e.g., product appraisal, store visits) and render more valuable consumer experiences.
These enhancements are technology-dependent. For example, head-mounted display (HMD) VR technology is believed to enhance consumer experiences by allowing for technological embodiment and real-world-like interactivity (Flavián et al., 2019). By wearing a HMD VR headset, users can look around in a 360° angle and interact with objects in the virtual space similar to how they would in base reality. Interestingly, despite these technological advancements, Alcañiz et al. (2019) recently identified that most VR studies still use less immersive VR interfaces with limited virtual affordances (e.g., 360° video & screen-based VR). This is viewed as a problem because it could significantly compromise experimental conclusions concerning the workings of modern VR. In response, they call for studies using highly-immersive HMD VR interfaces when investigating how VR technology can simulate and enrich core consumer experiences.
The purpose of this study is thus to investigate how HMD VR technology can enhance consumer experiences in the context of gamified VR advertising. We consider two affective mechanisms that could play a role in the workings of branded VR games: (1) virtual product appeal and (2) emotional response. First, we focus on the role of virtual products in branded VR games. Drawing on consumer learning theory, we test whether players’ appeal of a embedded virtual product strengthens the effect of brands in VR games on brand attitude and purchase intention. Second, we will redirect our focus toward the embedded brand. By considering insights from the brand-engagement literature, we explore whether brands in VR games elicit a unique emotional response and whether this emotional response is ultimately carried over to the brand. In sum, this study will contribute to the contemporary understanding of VR as a marketing platform and offers valuable insights into how VR technology can enrich core consumer experiences.
