Research on the dual-process theory of addiction (Stacy & Wiers, 2010; Wiers & Stacy, 2006) suggests that a brief cognitive intervention based on evaluative conditioning (EC) can change the implicit evaluation of alcohol and reduce drinking behavior (Houben, Havermans, & Wiers, 2010). EC is a computer-delivered procedure that aims to change the evaluation of a stimulus (the conditioned stimulus) by repeatedly pairing it with other positive or negative (unconditioned) stimuli (De Houwer, 2007; for a meta-analysis, see Hofmann, De Houwer, Perugini, Baeyens, & Crombez, 2010). In Houben, Havermans, and Wiers’s (2010) original study, participants reported a more negative implicit evaluation of alcohol and a sharp reduction in their drinking behavior following EC. In a conceptual replication, Houben, Schoenmakers, and Wiers (2010) found similar results. To date, however, there has been no independent and preregistered replication of these promising findings. It is important to replicate these findings because there is little evidence that computer-delivered interventions can reduce drinking behavior compared to relevant control interventions (Carey, Scott-Sheldon, Elliott, Bolles, & Carey, 2009). In the present study, we attempted to test whether the two key findings reported by Houben, Havermans, and Wiers (2010) could be conceptually replicated in an independent, high-powered study. Our aim was also to examine whether EC affects persons potentially at risk for addiction (hazardous drinkers). This objective was important because the original study targeted a non-clinical population; thus, the conclusions were limited with regard to possible clinical implications.
We predicted that participants in the EC condition would show a more negative implicit evaluation of alcohol and would consume fewer alcoholic beverages after the intervention compared to participants in the control condition. In an effort to extend the original findings, we also examined whether hazardous drinking moderates the effects of the intervention. More precisely, we tested whether the effects of the intervention generalize to hazardous drinkers. Support for this hypothesis would be found if the effects of EC were as pronounced, or more pronounced, among hazardous drinkers than among participants without harmful drinking behavior.
Following recent recommendations to improve the replicability of clinical research (Tackett et al., 2017), all hypotheses and materials were preregistered with the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/84nhd/registrations/) before the data were collected.
