“Innovation” as a field of study is a robust topic across many disciplines. It has been studied both as a product of organizational assets, culture and processes (Tellis et al., 2009; Sethi and Iqbal, 2008) and as a driver of various performance metrics (Sorescu et al., 2003). While the most common characterization of innovations is as being either incremental or radical (i.e., disruptive) (Tellis et al., 2009), an alternate and more tangible characterization is on the basis of the intellectual property which drives them.
From a patent-based perspective, innovations can either be utilitarian or technological in nature, where the innovation, typically an improvement in the underlying technology, results in a functional benefit; or a design innovation, where a change in the external appearance of the product is the source of innovation (Rubera and Droge, 2013; Eisenman, 2007; Verganti, 2006). Rubera and Droge (2013) and Verganti (2006) point out that most research has focused on technology innovations and less on design innovations. This may be because, according to United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) data, there is more than a 10:1 ratio between utility and design patents issued.1 Interestingly, an increasingly large number of firms seem to be committing greater resources towards the pursuit of design innovations. While some firms such as Sony, Samsung, LG, and Apple have a long history of design-focused innovation, others are new to this game. Competing through design may have reached a peak with Apple Inc.’s allegations that the Samsung Galaxy 11 tablet and Galaxy Nexus smartphone had copied several of the design features from Apple’s own iPad tablet and iPhone smartphone. Following a ruling in a United States district court, Samsung had to change features and make cosmetic tweaks to release its tablet under the new name, Galaxy Tab 10.1 N, and was ordered to pay $930 million in damages (Kendall, 2016).
A growing body of research has considered consumer reactions to product design (Bloch, 2011; 1995), the impact of product design on market share (Jindal et al., 2016), and the differential impact of technology versus design innovation on firm financial performance (Rubera and Droge, 2013). While researchers have some understanding of the outcomes of design innovation—for instance, increased positive consumer response and the resulting growth in market share and firm financial performance—we do not have a deep enough understanding of the firm characteristics that lead it to being successful in the development of design innovation. In other words, while recent work has established the performance benefits of design innovations (Rubera and Droge, 2013) and the benefits of including design at many levels of the new product development process (Roper et al., 2016), we need to more deeply understand the organizational and environmental antecedents of design innovation. That is the fundamental objective of this research.
In this study we examine the antecedents of design innovations, considering the organizational resources, financial management strategies, and environmental factors that are associated with their creation. Rather than looking at design innovations in isolation, we contrast the predictors and outcomes of a design innovation emphasis against a more traditional technology (i.e., “utility”) innovation focus. Thus, the fundamental research questions explored here are: What are the organizational antecedents of a technology innovation focus versus a design innovation focus (as measured by intellectual property outputs), and how do they differ?
To answer these questions, we utilize a unique data set assembled from multiple sources, which allows us to look at a 10-year window of innovation output in the form of design and technology innovations, measured through patents. The data set includes 770 firm observations, including over 4000 design innovations and over 72,000 technology innovations in the computer, communications, and audio and video manufacturing industries. The results provide valuable insights for managers trying to strategically shape their organizations for various types of innovation outcomes.
This study contributes to the literature in several ways. First, we consider the nature and potential importance of design innovations, a distinct type of innovation of growing importance, which has not, with very few exceptions (e.g. Rubera and Droge, 2013), been considered in the literature. Understanding this phenomenon deepens our understanding of innovation in general, and how different forms may emerge from an organization and ultimately influence performance. Second, we decouple the concept of “patents,” which has been studied in the past, into its two major forms, and highlight the different forces at play in their genesis. We then consider the differential sources of those patent types, as well as how they interact with one another, a topic that has not been previously considered. Third, by developing a deeper understanding of design patents we help illuminate the source of competitive advantage for firms which base a large part of their corporate strategy on the pursuit of design excellence. Finally, this work extends existing literature that attempts to understand the nature of design-driven strategy and how it may differ from traditional approaches to marketing and innovation. It also represents a first step in understanding an increasingly important direction in innovation strategy.
