Significant changes in the marketing environment due to new technologies are disrupting markets (Barczak, 2016). For instance, embedding technology into everyday products has yielded numerous complex and multi-functional hybrid products – products that possess features of more than one product category (Rajagopal & Burnkrant, 2009). Today, we are witnessing an explosion of hybrid products, such as computer wearables. These products feature a combination of sensors and/or computing devices embedded in apparel and fashion accessories, such as the Fitbit activity tracking bracelet or the Tambour Horizon smartwatch by Louis Vuitton (Friedman, 2017). The complex nature of computer wearables calls for product design, marketing and positioning approaches different from those used for traditional products.
Many industry observers believe that the dual nature of these emerging hybrid products offers the potential to duplicate the success story of athleisure – a highly lucrative new category (as exemplified by the yoga pants that we now see women wearing everywhere) created by combining athletic wear and leisure wear (Marlowe, 2016). However, the results for wearables have been mixed at best, and thus far some wearable products have failed (Temple & Winchester, 2017).
How can we explain this lackluster consumer acceptance? One plausible explanation is that both manufacturers and consumers remain confused regarding how to think about and categorize these new items. Is an Apple Watch a tech product, a fashion product, a fitness product or something else altogether? We saw a similar problem several years ago, when Motorola's personal digital assistant (PDA—a hybrid of a portable computer and personal organizer), failed to convince consumers of its value. Consumers had difficulty categorizing the device as a portable computer or personal organizer because it shared some characteristics from each category yet differed from other entrants in both categories (Keller, Sternthal, & Tybout, 2002).
The manner in which companies and users categorize products is tremendously important. This assignment results in a powerful self-fulfilling prophecy, as perceived category membership determines the criteria by which people evaluate the product, the competitors to which they compare it, and even where retailers display it in a store (Chaplin & Lowrey, 2010; Englis & Solomon, 1996). Is a rug furniture? Is flavored yogurt a meal or a dessert? Is an Uber a taxi?
The answer is important because it determines how manufacturers design and how retailers position products vis à vis consumer segments, as well as how they communicate product and brand attributes to appeal to different dimensions of self-concept. Rajagopal and Burnkrant (2009, p. 232) observed that the greatest issue regarding how shoppers categorize hybrids is a “single category belief,” with consumers assigning a hybrid to an extant category and then evaluating it according to the determinant attributes that they associate with this category. Thus, hybrids face a potential identity problem because to date it is unclear whether consumers will see them first and foremost as technology or fashion products (Chuah et al., 2016).
Academic research on hybrid products, which could help to address the identified questions, is still in its early stages. To date, it has primarily focused on visual and technology factors affecting cognition in relation to wearables—not on product categorization and its consequences for product design and positioning (e.g., Choi & Kim, 2016; Chuah et al., 2016). Especially because a bevy of hybrid products is poised to enter the market, it is important to develop frameworks that will help marketers to understand how to differentiate, position and display new hybrids to maximize the likelihood that consumers accurately apprehend and evaluate these new product domains. As a step in this direction, we focus our inquiry on the case of one of the earliest hybrid offerings to come to market – computer wearables. Regardless of the misfortunes of some wearable manufacturers (Temple & Winchester, 2017), this hybrid product category was estimated to reach >27 million users in 2017 in the U.S. alone, with strong growth projections for the future (Statista, 2016, Statista, 2017). We aim to understand:
a)the dimensions that we can expect consumers to use as they attempt to assign wearables to extant product categories;b)how hybrids will impact the consistency of a consumer's self-image (e.g., fitting with a self-image of fashionista versus tech-savvy person), considering the multiple needs that they address;c)how hybrids that differ in terms of how closely they link to a consumer's desired self-image will be readily adopted by users; and.d)how to develop marketing strategies for wearables and potentially other hybrid products from a product design and positioning perspective.
Our research program includes two studies. In Study 1, we examine the differentiating attributes of wearables and identify 4 product categories based upon a typology of: (1) functionality (mono- versus multi-functional products); and (2) fashion type (mass- fashion versus luxury). In Study 2, we employ a quasi-experimental design to explore how different types of products affect consumers and perceptions of self-identity and consequently their potential to bolster a desired self-image.
