Pearl is a kind of natural biocomposite and it requires several years of growth to achieve their unique sphericity and luster, resulting from biomineralization of calcium carbonate, matrix proteins and other organic matrixes [1], [2]. Generally, the majority of freshwater pearls have luster and the inorganic component of these lustrous pearls is constituted by aragonite crystal and these pearls are regarded as aragonite pearls [3]. The vast majority of pearls found today in the market are cultured. Moreover, only a small number of mollusks species are used for large-scale commercial cultivation [4]. In China, freshwater cultured pearls are generally gestated in Hyriopsis cumingii. Hyriopsis cumingii, a member of freshwater pearl mussels, is the most economically important mussel species in China (Naiad of the Unionidae family) [5]. In the world market, China produces 95% of freshwater pearls and 95% of freshwater pearls are produced from H. cumingii. As the best for producing high quality pearls, H. cumingii is widely cultivated in China [6], [7].
Pearl powder is made from bivalve mollusks (such as Pteria martensii (Dunker), Hyriopsis cumingii (Lea), Cristaria plicata (Leach), etc.) by the physical grinding method [8]. A number of studies have indicated that pearl contains over 25 organic salts and 10 amino acids, providing a rich source of organic calcium, selenium, zinc, and other trace metal elements. Pearl powder makes the ingredients more bioavailable. It replenishes the calcium deficit within a short period of time, as well as supplies some trace metal elements and thereby improve the immune system [9], [10]. Therefore, pearl powder is also popular for use in Chinese medicines and as raw materials in cosmetics.
However, so far, there is no exact and unified quality grading standards for pearl powder. Even the freshwater cultured pearls gestated in the same mussel have diverse qualities due to the different growth environment [11]. The quality of cultured pearls is influenced by environmental factors such as water quality parameters at the culture site and food availability, as well as non-environmental factors such as grafting techniques, host oyster condition, saibo influences and husbandry techniques [12]. Different quality levels of raw materials will affect the quality of pearl powder. Moreover, it is well known that the micro morphology and chemical composition of shell powder are similar to those of pearl powder, which all of them including calcium carbonate (aragonite, about 95 wt%), organic matrix like protein and polysaccharide (about 5 wt%) [3], [13], [14], [15]. Unfortunately, pearl powder adulterated with low-cost shell powder is occurring frequently in the Chinese market. Given that no established test standard of quality grading and authentication, it would be essential to develop a new promising approach for identifying pearl powder originated from different quality grades of pearls and authenticity identification.
Electronic eye, a computer vision technology converting the image into digital image, uses the image sensor instead of the human eye to collect images of objects, and use computer simulation criterion to identify the image avoiding the subjective deviation of human eye [16]. Since pearl powder usually has similar color, it is difficult to distinguish the color difference and the visual color of pearl raw materials by the naked eye. In this work, we used electronic eye to discriminate different pearl powder, obtain visualize information on different samples and make it traceable to the pearl quality trait–visual color categories. Thus, adopted the computer vision technology on the pearl powder from different sources, it could provide the color information for better traceability and more comprehensive characterization of them.
Tri-step infrared spectroscopy, a technique consists of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), second derivative infrared spectroscopy (SD-IR), and two-dimensional correlation infrared spectroscopy (2DCOS-IR) can not only reveal the main constituents in sample but also distinguish the varieties and contents of chemical constituents in highly similar matrices [17], [18]. FT-IR is a rapid, non-destructive and easy to handle molecular spectroscopic method with high signal-to-noise ratio and good repeatability to analyze complex systems as a whole [19]. FTIR is based upon the fundamental principles of molecular spectroscopy. Its advantages lie principally in the fact that it is a purely instrument-based test. It is relatively quick and easy to be perform, not need to consume massive chemical reagents and simultaneously achieve online detection of multiple parameters. To delineate severely overlapped spectra in FT-IR and enhance the apparent resolution, SD-IR can be used [20]. If the differences in FT-IR and SD-IR spectra are too small to tell, 2DCOS-IR can be employed to unfold FT-IR spectra in a second dimension to identify the differences more remarkably and convincingly and also provide dynamic chemical structural information potentially [21], [22].
Cluster analysis is the task of grouping a set of objects in such a way that objects in the same group (called a cluster) are more similar (in some sense or another) to each other than to those in other groups (clusters) [19]. Principle component analysis (PCA) is an unsupervised clustering analysis method [23]. The mathematic principle of PCA lies in coordinate conversion. It uses an orthogonal transformation to convert a set of observations of possibly correlated variables into a set of values of linearly uncorrelated variables called principal components. The main functions of PCA are dimensionality reduction and data structure simplification. Moreover, partial least squares (PLS) is a multivariate statistical technique for constructing predictive models when there are many highly collinear factors. It can simultaneously achieve regression modeling (multiple linear regression), data structure simplification (principal component analysis) and correlation analysis between two sets of variables (canonical correlation analysis).
In this study, we adopted a Tri-step infrared spectroscopy combined with chemometrics to comprehensively analyze and appraise the pearl powder originated from three different quality grades of pearls and adulterated with different proportion of shell powder in a holistic manner. In addition, computer vision technology was assisted to analyze the quality of pearl powder.
