Excessive anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions have disrupted the global carbon cycle leading to global warming and climate change. Among various GHGs, CO2 is the primary GHG as it accounts for the largest portion (77%) of the global GHG emissions [1]. Carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration (CCUS) technologies are attracting attention as a way to abate the GHG emissions until the full conversion to renewable energy takes place. CCUS involves capturing CO2 from sources like flue gas or industrial off-gas and storing (e.g., in saline aquifers) or utilizing them (e.g., as an extractive agent or as feedstock for conversion into chemicals or fuels) instead of emitting them into the atmosphere. In particular, carbon capture and utilization (CCU) can provide economic incentives that can compensate for the costs in contrast to carbon capture and sequestration (CCS).
One of the recent issues has been the need to evaluate CCU technologies to identify ‘sustainable’ options among a large number of candidates [2]. The need arises as numerous products can be made from CO2, and moreover, these products can be made through multiple processing pathways. Here, ‘sustainable’ CCU technology means that it is capable of achieving CO2 reduction with economic viability. Although various ideas for CCU have been suggested, not all of them are sustainable in this sense as most CCU technologies require significant energy inputs, which themselves carry carbon footprints. For instance, methanol production through CO2 hydrogenation reaction (CO2 + 3H2 → CH3OH + H2O) is a representative CO2 utilization path that can be made sustainable with renewable resources but may be too expensive at present. If the hydrogen feedstock is generated from fossil fuels to improve the economics, it results in a net-positive CO2 emission meaning that, in the process of converting CO2 into methanol, more CO2 is emitted to the atmosphere than consumed [3].
As summarized in Roh et al. [2], a limited number of CCU technologies such as those for producing methanol [4], dimethyl carbonate [5], and sodium carbonate [6], have been analyzed in terms of sustainability, but the sustainability of many other technologies remain unanswered. Theoretically, the number of potential products from CO2 feedstock stands at more than one hundred [7]. Many more candidate processes need to be examines if every possible reaction path and technology are to be taken into account. In order to determine promising CCU technologies systematically, it is important to analyze and evaluate a large number of candidate pathways and technologies fast and efficiently.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to analyze the sustainability of CCU technologies due to the need to consider multiple evaluation metrics. Net profit ($/ton-product) is a key metric for assessing the economic viability while net CO2 lifecycle emissions (or carbon footprint, mass of CO2 equivalent emission per mass of product) determine the CO2 reduction capability. As such, both techno-economic analysis (TEA) and CO2 lifecycle assessment (LCA) must be performed, but doing so is both time and labor intensive. First, a comprehensive set of data detailing the mass balances, utility consumptions of the CCU processes, and prices and CO2 lifecycle inventory (LCI) of involved raw materials, products, and utilities should be collected. If a comparative analysis against a reference case is desired, such data for the reference case should be collected also. Sometimes, the LCA and TEA results should be combined to form additional metrics. For instance, CO2 avoidance cost (dollar per ton of avoided CO2 equivalent), which is a metric frequently used for comparing the competitiveness of CCUS technologies, requires net cost and net CO2 reduction, to be derived from TEA and LCA respectively. While commercial tools such as Aspen Process Economic Analyzer® [8], Ecoinvent® [9], and SimaPro® [10] are there to assist TEA and LCA studies, compiling the individual results to prepare appropriate metrics for the evaluation of CCU technologies can be extremely tedious and time-consuming. All the commercial tools for TEA and LCA are applicable to a wide range of technologies and processes. Nevertheless, they are not developed specifically for CCU technologies and therefore have limitations and inconveniences. To the best of our knowledge, there is no tool tailored to the analysis of CCU yet.
To solve this problem, we have developed a computer-aided tool tailored to CCU processes for this purpose. It is called ArKa-TAC3, which stands for Aramco-KAIST/Tool for Analysis of CO2 Capture and Conversion systems. ArKa-TAC3 is a software that enables an easy construction of multiple candidate CCU processing paths and the calculation of key metrics for evaluating the sustainability of a specific pathway in a quick and convenient manner. Adopting the concept of superstructure model, which is a network model that encompasses all possible candidates and design options, the software allows the user to describe a CCU processing network encompassing multiple technical options (e.g., processing paths). The concept of superstructure model is described in Section 3. In addition, users can perform both TEA and CO2 LCA on a selected processing path within a constructed network efficiently, as the software provides the database and the calculation engine.
In the following sections, a methodological framework for evaluating the sustainability of CCU processes is briefly reviewed. Within the framework, the role of ArKa-TAC3 is highlighted. Also, the structure of the software is described with requisite model equations. As a case study, a CO2 capture and utilization path for acetic acid production is introduced and its sustainability is analyzed using the software. Finally, some perspectives on the application of the developed tool are given.
