More than 40 million cybersecurity incidents are reported every year, and the damage done by cybercrime to the private sector is estimated to amount to hundreds of billions of euros every year (Isace and RSA Conference 2015, Gandal, 2015). These numbers indicate that information security is of utmost importance for companies. Companies protect themselves from data breaches and cyberattacks by implementing a range of technical security measures (TSMs). If employees use these measures as intended, more stringent security measures would by design result in higher levels of security, although they may have a negative impact on productivity. However, if employees perceive those measures as less usable they may find ways to circumvent them, which potentially makes them less or even counter-effective (Dinev et al., 2006, Kirlappos et al., 2015, Post and Kagan, 2007). For example, if employees are forced to change their password every week, they may write down their passwords on post-its attached to their desk. Although it is usually the companies’ Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) who makes the decisions on technical security measures, it is the compliance behaviour of the employees that largely determines the resulting level of the company's cyber- or information security.
CISO's thus have to make complicated decisions, involving not only security, but also cost (limited budget), usability, and impact on productivity, and the success of their decisions partly depends on the preferences and behaviour of the employees. It is often suggested (see literature review in the next section) that the most secure measures are perceived by employees as particularly user-unfriendly, suggesting that CISO's have to make a trade-off in this regard. But there is in fact little empirical evidence about whether such a trade-off exists, nor about the strength of this correlation. Furthermore, it is unknown what importance employees attach to (perceived) security and (perceived) usability of information security measures. This makes it hard for CISOs to select those technical measures that provide a high level of security but still are considered sufficiently usable, enabling effective security deployment. Therefore, it is important to study the employees’ behaviour, in particular in relation to the supposed trade-off between the security of such measures and their usability. This can be done within the framework of discrete choice theory (DCT) and discrete choice experiments (DCE), which is particularly suitable to study trade-offs. To this best of our knowledge, this method of data collection (DCE) and analysis (DCT) has not been used before in the context of cyber- or information security.
This paper intends to fill the above described knowledge gap by empirically studying employees’ trade-offs concerning the usability and security of information security measures within a DCE framework. In our DCE employees are asked to provide responses to hypothetical security packages describing combinations of technical security measures. Our approach is more sophisticated than the usual experimental set up used for choice analysis, in the sense that – in addition to observing choices among those security packages – we also explicitly measure and model perceptions concerning the security packages in terms of security and usability. Data are collected using an on-line experiment which was completed by a sample of 230 employees. The insights the application of this methodology reveals can be used by system administrators to choose security measures that are perceived to be usable and may increase compliance behaviour.
The next section discusses related work; after that, we provide a conceptual framework and derive research questions. Subsequently, the construction of the experiment, the data collection and the model estimation procedures are explained. This is followed by a presentation and discussion of the results of the estimated models, including implications for practice. Finally, the results are discussed in light of the literature and avenues for further research are discussed.
