Nurses are the largest segment of the health care workforce, and their skills can directly affect health care quality, safety, and efficiency. The 2010 release of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) report, The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health, stated, “the nursing workforce needs to be well educated, team oriented, adaptable, and able to apply competencies” to overcome the complex and numerous challenges facing the health care system (Institute of Medicine, 2011). New nurses, however, often lack confidence in their decisions and frequently do not possess the abilities in clinical reasoning expected for the practice role (Liou et al., 2016). This deficit can adversely impact nurses' ability to provide high quality, effective and safe care and achieve desired patient outcomes.
The nursing process involves the use of different cognitive skills and the ability to employ these skills correctly or accurately is directly related to the safety and quality of care (Lunney, 2007). Clinical decision making is a problem-solving skill that nurses use to define patient problems and select appropriate treatment. Diagnostic accuracy, another skill that is central to the quality of care, is defined as a process that enables a person to correctly assign meaning to and classify phenomena in clinical situations by integrating observation and critical thinking (Jahn and Braatz, 2014). In nursing, the problem statement has been called the “nursing diagnoses” and the NANDA Taxonomy II is the most extensively used classification of patient phenomena in the nursing domain, leading to improvements on the quality of nursing records (Muller-Staub et al., 2007; Tastan et al., 2014).
Deficiencies in preparing nurses for the complexities of care are reflected in studies examining accuracy and quality of nursing students' diagnostic inferences. Studies have reported that nursing students' inferences usually have low accuracy and are incomplete (Hong et al., 2015), and medically and physiologically oriented (Yont et al., 2014; Hong et al., 2015). There are several causes for these deficiencies including lack of: (1) theoretical knowledge, (2) clinical experience, (3) cognitive development, and (4) learning strategies to enhance clinical reasoning (Harmon and Thompson, 2015; Yont et al., 2014). Inaccurate nursing inferences can lead to errors, harm, poor patient outcomes, patient dissatisfaction and the associated costs of providing the wrong care (Lunney, 2007).
Researchers have investigated diagnostic accuracy of nursing students using case scenarios about patients in specific clinical situations (Noh and Lee, 2015; Peres et al., 2016). These studies have limitations in the depth and breadth of factors examined in the analysis and the absence of comparison of groups representing different levels of training and experience.
It is crucial to understand how the nursing students utilize the defining characteristics and related factors to identify patient diagnoses since diagnostic accuracy is based on the ability to connect these factors in ways that best represent a patient's current condition. Further, it is also important to determine if students are achieving the expected higher levels of diagnostic accuracy at different stages of their formal nursing education programs. Such could be used to augment curricula in ways that will improve nursing students' diagnostic accuracy that in turn positively impact patient and nursing outcomes. In sum, this vital knowledge will help educators to better prepare students to engage in accurate diagnostic reasoning and to evaluate the curricula and patient outcomes related to nursing diagnosis.
Diagnostic reasoning involves several cognitive activities, including information gathering, pattern recognition, problem solving, decision making, judgement, and empathy (Berner, 2016). Because of the complexity involved in measuring these skills and the lack of measures to evaluate such cognitive activities in a precise way, we decided to use the three-part statement method proposed by NANDA-I to access nursing students' diagnostic accuracy in this study. This method consists in correctly identifying the diagnostic label, the etiology (related factor), and the signs/symptoms (defining characteristics) during the clinical judgement (Herdman and Kamitsuru, 2014).
This study's aim was to compare the diagnostic accuracy within and across the NANDA-I diagnoses domains of junior, senior, and graduate-entry students.
