Bioinformatics [1] is a field of applied science in which computational and mathematical models are applied to biology. Quantum computing is an attractive field that deals with theoretical computational systems (i.e., quantum computers), combining visionary ideas of Computer Science, Physics, and Mathematics. It is based upon the quantum phenomena of entanglement and superposition to perform operations on quantum computers. Quantum mechanics with classical finite automata gives us quantum finite automata (QFA).
It is a theoretical model with finite memory for quantum computers, which plays a vital role in performing real-time computations. Quantum automata lay down the vision of quantum processors for performing quantum actions on reading inputs. It is defined as a quantum counterpart of a classical finite automaton. In QFA, quantum actions are performed by reading the symbols from the input tape.
The concept of quantum automata was first proposed by Moore and Crutchfield [2] and Kondacs and Watrous [3], independently. In 1997, Kondacs and Watrous [3] proposed a variant of quantum automata: measure-many one-way quantum finite automata (MM-1QFA) and two-way quantum finite automata (2QFA), which is a quantum variant of two-way finite automata. In the 2QFA model, the tape head can remain stationary or move either in the left or right direction. The 2QFA is more dominant than the classical model. In 2000, Moore and Crutchfield [2] proposed another variant of the quantum model: measure-once one-way quantum finite automata (MO-1QFA).
Nowadays, a major concern of bioinformatics is the analysis and representation of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). The grammatical formalism of biological sequences, such as DNA, RNA, and proteins, can be used to solve bioinformatics problems efficiently, such as multiple alignment calculation, classification, and prediction of biological sequences with their primary and secondary structures and their functions. The RNA structure folds around itself to do base pairing, which leads to the formation of various secondary structure motifs (loops). In RNA secondary structure formation, some of the base pairs contain exact complement base pairs, whereas other base pairs will not perform pairing because of the lack of exact complement pairs, thereby tending to form loops. Loops can be of various types, such as the hairpin loop, bulge loop, internal loop, double helix, and pseudoknot, depending on their shape. Moreover, RNA and DNA are made by monomers known as nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of a pentose carbon sugar, a phosphate group, and a nitrogenous base. If the sugar is ribose, then the polymer is RNA. If the sugar is deoxyribose, then the polymer is DNA. In addition, RNA is single-stranded structure, whereas DNA is double-stranded helical structure.
RNA structure is classified into primary, secondary and tertiary structures. RNA is single-stranded structure i.e. the sequence of the bases (a,c,g,u) are in linear order in its primary structure form [4], where purines are classified into adenine (a) and guanine (g), while pyrimidine are classified into cytosine (c) and uracil (u). RNA structure folds around itself to do base pairing which leads to the formation of various secondary structure motifs (loops). In secondary structure formation, all the bases do not contain exact complementary base pairs, some of the bases lack correct complement base pair, which leads to the formation of loops such as hairpin loops, internal loops, bulge loops and multi-branch loops. At least three bases are required to form loop [5]. Watson-Crick pairing mostly occurs whereas Wobbleâpair rarely occurs in RNA secondary structure. The tertiary structure involves orientation of these secondary structure motifs with respect to each other. It forms certain structures such as pseudoknot which have number of functional features. RNA tends to form single-stranded 3D structures due to presence of extra2′-hydroxyl group present in ribose part of RNA .
The field of quantum computation and information processing has subsequently made a significant impact on the academic and research community alike. Recently, various applications of QFA models to interactive proof system [6], [7], debate system [8]; temporal logical theory [9]; automata in molecular biology by quantum mechanics [10] has been investigated. There are various surveys papers on QFAs. Recently, [11] survey is comprehensive enough and provides a general framework for all possible models. Moreover, it has classified and survey results systematically by considering almost all possible research questions that have been examined until now e.g. simulation between classical and quantum models, state complexity, different language recognition models, decidability and undecidability results, interactive proofs, using advise, promise problems, etc.
Furthermore, various generalizations of quantum computational models such as quantum computation over infinite words [12]; QFA models on promise problems [13], multihead one-way quantum finite automata (1QFA(k)) [14]; Two-tape QFA models [15] has been introduced. Recently, Pan et al. [16] quantified the multiqubit states in Grover’s searching algorithm by using geometric measure of entanglement (GME). Li et al. [17] studied the phase estimation by using distributed semi-computing model. They have proposed a semi-distributed algorithm for phase estimation which has achieved exponential acceleration and performs better than the classical algorithm.
In classical automata theory, Freivalds [18] shown that a non-regular language L={ambm∣m≥1} can be recognized by 2PFA with arbitrary small error. Later, Dwork and Stockmeyer [19] proved that 2PFA takes an exponential time to recognize the same language. It has been shown that non-regular language can be recognized by 2PFA with error probability below 12, then there exists a constant b>0, such that for infinite number of input n, the expected runtime of 2PFA must exceed 2nb, where n is the length of input. It is known that 2DFA can recognize only regular languages [20], [21].
The research has consistently grown in the field of quantum finite automata theory. Kondacs and Watrous [3] shown that a non-regular language L={ambm∣m≥1} can be recognized by 2QFA with one-sided error in linear time. In this paper, we have shown that it is possible to define non-context free languages by using 2QFA. This paper is concerned with representing the secondary structure loops of RNA using 2QFA, as the secondary structure loops of RNA contain nested dependencies. But, it cannot be represented by 2DFA, and two-way probabilistic finite automata can parse these sequences in exponential time. Thus, it follows that 2QFA is more powerful than its classical variants in terms of language recognition.
1.1. Prior workVarious representations of DNA and RNA sequences using formal grammar and automata have been found in literature. For example, Kalra and Kumar [22] represented DNA and RNA biological sequences, such as inverted repeat, pseudoknot and tandem repeat using state grammar and deep pushdown automata. Sung [23] represented the secondary structure loops of RNA, such as the hairpin loop, internal loop, bulge loop, and double helix, using context-sensitive grammar. Various forms of context-free grammar are also used to represent RNA sequences [24], [25].In addition, cross-interaction grammar was used by Rivas and Eddy [26] to represent the secondary structure loops of RNA, including pseudoknots. Searls [27] used indexed grammar to represent DNA and RNA sequences, such as tandem repeat, inverted repeat, and pseudoknot. Searls [28] also represented DNA sequences using string variable grammar. Mizoguchi et al. [29] used stochastic multiple context-free grammar to represent various classes of pseudoknots. Parallel communicating grammar systems were used by Cai et al. [30] to represent the pseudoknot structure of RNA.Various researchers have represented the structures of RNA and DNA using concept of grammar and automata theory. Kuppusamy et al. [31] introduced the concept of matrix-insertion deletion grammar and represented the commonly found structures of DNA and RNA which occur at intramolecular level such as pseudoknot, hairpin, stem and loop, cloverleaf, dumbbell and attenuator. Kuppusamy et al. [32] also represented the DNA and RNA biomolecules structures which occur at intermolecular level such as nick language, double strand language and linear hybridization (ligated) languages using matrix insertion-deletion grammar. Further, Kuppusamy and Mahendran [33] extended their own work of bio-molecular representation using matrix-insertion deletion grammar and represented the RNA and DNA bio-molecular structures of the intermolecular level, intramolecular level and RNA secondary level using matrix-insertion deletion grammar. Mahendran and Kuppusamy [34] also modeled commonly occurring of RNA pairing process using matrix insertion-deletion grammar. Various commonly occurring structures are represented as double bulge loop, extended internal loop and triple stem and loop. Fernau et al. [35] proposed universal matrix insertion grammars of small size as an extension of matrix insertion-deletion grammar to represent all DNA computations.Anderson et al. [36], [37] represented the RNA structure using stochastic context-free grammar. Rothemund [38] and Cavaliere et al. [39] represented the action of a restriction enzyme in DNA using a Turing machine and pushdown automata, respectively. Furthermore, Krasinski et al. [40] extended the Cavaliere et al. [39] approach and represented the action of a restriction enzyme in DNA using circular pushdown automata in which stack and input tape are on the same circular strand. Recently, Khrennikov and Yurova [10] have proposed a model of protein behavior by using theory of automata and also explored the similarities between the modeling of behavior of proteins and quantum systems.
1.2. ContributionsAfter introducing some preliminary concepts in Section 2, the following contributions are claimed:•Two-way Quantum Finite Automata of Hairpin Loop (Section 3).•Two-way Quantum Finite Automata of Internal Loop (Section 3).•Two-way Quantum Finite Automata of Double Helix Loop (Section 3).We will conclude in Section 4.
