The internet has been defined as the communication superhighway that links, hooks, and transforms the entire world into a global village where a different individual can easily get in touch, see, or speak to one another, as well as exchange information instantaneously from one point of the globe to another (Shitta, 2002). This technology has reshaped the tertiary educational practice in terms of improving academic learning (Apuke and Iyendo, 2017; Manasijević et al., 2016; Iyendo and Halil, 2015) and will be more feasible in the future. Hussain (2012) reported that the internet and its usage in higher education have improved educational development and research and has encouraged virtual interactions for sharing research findings.
The rationale for internet utilization for academic and research purposes stems from the benefits derived, such as free access to online journals, magazines and other information resources. It has been theorized (i.e. Technology acceptance model) that the perceived usefulness or perceived utility is the major rationale for the acceptance of technological devices such as the internet. The perceived usefulness (PU) is described as the extent to which a person perceived that utilizing a particular technological device will improve a given job performance. Whilst perceived ease of use (PEOU) is the extent a person feels that utilizing a particular technological device would require less effort, or how well a technological device can fasten a work without necessarily putting much effort (Tezer and Soykan, 2017; Davis, 1989). In this regard, Sahin et al. (2010) pointed out that the use of internet in the educational setting has enabled easy access to many resources and information sharing. This conforms with Audu's (2006) claim that the internet is beneficial in several ways in the academic settings in terms of providing access to global sources of information and permitting researchers to discuss and share experiences. Bashir et al. (2008) noted that educators who advocated for technology integration into the learning process had the impression that it will improve learning and prepare students to effectively participate in the twenty-first-century workplace. It has been observed that new digital technologies have been widely used in higher education institutions (Dogruer et al., 2011), and this efficiently helps students to carry out substantial research work (Devi and Roy, 2012). Despite these possible benefits of the internet for learning, instructing, and research, there is the limited provision of efficient internet services in most tertiary institutions (Ureigho et al., 2006) in developing countries. Muniandy (2010) comment that the adoption of the internet would be meaningless in the educational settings without appropriate internet facilities.
Like in any other higher institution of learning around the globe, Nigerian university undergraduate students are often required to conduct diverse research work as they progress through their final year. The qualities of a student's research and learning are largely dependent on the quality, quantity and current internet resources referred to (Ilo and Ifijeh, 2010; Mbofong, 2003). This has attracted research debate on the use of internet in contemporary educational contexts in developing countries such as Nigeria. However, most of these studies predominantly highlight its impact on academic performance (grades), communication, and general educational purposes (Ifinedo, 2017; Cerretani et al., 2016; Rashid and Han, 2016; Nwagwu et al., 2009; Adegboji and Toyo, 2006; Oduwole, 2004). This indicates that detailed studies that try to interpret student perspective on internet access and usefulness for research and academic learning are still in their embryonic phase (Emeka and Nyeche, 2016; Fasae and Adegbilero-Iwari, 2015; Adekunmisi et al., 2013; Nwezeh, 2010). It is worthwhile to mention that most of these documented researches based merely on students within Southern, Eastern and Western region (Afolabi, 2015; Otunla, 2013; Agboola, 2010; Ani, 2010; Nwagwu et al., 2009; Omotayo, 2006; Adogbeji and Akporhonor, 2005). This strong focus has led to a limited research conducted among students' in the North-Eastern part which is amid slower technological change (Ahmed and Bukar, 2016; Emeka and Nyeche, 2016). Though, there is evidence to show that a limited proportion of the population has access to the Internet at home, yet, little is known if students in this region incorporate this technology into their research and learning (Navaretti and Tarr, 2017; Hartnett and Russell, 2002). Poushter (2016) observed that technological development in universities within this region is not much advanced and very little research in the implementation of information and communication technology (ICT) has been undertaken as compared to research in universities in other regions of Nigeria.
This backdrop provides a scope for an in-depth research into the students' experience and perspective on the access and utility of electronic sources for academic research and learning. Thus, it is pertinent to research into how these students find ways to make use of the internet to facilitate their academic research and learning. This also calls for exploring the challenges facing the students in this region as it relates to internet usage for academic research and learning. It is believed that the outcomes of this current study will contribute to enhancing the empirical research results that are beneficial for informing teaching and learning practice in higher education. This will also provide an understanding of the application and appreciation of internet resources by students residing in this overlooked region.
