1.1. Forensic case analysis using 3D dataDigital information has proven to be highly useful for the reconstruction of crime or accident scenes as well as for the documentation of forensic findings. Forensic investigations have made use of digital photography for around two decades. Images can be further exploited to reconstruct 3D surface models based on computer-aided photogrammetric methods. 3D scanners are increasingly used to document the three-dimensional geometry of crime scenes, items and humans.Additionally, recent years have brought an increasing interest in 3D medical imaging modalities like computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [1], [2], [3], [4]. These modalities are now on the cusp of routine use in legal medicine. The additional benefit of CT and MRI over images and 3D surface reconstruction is their ability to record and thereby preserve forensic information from the inside of victims, such as the spatial configuration of findings, which inevitably gets destroyed in autopsies. MRI data are the only non-invasive source of information from inside the body in living victims. In post mortem cases, CT and MRI are both a valuable tool to complement autopsies by preserving spatial interrelations of findings. However, CT and MRI are limited to visually perceptible sensations and therefore will not replace autopsies unless evidence from olfactory and tactile sensations may be neglected.Generally speaking, 3D imaging modalities help to get a more complete impression of a forensic case. Evidence invisible by sole investigation from the outside becomes readily available for case analysis.
1.2. General requirementsTomography data has the potential to be extremely helpful in the forensic context, but there are several problems exacerbating its daily use. Unlike photographs, understanding X-ray computed tomography or magnetic resonance tomography data requires radiological knowledge and experience in their interpretation. Radiologists typically read the data by browsing through stacks of 2D slices in orthogonal planes using a radiological workstation and radiology software designed for clinical investigations. Such tools assume that the main problem is the detection and classification of anomalies in the data, as required for clinical diagnosis. Furthermore, it is assumed that users are radiology experts, who are able to build up a mental 3D model of the anatomy. Functionality to generate visually appealing 3D visualizations based on direct volume rendering techniques (DVR) [5] is typically included. However, it is limited, since the focus is laid on clinical questions, which rarely demanded complex 3D visualizations.Forensic questions differ from the clinical view on tomography data. In the clinical context, radiologists are trained to detect and assess pathological findings with the goal to find or optimize treatment strategies. Forensic case analysis is interested in findings supporting case understanding. This includes everything that can explain the cause of death, injuries and the course of events. Such findings are not limited to clinically relevant ones. In addition, lesions such as haematomas, bruises, air/gas inclusions in atypical regions and other findings, which are mostly irrelevant for medical treatment, demand attention. Another fundamental difference to clinical diagnostics is the fact that the spatial distribution of findings is at least as important as their occurrence. Spatial relationships between findings are valuable clues for forensic event reconstruction, to e.g. determine direction of a force application. Therefore, visualization tools depicting all the structures of interest and aiding the understanding of 3D properties, such as the spatial locations, distances, and shapes of individual findings are of utmost importance. In some cases lesions need to be explicitly extracted from the data to obtain quantitative indices. This requires image analysis functionality to perform image segmentation, i.e. the separation of semantically meaningful structures from the rest of the dataset. These operations are not optimally supported by standard radiology software.Forensic case analysis should include as many pieces of evidence as possible. They must be jointly studied to maximize the probability to recognize complex connections between findings. Therefore, a computer-aided case analysis tool should ideally support data from all sources of digital information available. Integrated visualization techniques offering conjoint display of multiple spatially overlapping 3D datasets and seamless inclusion of 2D images and 3D surface models are a key requirement. Joint visualization can greatly help forensic experts to study spatial interrelations, draw conclusions, and thereby help to reconstruct the course of events. However, this type of visualization is not possible with current radiology software. Therefore, tools which support forensic case analysis based on interactive processing and joint visualization of heterogeneous 3D datasets are highly desirable.After successful case analysis, the information gained needs to be conveyed to the court scenario, where persons without medical background need to understand the findings and the course of events. Illustrations composed of all the data used in the analysis stage are a good starting point. However, for the target audience further explanation might be required. Ideally, images and videos presented in court should be self-explanatory to great extent. Therefore, a forensic software toolkit should also include functionality to point out and highlight particular case relevant findings and features to illustrate their interpretation by the expert. In case this is still not sufficient, animations and text or image annotations may be needed.
1.3. Data characteristicsCT has established itself as the most frequently used 3D imaging modality in post mortem forensic imaging. Reasons include high resolution and volume coverage, low scan costs, comprehensive availability of scanners, and very importantly, the fact that radiation exposure is irrelevant for post mortem examinations. CT is especially well suited for cases involving bone injuries or gas inclusions. On the downside, soft tissue contrast is limited, and artefacts due to metal objects may occur. MRI excels in soft tissue related questions. Since MRI is free of ionizing radiation, it is also the ideal 3D modality for clinical-forensic examinations of the living. Forensic questions often benefit from MRI protocols tailored to the task at hand or the modification of existing ones to better depict forensically relevant information, like haematoma [6]. MRI images share the property of good contrast for tissues in question, but they suffer from signal inhomogeneities and geometric distortions. These issues complicate 3D visualization. Scanning time restrictions and image quality requirements often lead to small scan regions around injuries in question. While this is acceptable for case analysis by forensic experts with anatomical knowledge, jurists and laymen in court might fail to understand or even misunderstand the case, if not provided with illustrations showing sufficient anatomical context. Therefore, computer-aided tools to visually relate spatially restricted scan data to their anatomical context are needed.
1.4. Tool overviewIn this work, we present a novel software tool for forensic case analysis and illustration based on almost any type of 3D data and other sources of digital information available. The tool supports the whole case work-flow from analysis to presentation in court by providing three-dimensional visualizations and illustrations of the data at hand at any time. This is facilitated based on co-joint three-dimensional display of data from different sources, including but not limited to volumetric 3D CT or MRI datasets, 3D surface models, and 2D images. Furthermore, the data can be interactively conditioned and processed to reveal and visualize forensically relevant details and to obtain quantitative indices. Joint visualization of multiple datasets allows to study spatial interrelations of findings. Case presentation is further aided by annotation functionality based on text labels, images and animations to explain individual findings in more detail and to illustrate the experts’ interpretation. Results can be exported as largely self-explanatory illustrations and video clips suitable for presentation of the forensic findings in court.
