Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas L.) is a very important agricultural crop that is rich in carbohydrate and can serve as a source of protein, carotenoid, vitamin C. and fibres (Oladejo et al., 2017), particularly in the industrial production of health and pharmaceutical products. They are also commonly processed as bakery products, snacks and fries for human consumption. However, sweet potato is susceptible to spoilage even at ambient and refrigerated temperatures, due to its high moisture content. Thus, it must be utilised within weeks after harvest or must be preserved properly. Drying is the most common method of preserving agricultural crops. This preservation method which involves the removal of moisture from a material is often used as a unit operation in the production of premium food products. Traditionally, dried sweet potato is produced using sun drying, while hot-air drying is widely used in its industrial and commercial production (Oh et al., 2017). These conventional methods are direct, simple and affordable. However, they are time consuming (Onwude et al., 2016a, Onwude et al., 2016b, Onwude et al., 2016c, Toontom et al., 2012), and affect the final product quality (Singh and Pandey, 2012).
Moisture content and colour are two important quality parameters that affect the acceptability of dried agricultural products (Onwude et al., 2017). Over the years, quality attributes of dried agricultural crops are often determined using destructive methods. These methods, which include manual measurements (vernier caliper, micrometer, etc.) and displacement measurement have proven to be inadequate because they allow the product to be in contact with the measurement tool, and the destructive, manual, and inefficient nature, especially for in-line quality monitoring in the case of direct measuring method (Romano et al., 2011, Romano et al., 2008, Yan et al., 2008). These limitations can be overcome by applying non-destructive techniques which offer more reliable and promising results.
Computer vision (CV) based on Red-green-blue (RGB) imaging technology, which consists of charge-coupled device (CCD) camera, computer and software for analysing captured data associated with the quality parameters has increasingly been applied in most post-harvest processes. It has been used as a non-destructive method for detecting various quality properties of different agricultural crops, such as ripeness, colour, moisture content, firmness and soluble solids contents (SSC) (Hashim et al., 2010, Mohd Ali et al., 2017a, Mohd Ali et al., 2017b, Mohd Ali et al., 2017c, Sanaeifar et al., 2016, Vesali et al., 2011, Zheng et al., 2006). For instance, Hashim et al. (2010) demonstrated a significant correlation between RGB parameters and ripening stages of banana during storage. In the same vein, Mohd Mohd Ali et al., 2017a, Mohd Ali et al., 2017b, Mohd Ali et al., 2017c observed that RGB parameters were able to predict the firmness, SSC, pH, moisture content, and colour properties of watermelons during storage, with R2 > 0.5. Fernández et al. (2005) applied CV imaging techniques in monitoring the quality changes of apple disc during drying. The result of their study showed the CV imaging techniques was able to classify the colour changes of apple disc during drying with an accuracy of 95%. The results reported by these authors have shown that RGB based CV has the potential to replace the conventional method of assessing and monitoring quality parameters during postharvest processes. But the advantages of combining CV and other non-destructive method for increased efficiency have not been thoroughly investigated.
Recently, backscattering optical technology has gained increased interest as a non-invasive quality monitoring technique in post-harvest handling and processing of agricultural crops (Hashim et al., 2013, Qing et al., 2007, Qing et al., 2008, Romano et al., 2008). Backscattering laser light technology involves the capturing of scattered light because of photons projection at several angles in a material. The scattered light could be either elastic or inelastic in nature. For elastic scattering mode (Rayleigh and Mie scattering), the incident and reflected light are the same. On the other hand, the inelastic scattering mode (Raman scattering) occurs when there is an energy exchange between photons and molecules (Lu, 2016). According to Lu (2016), Mie scattering mode can best be used to describe the light scattering in food and agricultural products, because it is suitable for particles of any size. Furthermore, the dissemination of photons through the surface of the material depends on the material’s physicochemical properties such as colour and moisture content (Romano et al. 2012). For instance, Mohd Mohd Ali et al., 2017a, Mohd Ali et al., 2017b, Mohd Ali et al., 2017c evaluated the quality of watermelon during storage using laser-induced backscattering imaging emitting at 658 nm wavelength. This method was able to accurately predict the moisture content changes of watermelon during storage with R2 of 0.942. A reduction in the moisture content of a product results in a reduction in the scattering of measurable photons (Romano et al., 2010). According to Romano et al. (2012), this technology is cheaper and more rapid when compared to other optical techniques. This method does not require spectral analysis as it is the case for near-infrared-radiation imaging techniques (NIR) such as multispectral and hyperspectral imaging. This novel technique has also proven to be viable and very promising, and serves as a basis for developing in-line monitoring systems for the drying of agricultural crops.
More interestingly, laser light backscattering imaging technology can be operated in combination with CV for improved efficiency and accuracy, and to provide better evaluation. Furthermore, this novel imaging approach is highly economical, because the scattered light and digital images are both captured from the same camera source with no additional cost. A limited number of papers was found in the available literature on combined CV and backscattering imaging parameters in inspecting the quality of agricultural crops during drying. Romano et al. (2012) studied the use of CCD camera combined with laser diodes mainly for moisture content determination, and CCD camera without lasers for colour determination of bell pepper during drying. The results of their research, which was conducted on different varieties of bell pepper showed that these monitoring techniques are very promising and encouraging with R2 ranging from 0.33 to 0.93 for moisture content predictions, and 0.87–0.97 for colour properties predictions. Most recently, Udomkun et al. (2017) investigated the coupling of computer vision and laser light backscattering parameters for colour evaluation of papaya during drying. In their study, multivariate correlations of measured backscattering parameters as well as the digital image properties adequately fitted for colour validations. The obtained R2 values for L*, a* and b* colour parameters were greater than 0.90, respectively. But the effect of temperature and time on the combined imaging parameters was not described. Their study also considered few imaging parameters and the various contribution of individual imaging parameters (CV and laser light backscattering parameters, respectively) were not considered. Besides, for combined CV and laser light backscattering parameters to be accepted for monitoring the drying process of agricultural crops both commercially and industrially, more robust experiments, that will include several optical parameters and different agricultural crops must be conducted. In addition, a better understanding of combined CV and backscattering optical parameters in model development and quality prediction must also be investigated to fill the market and research gap. To the best of the authors knowledge, there is no known study on the potential of applying combined CV and backscattering imaging parameters to monitor and predict the quality attributes of sweet potato during drying, as sweet potato exhibits different morphological and physiochemical properties from other agricultural crops such as apple (Valentina et al., 2016), banana (Valentina et al., 2016) and papaya (Antonio et al., 2011) during drying. Taken together, the objective of this study was to investigate the potential of using CV imaging system in combination with laser diode in monitoring and predicting quality properties of sweet potato during drying.
