Education has moved into the digital era, and laptops and other technologies have been progressively introduced into classrooms around the world. This diffusion has been partly fostered by public authorities, often as part of the One Laptop per Child (OLPC) program, whereby an education authority provides laptops to children (for free or at a subsidized cost) instead of traditional textbooks. The value of OLPC programs is rarely questioned, as they appear to be modernising schools and boosting pupils’ acquisition of information and communication technology (ICT) skills. However, in the economics literature, no consensus has yet been reached about the impact of OLPC programs in particular, and the use of computers in general, on student skills and academic performance.
In this study, we analyse a program implemented by the Catalan government (known first as eduCAT1 × 1 and later as eduCAT2.0), aimed at providing laptops, wireless connectivity and digital boards to participating schools. Specifically, we study the impact that this program had on student performance in Catalan, Spanish, English and mathematics.
This paper adds to the existing literature on the effect of computer use on academic achievement in two main aspects. First, there are only a few studies examining the impact of an OLPC program on student performance in Europe. Second, our analysis considers population data for students in secondary education for an entire educational administration (the region of Catalonia) and not just a local experience limited to a few schools.
Our results consistently show that the eduCAT program had a small, but statistically significant negative effect on student performance. This negative effect is greater among boys than among girls. In order to check the robustness of these findings, administrative data are combined with information on school time-varying confounding characteristics derived from a survey we conducted in almost 70% of all schools. Results are robust to the inclusion of this additional information.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the related literature. In Section 3, we outline the program and provide a description of the data used. Section 4 describes the econometric methodology and presents the empirical results. Section 5 concludes.
