Many different types of user interfaces such as two-dimensional interactive surfaces, three-dimensional interfaces (e.g., haptic and tangible interfaces, Virtual Reality interfaces) and speech recognizer interfaces (e.g., Amazon's “Alexa” ) increasingly influence our everyday experiences, interaction behaviors and lifestyle. Thus, one popular scientific undertaking is the quest for providing users with intuitive human-computer interaction (HCI) environments that allow technology to work for people by anticipating human knowledge, decisions and needs. Contemporary interface design, however, tends to rely on socio-culturally produced representation systems, and only users familiar with these can successfully interact with an interface. I will report on two studies conducted within the collaborative project Universal Cognitive User Interface (UCUI), which aims at developing a universal hardware module that enables intuitive interaction with technical devices whilst safeguarding privacy. Following a “design for all” - approach, such intuitive devices should enable effective interaction with a system based on the subconscious application of basic prior knowledge that is available to users of all ages independently from previous technical experience (Mohs et al., 2006, Turner, 2008). Such human-centered technologies need to implement models for a variety of human experiences. Therefore, this investigation focuses on the impact of one fundamental building block of human thought that should influence interaction with computers, which is the development of image schemas and associated primary metaphors.
Formed in earliest multimodal sensorimotor experiences, image schemas are basic pre-conceptual, universal patterns of human experience integrating information from multiple perceptual modalities (e.g., visual, acoustic and haptic information; Johnson, 1987, Lakoff, 1987). Primary metaphors refer to cognitive mappings across conceptual domains such as valence (e.g., good versus bad) and verticality (i.e., up-down; Lakoff & Johnson, 2011b). Grounded in everyday sensorimotor experience, image schemas and primary metaphors serve to structure human thought, behavior and experience (Lakoff and Johnson, 2011a, Lakoff and Johnson, 2011b), which should include human interaction with technical devices.
Findings (e.g., Hurtienne et al., 2010) seem to support this hypothesis and suggest image-schematic primary metaphors as valid tools for designing intuitive technical interfaces; but the literature on concept formation questions the extent to which this applies to all image schemas alike. Due to differences in developmental origin, some image schemas and associated primary metaphors may exert greater influence on human behavior and thought than others (e.g., Collins and Loftus, 1975, Mandler and Pagán Cánovas, 2014). For instance, the ability for abstract conceptualizations of an above and a below (linked to the image schema of verticality) develops well before the ability to conceptualize a between (Quinn, 2003).
Thus, early image schemas may exert greater influence on human behavior when interacting with computers than late image schemas. In the following, I will introduce the mental representations of everyday sensorimotor experience that form the cognitive basis for the mappings of spatial image schemas and abstract concepts (i.e., the emergence of primary metaphors). Then, I will explore the potential of image schemas and primary metaphors in HCI.
1.1. Mental representations of everyday sensorimotor experienceImage schemas are defined as basic mental representations of physical dimensions that form the essential building blocks of more complex mental representations (Gibbs and Colston, 1995, Grady, 2005). As we experience an everyday event like Opening the water tap, a mental representation of this event is encoded and stored in semantic memory. Such mental representations of events contain various associated components, such as typical agents, instruments and spatial information (Gibbs and Colston, 1995, McRae et al., 2001). Similarly, such semantic associations also represent abstract concepts such as the good and the bad (Nakamura & Zeng-Treitler, 2012). The more often a particular physical (and concrete) experience is related to a specific abstract entity such as “feeling happy and good whilst having an upright posture”, the stronger should be concrete-abstract associations such as the good is up, the bad is down. These associations are explicitly stored in semantic memory to form the basis for primary metaphors. Frequent retrieval from and restoring in sematic memory serves to strengthen the semantic associations that represent abstract concepts (Collins & Loftus, 1975). Regardless of whether an event is physically re-experienced or simply recalled in verbal interaction (i.e., talking about feeling low), concrete-abstract associations are retrieved automatically and fast from semantic memory without the need of more controlled and strategic cognitive processes (e.g., Neely, 1991). Fast retrieval is highly relevant for the human brain to generate context-specific predictions that are necessary anticipate and prepare for events when interacting with the environment such as in HCI (Bar, 2007).People often also spontaneously gesture when they interact with the environment, and many gestures serve to express the semantic content of what is being said and thought about. Such representational gestures may indicate directions, shapes and movements of referents as well as refer to abstract ideas (McNeill, 1992). Since gestures are a product of mental simulations of motoric actions and events, they should activate associated mental representations that entail image-schematic primary metaphors (gesture-as-simulated-action approach; e.g., Hostetter and Alibali, 2008, Barsalou, 1999; Marstaller & Burianova, 2015). Likewise, producing or imagining body movements facilitates the comprehension of associated metaphorical phrases (Wilson & Gibbs, 2007). This suggests an influence of image-schematic primary metaphors on human thought (e.g., expectations) and behavior (e.g., gesture and touch responses) in HCI.
1.2. Image schemas and primary metaphors in HCIPrevious research seems to support that primary metaphors are valid tools for designing intuitive interfaces (Hurtienne et al., 2010). The literature also suggests that concept formation of some image schemas (e.g., the path schema) occurs earlier to exert a greater influence on the development of thought and language compared to later developed image schemas (e.g., the center–periphery schema; e.g., Mandler & Pagán Cánovas, 2014). Basic image schemas occurring early in infancy at preverbal stages are the path, start and end path, up-down, container, location, blockage, into, out of and open schema. Late image schemas that build upon the basic primitives are center-periphery, scale, balance, near-far, multiplicity/ unity, cycle and other process schemas (such as iteration) as well as non-spatial image schemas linked to attributes such as big-small, warm-cold (Mandler & Pagán Cánovas, 2014). In line with the suggestion that basic image schemas are more productive in thought and language, words (and word pairs) linked to early, basic image schemas (e.g., up = 43.627 occurrences; down = 23.548 occurrences) appear to be more frequent than those linked to late image schemas (e.g., near = 6.834 occurrences; far = 5.322 occurrences; Wortschatzportal, 2017) at least in German language. More frequent basic image schemas in language (and thought) should increase opportunities for retrieving, encoding and re-storing information that is associated with basic image schemas. This leads to greater association strengths for basic image schemas and serves faster retrieval with greater ease compared to late (and less frequent) image schemas.In line with this, participants applied early image schemas significantly more frequently than late image schemas in a speech interaction task employing a Wizard of Oz paradigm (Huber et al., 2018). Furthermore, studies show that the frequency with which word pairs occur in language in a specific order (e.g.; up-down = 27.718; near-far = 10.042) influences the ease of retrieval and response times (Louwerse, 2008; Wortschatzportal, 2017).1To investigate the impact of developmental origin of image schemas on the extent to which primary metaphors (e.g., more is up; important is central) can aid intuitive interface design, I conducted both a questionnaire-based as well as a gesture and touch interaction study. Even though participants in the gesture interaction task were free to move in a three-dimensional space, both studies focused on human behavior when interacting with a two-dimensional interactive surface computer (i.e., touch screen).Further, I examined the extent to which age, gender, and technical experience may influence image schema application. Due to their early origin in childhood, I expected the application of early image schemas and associated primary metaphors to be widely independent from individual difference variables such as age, gender, and technical experience. On the contrary, differences in the application of later developed image schemas and associated primary metaphors may be related to individual difference variables. In line with this, there were some significant age-related differences in the extent to which image schemas were applied in agreement with primary metaphors in a previous investigation (Hurtienne et al., 2010).Based on the literature cited above, I tested three hypotheses in both the questionnaire-based study (study 1) and touch and gesture interaction study (study 2).1An impact of image-schematic metaphors on participants’ responses independently from developmental origin was expected: Questionnaire responses as well as touch and gesture responses should be significantly above chance level (50%) in agreement with image-schematic primary metaphors in both developmental target groups (early image schemas, late image schemas).2An impact of developmental origin of image schemas on participants’ responses was expected: In both studies, agreement of primary metaphors associated with early, basic image schemas should be significantly greater than primary metaphors associated with late image schemas.3An impact of individual difference variables on responses linked to late image schemas only was expected: Agreement of primary metaphors associated with late image schemas should decrease with age as well as increase with technical experience.
