Computer controlled scanning electron microscopy (CCSEM) is a powerful method for characterizing individual airborne particles. It has the advantage that thousands of particles can be characterized individually in short time by localizing particles in backscattered electron images and measuring their composition with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Morphological parameters of individual particles can be obtained as additional characteristics of the particles. CCSEM as well as other methods for automated single particle analysis like Raman microscopy (Huang et al., 2013, Ivleva et al., 2007) or aerosol mass spectroscopy (Lanz et al., 2007, Richard et al., 2011) are particularly useful for apportionment studies of ambient aerosols. An important step of the apportionment procedure is the classification of the particles. Comparing ambient particle compositions with a library of reference emission particles allows assigning the particles to corresponding sources.
Many different approaches have been proposed for the classification process, including rule-based expert systems (e.g. Willis, Blanchard, & Conner, 2002), hierarchical (e.g. Osán et al., 2001; Huang et al., 2013) and non-hierarchical cluster analysis (e.g. Bernard & Van Grieken, 1986), artificial neural networks (e.g. ART-2a) (Hopke, 2008) and other statistical approaches like principal component analysis (PCA) (e.g. Genga et al., 2012) and Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) (Tan, Malpica, Evans, Owega, & Fila, 2002).
Rule-based classifiers using chemical boundary conditions (CBC) are widely used and are suitable for simple situations with well-known sources (Ebert et al., 2002, Ebert et al., 2000, Ebert et al., 2004, Kandler et al., 2007, Kang et al., 2008, Ro et al., 2004). For example, Lorenzo, Kaegi, Gehrig, and Grobéty (2006) studied particles originated from railway traffic by using a simple but efficient rule-based class building system, based on EDS net intensities of Fe, Si, Al, S and Ca.
Willis et al. (2002) proposed in the guidelines for the application of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) of the US Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) a rule-based classifier, using chemical composition, morphological aspect ratio, total X-ray counts and grayscale brightness value.
Anaf, Horemans, Van Grieken, and De Wael (2012) compared their CBC classifier, based on procedures proposed by Kandler et al. (2007), with a method for hierarchical clustering (HCL) (e.g. Osán et al., 2001). They concluded that CBC has advantages compared to HCL, as cutting the clustering dendrogram at different heights in the latter method is somewhat arbitrary. Furthermore, they pointed out that HCL has some difficulties with particles of mixed phases. These particles often have wide compositional ranges, which is difficult to map by hierarchical clustering. Nevertheless, HCL and non-hierarchical clustering are widely used for particle classification (Bein et al., 2005, Bernard and Van Grieken, 1986, Genga et al., 2012, Kim and Hopke, 1988, Moffet et al., 2013). Handling of outliers is a major problem in clustering. Most methods cannot properly deal with outliers, which have a strong impact on the cluster shapes.
In this paper, a new two-stage classifier for particles is presented. It consists of a combination of a rule-based first stage and a robust model-based second stage classifier. For each particle, element concentrations below 5 wt% are set to 0 wt% and the proportions of the remaining elements are rescaled to sum up to 100%. This elimination step is necessary because most spectra are noisy and, without thresholding, erroneous peak attributions are likely. For a system with better signal/noise ratio the threshold could be lowered. The set of the remaining elements defines the main class, which is subdivided in a second stage by a robust model-based clustering method. The resulting classes are hereafter called subclasses and are (after a transformation) described by (p-1)-dimensional ellipsoids with p being the number of elements present in the corresponding main class. Outliers are excluded automatically and hence have no effect on the shapes of the subclasses. Outliers found during classification are not assigned to any class and declared as unknown. As the classifier was trained with samples exposed to a broad range of sources, it is able to classify a broad range of airborne particles. If required, new classes can be easily included by further training. The classifier works for homogeneous particles, heterogeneous mixed particles and solid solutions.
