The human skull may be considered to consist of a sandwich of marrow-infused cancellous bone between two layers of essentially solid cortical bone. The transit-time of an ultrasound wave through the skull can vary significantly due to anatomical inconsistencies in both the composition and overall thickness of the skull [1]. This has the potential to create phase-interference and hence significant wave degradation, which may impede both diagnostic imaging and therapeutic interventions of the skull. A number of ‘active’ approaches have previously been considered to compensate for variation in transit-time, adjusting the transmission delay of ultrasound pulses from a large array of individual transducer elements; essentially a phased-array approach. By first analysing the variation in transit time, time-reversal compensation may be applied [2], [3], [1]. Analytical [4] and simulation [5] approaches have also been considered based upon X-ray CT data. A passive micro-bubble-derived aberration correction technique has recently been described [6], comparing actual and predicted transit times at each element of a hemispherical array. Although these techniques have successfully demonstrated a reduction in transcranial ultrasound wave degradation, they are inherently complex, necessitating electronic control of each of the individual transducer elements, which typically numbers 1000 in total; further, they are inherently restricted to the ultrasound system being utilised.
The author has previously hypothesised that the primary ultrasound attenuation mechanism in complex porous media such as cancellous bone is phase-interference caused by the variation in transit time as detected by the phase-sensitive ultrasound receive transducer [7]. He also proposed a concept describing the propagation of ultrasound through such a complex structure as an array of parallel sonic-rays. The transit time of each sonic-ray is determined by the relative proportion of the two constituents of differing propagation velocity, for example bone tissue and marrow, regardless of the sample’s structure. Hence, transit time minima (tmin) and maxima (tmax) correspond to propagation through entire bone and marrow respectively. A transit time spectrum (TTS) describes the proportion P(ti) of sonic-rays having a particular transit time (ti) between tmin and tmin. Reflection and refraction are not incorporated, being considered to be secondary phenomena. The sonic-ray concept has been initially validated through a comparison of experimental measurement and computer simulation in acrylic step-wedge samples of varying transit time heterogeneity immersed in water [8].
The author hypothesises that the sonic-ray concept may be applied to create a ‘passive’ twin-layer ultrasound phase-interference compensator (TL-UPIC) that would significantly reduce wave degradation in the skull. The first aim of this paper was to investigate through computer simulation, the relationships between partial and full spatial-temporal matching upon phase-interference induced ultrasound wave degradation. The second aim was to create and experimentally validate a passive TL-UPIC.
