We may well claim that, from the computer scientist's point of view, our era is rather dominated by modern computing applications and systems that place human beings in the center of their attention. In general, the next big thing in computer science is information handling and, in particular, the type of information deriving from human-generated actions or tasks that are interconnected by definition. Thus, it is easy to understand that information no longer arise in seclusion, leading to new, innovative ways of interpreting them. In this framework the term context came into serious play within relevant computer science tasks a little more than 15 years ago, although its true origins date back to the beginnings of computation [5].
In the field of humanistic computer science, which ranges from the theoretical branches of computer science and information theory to artificial intelligence and multimedia analysis tasks, contextual information plays an ever increasing role. To the best of our recent knowledge researchers and students are eager to obtain comprehensive and insightfully written reviews of related studies on modern computing information handling. This survey attempts to provide a rich source of ideas for them and a good point of reference for those who want to start studying contextual information in depth within the framework imposed by the latest computer science advances. Among its goals is the identification of different types of contextual information in humanistic informatics and the provision of an overview on the definition and utilization of context variations exploited within semantics and the modern social media/networks content analysis approaches and applications.
The structure of the rest of this paper is as follows: in Section 2 we explain in brief detail the motivation behind investigating context in modern computing tasks and applications. Section 3 discusses contextual semantics, whereas the most recent trends in the social media world are summarized in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the resulted findings, conclusions and future perspectives of each one of the contextual building blocks of the survey, whereas Section 6 concludes this work and presents potential future directions of expanding the current survey research.
