1.1. Developing a new theory of technology useIt has become increasingly important to understand the relationship people have with technology. Many positive effects have arisen from technology use such as social inclusion, increased access to information, assistance with every-day tasks, and healthcare applications (Andrade and Doolin, 2016, Khosravi et al., 2016, Kirkpatrick, 2016, Piwek et al., 2016a, Piwek et al., 2016b). In contrast, negative side effects such as technology addiction, perceived privacy breaches, reduced physical activity, online shaming, and unsatisfactory work-life balance remain widespread (Akdemir et al., 2015, Bergström, 2015, Clayton et al., 2015, Jeong et al., 2016, Klonick, 2016, Mamonov and Benbunan-Fich, 2014, Osiceanu, 2015, Schoneck, 2015, Steijn and Vedder, 2015). At the same time, technology rapidly develops and adapts, with current trends suggesting a dramatic increase in the number of everyday objects that connect to the internet (e.g., the internet of things) (Bergman, 2015). Yet, despite significant and measurable impacts, the relationship between people and technology remains poorly defined from a theoretical standpoint. This hinders the development of new technologies and prevents a fuller understanding of their impact.The fundamental reasons behind technology use have often been difficult to conceptualize, despite the prevalence of technology in society. Even specific factors which influence or predict future use remain contentious (Ding et al., 2012, Karahanna et al., 1999). However, through the evaluation of previous theoretical models, we propose a new integrated theory of continued technology use and technological impact.Theoretical and empirical work often struggles to keep up with the speed of technological development, however the research remains essential when attempting to predict subsequent successes and failures. Continued use may indicate the potential life cycle of a developed technology and it is possible that by measuring technology use, we can explore applications that benefit many stakeholders including end-users, developers, and retailers of technology. For example, those who develop and sell technologies have to keep customer satisfaction high through adequate and beneficial use if they wish to obtain a large and loyal consumer base. Furthermore, encouraging the use of quality of life technologies, such as health monitoring devices, can increase the positive impact of the intervention. The exploration of continued use may increase our understanding of technology use habits, a variable which can both prevent and encourage behavioral change. Technology is often developed to improve lifestyles but whether these benefits are realised depends on the way in which they are used.
1.2. Existing theoriesAs the applications of studying technology use span widely, there has been a shift in the literature from measuring technology adoption to measuring technology use (Ding et al., 2012). Often, the continued use of a technology is seen as an extension of the adoption process, suggesting both adoption and post-adoption behaviors can be measured using the same variables (Davis et al., 1989, Venkatesh et al., 2003, Venkatesh et al., 2012, Venkatesh et al., 2016). The most popular theory that predicts technology adoption and future-use is the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Marangunic & Granic, 2015). TAM contains several variables such as perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, external variables, attitude and behavioral intention as precursors of technology adoption and use (Davis et al., 1989). However, the variables that predict technology adoption are different from those that predict continued technology use (Limayem, Cheung, & Chan, 2003). For example, a person's attitude towards a technology before adoption is often influenced by perceptions of usefulness, ease of use, result demonstrability, visibility, and trialability, whereas attitudes after adoption are influenced by instrumental beliefs of usefulness and perceptions of image enhancements (Karahanna et al., 1999). As such, it appears that continued technology use is not just a continuation of technology adoption, but a phenomenon within itself. This raises additional questions regarding the suitability of TAM and successive extensions when measuring continued use.After citing the original TAM model, many researchers simply extend it by including additional variables of their own choosing, which they perceive to have particular relevance to the technology being assessed. (Jafarpour, 2016, Ooi and Tan, 2016, Ramos-de-Luna et al., 2016, Tsai et al., 2016, Wang and Sun, 2016, Yoon, 2016). This can make subsequent generalization difficult and a 2007 meta-analysis generated a list of 78 external variables that had been added to TAM with the aim to predict perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness across various contexts (Yousafzai, Foxall, & Pallister, 2007a). Examples of these included ‘Screen Design’, ‘Management Support’, ‘Organizational Policies’, ‘Cognitive Absorption’, and ‘Cultural Affinity’ (Yousafzai et al., 2007a). There is no coherent trend regarding which variables are included in these models. Consequently, the reliability of variables cannot be assessed due to a lack of succeeding confirmatory research. The development of any new theory must therefore be inclusive of key constructs which predict the use of current and future technologies. In turn, this will also become a platform for researchers to re-test the same concepts and improve our understanding of continued technology use.
1.3. Theoretical unificationSeveral theories of continued use describe a set of variables which predict technology adoption, and then include additional variables to explain continued use (Kim and Crowston, 2011, Setterstrom et al., 2013). Others consider continued use in isolation as its own behavior (Bhattacherjee, 2001, Limayem et al., 2003). A theoretical unification approach (Venkatesh et al., 2003) was chosen to generate a new model (Fig. 1). This acknowledges both existing work and evidence that can contribute to our understanding of continued technology use. However, merging existing theories can sometimes lack the novelty required to provide new research directions that expand our knowledge. Therefore, we aimed to merge competing theories into a singular comprehensive model of technology use and impact, whilst incorporating psychological constructs which have never been considered in existing technology use models. What makes the current unification different from previous attempts including the UTAUT, UTAUT2 and the Multilevel Framework of Technology Acceptance and Use (Venkatesh et al., 2003, Venkatesh et al., 2012, Venkatesh et al., 2016), is its retained parsimony, its focus on technology use rather than adoption, and the inclusion of novel insights which describe the impact that technology has on people. To inspire the new model, key groups of variables will be identified across existing technology use theories. A novel variable called extended-self is introduced, which is proposed to predict continued technology use (Steinert, 2015; Belk, 1988, Belk, 2013, Clark and Chalmers, 1998). The scope of new model is then defined, presented and discussed in detail.Download : Download high-res image (91KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The Technology Integration Model (TIM).
