Energy plays an essential role in the development of society, it has promoted great advances and has also generated inequalities and conflicts throughout history (Smil, 2010). In the last decades, due to industrial evolution and population growth, world’s energy demand has been continuously increasing (Melorose et al., 2015).
Nowadays, different energy forms are consumed, electricity which is the most demanded is not a natural energy form and must be obtained from other energy sources. It is estimated that 77.9% of electricity is generated by traditional methods (fossil and nuclear) (Schou, 2000), which are heavily polluting the environment and contributing to the climate change and global warming (Kannan and Vakeesan, 2016). The continuous use of fossil energy sources may lead to climate change, which may in turn end up with heavy natural disasters (Schou, 2000).
Therefore it is crucial to go for ecofriendly energy sources, even more when the development carried out in different renewable energies sources (solar, wind, hydropower and geothermal) makes them viable sources of energy, even in places rich in fuel reserves. Recent studies (Scheer, 2013, Hohmeyer and Bohm, 2015, Jacobson et al., 2015) indicate that 100% of renewable electricity and energy in general supply can be achieved in the top industrialized countries, how the transition should be and its economic, environmental and social benefits. These studies include all renewable energy sources to provide energy and propose an energy mix.
The transition to 100% of renewable supply demands a global agreement to focus the education on renewable energies (Broman, 1992). Although the need for this, education for suitable development at all levels is globally recognized (Kandpal and Broman, 2014), an extended review shows that the situation of the renewable energy educational practices is not satisfactory because it is not as developed as it should be (Ciriminna et al., 2016).
It is vital for the success of new renewable energy education programmes to use modern educational technology, accessible and low cost (Kandpal and Broman, 2014), which facilitates the integration with the emerging smart world (Liu et al., 2017). In the last decade, different educational paradigms had made use of flexible and modern educational technology (Jennings, 2009) like on-line educational programs, due to the urgent need for on-the-job training in renewable energies and to reach a wider audience. Educational tools based on videocast techniques (Torres-Ramírez et al., 2014) and virtual and/or remote labs have proven to be powerful tools with lot of benefits (Fabregas et al., 2011, Chao et al., 2015), great scientific impact (Heradio et al., 2016) and able to extend the access to science and engineering (Colwell et al., 2002).
Of all renewable energies, solar energy is the most abundant energy source (Panwar et al., 2011), it is inexhaustible and exceeds output efficiencies given by other energy sources, it does not have any negative impact on the ecosystem and can help us to mitigate inequalities due to traditional energy sources.
The amount of scientific production (Sheikh et al., 2016) demonstrates that the solar energy is in demand, its use is growing and many researchers are undertaking investigations in order to increase efficiency and reduce cost (Kannan and Vakeesan, 2016). There are different technologies based on solar energy that improve the efficiency of the system by means of concentrating the solar flux with optical systems that demand a solar tracking system to control the system alignment with the Sun, becoming the solar tracking a key issue for the general system efficiency.
Despite the increasing interest and the educational demands in solar energy, there are few educational tools related to it. In solar photovoltaic technology some educational tools can be found, the most interesting ones being: photovoltaic solar cell remote trigger virtual lab (Freeman et al., 2012), e-training system for the renewable energy systems (Drigas et al., 2005), experimental determination of the current-voltage characteristic curve of a photovoltaic panel (Kandpal and Broman, 2014) and web based education resources for self-education in renewable energies (Bauer et al., 2013). Regarding to low and medium temperature solar systems, HTI e-learning laboratory (Michaelides et al., 2005), mobile remote lab system to monitor in situ thermal solar installations (Saez de Arregui et al., 2013) and an interactive tool to teach solar parabolic trough concepts (Silva et al., 2011) are available. It is necessary to increase the number of these resources and make them generally available.
With the aim of providing a powerful tool for solar educational purposes and specifically for solar tracking fields, reducing fixed costs associated with traditional labs and control system, a new solar tracking system based on computer vision (CV) implemented in low cost open source hardware has been developed and its main features are explained in the next sections. Also, the code has been published for free use (GitLab, 2018).
