Information and communication technology (ICT) systems are critical to modern manufacturing. The Forth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) integrates all current technologies such as sensors, wireless networks, Internet of Things (IoT), robotics, artificial intelligence and information management systems to create a Cyber-Physical System (CPS) and smart factories (Jang, 2016; Kang et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2015). Industry 4.0 refers to a number of automated systems equipped with automatic data exchange and manufacturing technology capabilities. These systems exert a transformative effect on economic and social processes. Recently, Industry 4.0 concepts have attracted considerable attention in advanced manufacturing countries as a means of streamlining production.
Industry 4.0 is thus not a completely new area of research, but builds upon previous research and ties together recent advances in the areas of automation, artificial intelligence, production technology, information communication technology, and cloud technology (Kagermann et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2015). A key component of Industry 4.0 is the concept of smart manufacturing. According to the National Institute of Standard and Technology, NIST (2014), Smart Manufacturing is defined as “fully-integrated and collaborative manufacturing systems that respond in real time to meet the changing demands and conditions in the factory, supply network, and customer needs.”
Smart manufacturing is driving a push towards enhanced competitiveness among manufacturers worldwide. According to PwC's “2016 Global Industry 4.0 Survey,” the global manufacturing industry will invest more than US$900 billion in Industry 4.0 initiatives by 2020. In 2015, 33% of global enterprises surveyed in the report considered themselves to be highly digitized, but this ratio is expected to increase to rise to 72% by 2020. Global manufacturers are digitizing key functions of their internal horizontal value chains and external vertical supply chains, and these digital innovations are expected to help enterprises reduce costs by 43% and increase revenues by 35% (PwC, 2016).
According to the World Economic Forum's, 2014–2015 Global Competitiveness Report, Taiwan is the world's most concentrated IT industry cluster, and is the world's second-largest exporter of high-technology manufactured goods, reflecting Taiwan's high degree of hardware/software integration, creating conditions for flexible production and rapid commercialization. In 2015, Taiwan's government unveiled a plan called “Productivity 4.0” and earmarked over US$1 billion for investment over nine years to transform sectors such as technology, machinery, and transportation. By 2024, this plan aims to raise the per capita productivity of Taiwan's manufacturing industries by 60% to NT$10 million (Prakash, 2016). In addition, building on Taiwan's solid foundation of precision machinery and ICT technologies, Productivity 4.0 is pushing the development of Smart Machine solutions in an integrated industrial ecosystem (Taiwan Executive Yuan, 2015).
In our study, smart manufacturing technologies are categorized as belonging to a sensor layer, an integration layer, an intelligent layer and a response layer. A technology roadmap is developed as a context for the analysis of correlations between technology applications and industry maturity. Technologies were defined through interviews with industry experts, and the correlation results are used to create a correlation matrix for the current status of smart manufacturing in Taiwan, including market maturity, technology maturity and correlation of key technologies. Suggestions for future smart manufacturing industry development in Taiwan were also collected. This paper analyzes technology applications related to smart manufacturing and emerging trends. Analysis of authentic cases illuminates the development of technologies related to smart manufacturing in a range of countries, and market and technology maturity trends for each technology are discussed in the context of Taiwan. This paper aims to provide a foundational understanding of key technology development trends for industry while serving as a useful reference for the formulation of government policy to support industrial initiatives.
