The important mechanical and chemical processes can be determined according to the variance analysis regarding the associated mass changes. The heightened interest in the usage of the quartz-crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCMD) device is in part the result of the fast progress in the development of the scientific portable-instrumentation and computer-simulation methods [1, 2]. The extensive applicability of the quartz-crystal microbalance (QCM) since its conception includes the environmental, food, and clinical analyses, owing to its inherent ability to perform real-time dioxyribonucleic acid (DNA)-biosensor, immune-sensor, and drug-detection analyses, among others. Further, it has also been used in adverse environments such as the monitoring of different degradation processes (automotive lubricants, composter, etc.) and the monitoring of the charge status in the lead-acid batteries [[3], [4], [5]].
At present, new technologies are facilitating the accurate and fast calculation of small amounts of the organic and nonorganic substances. The progress of the sensor technologies has been feasible due to the innovations in a variety of fields including materials and electronic systems [6, 7]. The versatility of the QCMD underpins its usage in the present study for the overriding review on the QCMD study of the particle interactions. The QCMD is an ultrasensitive technique for the determination of mass changes in the order of tens of ng (nanograms), or a mass density <1 μg/cm2 [8, 9]. Given that the QCMD sensors are also sensitive to the variables of the viscosity and the viscoelasticity with respect to alterations of the surface-attached mass, the QCMD method is convincingly proper for the blood-coagulation measurements like the fibrinogen-level estimation. The role of the crystal diameter is vital in the stability of crystals, which are generally 1.27 cm in diameter, although diamters of 2.54 cm or higher are available. The crystal thickness controls the resonant frequency, which in turn describes the mass sense [10, 11]. To perform the combined f and D measurements, while simultaneously varying the crystal oscillation amplitude in the actuator mode, an additional frequency generator was added to the original QCMD setup [4, 12].
The biochemical functionalization of the quartz-crystal electrode permits the label-free monitoring of specific molecular interactions with a high accuracy and precision, and the real-time determination of the kinetic rates and the similarity constants. This feature makes the QCM a versatile bio-analytic tool for various monitoring and detection applications ranging from the single and complex molecular layers, polymeric films, and complex macromolecules to the whole live cells, with the QCMD technique considered to be one of the most attractive tools [7, 13]. The use of the light aggregometer to detect and measure the nucleoprotein (NP)-induced platelet aggregation is limited. Indeed, the instrument is not sensitive enough to detect the microaggregates; that is, it operates only in the no-flow mode and therefore does not mimic the flow-mediated aggregation events encountered in the microvasculature. Some methods for the characterization of the nanoscale platelet microaggregation under the flow conditions has recently been developed using the QCMD technology [14, 15]. In addition, in-advance preparation has been undertaken regarding a contact-free and label-free method for the researching of the intercommunion of the NPs with the model surfaces and the supported lipid bilayers. The supported lipid bilayers are the planar adoptions of the phospholipids that are extensively used as the model membranes of the microbial and mammalian cells [16]. Supplementally, the sensor oscillation-decay rate provides the information about the dissipation of the binding-induced dissipative-energy losses (ΔD). When the sensor is modified with a bio-recognition element, both the resonant frequency (Δf) and the ΔD can be used as the bio-sensing transduction signals. As another feature to be exploited, the Δf–ΔD combination facilitates the further analysis of the properties of the surface-deposited nanostructures, such as the phages. During the nanostructure-attachment process, almost the entirety of the dissipation triggers the particle-liquid boundary, as the sensor oscillation moves the particle through the bulk liquid [[17], [18], [19], [20]].
The final target of this study is the construction of a portable and low-cost real-time QCMD measuring system for the biomedical application. The salient features and advantages of the QCMD, compared with the customary QCM, is that it can also measure the changes in the ∆f, which is a concurrent parameter connected to the energy loss or ∆D of the system that can also be determined. The ∆f measures the changes in the mass attached to the sensor surface, while the ∆D measures the properties coupled to the viscoelastic properties of the adlayer. The crucial advantages of the proposed method are that it is intuitive, and the possibility that it is compatible with the essential electronic devices that are ubiquitous throughout the electronic laboratories.
The dissipation module is an important enhancement in the LabVIEW-software simulation-analysis QCMD system. In particular, the reduced number of the introduced electronics pieces can be easily incorporated into any system. The present work describes the way the module could be successfully integrated into the LabVIEW simulation for the real-time monitoring and shows an efficient design as well.
