Over the past decades there has been a large increase in female human capital investment and labor force participation. The ratio of male to female college graduates has decreased consistently, to the extent that it has even reversed in many countries — in some countries there have been more female than male graduates in recent years (Goldin et al., 2006; Becker et al., 2010; Goldin, 2014). This trend is partly due to more women graduating in what used to be male-dominated fields such as math, science and engineering. The math and science test score gender gap is of special interest because it is a good predictor of future income (Murnane et al., 1995; Paglin and Rufolo, 1990; Brown and Corcoran, 1997) and because there is still a considerable gender gap in employment in these fields. Although evidence based on recent PISA testing1 shows that gender gap in math is closing in many countries, there is still a large disparity at the upper tail of the test scores distribution (Ellison and Swanson, 2010; Hyde et al., 2008; Machin and Pekkarinen, 2008; Fryer and Levitt, 2010). In addition, striking evidence from the UK shows that in 2012 about 80% of those who took A level physics were male,2 and that men were awarded 85% of engineering and technology degrees and 82% of computer science degrees, while in the same year, 83% of medical degrees and 79% of veterinary science degrees went to women.3 The related employment gaps are even larger, as females are only 6% of the engineering workforce, 5.5% of engineering professionals and 27% of engineering and science technicians.4
What explains these gender disparities in cognitive performance and in math and science scores is still an open question. Some emphasize the role of biological gender differences in determining gender cognitive differences,5 while others emphasize the social, psychological and environmental factors that might influence this gap. For example, some argue that gender role attitudes and stereotypes influence the gender gap by shaping the way parents raise their children,6 by affecting the environment at school and teachers' attitudes, and by determining social and cultural norms.7 There is limited credible evidence for this debate because it is difficult to disentangle the impact of biological gender dissimilarities from environmental conditions, and because it is difficult to measure stereotypes and prejudices and test their causal implications.
In this paper we focus on the effect of gender bias in a schooling environment. Stereotypical attitudes of teachers towards boys and girls in class have been widely documented in the psychology and sociology literature, and have been argued to substantially influence students' self-image and educational outcomes. For example, teachers are said to treat the successes and failures of boys and girls differently, by encouraging boys to try harder and allowing girls to give up (Dweck et al., 1978; Rebhorn and Miles, 1999). Sadker and Sadker (1986) suggest that teachers give more attention to boys by addressing them more often in class, giving them more time to respond and providing them with more substantive feedback. They receive more praise for intellectual quality of their ideas whereas girls receive less instructional time, fewer challenges and are reinforced for conformism and passivity (Sadker et al., 2009). Teachers are also found to treat boys and girls differently, in particular with regard to math instruction: Hyde and Jaffe (1998) show that math teachers tend to encourage boys to exert independence by not using algorithms and that boys who pursue this rebellious approach are seen as having a promising future in mathematics; girls, on the other hand, are controlled more than boys, and are taught mathematics as a set of rules or computational methods. Leinhardt et al. (1979) find that teachers spent more time training girls in reading and less time in math, relative to boys. In addition, according to the National Center of Education Statistics (1997) girls are less likely than boys to be advised, counseled and encouraged to take courses in math.
Using all of these mechanisms through which gender biases of teachers potentially affect their students' educational outcomes, we build a quantitative measure of primary school teachers' gender biases and estimate the impact on boys' and girls' academic achievements during middle and high school, and on the selection of advanced level courses in math and sciences during high school. We measure teachers' gender biased behavior by comparing their average marking of boys' and girls' papers in a “non-blind” exam to the gender means in an anonymously marked “blind” national exam. We assume this measure of teachers' biases captures her/his overall perception about gender cognitive differences. We then use it as a proxy for teachers' behavior towards the different groups in class. This measure might embody a wide range of behaviors, from conscious discriminating behavior to unintentional teaching style and personal traits that makes learning easier for one group over another.8 Students might be affected by either one of these behaviors, all influencing their self-perceptions and functioning in a way of a sort of a self-fulfilling prophecy. We show that there is a large variation within schools in this measure, and that it has a significant effect on the academic achievements of both genders during middle school and high school in math, science and language and the difficulty of the math and science courses chosen in high school. These high stakes choices determine whether a student will meet requirements for admission to science and math studies at university.
The construction of the teacher bias measure is based on two tests that differ in timing (by one year) and because of that also differ somewhat in the material they cover. We note however that between the dates of these two tests there are no changes in teaching quality nor in the social environment in class because the class has the same teacher in 5th and 6th grades and because the class composition is unchanged as class enrollment is the same. In addition, since non-blind tests are graded by the class teacher who presumably knows their students more intimately, the blind score might capture more accurately students' unobserved characteristics than the national test. Being aware that these differences between blind and non-blind tests might lead to different interpretation of our findings, we address these confounding factors in several ways. First, we show that there is meaningful variation in gender-based biases by teachers within schools and often it is even the case that within school and same subject teachers will have opposite gender biases. Therefore, since teachers and students are randomly assigned to classes within a given school, the within school by subject variation in our treatment variable permits us to use a school by subject fixed effect estimation strategy to estimate the effect of teachers' biases on their students' future education outcomes. Note that this identification strategy helps our interpretation of our findings against a variety of alternatives that rely on gender specific differences in behavior and characteristics, even if they are subject specific. Second, the within class variation in teachers' bias enable us to use also class fixed effect estimation strategy.9 The similarity in the estimates we obtain from these two alternative model specifications reduces the possibility that our measure of teachers' gender bias simply pick up random (small sample) variation in the unobserved cross-subject stable “quality” of boys versus girls in a particular class. Furthermore, adding class level differences in average students' ability by subject to this class fixed effect estimation strategy accounts for any other subject-specific variation in achievements in class. Third, we define an alternative jackknife measure of teacher bias for each student based on excluding his own exams' gap between “non-blind” and “blind” exams scores. This jackknife version addresses the problem that might arise if the student's own exam scores' gap is mechanically correlated with his future educational outcomes because of teacher's evaluation (“non-blind” test score) reflecting more accurately his unobserved traits than standardized tests (“blind” test score). Since this alternative measure might contain a measurement error due to the omission of one student from the class mean, we present both estimates: the benchmark measure represents a higher bound for the effect of teacher biases whereas the jackknife measure represents a lower bound. Finally, we provide additional and more direct evidence that our estimates reflect teachers' behavior and not students' characteristics or behavior. We show that teachers' biases are correlated with their own characteristics. For example, we find that having a bias in favor of girls is positively correlated with the proportion of daughters among teachers' children. In addition, we show that when a teacher is teaching two subjects, the correlation between teacher's biases measured in each of these two subjects is significantly higher than the correlation when the two subjects are taught by two different teachers.
The systematic difference between non-blind and blind assessment across groups as a measure of discrimination or stereotypes was pioneered in economics by Blank (1991) and Goldin and Rouse (2000).10 This approach was first applied to the economics of education in Lavy (2008), to measure gender bias in grading by teachers and it was followed by others, for example, Tyrefors et al. (2011), Hanna and Linden (2012), Cornwell et al. (2013), Burgess and Greaves (2013), and Botelho et al. (2015), who implemented the same methodology using data from other countries and getting overall similar evidence about teachers' stereotypes/biases.11 In the present paper, however, we go beyond measuring teachers' biased behavior and focus on the implications of this behavior for gender differences in human capital formation. We think this paper is the first to examine the consequences of teachers' biased behavior on their students' gender gap in human capital formation, in particular regarding gender differences in math and science studies.12 Few papers pursued recently this idea which we introduced first in earlier draft (Lavy and Sand, 2014). Consistently with our finding Terrier (2014) shows that in primary schools in France there also exists a positive correlation between teachers' bias in favor of boys in a specific subject and the progress of boys relative to girls in class in that subject. Lavy and Megalokonomou (2017) documents similar teachers' biases in secondary schools in Greece and their impact on students' outcomes. In a related paper, Carlana (2017) finds a negative correlation between gender biases of math teachers based on Implicit Association Test scores and their female students' math test scores.
To this end, we focus on boys' and girls' choices about the difficulty of the math and science courses they select in high school. In Israeli higher education, as in many other countries, these choices have important implications for occupational choices at adulthood, because advanced courses in math and science in high school are a prerequisite for post-secondary schooling in engineering, computer science and so on. We test whether teachers' biases towards one of the sexes, as reflected by a more positive evaluation on the “non-blind” tests relative to the “blind” tests of this group, influence this group's future achievements and affect their orientation towards enrollment in advanced math and science studies in high school.
Our data enables us to evaluate the impact of teachers' gender biases on students' test scores in later years by following three cohorts of 6th grade students between the years 2002–2004 in Tel-Aviv, Israel. By tracking students from primary school to the end of high school, we are able to measure students' exposure to teachers' gender biases in primary school, and to estimate the effect on both 8th grade (middle school) test scores in national tests as well as on the high stakes matriculation exam scores at the end of high school, more than six years after the exposure to biased behavior. In addition, we are able to examine whether this measure of teachers' biases is correlated with certain teachers' characteristics, such as age, ethnicity, marital status and gender composition of own children.
Our results suggest that teachers' more positive assessment of boys (girls) in primary school in a specific subject has a positive and significant effect on boys' (girls') achievements in that subject in middle school and high school national tests. We find that the magnitudes of these effects are more pronounced for boys than for girls, especially when using the jackknife version of the teacher bias measure. In addition, we find that the favoring of boys (girls) by primary school math teachers also affects boys' (girls') successful completion of advanced courses in math and science in high school. Teachers' biases that favor boys (girls) encourage boys (girls) to choose advanced math courses and to successfully complete more units in math and science courses. Since these courses are prerequisites for admission to higher education in these subjects, teachers' biases contribute to the gender gap in qualifications in fields like engineering and computer science, and therefore to the gender gap in related occupations. These impacts on human capital outcomes by the end of high school have meaningful economic consequences for quantity and quality of post-secondary schooling and for earnings in adulthood. In addition, we show that these effects have interesting patterns of heterogeneity by parental years of schooling and parental education gap.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we explain the identification and estimation methodologies. Section 3 presents our data. We detail our results in Section 4, and Section 5 offers conclusions and policy implications.
