As the leading cause of mortality in Korea, lung cancer has been the country’s major public health concern since 1983. Over 26,000 patients were newly diagnosed with lung cancer, and 18,371 died from the disease in 2017 (Jung et al., 2017). Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common type of lung cancer, grouped based on clinical behavior and the histological appearance of the cancer cells. Approximately 85% of lung cancer patients fall into this group. Most patients diagnosed with NSCLC are at the advanced stage for which predicting the chance of survival and therapeutic options are vital. Unfortunately, 70% of NSCLC tumors are not resectable during diagnosis, which is crucial for a pathological examination that will reveal molecular information, and hence, the prognosis outcomes. Knowing a prognosis helps to determine whether it is useful to attempt a certain treatment. Therapeutic regimens were once independent of subtype (Anon., 1996; Schiller et al., 2012) but became a concern as the understanding of phenotypic differences in tumors improved over the years. A practical histologic sub-classification has become essential for guiding systemic drug administration, such as pemetrexed, bevacizumab, and epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs) (Ho et al., 2015). The importance of categorization of NSCLC tumors associated with systemic treatment practices came to the fore around 2002, and since then multiple efforts have been taken to acknowledge this issue. For instance, International Classification of Disease for Oncology (ICD-O) by the world health organization (Fritz et al., 2018) and a collaboration panel of the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer, the American Thoracic Society and the European Respiratory Society (IASLC/ATS/ERS) (Travis et al., 2011) for which classification systems were derived based on tumor neoplasm characteristics. Although such classification systems are proven reliable for clinical decision-making, they are not technically feasible because tissue acquisition through biopsy or resection samples might not represent the whole tumor and may indicate the possible necessity for further biopsies in different locations. Besides, being invasive and difficult to obtain in certain situations, biopsy and resection samples are subjected to sampling errors and risk of infections. A recent study demonstrated that repeated biopsies are still highly subjected to inaccuracies resulting from intra-tumor heterogeneity (Serefoglu et al., 2013). On the contrary, imaging offers a non-invasive and comprehensive method of analyzing these molecular signatures using standard images acquired as part of routine care. A computerized sub-classification may provide a basis for imaging-based subtyping derived from tissue characteristics as captured by imaging phenomena, such as signal intensity, attenuation parameters, and texture patterns. Heterogeneity is a well-recognized feature associated with adverse tumor biology such as variations in genomic subtypes and expression of growth and angiogenic factors. Tumor heterogeneity is assessable through pathologic analysis or imaging data. Until recently, heterogeneity evaluation has been limited to qualitative assessment due to lack of correlation between quantitative measurements of tissue characteristics and underlying tumor biology (Ganeshan and Miles, 2013). However, discoveries in the field of biomedical informatics, are beginning to link qualitative assessments of biopsy or resection to quantitative measurements of imaging data (Aerts et al., 2014; Ellingson, 2015; Gevaert et al., 2012), stimulating the idea that molecular level activities possibly reflect as imaging characteristics. With this recognition, we set out to investigate two objectives in this study: (I) the possibility of conveying the same degree of molecular information offered by qualitative assessment using a quantitative analysis, and (II) if the finding in (I) prove or nullify the earlier discoveries made in the literature.
