Developments in the area of hardware and computer technologies led to an increase in the use of intelligent and interactive systems supporting human activities. Computer capabilities are considered as extensions and expansions, whereas the machines are tools, and people are tool builders and tool users (Roth et al., 1987). This interaction between technology and user is defined by the term “Human Interaction System” (HIS).
As tools and technology become more advanced, the concept of ambient intelligence (“a digital environment that proactively supports people in their daily life”) becomes a new reality, as well as, a standard of progress and quality of life. The main components of ambient intelligence (AmI) are: smart materials, sensor technology, embedded systems, ubiquitous communications, I/O device technology, and adaptive software (Ramos et al., 2008). Although in its infancy, the AmI concept is well covered by multiple technologies and case studies, and has a great influence on multiple aspects of life (Cook, 2009).
In this study, firstly, a 32-channel DAQ was designed and created, then sensors were attached in order to create a complete HIS and a system that could be considered as being allied with the AmI concept. The technique used to create the 32-channel system is represented by the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system, which is a broadly dispersed automated system primarily applied to remotely control and monitor the condition of field-based assets from a central location (Daneels, 2009). SCADA systems can gather and analyse real-time data and it is frequently used in manipulating equipment (Boyer, 2009). It allows a user to accumulate records from distant locations and to send control instructions to those locations. This is the reason why SCADA is highly applicable to processes that are spread over large areas.
Data acquisition is a technique used to take data from the real world and process it into digital domain. After digitally processing the data, the data is converted back into the analog data. The analog data then controls the hardware in the form of output parameters. The DAQ device takes the signal from the sensors and transfers these signals to the computer for processing. The output signal controls the hardware. The I/O port is also called channel. The DAQ contain many numbers of channels. In this research, the 32-channel DAQ system is discussed. The DAQ device works actively with a remote front panel designed in LabVIEW. LabVIEW is used because of its vast scope in engineering education. LabVIEW is a software designed by NATIONAL INSTRUMENTS (NI). The data from 32-channel DAQ appears at the PC COM port. The LabVIEW reads the data from the COM port and provides the I/O signal for any controlling actions. The Arduino used in the DAQ device acts as a communication device between the external hardware and PC used for controlling. The system has a vast scope in engineering education. In this research, one study case that covers the biomedical has been discussed. Any other study cases can be implemented and 32-channel system can be used for this purpose. For instance, traffic monitoring and control system, street light monitoring system, plant irrigation system and any other study cases can be implemented.
The 32-channel system is implemented using a combination of analog and digital channels. The analog channel value can be converted into digital value using a device named analog-to-digital converter (Walden, 1999). The embedded agents can be used for creating the system (Hagras et al., 2004). The system is provided with graphical user interface software that can be used to actively monitor the connected array of sensors and thus allow the user to customize the settings. The graphical software is in an executable form. Different arrays of sensors can be connected for different applications. The 32-channel system is first tested. Once designed and tested, the system can be used for different applications. In this study, a patient monitoring system has have been designed and implemented. The hospital can be provided with a graphical user interface (GUI) and the patient has to wear the suit with the sensors array pre-installed. The sensors array, once installed in the suit, can be used at medical clinics and institutes for testing patients. The data parameters, signals and graphs can be visualized graphically on LabVIEW and with the aid of remote server, the data can be monitored over the internet which can be considered as an application of the internet of things (ioT) technology. Similarly, other sensors can be used with the 32-channel system to create further applications (Teaw et al. (2005)).
There is a close relationship between the 32-channel system and engineering education. Using the knowledge of engineering education, more cases studies for the 32-channel system can be implemented. More of these cases can include complete e-health, security system, smart traffic and plant growth monitoring etc. For every study case, using the knowledge of engineering education, hardware for the 32-channel has to be modified by connecting the required sensors. Using the concept of AmI and 32-channel system, several other study cases can be designed (Augusto and McCullagh, 2007). Using the data logger, data can be stored for future processing (Heemels et al., 1997).
The 32-channel system is a complete computer-controlled monitoring system. The system can be allowed to operate automatically or manually. In the case of automatic mode, the system itself, via the usage of decision making techniques, controls the output factor, once the input data has passed the permissible limits. The system works with two types of data signals: digital and analog. The 32-channel system works with the data logger feature that includes storing the data in the form of databases. The data, once stored, can be retrieved and further used for making the system act as a causal system. A causal system depends on the present and past value of the system to produce the output value. In order for the system to be causal, the system must be able to store the previous data in the data logger. The 32-channel system can be manually controlled to operate on the occurrence of an unnecessary condition which is not pre-programmed. The system can be programmed with further case studies to increase its development and uses to assist human life. This system can be used in engineering education since students can be encouraged to develop the new study cases. The 32-channel system is specifically designed for educational purposes so every student can be urged to design a study case.
