Breast cancer is the most diagnosed female cancer and the second leading cause of cancer deaths among women worldwide. In 2012, this disease affected 1.67 million new cases (25% of all female cancers) and killed 522,000 women (14.7% of cancer-related deaths) [8]. Breast cancer is arising from cells of the breast that develops locally in the breast and metastasizes to the lymph nodes and internal organs. Even though some studies pointed out several risk factors of having breast cancer such as genetics and tobacco, the cause of cell metastasize is not clearly known. This makes early prevention of breast cancer not possible. Thus, early detection is considered as the cornerstone in breast cancer treatment. A breast cancer detected at early stage is easy to handle, whereas late detection decreases treatment options and increases mortality rates. Unfortunately, traditional detection methods such as palpable breast examination or clinical women request (after pain) usually detect cancers at non-recoverable stages. Screening programs are applied to cope with this issue: women with higher risk (such as old women) but with no clinical symptoms are examined. The best cost-effective tool for breast cancer detection is currently screening mammography. It can detect breast abnormalities at an early stage when they are not detectable by a woman or doctor, what increases very significantly the chance of cure [16]. For instance, several developed countries established systematic nation-wide screening mammography programs for early breast cancer detection: each woman over 50 years undergoes a mammography examination every two (or three) years. These programs helped in reducing the mortality rate of breast cancer [13], [27].
However, mammography interpretation is a difficult and error prone task, even for skilled radiologists, mainly due to the subtle signs of breast abnormalities and the overlapping dense fibro-glandular tissue. Misinterpretation of mammograms leads to false positives and/or false negatives. False positives -taking normal tissue for abnormalities- result in high recall rates with unnecessary treatments (such as invasive biopsies). False negatives -missing a cancer abnormality- complicate treatment options and threaten patient life. Due to the huge amount of screening mammograms to be analyzed and the limited number of radiologists double reading by a second radiologist is not feasible in screening programs. A cost-effective alternative to human double reading is the use of Computer Aided Detection systems (CAD), which may replace the second reader and alert the radiologist to suspicious regions. These systems have improved the detection rates of breast abnormalities such as micro-calcification and masses. Given that the detection of masses is much more challenging because some normal tissues may look visually similar to masses and can be taken for abnormalities, the aim of this work is to reduce mass false positives produced by CAD systems. Indeed, the main drawback of CAD systems for masses is false positives, which may increase unnecessary biopsy rates. Besides, given the low rate of cancer occurrence in screening programs, radiologists may over-look CAD outputs that contain suspicious regions. Hence, a posterior step of reduction of false positive rates in CAD systems is crucial to reduce unnecessary follow-up treatments and to ensure radiologistâs acceptance. Indeed, two issues are typically addressed in computer-aided detection of mammographic masses. The first one is the detection step, which aims to localize candidate ROIs that may depict abnormalities. The second is false positive reduction step, which aims to detect and eliminate normal ROIs. In this paper, we assume that we have already ROIs from the detection step and, thus, we address only the false positive reduction step.
Several studies have focused on reducing false positives for masses. Hence, given suspicious regions detected by a CAD system, false positive reduction (FPR) methods aim to classify these regions as normal or abnormal. A first class of methods aimed to include information from the current mammogram or other views. For instance, Vállez et al. [30] included a breast density classification step prior to lesion detection so that to improve the detection results. Li et al. [22] used a bilateral similarity analysis to combine information from right and left breast views. Tan et al. [29] proposed a score fusion to combine detection results of medio-lateral oblique (MLO) view and cranio-caudal (CC) view. A second class of methods solved the pattern recognition problem of distinguishing between normal tissues and masses in three steps: lesion segmentation, feature extraction, and binary classification. For instance, Junior et al. [17] used a spatial approach of diversity indexes to describe patterns detected in previously segmented regions and a SVM classifier to classify regions into masses and non-masses. Liu and Zeng [24] used adaptive region growing and narrow band based active contour for mammographic masses segmentation, gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) and complete local binary patterns (CLBP) for the description of the segmented lesions, and SVM for classification. de Sampaio et al. [5] performed masses segmentation based on micro-genetic algorithm. Then, Local binary patterns and SVM were used to classify the suspicious regions. However, the segmentation of mammographic masses is a very difficult task and error-prone. Therefore, some authors proposed to omit the segmentation step and to compute the feature vector directly from the ROI. For instance, Dhahbi et al. [6] proposed a multiscale texture analysis method for false positive reduction based on curvelet moments. Curvelet transform was first performed on region of interest (ROI). Moment statistics (mean, variance, kurtosis and skewness) were then computed from each curvelet band and were input into a k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) classifier. A feature selection step was also included to select the most relevant curvelet moments. Zyout et al. [32] reduced false positive of mass detection based on multiscale textural feature extraction, particle swarm optimization and support vector machines (SVM) classification. Hussain [14] introduces a method for false positive reduction based on Weber law descriptor (WLD) and SVM classification. Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) features have been used to describe mammographic ROIs for scalable mammogram retrieval [15], [23]. 2D wavelet transform modulus maxima method (WTMM), that was originally introduced to perform multifractal analysis of rough surfaces using the continuous wavelet transform [1], has been applied to quantify the roughness fluctuations in mammographic images and to segment these images into dense tissue regions, fat tissue regions and micro-calcifications [19]. Batchelder et al. [2] used the WTMM method to detect microcalcification in human breast tissue in mammograms and to characterize the fractal geometry of benign and malignant microcalcification clusters, the former being Euclidean whereas the latter being fractal.
Our main motivation in this work is to improve the performance of mammographic masses detection through false-positive reduction. To avoid the error induced by the segmentation step and to take into account the texture around the lesion [9], [10], [11], [25], we proposed a segmentation-free framework with particular attention to improve feature extraction and classification steps. The flowchart of the proposed framework is given in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (233KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Flowchart of the proposed framework.
Hence, we propose five different feature extraction methods to describe mammographic regions. The first method extracts 23 features based on Hilbert’s image representation. The second method uses fractal texture analysis to extract 36 features. The third set is composed of 38 Kolmogorov–Smirnov distances. The fourth set consists of 15 features corresponding to statistics from the gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM). The last method is based on K-S statistic and Minkowsky approach to compute 10 features corresponding to maximum sub-region descriptors. To the best of our knowledge, Hilbert’s image representation, Kolmogorov–Smirnov distances and maximum sub-region descriptors are introduced for the first time for mammographic masses analysis and false positive reduction. Once the 122 features are computed, we performed a sequential feature selection method to choose the most discriminative subset. For the classification step, even though the SVM classifier is the most common classifier for mammographic masses classification, other classifiers could yield better results. Therefore, we investigated three different classification methods: SVM, decision tree and random forest. The main contributions of the paper are as follows:

1.Effective representation of mammographic masses through Hilbert’s image representation, Kolmogorov–Smirnov distances and maximum sub-region descriptors.2.Combination of the proposed three feature sets with two other commonly used sets: fractal texture features and gray level co-occurrence matrix statistics.3.Selection of the most discriminative features for masses description.4.Investigation of three different classification methods.5.Experimental evaluation of the proposed framework in a large and challenging database Fig. 3.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 describes the used mammograms in the experiments. Section 3 presents the feature extraction methods we used to generate diagnostic features. Section 4 recalls the feature selection method. Section 5 is devoted to numerical experiments. Conclusions are stated in Section 6.
