According to the two-stage model, proposed for the integral membrane protein folding, the interaction between the secondary structure elements is the key process, determining the spatial structure and activity of a membrane protein [1]. In case of the helical membrane proteins, it would correspond to the transmembrane (TM) helix-helix association. The latter is known to be especially important for the function of so-called type I or bitopic membrane proteins, which have small TM domains, consisting of a single α-helix. These species are usually active as homo or heterodimers [2], and interaction between their TM domains was shown to regulate their activity in various ways. Mutations in the TM domains of bitopic proteins can inhibit or activate them [3], and, moreover, their isolated TM segments may serve as inhibitors of the full-length type I proteins [4,5].
While, like for the soluble proteins, the interaction between the TM domains is to a certain extent determined by the specific energy terms, such as hydrogen bonds (either canonic or non-canonic [[6], [7], [8]]) or surface complementarity, the plasma membrane may also be considered as a participant of the TM helix-helix interaction. It is now an established fact that the cell membrane is not a homogeneous liquid-crystalline environment, but it has a mosaic structure, characterized by the presence of nano/microdomains with the altered lipid and protein contents, thickness, lipid packing and ordering properties [9]. Several bitopic proteins are known to be activated/inactivated inside such domains, or migrate there upon ligand binding [10]. Additionally, some TM domains were shown to adopt the completely different conformations in membrane mimetics of various type (e.g., in micelles/bicelles) [11,12]. Computer simulations also reveal that the change of lipid contents in the membrane can alter substantially the structural parameters of interacting TM helices or stabilize/destabilize the specific conformation(s) of TM protein complexes [[13], [14], [15]]. Finally, the presence of specific lipids, such as gangliosides was shown to affect the activation and dimerization of single-pass membrane proteins [16]. Thus, the parameters of membrane environment represent an important factor, influencing the free energy and mode of TM protein-protein and helix-helix contacts.
The lipid-related effects may also be considered as a sum of specific and non-specific contributions. The former include the ability of TM domains to bind a certain lipid component of cell membrane, e.g. gangliosides, inositol phosphates [16] or cholesterol [17]. In turn, the non-specific effects are ascribed to the so-called “lipophobicity” or hydrophobic mismatch [18,19]. Both phenomena may be a manifestation of the same kind of problem - the unfavorable free energy of lipid molecules in close proximity to the protein. This unfavorable state of lipids may be either the result of a mismatch between the bilayer thickness and length of a TM domain, which enforces the membrane to alter its equilibrium thickness near the protein, or it may arise from the strong protein-lipid interactions, which result in the formation of more ordered lipid bilayer around the TM domain and in the reduction of lipid entropy, similarly to the hydrophobic effect observed for soluble proteins [20,21]. These two non-specific terms make proteins decrease the lipid-accessible surface area either by the tilt with respect to the bilayer plane, by oligomerization, or by the migration to the area with altered bilayer thickness. This explains the preference of various proteins to the certain membrane compartments.
With all aforesaid, it is obvious that the spatial structure of a TM dimer and free energy of dimerization in a single membrane system are not sufficient to understand the functioning of cell receptors that are known to partition into the nano/microdomains of plasma membrane under certain conditions. One needs to somehow probe the free energy and structure of the protein in several environments with different parameters in order to get the amount of data, necessary to interpret the effects of point mutations in the TM domains of bitopic proteins. Moreover, such kind of data is also required to elicit the basic principles of membrane protein folding and solve the refolding problem. However, to date, the studies of the lipid-related effects on the free energy and structural mode of TM helix-helix interactions are represented mainly by computer simulations, performed mostly in the coarse-grained regime, which definitely need to be verified experimentally.
In the present work, we suggest utilizing the solution NMR spectroscopy and isotropic phospholipid bicelles to solve the specified problem. As we have shown previously, NMR can be used to simultaneously investigate the structural mode and free energy of protein-protein interactions in membrane mimetics, forming the small particles in solution [22]. Bicelles, in turn, provide a convenient tool to model various types of lipid bilayer [23,24]. According to recent studies, small bicelles indeed do contain a patch of the lipid bilayer that can even undergo the gel to liquid-crystalline phase transition, which supports the relevance of data obtained in such systems [25]. Moreover, the known dependence of bicelle size on both the solution contents and amount of protein copies inside it allowed us to improve the model, previously suggested to extract the dimerization free energy from the NMR data. Here, we report a new approach to measure the free energy of protein-protein interaction, specific for bicelles, and probe the free energy and structure of ErbB4 (HER4) TM domain, a convenient model object, in the environment of four different lipids.
