The purpose of this study is to investigate beliefs attitudes and perceived stereotypes that children have towards female computer scientists. Despite various interventions, over many decades, the discipline of computing science (CS) still appears to be unattractive to females. In this study we investigate the perceived stereotypes associated with females in CS from the viewpoint of adolescent boys and girls. This study is important in terms of problem appreciation from a specific group of stakeholders, namely adolescent children. Before we can make change to improve attractiveness and retentions figures for females in CS we have to understand what the problem is, why the problem exists, and who or what perpetuates the issues. In this study we ask adolescent children their views on females in computing and determine if there is a difference between boys and girls. Using visuals as a medium for knowledge discovery we seek to identify perceived physical appearance, perceived personality type, and perceived digital abilities that are associated with females in CS.
Females are seriously underrepresented in STEM subjects (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics). This is commonly known as the leaky pipeline describing the path and dropout rate from school to work of females in STEM. It is described as leaky due to the numbers of women who ‘fall out of the pipeline’ (Varma & Hahn, 2008) by dropping out of STEM fields at differing stages of their careers. Researchers have sought to find various issues within secondary school education that could contribute to the dwindling numbers of women. For example, Han (2016) highlighted that when asked about their future, male secondary school pupils expected to enter STEM subject based careers, whereas females expected to enter industries such as healthcare and life sciences. Shoffner (2015) suggests this is due to a decrease in self-esteem and a fear of failure in STEM subjects as a woman progresses through secondary school. Indeed, this view of a lack of confidence has been highlighted as a key issue by numerous researchers (Meelissen & Drent, 2008; Stoilescu & Egodawatte, 2010; Vekiri, 2013). Having a female teacher provides female students with a role model, and can help the retention along the pipeline (Beyer, 2014; Friend, 2015). Gendered messages can shape school pupils' opinions (Shapiro et al., 2015), and under-represent females within the field (Beyer, 2014; Friend, 2015; Herman, 2015). Classroom environments whereby stereotypical images and symbols are displayed can also be a deterrent, as it can lead to dissuasion and a general lack of belonging within the subject (Cheryan, Meltzoff, & Kim, 2011). The reason this is more pertinent to females, as suggested by Vitores and Gil-Juárez (2015) is due to the fact that these potentially harmful images and stereotypes seem to have a greater effect on females than males.
Many researchers have looked specifically at the STEM field of computing Science (CS) and the dearth of females. Lovegrove and Hall (1991) suggested that as children, boys tend to take a more hands on approach to technology, whereas girls tended to be cautious, and afraid to make mistakes in front of their peers. Ogan, Robinson, Ahuja, and Herring (2006) additionally stated that males tend to learn computing related skills independently, in the home, whereas females tended to learn in organisations such as schools, potentially leading to males receiving better grades if they are learning at a younger age (Denner, Werner, O'Connor, & Glassman, 2014). This perception of males performing better in computer science is a negative stereotype, despite the fact that the differences in performance are negligible (Beyer, 1999). Kermarrec (2014) recognised that school children are at the age where they are most likely to be influenced by stereotypes, and by the time they reach University, it is harder to change views that have been formed. Goode, Estrella, and Margolis (2006) suggested some reasons why and how high school female students are, or are not, drawn into the field of CS. The discovered that there were few learning opportunities existing at high school level, pre-set notions of relevance play a key role in influencing choice, and a limited and narrow presentation is purported on what CS is and what computer scientists do. Goode et al. further suggest that female students who do take CS have negative experiences in classroom settings, where greater male technology experience and female isolation are part of the cultural setting.
Papastergiou (2008) investigated Greek high school students' intentions and motivation towards and against pursuing studies in CS. She found that girls are less likely to pursue CS due to extrinsic reasons rather than personal interest. Extrinsic reasons were suggested to be lack of opportunities for early familiarization with computing in the home and scholastic environments involving teaching and encouragement. Meelissen and Drent (2008) state that there are non-academic factors which affect an individual's view on computing such as digital availability in the home, parental influence, the overall gender bias towards men in computing, and the general technical skills. Vekiri and Chronaki (2008) further this by suggesting any gender differences that may exist are through socialisations between an individual and their family and peers. Their studies, measuring perceived parental support, showed that boys tended to use computers more in their daily activities than girls that were questioned in a survey, despite equal accessibility to computers for both genders. However, they found primarily that parental encouragement is a greater influencer to their child's self-confidence than computer based activities (Ibid.).
Over the past few decades, various solutions to the ‘leaky pipeline’ have been suggested each with varying levels of success (Tech Partnership, 2016). Intervention programmes showcasing to secondary school girls the various different careers available to them have had “limited effects” in terms of its success (Lang, Fisher, Craig, & Forgasz, 2015). It has been highlighted that earlier intervention methods may be necessary to help improve numbers of women in CS and later representation (Klawe, Whitney, & Simard, 2009). Klawe et al. suggest that potentially, efforts at a secondary school level, may be too late to help improve the situation and encourage more girls into CS related subjects. However, Alvarado and Judson (2014) highlight the success of conferences with college students, helping them to decide whether or not to major in CS related subjects. Vitores and Gil-Juárez (2015) suggest the problem exists with the masculine culture that surrounds computing, education and work and that computing is a “chilly environment” where women need metaphoric “sweaters” to survive.
