The annual death rate of chronic kidney disease has seen a sharp rise from 15.7 to 16.3 per 100,000 between the years 1990 and 2010. According to the 2010 Global Burden of Diseases study, this rate of increase was only second to that of HIV and AIDS [1]. Unfortunately, this trend is expected to increase with the growth of the global elderly population, especially in developing countries.
The diagnosis of kidney disease is typically carried out by blood and urine tests, while biopsy samples are required in certain cases when the specific cause of the diseases is unclear or abnormal [2]. These biopsy samples will be stained and observed for the presence of any pathological structures, and one of the main identifying structures of chronic kidney disease is interstitial fibrosis. The visual evaluation of the biopsy sample is conducted by pathologists under a light microscope in a semi-quantitative manner, in which a score of the approximate amount of interstitial fibrosis observed is produced. One of the only standard for this semi-quantitative interstitial fibrosis quantification is the Banff schema commonly used for the renal allograft rejection grades classification [3]. Despite the existence of this largely generalised scoring standard, visual scoring is still very much subject to the pathologists’ intra- and inter-observer variability, and it may not be repeatable or reproducible [4], [5], [6]. This variability arises from the fact that even experts tend to produce an overestimation or underestimation in ambiguous cases [7]. These middle areas (or ‘grey area’) of which the decision threshold is based heavily upon the judgement of each observer are the main research issue in this study.
Recent advances in computerised tools in the biomedical area have spurred the development of automated image analysis systems to aid pathologists in accurately quantifying interstitial fibrosis. The precision and meticulousness of the computer system provide an advantage over human judgment in medical image analysis, especially in the quantification of tissue structure area in digital images. Specifically, in the case of this research, the colour information from chemically-stained biopsy slides serves as the main input to the computer system for processing. In computer vision applications, a colour image can be represented in several different colour spaces [8]. A colour space is effectively the description of the range of colours that can be reproduced in an image, described by a mathematical relationship that correlates colours to physical ink colours or illuminated displays on digital display devices. Various colour spaces present different representation of colour information that suit specific applications. Colour space transformation finds its application in the analysis of stained histopathological slides for the medical and healthcare area [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15].
The automatic quantification of fibrosis has been well explored for applications in the liver [16], [17], [18], lung [19], [20], and heart [21], [22]. Research on computer-aided quantification of interstitial fibrosis in the kidney has also been carried out, with the majority based on the premise of point counting. In other words, the total pixel area corresponding to fibrosis is calculated as a percentage of the whole biopsy tissue sample. For example, Masseroli et al. [23] performed automatic extraction and quantification of renal fibrosis area on Sirius red-stained biopsy samples by using an automatic threshold and morphologic filtering method to detect the fibrotic region. The stained fibrosis area was segmented by a global thresholding method from Kurita et al. [24] to produce a binary image for subsequent classification of features based on their shape and size. Similarly, Servais et al. [25] also presented an automatic quantification method that extracts the green-coloured region of trichrome-stained renal biopsies, which is the colour indicative of interstitial fibrosis for the stain. On the other hand, Moreso et al. [26] employed a texture analysis method instead of attempting to segment tubulointerstitial structure in quantifying renal damage. This decision stems from the claim that the similarity between the brightness of the features to be extracted and the background will cause a loss of information in segmentation.
Yet, a higher accuracy of interstitial fibrosis quantification cannot be achieved without positive identification of the segmented structures or regions of interest. This approach has been adopted by Klapczynski et al. [27] in rat renal tissue specimens, while a more comprehensive system for identifying human kidney structures was presented by Meas-Yedid et al. [28]. The quantification system presented by Meas-Yedid et al. proposed to segment the green colour of the trichrome staining in renal biopsy images by performing colour clustering in a self-defined I1H2H3 colour space. Since the interstitial fibrosis structure is not the sole structure stained green by the trichrome stain, the system proceeded to remove other non-interstitial fibrosis structures such as the renal capsule, basement membrane, glomeruli, and blood vessels. However, segmentation by green pixel detection is highly subject to stain quality and sample age, as the green colour contrast fades significantly with age compared to the red colour. Aside from that, pathologist feedback suggested that the quantification for interstitial fibrotic area is not limited to only blue-green regions, following certain assumptions in the tissue structure.
The amount of interstitial fibrosis, especially tubulointerstitial fibrosis, has been shown to be a good predictor of progression of end-stage renal disease [29]. When there is a damage or injury to the kidney, the tissue responds by forming fibrosis in both the glomeruli and interstitium. However, it is not as useful to quantitate glomerulosclerosis because the glomerulosclerosis will be replaced by interstitial fibrosis in later stages of the disease. Moreover, previous studies have shown that a decrease in glomerular filtration rate is better correlated with tubulointerstitial injury than with glomerulosclerosis [30], [31]. Thus, having an accurate quantification of the amount of interstitial fibrosis will help in predicting the time lapse before renal failure sets in for a patient. To the best of our knowledge, there has not been an automated quantification system for renal interstitial fibrosis that is based on the recognition of all main tissue structures in the biopsy sample. This recognition step is useful in accurately estimating not only the interstitial fibrosis area, but also the relative health of the tissue based on the tissue structure appearances. The proposed quantification framework based on a comprehensive recognition of tissue structures is tested on a set of renal biopsy images with ground truth prepared in collaboration with an expert pathologist.
