Hospitals are the first level for provision of PHC1 service known as an appropriate paradigm for observing the hygiene [1]. These places produce wastes very different from domestic types in terms of their nature and significance. In recent years, along with population growth, concerns about these types of wastes have become worldwide [2,3]. About 15 to 25 percent of medical wastes are infectious containing sharp instruments, human tissues, dressings impregnated with blood, and other substances. These cases cause direct health risks, while their indirect risks create more serious problems including environmental issues, such as water, air, and soil pollution. Indeed, the increasing production of these wastes has doubled the concerns [[4], [5], [6], [7]]. Many organizations, such as EPA2 and WHO3, have made policies for HCWs4 and have approved various laws in this field. Nevertheless, after many years this section still remained ambiguous facing with many challenges [8,9]. In fact, implementing these policies boils down to using comprehensive documents that are consistent with the real conditions which, in turn, necessitates detailed assessments [10]. This is while many studies have focused on considering only one or few influential criteria to describe the waste management status in hospitals. For example, in 2012, Pereira et al. conducted a study in the emergency ward of hospitals in Goiania, Brazil by determining the daily waste production rate for each patient [11]. Similarly, Farzadkia et al. investigated the amount of produced wastes in one of the hospitals in Tehran, Iran in 2013 [12]. Miranzadeh et al. also examined the performance of waste neutralizing facilities, as one of the important criteria in HCWM5, in one of the hospitals in Kashan, Iran in 2012 [13].
One of the main problems of these studies is lack of an integrated approach for assessing the current status of health-care waste management in hospitals which needs analyzing and managing bulky data collected from the health inspection checklists. These problems are bolded in developing countries due to limited economic resources and facilities [[14], [15], [16], [17]].
There are two important key values for replying to unknowns in hospital process management. First of all, ontology that in the field of Information Technology is “a formal naming of conceptual variables in computers that is a relatively new approach helps coping with conceptual obstacles in engineering software” and second, process mining that refers to a set of techniques making the real process modeling be materialized in an organization. “These techniques link between data mining and process mining which have been now turned into worth disclosure in Business Process Management”. BAM6, CEP7, CPM8, CPI9, BPI10, TQM11, and Six Sigma are some of well-known types of process mining techniques [18,19].
Besides, big data are so present in hospital process documentation and consequently, information optimizing in such environments requires establishing suitable algorithms on data. Big data analyzing in hospitals contributes to better information transfer between health experts and managers as well as promoting the process of documentation that results in more efficient control on hospital’s processes. Therefore, a wise selection of suitable algorithms along with modeling of data gathered by health experts bring about realistic assessment of hospital’s performance while lack of such algorithms has been observed in public health management systems [20].
Multi-criteria decision-making models are widely embedded in many engineering software and managerial systems to solve complex process planning or to control problems. These models have been prosperous basically because they could successfully cope with data managing problems in big data environment. Therefore, their capability could be also evaluated as algorithms in process mining techniques. As an example, Lee et.al in 2014 used decision support systems in machine self-control systems in big data environment in order to enable them run self-maintenance functions [20]. Niaraki and Kim in 2009 pronounced decision-making models like AHP12 as one of ontology-based models and by integrating this model with GIS13 they could propose a framework for choosing the best user-centric travel pathway [21].
Some researchers, including Zaimastura, believe that HCWs should be managed in a comprehensive and coordinated way so that all components of the managerial system are considered in assessment. Such an assessment requires involving several criteria and only investigating the performance of a hospital in the case of each criterion separately, does not represent a proper judgment of the real condition [2,4].
To solve this problem, it is necessary to use ontology-based MCDM14 techniques coupled with big data management that serve as process mining techniques. But, in most papers that have done on the application of MCDM models in hospitals the main discourse was how to prioritize treatment or disposal strategies of HCW itself not having an approach to model what is happening in the whole HCWM process, evaluating its performance, or data management in this ward of hospitals which created a significant gap in HCWM. For instance, Dursun et al. in 2011 ranked the waste management alternatives in hospitals of Turkey by using fuzzy group MCDM [22]. In 2013, Liu et al. weighted six criteria through aggregation of five DMs’ opinions15 and, then, prioritized waste disposal methods in the hospitals of Shanghai, China [23]. In 2009, Gumus ranked hospital waste transmission methods by using Fuzzy AHP and TOPSIS16 models [24]. Karamouz et al. used AHP model to determine the pollution share of hospitals of Khuzestan province, Iran in 2007. They assessed 16 hospitals by applying 18 criteria [25].
As the authors of this study had set out research projects intending to evaluate the application of MCDM models in other science areas like water resources studies, they have found these techniquies be potential for big data manageming and problem solving for hospitals’ HCWM precess as well. Therefore, according to the lack of holistic assessment of HCWM found in similar studies such as the ones mentioned above, this paper tried to present a new framework introduced as software-based HCWM index by using multi-criteria decision support systems based on the principles of fuzzy modeling and consensus evaluation.
