Cognitive impairment is a significant contributor to social and occupational dysfunction in schizophrenia and is a barrier to optimal response to evidence-based practices, such as supported employment (McGurk et al., 2015). Many trials confirm that cognitive remediation therapy (CRT) delivers meaningful, durable improvements in cognition and functioning, but few computerized CRT interventions remediate social cognition. Further, reports of the effect sizes of CRT interventions, regardless of the chosen approach, have been reported to be modest in two large meta-analytic studies with cognition as the outcome (McGurk et al., 2007; Wykes et al., 2011). This raises the issue of how to augment the effects of CRT on neurocognition as well as on social cognition measures. Based on our previous work, we wanted to further explore the added benefit by including a social cognition training program to CRT with a possible effect not only on cognitive functioning, but also on social cognition deficits in patients with chronic schizophrenia.
Social cognition (SC) refers to the cognitive processes involved in how we perceive, interpret, and process social information (Pinkham et al., 2008). The inability of individuals with schizophrenia to accurately recognize the emotional states of others has long been seen as a significant deficit, though it has not been specifically targeted by cognitive remediation training modalities. Studies have shown that social cognition deficits have a stronger relationship with functional outcomes than neurocognitive deficits (Combs et al., 2006; Penn et al., 1997; Pinkham and Penn, 2006). Additionally, social cognitive domains appear to be linked to community functioning, with evidence for an association between functioning, social and emotion perception (Couture et al., 2006), and theory of mind (ToM; Fett et al., 2011).
There have been only a small number of studies that have investigated the added effect of computerized social cognition training to CRT. Mueller and Roder (2008) demonstrated favorable effects of combined interpersonal therapy (IPT including CRT) treatment and social cognition training. Our previous pilot study has also shown that adding social cognition training to CRT can increase both neurocognitive and social cognitive outcomes over CRT alone in severely impaired individuals with schizophrenia (Lindenmayer et al., 2012). The limitation in that study was our small sample size and the lack of instrumental functional assessments. Other combined social and neurocognitive intervention studies have also shown significant effects on neurocognition, social cognition, and social functioning, but the contribution of each modality was not assessed (Fernandez-Gonzalo et al., 2015; Fisher et al., 2017; Hooker et al., 2012; Sánchez et al., 2013; Peña et al., 2016). Hence, the question as to whether neurocognition can be further improved by adding social cognition training remains an important one.
Our primary aim was to evaluate the effects of computerized social cognition training plus CRT compared with CRT alone. We hypothesized that social cognitive training combined with CRT will produce increased benefits in neurocognitive and social cognitive outcomes compared to CRT alone.
