Over fifty years ago, Hamilton, 1963, Hamilton, 1964a, Hamilton, 1964b proposed a theory about gene-based altruism. This theory posited that if a prosocial mutation came into being, it might be passed on to succeeding generations as the result of explicitly non-cognitive, i.e., unconscious and non-reciprocal, reproductive social interaction. In the intervening fifty years, many researchers and theoreticians have considered the Hamiltonian argument. Often, they instantiated their models as agent-based simulations (e.g., Premo, 2006), grounded them in game theory (e.g., Grund et al., 2013) and/or considered the argument using quantitative statistics (e.g., Gavrilets, 2012). Each time the argument was considered, the individual researchers had to decide if the hominin population under study needed to have some degree of cognitive capacity to support reciprocal prosocial interaction or if their respective research question could be nuanced such that the research could be run without modeling any explicit hominin cognitive attribute in support of prosocial behaviors. This meant researchers might miss the entire point of the initial Hamiltonian argument when they decided that their theoretical model should incorporate hominin cognitive support for prosocial behavior. The research reported in this paper deals with hominin populations having explicit biologically based prosocial behaviors, i.e., non-cognitive, non-reciprocal social interactions. In particular, it will be shown experimentally by means of computer simulation that a population could survive, evolve, and adapt on the basis of pure gene-based altruism.
Recent simulation research in the context of hominin evolution is perhaps best represented by the works of Premo (2006) and Gavrilets (2012). Premo (2006) provided a comprehensive simulation research experiment constructed as an agent-oriented simulation operating within a hybridized game-theoretical framework. His work demonstrated evidence of a strong correlation between gene-based altruism, species adaptive survival, and the distribution of forageables within a simulated environment. While Premo (2006) simulated hominin agents that enjoyed only asexual reproduction and ‘lived’ within an abstract simulation cycle uncoupled from real-world time, he also created two categories of agents whose simulated alleles expressed for phenotypic altruistic behavior. His first category of agent was one in which he installed a discrete set of cognitively nuanced social behaviors. His second agent category represented a non-cognitive hominin he referred to as a ‘null’ object. Premo's (2006) ‘null’ agents provided a control against which his more cognitively rich agents could be compared. These ‘null’ agents were similar to those in this paper, but only in an abstract sense, since the work reported here greatly narrows and extends the previous work by Premo (2006).
In the category of purely quantitative models, Gavrilets (2012) provided a powerful equation-based exploratory mechanism, based on an integrative computational process whose abstract product was evidence that individual, promiscuous hominins could transition to pair-bonded relationships. However, his research did not use an explicit articulation of time, i.e., his populations were neither born nor did they die, and there was no evolution. Simply, Gavrilets' (2012) model was not temporally coupled to the reproductive cycles of any hominin explicit biology, nor their needs to forage in order to survive. Ultimately, his research did not address the role that time and environment, as stochastic drivers of hominin behavior, must have played in hominin evolution. In contrast, in the present article the theory of gene-based altruism is tested using a highly detailed, temporally grounded, discrete-event, microsimulation technology called a spatial agent-based model (ABM; Grimm et al., 2010). This article describes that simulation research performed, the technology that was used, and discusses the results derived for the understanding of hominin origins and evolution.
1.1. MotivationThe original motivating challenge behind the simulation experiment described in this paper was to discover why reciprocal exogamy (a social behavior involving the intentional exchange of mating resources; Chapais, 2008) emerged among the higher primates in general and among Homo in particular. Based on this motivation, several non-critical hypotheses (listed in the next section) were formulated to help begin the process of operationalizing the problem space, so that its properties and mechanisms could be translated into computer code. However, the first problem was to find a way to sufficiently constrain the motivating challenge, while still producing plausible research whose experimental method could take advantage of a discrete-event simulation technology called ABM. What was required was to identify the set of necessary and sufficient causal mechanisms (biological, possibly cognitive, social, environmental, etc.) that: 1) could be translated into computer code; 2) would support emergent results, later identifiable as solutions directly related to the motivating challenge; and 3) would not provide any ‘hard-coded’ solutions in any sense. The descriptive name for the project software (‘Clans’) was selected based on the notion that, if the research was successful, then one should expect to see extended family groups (or ‘clans’) self-organizing within each large and promiscuous experimental population. Logically, such evidence of clan-like social behavior would seem to be a necessary precondition to the emergence of reciprocal exogamy. Unfortunately, evidence of reciprocal exogamy never occurred during the experimental period, likely due to limitations of time and coding resources. However, when evidence of the self-organization of ‘family-like’ groups (more technically called evidence of semipermanent breeding bonds) began to emerge in the simulation, using only an independent variable gene for altruism, the work of Hamilton, 1963, Hamilton, 1964a, Hamilton, 1964b came to mind. It is this part of the simulation experiment and its results that are described here.
1.2. HypothesesThe central hypothesis operationalized for simulation in Clans was that prosocial, gene-based altruism should lead a simulated population of promiscuous hominin agents to develop emergent, semipermanent breeding bonds. The null hypothesis was that, if the same prosocial gene (for gene-based altruism) was withheld from an identical population, then semipermanent breeding bonds should still emerge. In contrast to the central hypothesis, and not implemented in Clans, were the original motivating challenges. These proposed that “reciprocal exogamy emerged because of innate drives for specific territoriality constrained by […] bipedal mobility, social altruism and alliance, environmental and social circumscription, and sexually differentiated philopatry” (Rouly, 2015a:83). Philopatry, of course, refers to the tendency of community members of one sex to remain in collocation with conspecifics after sexual maturity is achieved, whereas the opposite sex members of the same community will typically engage in some degree of distal migration into unrelated social groups (Parish and de Waal, 2000). To assist in framing and operationalizing the central hypothesis (as instantiable computer code), two additional hypotheses were adopted: 1) a pristine environment is necessary for the identification of the fundamental principles of small-group social behavior, and 2) an environment having a sufficient absence of cultural confounds but also one having a sufficient fullness of socioenvironmental stimuli is required for a complete understanding of ‘emergent’ sociality. In this context, the word ‘pristine’ refers to a setting void of prescriptive culture, social assumption, or other human-constructed artifacts. These latter two ‘framing’ hypotheses led to the development of the artificial ecology inhabited by the Clans hominin agents.
1.3. The simulation technologyInitially, the simulation research had a single purpose: try to understand how Pan-like promiscuous individuals might transition into family-unit households and, much later, extended families and clans capable of practicing reciprocal exogamy. However, in hindsight, it seems that little empirical evidence exists about ‘why’ the Hominini transitioned from being presumably small groups of Gorilla-like polygynous and/or possibly Pan-like promiscuous individuals into family-units having stable breeding bonds, and much later extended families and clans. It seems reasonable to assume that the transition process was quite slow to develop into fuller social dominance among the early hominin species, even as Ardipithecus, Australopithecus, or even Homo emerged (Lovejoy, 1981, Chapais, 2008).As a simulation technology, Clans is an example of the computational study of natural life called artificial life (Alife). As it will be shown in the next several paragraphs, ALife is only a few decades old. This science uses computer programs (simulations) to study an extremely broad range of natural life topics. Historically, this science may have started in a computer program called ‘The Game of Life’ (Conway, 1970), which produced a visual output (a computational side-effect) that resembled ‘living’ cells moving about on a two-dimensional display grid. As the program executed, the cells appeared to self-organize in spatial and relational interaction, and those interactions revealed a probabilistic event course that determined all life, death, movement, and reproductive exchanges among the cells.At about the same time, but following a slightly different argument and path, Axelrod (1986) was considering the evolution of a set of complex human social behaviors. During the early 1980s he developed software with self-organizing mechanisms that appeared to mimic processes associable with the emergence of social norms. Clans owes a debt to the work of Axelrod (1986), because he demonstrated that informal descriptions of human behavior could be translated into executable code. For example, Axelrod (1986:1098) wrote that, after being ‘seen,’ a “player's vengefulness” may lead “he or she [to] punish someone who is spotted defecting.” Although we intuitively understand the behavioral description and its implication that a complicated social interaction was involved, it still requires fluency in software coding and design to write the experimental code. However, following Conway (1970) and Axelrod (1986), another early ALife researcher decided to practice “a new discipline that studies ‘natural’ life by attempting to recreate biological phenomena from scratch within computers” (Langton, 1989:1). That is, Langton (1989) tried to emulate biological systems in computer code, and his abstract formalization of a theoretic ALife moved the discipline forward. However, a more tangible result was not produced until Yaeger (1994) extended Axelrod's (1986) work. Yaeger's (1994) work included mobile agents that could emulate a primitive visual sense and therefore ‘see’ (detect) objects in the space around themselves. Using their simulated ‘vision,’ the agents could seek out (forageable) food objects. In this sense, the hominin agents in the current simulation, which simulate an ability to see each other and their food objects, owe some debt to Yaeger's (1994) work.During the remainder of the 1990s, advances in computational machinery led to an already well-accepted software engineering technique to further mature and to begin to evolve. This established technique was known as object oriented programming (OOP; Martin and Odell, 1998). However, by the late 1990s and early 2000s, a new coding style started to emerge from within the OOP community, which took on primacy in some quarters of ALife research. This new coding technology placed a high value on the ability of the software modeler to incorporate informal descriptions of behavior (both ecological and anthropomorphic) in the executable code of OOP software objects—now referred to as ‘agents.’ This new, ‘improved’ OOP technology became known variously as individual-based modeling (IBM) and/or agent-based modeling (ABM). As IBM and ABM matured, it became obvious there was only a very subtle difference between the two. The difference mostly depended on the emphasis (by degree) between ecologically grounded research and social system research, each respectively.Researchers like Axtell et al., 2002, Epstein and Axtell, 1996, and Kohler et al. (2000) were among the first to use the new ABM and IBM technologies as the foundations of their respective research. In so doing, they materially realized the thesis of the ‘sciences of the artificial’ (Simon, 1996). Moreover, it was entirely because of ABM and IBM technology that the new discipline of computational social science emerged (Cioffi-Revilla, 2010, Cioffi-Revilla, 2016). Leveraging these new technologies and discipline, Epstein and Axtell (1996) created the simulation ‘Sugar Scape.’ This was a program wherein each mobile, self-organizing agent demonstrated an emergent, independent participation in abstract culture and foraging. The current research owes a huge debt to Sugar Scape, even though the agents of Sugar Scape were not tasked with surviving for lengthy periods of time or to operate under empirically derived biological constraints. Yet, these researchers (exemplified by Kohler et al., 2000, Axtell et al., 2002) showed that in an ABM, the behavioral relationship of situated agents with regard to their environments, as well as with regard to each other, changed both agent and environment in mathematically complex ways. For example, an ABM can compute the results of time and space-dependent non-linear inter-agent behavior and agent–socioenvironmental interaction not easily achieved by any other means. The simulation reported here owes its existence to all of the foregoing modelers, theorists, and scientists: their concepts, simulations, research, and their free sharing of experimental methodologies. The Clans simulation is an example of a complex, natural-life system modeled and instantiated in executable computer code, and therefore an example of ALife.
1.4. Clans in the context of related research softwareClans began by instantiating in software an abstract model of artificial hominin life and a simulated environment as we imagine it may have existed in the Awash River area of the Afar Depression (Ethiopia), perhaps 3–7 million years ago (Ma). (The environmental model provided its hominin inhabitants with large and small water features and abundant forageable opportunities, including leaves, fruits, roots, fish, small prey monkeys, and termites, to name a few.) Clans set three control (reference) populations in comparative opposition to two types of experimental populations. The experimental design aligned the populations as a set of highly related, longitudinal studies. This made the Clans research an experiment whose methodology the reader may want to contrast with, for example, Premo and Kuhn, 2010, Premo, 2012, Wren et al., 2014, Shook et al., 2015, Wren and Costopoulos, 2015, and Hölzchen et al. (2016). Moreover, its experimental design not only made Clans unique, but the design allowed it to consider simultaneously how hominin biology, ecology, and cognition might have interacted over evolutionary time to produce social behaviors characteristic of modern humans. Because Clans is an agent-based simulation, it can be directly compared with the works of previous researchers (te Boekhorst and Hogeweg, 1994a, te Boekhorst and Hogeweg, 1994b, Hemelrijk, 1999, Hemelrijk, 2002a, Hemelrijk, 2002b, Hemelrijk, 2002c, van der Post and Hogeweg, 2004, van der Post and Hogeweg, 2008, van der Post and Hogeweg, 2009, Hemelrijk et al., 2005, Hemelrijk et al., 2007, Hemelrijk et al., 2008, Janssen et al., 2005, Janssen et al., 2007, Poethke et al., 2007, Puga-Gonzalez et al., 2009, van der Post et al., 2009, van der Post et al., 2015, Griffith et al., 2010). However, in contrast to all of these foregoing works, Clans combined a simulation of primates (individual software agents with socioenvironmentally influenced artificial genetics and situated in cohort-centric societies) within a pristine ecology over very long temporal horizons. Each of the above-mentioned works was a simulation of various pieces of primate life, behavior, environment, social interactions, and/or socioenvironmental issues, whereas, in contrast, Clans is a combined whole.
