Compositionality, where one sees complex systems as being built from smaller subsystems, is widely regarded within computer science as a key enabling technique for scalability. Since the subsystems are smaller, they are easier to reason about, and compositionality also promotes modularity and reuse; a particular system can be a subsystem of many different supersystems. Can compositionality be applied also to economic games? In general, not all reasoning is compositional, especially if significant emergent behaviour is present in a large system but not in its subsystems. This is unfortunately the case for economic games. For example, if σ is an optimal strategy for a game G, then is σ part of an optimal strategy for G⁎H, where G⁎H is a super-game built from G and H? Clearly not, e.g. the Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma has equilibria — such as cooperative equilibria — that do not arise from repeatedly playing the Nash equilibrium from the Prisoner's Dilemma [2].
However, Ghani et al. [3] produced a compositional model of game theory which included a limited set of operators for building new games from old. One shortcoming was that this did not treat the infinite iteration of games, or more generally contain an operator to compositionally build infinite iterations of games. This paper addresses that problem. Within programming language theory, these sort of issues are tackled by final coalgebra semantics [10] and we follow this practice, with the added benefit of bringing related bisimulation techniques to the game theory community. We highlight two relationships between our work and traditional approaches:
•Each round of an infinite game produces utility. Traditionally, this infinite sequence of staged utilities is combined into a single utility in one of a number of ad hoc manners. We take the bolder approach of not requiring the choice of a single mechanism for combining utilities.•The coalgebraic approach we advocate dovetails well with the economic concept of subgame perfection, where a strategy must be an optimal response in all subgames of the supergame [13].
The general approach of Compositional Game Theory deals with a new concept of coutility. However this paper makes the simplifying assumption that the coutility function is the identity. Despite this, our approach covers many games, as those occurring in the traditional literature do not possess coutility.
Related Work. An introduction to the economic treatment of iterated games can be found in Mailath and Samuelson [5]. The fundamental concept of game theory is that of Nash equilibrium [7], which has been adapted for the study of repeated and dynamic games to the concept of subgame perfect equilibrium first introduced by Selten [12]. Significantly influential work on using logical methods and coalgebraic reasoning in economics include Lescanne [4] and Abramsky and Winschel [1]. Open games are also closely related to the ‘partially defined games’ of Oliva and Powell [8].
Structure of the paper. Section 2 consists of preliminaries and a summary of previous work on open games; Section 3 introduces an operator for dealing with subgame perfection; Section 4 introduces morphisms between games, and Section 5 consists of our final coalgebra semantics for infinite open games. In Section 6, we show how bisimulation and coinduction can be used to reason about infinitely repeated games. Finally Section 7 contains concluding remarks and discussions of further work.
