One of the possibility of defining resonances is by the purely outgoing solutions of the Schroedinger equation (Siegert condition), i.e. by solutions with complex energies at the pole of the S-matrix. These solutions are called Gamow states, since Gamow was the first who introduced them in nuclear physics for the description of α-decay early in the last century.Gamow states represent non-stationary states, since they describe resonant states with finite lifetime. The lifetime is promotional to the inverse of the width of the resonance. The energy of the Gamow solution is a discrete complex value which corresponds to the pole of the S-matrix in the complex energy sheets. It is more convenient to use the wave number k instead of the energy, since in single channel problem we have only one complex wave number sheet. The energy is proportional to the square of k, therefore the upper half of the k-plane maps to one of the energy sheets (called physical energy sheet), while the lower half of the k-plane maps to another energy sheet, called unphysical energy sheet.
Decaying resonances lie in the fourth quadrant of the k-plane. For a real potential the capturing resonances are mirror images of the decaying resonances. Both types of resonances lie on the second energy sheet, the decaying ones are below, the capturing ones are above the real axis, where the cut separates the first and the second energy sheets. In the calculation of nuclear reactions we often use complex potential (optical potential). The JOZSO program is able to calculate resonances in complex potentials like its ancestor, the code GAMOW. The name of the new program comes from the nickname of the late József Zimányi to whom one of the authors (T.V.) is greatly indebted.
One of the goal of writing a new code is to provide an efficient tool for calculating the poles of the S-matrix under a whole domain of the complex k plane including regions with large values of the complex k-values. First a landscape of the S(k)-matrix on a mesh of certain region of the k plane is calculated, then the positions of the poles in the domain are localized. After we localized a complex k eigenvalue we normalize its wave function to unity, using regularization methods taking the contribution of the external region into account. For neutral particle the contribution of the external region can be calculated in closed form given in Ref. [1]. It turned out only later that the normalized wave function of the anti-bound pole can be either real or imaginary in a real potential [2]. An option for calculating trajectory of selected poles is built into the new program. The trajectories are complex curves in the complex wave number plane along a certain pole moves as the potential strength slowly changes. The potential strength is a real number γ, which multiplies the sum of the nuclear potential terms. The γ→0 represents the free particle limit. The use of the code JOZSO was demonstrated in Refs. [3] and [4]. In a most recent work [5] it was found that the JOZSO program gives more accurate values for the imaginary part of the resonance for large values of the real part of k.
The program deals with potential wells only, i.e. in which the poles become bound or anti-bound for large values of the potential depth.
We describe the mathematical formalism in details in the following sections.
