The preparation of porous polymer membrane by non-solvent induced phase separation (NIPS) exhibits great advantage of easy operation (Chen et al., 2017, Wu et al., 2017). Generally, the casting solution used in NIPS method consists of the good solvent and polymers, which act as bulk membrane material (BMM). Then the casting solution is spread on a glass and immersed into a coagulation bath composed of non-solvent. The solidification of polymer membrane happens as the solvent and non-solvent exchanges (Guillen et al., 2011). Also, additives could be added into the casting solution to achieve the functionalized polymer membrane.
Based on the NIPS method, forced surface segregation has become an effective approach for membrane modification to resist flux decline caused by oil and protein fouling (Bengani-Lutz et al., 2017, He et al., 2016). Forced surface segregation is aimed at introducing block copolymer modifiers containing hydrophilic segments and low surface energy segments on the membrane surface. The modifiers and BMMs are dissolved in the casting solution. During the process of membrane preparation via NIPS, the hydrophilic segments migrate toward the polymer-water interface and drag the low surface energy segments toward the membrane surfaces, which is the basic mechanism of forced surface segregation. As a result, the hydration layer formed by hydrophilic segments can block the foulants whereas the lower surface energy leads to weaker interaction between the membrane and foulants (Sundaram et al., 2011). The foulants cannot stably exist on the surface of the membrane and are easy to be removed by hydraulic cleaning, therefore the prepared membrane has the function of antifouling (Zhang et al., 2017b). Zhao et al. combined polyethersulfone (PES) as the BMM with the hydrophilic poly(ethylene oxide) segments and low surface energy polydimethylsiloxane segments to develop a membrane with both biofouling-resistance and biofouling-release abilities (Zhao et al., 2014). Subsequently, they (Zhao et al., 2015) performed the synergistic surface segregation of the inorganic hydrophilic TiO2 nanoparticles with copolymers onto the polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane surface. The copolymer, which contains fluorine-based low surface energy segments poly(hexafluorobutyl acrylate) and hydrophilic poly(acrylic acid) segments, formed metal–organic coordination interactions with TiO2 and served as the moiety of surface segregation. It endowed the membrane with properties of superior antifouling and high mechanical strength during the utilization in oil/water separation.
Although some experiments have been reported on antifouling membranes modified through forced surface segregation method, the molecular level mechanism of forced surface segregation is still far from complete understanding. Computer simulation can be used as a complement to determine the chemical composition and distribution on the surface of membrane materials (Cheng and Grest, 2016, Esteves et al., 2013). Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a powerful tool for explaining the structure and surface phenomena of composite materials (Darvishi and Foroutan, 2016, Shaikh et al., 2016); however, MD is hard to match the timescale of the whole dynamic process of phase separation in membrane formation. A mesoscopic simulation method is necessary to study the microphase separation of polymer membranes. Dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) method coincides with the time scale of the self-assembled behaviour of polymers (Liao et al., 2017, Min et al., 2017, Wang et al., 2017). It has been used as an important tool to study complex soft matter systems (Shi et al., 2015, Tomasini and Tomassone, 2012, Xu et al., 2016). Yu et al. successfully prepared the membrane pore size to the range of nanofiltration by the self-assembly of polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P4VP) and polystyrene-b-poly(acrylic acid) (PS-b-PAA). DPD was utilized to simulate the process of membrane formation and explain the reason of pore size reduction combined with high water permeability (Yu et al., 2015). The surface segregation in an athermal polymer-nanoparticle system was studied by Teng et al. (2017). The nanoparticles transited from surface segregation to bulk aggregation as the particle size changes. Recently, Wang et al. simulated the NIPS process and explored the influential factors of porous membrane formation (Chen et al., 2017). DPD is becoming a more and more important tool to study the complex self-assembled behaviour of polymer systems.
In this study, DPD simulations will be performed to study the formation of the homoporous copolymer membrane via forced surface segregation. The cellulose acetate (CA) backbone, low surface energy segments poly(hexafluorobutyl methacrylate) (PHFBM) and hydrophilic segments poly(poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate) (PEGMA) compose the tri-block copolymer CA-PHFBM-PEGMA. The effects of the concentration of copolymer, PHFBM/PEGMA block ratio, and the mixing ratio of CA-PHFBM-PEGMA with CA on the homoporous membrane formation were investigated for a better understanding of the forced surface segregation process. This study aims at the mechanism of phase separation and provides guidance for the molecular design and development of homoporous membrane systems.
