A massive earthquake can seriously damage structures such as houses, buildings, and bridges, consequently affecting the safety of people and even their lives. To protect human life from such unexpected disasters, the seismic design of structures with specially-designed seismic safety materials is essential. As the number of high-rise buildings has increased with the growth of megacities worldwide, the demand for seismically safe materials with enhanced mechanical properties has increased in recent years [1]. On the other hand, global warming has become one of the most important environmental issues around the world. The signatories to the Paris Agreement have agreed to decrease greenhouse gas emissions to keep global temperature rise in this century well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels [2]. Each country has proposed a plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 across all economic sectors. The field of construction is expected to apply higher strength concrete and steel materials to reduce CO2 emissions from the production of raw materials and reduce energy consumption in storing heat or cooling in construction materials.
In order to satisfy the demands for both safety and global warming reduction, seismic reinforced steel bars with higher strength are required. In South Korea, KS (Korean Standards) D 3504 defines three types of reinforced bars for seismic safety. However, the steel bar with the highest strength of 600 MPa has not been commercialized owing to conflicts with the Korean Building Code. The revision of KS D 3504: 2016 made it possible to utilize grade 600 MPa reinforced steel bars for seismic safety. Generally, the period between the development of a new steel grade and its application in the field of construction is very long. Sometimes, the practical application of new steel grades in the field of construction is limited because the developed steel fails to meet the requirements of construction engineers in terms of both mechanical properties and price. Constructive discussion between engineering bodies in different fields about the materials designed by computational thermodynamics may accelerate the commercialization of new types of steel products. Recent developments in computational thermodynamics and application software have made it possible to design suitable materials as well as support engineers of steel manufacturing companies in the production of the designed material with minimized benchmarks in practical operations: refining, casting, hot rolling, cooling, and heat treatment [3].
This paper describes our recent success in developing grade 600 MPa reinforced steel bars for seismic safety in South Korea. We demonstrate how computational thermodynamics aided practical material design. First, conventional alloy design based on CALPHAD-type computational thermodynamics was carried out. For this purpose, a typical alloy system of Fe-0.30C-0.23Si-1.37Mn-0.14V-0.22Cu (in wt%) was selected. Second, in order to reduce the V content of steel for economic reasons, a cooling process designed using FE simulation based on a thermodynamic database was performed. For this application, Fe-0.34C-0.22Si-1.34Mn-0.04 V (in wt%) alloy was chosen. The mechanical properties of the reinforced steel bars with a diameter of 32 mm produced based on the simulated results were compared and discussed in relation to the required properties.
