Despite the growing interest in the utilisation of renewable and sustainable thermal-energy sources, as well as in improving energy efficiency and reducing fossil-fuel consumption and our impact on the environment, there remains a lack of widespread deployment of relevant technologies and a significant amount of waste heat that is currently rejected to the atmosphere. Of the many technologies that can be considered for the conversion of renewable or recovered waste-heat into electricity, including some recently proposed novel two-phase cyles such as the non-inertive-feedback thermofluidic engine (NIFTE) [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5]] and Up-THERM heat converter [[6], [7], [8], [9]], the organic Rankine cycle (ORC) [[10], [11], [12], [13]] is one of the most promising and mature candidates, and is suitable for low- and medium-grade heat sources, typically at temperatures between 80 and 400 °C [14,15].
One of the most important elements of an ORC system is the working fluid that undertakes the thermodynamic cycle. As such, the selected fluid affects system performance and operation, as well as component design, size and cost. With increasingly more stringent legislation, fluids such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) have already been phased out, whilst fluids such as hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are set to be phased out in the coming years [16]. From the perspective of an end-user, technical solutions are required that are both environmentally friendly and economically feasible. This demands the identification of both novel fluids that meet all legislative requirements, and ORC systems that are optimised in terms of economic performance indicators such as the net-present value (NPV) or the levelised cost of energy (LCOE).
During a conventional working-fluid selection study an optimal working fluid is typically selected after screening a group of fluids based on predefined criteria and then conducting a parametric optimisation study [17,18]. However, such an approach cannot be used to identify new and potentially novel working fluids, and therefore more holistic approaches are required. For example, Drescher and Brüggemann [19] identified five optimal working fluids for a biomass application from an initial group of 1800 substances, whilst Schwöbel et al. [20] devised a working-fluid screening process and applied it to 3174 potential working fluids. More recently, Preißinger et al. [21] combined computational chemistry techniques with a thermodynamic process simulation, and applied a multi-criteria evaluation technique to 72 million chemical substances. Other authors have attempted a more generalised approach to working-fluid selection, by developing correlations that relate working-fluid parameters, such as the critical temperature, to the heat source conditions [22,23].
Alternatively, computer-aided molecular design (CAMD) can be used to provide a more holistic approach to working-fluid selection. In CAMD, a potential working fluid is described by functional groups, which can be put together in different ways to form different molecules. For example, the CH3, CH2, >C, >C<, CH2, and CH groups can be combined to generate a large number of hydrocarbon working fluids. Then, if an equation of state is available that can predict thermodynamic properties based on the functional groups from which it is composed, the molecular structure of the working fluid can be simultaneously optimised alongside the ORC system. In this sense, CAMD-ORC models have the potential to identify novel working-fluids which may otherwise be overlooked, whilst removing pre-emptive and subjective screening criteria.
Papadopoulos et al. [24] used CAMD to identify potential working-fluid candidates before completing a more conventional ORC process simulation, and later applied CAMD to the optimal design of working-fluid mixtures [25]. Brignoli and Brown [26] used group-contribution methods to investigate the effect of a working-fluid's critical point on the thermodynamic performance of the ORC, whilst Palma-Flores et al. [27] demonstrated the potential of CAMD to identify new fluids with higher thermal efficiencies and better safety characteristics. Furthermore, Su and Deng [28] developed a thermodynamic ORC model, and later implemented this into a CAMD-ORC framework [29]. Cignitti et al. [30] also developed a CAMD-ORC model and, in addition to optimising thermodynamic performance, considered the associated heat-exchanger requirements. Nevertheless, these previous studies have relied on empirical group-contribution methods, such as the Joback and Reid method [31], to obtain working-fluid parameters including the critical temperature and pressure from which thermodynamic properties can be calculated using a cubic equation of state. More advanced group-contribution equations of state have also been applied within a CAMD-ORC framework, which use molecular-based equations of state based on statistical associating fluid theory (SAFT) [32,33]. Lampe et al. [34,35] developed a CAMD-ORC model based on the PC-SAFT equation of state [36,37], and used this model to optimise ORC systems for a geothermal application. The CAMD-ORC optimisation was split into two stages. In the first stage an optimal, but hypothetical, working fluid was identified, and in the second stage real working fluids with similar performance were identified. Later, Schilling et al. [38] reduced the problem to a single stage optimisation in which the working-fluid structure and ORC system are simultaneously optimised, and has recently extended the model to include transport properties and cost correlations, facilitating the specific-investment cost to be determined [39].
With a few exceptions, the major limitation of previous CAMD-ORC models has been a focus on optimising the cycle and its thermodynamic performance; nevertheless, achieving the successful commercialisation of ORC systems across a range of applications requires a consideration of thermoeconomic performance. Quoilin et al. [40] evaluated the specific-investment cost (SIC) of small-scale waste-heat driven ORC units, whilst Lecompte et al. [41] optimised the design of ORC units for large-scale CHP plants and waste-heat recovery. Multi-objective optimisation studies can be also found in the literature [[42], [43], [44]], where the authors considered the trade-off between maximising power output whilst minimising the SIC. However, all of these previous thermoeconomic studies consider only predefined working fluids, and conduct a separate optimisation for each specific fluid. On the contrary, thermoeconomic methods have not been previously applied to CAMD-ORC models, partly due to the requirement of group-contribution methods for determining transport properties to size the system heat exchangers.
Another limitation to previous CAMD-ORC models is that they have focussed typically only on non-recuperated and subcritical ORC systems. However, there exist opportunities to improve the thermodynamic performance of this basic ORC by changing the cycle architecture. For example, using a working-fluid mixture instead of a pure fluid results in non-isothermal, isobaric phase change processes, which facilitates a better thermal match between the working fluid and heat source, and between the working fluid and heat sink, thus reducing irreversibilities and improving the thermodynamic performance of the cycle [42,45,46]. Alternatively, operating a partially-evaporated cycle, in which expansion occurs from a two-phase state, can also be used to increase the power output from system [47,48].
The authors of the current paper have previously developed a CAMD-ORC framework, based on the SAFT-γ Mie group-contribution equation of state [49]. In this previous work, empirical group-contribution transport property prediction methods for hydrocarbon working fluids were validated against NIST REFPROP [50]. The aim of the current study is to combine these transport property prediction methods with a heat-exchanger sizing model and integrate this model into the CAMD-ORC framework. This, in turn, allows a thermoeconomic assessment of the system to be conducted following a thermodynamic optimisation, and therefore optimal working fluids to be identified based on thermoeconomic performance indicators. In addition, the current paper extends the thermodynamic model, such that recuperated, partially-evaporated and working-fluid mixture cycles can all be considered within the CAMD-ORC framework. It is noted that although models for these novel cycles are presented and validated in this paper, they are not considered further in the case studies since suitable methods for predicting the heat transfer in complex flows of fluid mixtures and cost correlations for two-phase expanders are not readily available. However, their inclusion is justified as it facilitates these novel systems to evaluated in the future. As far as the authors are aware, this is the first study that details a complete CAMD-ORC framework, based on an advanced group-contribution equation of state, that can conduct a thermoeconomic assessment in this manner, in addition to simulating novel cycle architectures.
In what follows, the key aspects the CAMD-ORC framework are discussed in Section 2, including the group-contribution methods, the thermodynamic model, and the component sizing and costing models, which are then validated in Section 3. The framework is applied to three case studies that consider the design of hydrocarbon working-fluids and corresponding optimised ORC systems in Section 4, and some further economic considerations are discussed in Section 5. Finally, the key findings from this study aresummarised in Section 6.
