In the context of conservation, protection and management of aquatic resources, assessment of phytoplankton community structure helps to understand aquatic ecosystem functioning. Phytoplankton constitute a biological quality element that can be used to assess the ecological health status of water bodies as well as changes occurring under a range of environmental conditions including anthropogenic pressures. Demographic traits such as presence/absence, abundance and biomass have traditionally been included in directives and monitoring programs as descriptors of the ecological status of aquatic ecosystems (Water Framework Directive (EU/2000/60), Marine Strategy Directive (EU/2008/56), Copeland, 2016). The implementation of European Union Directives, particularly in Member States, has led to the development of monitoring plans for collecting metadata and information on phytoplankton. Indeed, EU policies call for the scientific community to resolve large-scale questions facing aquatic science, such as global warming, the spread of invasive species and resource depletion. All of these issues require the development of monitoring programs for collecting data and the improvement of large-scale data sharing and data integration for meta-analysis. The heterogeneity of data sources creates a barrier in terms of making connections within and among multiple domains of information (Bonacin et al., 2016). Data are collected by organisations and institutions using a variety of different standards, technologies and conventions, making it difficult to combine information from different surveys or different databases.
Even though the Utermöhl method (Lund et al., 1958; Utermöhl, 1958) is the most widely adopted method to determine the abundance of phytoplankton assemblages, the procedures used for phytoplankton analysis vary widely between research and monitoring groups, despite the numerous efforts to standardise phytoplankton data. Such data may need to be used several decades after they were first gathered, by users that did not participate in their production, and a fundamental effort is thus required in order to ensure the harmonisation and consistency of phytoplankton time series data and facilitate their accessibility and comparability. In order to facilitate reliable evaluation of the changes in phytoplankton data, as well as the comparison of phytoplankton data collected at different temporal and spatial scales (Zingone et al., 2015), quality assurance and quality control procedures are crucial. In addition, transferring data manually to computer spreadsheets takes additional time and introduces possible typing errors. A system that simplifies these procedures, shortens the time required for analyses, and reduces potential human error therefore represents an important contribution (Zohary et al., 2016). In addition, the collected data need to be stored in flat files or spreadsheets with minimal formal structure and few metadata. The use of such a system would greatly enhance information exchange between agencies and improve the usefulness of phytoplankton databases.
We developed PhytoNumb3rs, a tool designed to support phytoplankton analysts and researchers during each step of the analysis from the compilation of the raw data sheet to the computation of abundance to the structuring of the dataset in a given format. The PhytoNumb3rs counting toolkit is based on the Utermöhl method, standardised as UNI EN 15204 (2006). However, besides being time-consuming and labour-intensive, the procedure described in the UNI EN 15204 (2006) guidance also suffers from a lack of detail concerning the counting analysis. For example, the information on how analysts should choose the counting strategy, how many cells per sample should be counted and how uncertainty should be estimated is purely generic. For this reason, various guidelines and operating manuals have been drawn up (Fiocca and Vadrucci, 2009; HELCOM, 2017; IOC-UNESCO, 2010; Ospar Commission, 2016; Zingone et al., 2010). Most of them propose default counting procedures and/or a fixed number of cells to be counted. However, they provide no clear information that would support the operator in a conscious choice of which counting strategy to adopt, which depends on the variability of distribution and the number of cells in each individual sample.
The innovative aspect of PhytoNumb3rs is that it aims to provide guidance on microalgal analysis, including statistical procedures for the design and the optimisation of methods to analyse each single sample. In addition, we have developed a tool for microscopic analysis of phytoplankton that makes it easier to calculate cell density and to incorporate qualitative and quantitative aspects concerning data precision, bias and method sensitivity. Specifically, it allows the user to estimate performance characteristics such as uncertainty and quantitative detection limits. PhytoNumb3rs is a user-friendly computing system based on combined Excel® spreadsheets. It represents a first step towards harmonisation of data and the promotion of standardised procedures for data management that will save time during data entry and storage. It allows the user to select and vary the magnification and the counting strategy while analysing a sample and to obtain the relative cell density, uncertainty and detection limit for each taxon. Our objective in presenting PhytoNumb3rs is to provide a useful software tool with advantages on a number of levels:
1.At the personnel level, it enables the analyst to adopt a suitable counting strategy during the analysis and to save time during data entry and storage;2.At the laboratory level, it makes it possible to calculate the quality of analytical results in accordance with UNI EN 15204 (2006) procedures;3.At a global level, it can be used to meet the increasing need for harmonisation and standardisation of phytoplankton data in order to improve the quality, comparability and accessibility of intra- and inter-laboratory results over time.
