According to the results of theoretical-experimental research draught resistance of the land cultivation machines is mainly dependent on condition of the processed environment, properties, the structural parameters of working organ and the kinematic regime of the system. Increasing soil specific resistance results in serious obstacles to the work of the working organ and deterioration of the technological process (see Table 1, Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4).Table 1. Stainless steel and soil characteristic properties.Characteristic propertiesIndexes of substancesMeasurement pointsStainless steelSoilDensity7850500kg/մ3Young's modulus2 * 101125PaPoisson's ratio0.30.45–Volumetric Elasticity Module1.6 * 101183.3PaExtraction module7.69 * 10108.62PaHeating capacity434–H/kg,kDownload : Download high-res image (296KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The values of vertical componen of soil deformation for the first test sample of the wedge.Download : Download high-res image (355KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The values of soil strain for the first test sample of the wedge.Download : Download high-res image (371KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Positive and negative values of vertical deformation of the soil for the second test sample of the wedge.Download : Download high-res image (385KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. Positive and negative values of strain of the soil for the second test sample of the wedge.
For modeling the interaction between the soil and the working organs has been studied computerized automated design possibilities, through which the nature of the interaction will be more prominent.
Computerized automated design tool can be viewed as finite element computing systems which with the help of the computer and the corresponding software tools allow to model soil-working organ interaction and to extract data from various modular dimensions which would require the results of the sample of test experiment.
Finite Element Analysis (FEA) is widely used in the solution of problems of mechanical systems, such as interactions of solid bodies and deformations [2,3]. The necessity of such analyzes arises in automated designing systems when it is necessary to make the analysis of the process without the preparation of a real sample during the digital modeling of the project. Finite Element Analysis(FEA) is based on a finite element method, which is method of the solution of the differential and integrated equations with private derivatives [4]. As the title of the analysis suggests, the solid body is conditionally divided into finite elements that represent the finite-component particles of the solid body attributed to the body's parameters. Thus, the interaction of solid bodies is considered by finite particles. During the problem analysis, depending on the tasks and the required accuracy, it is possible to reduce or increase the degree of finite element breakdowns receiving the necessary steps for the accuracy of the calculations.
During the selection of software tools was separated ANSYS Workbench software package which gives a wide range of possibilities for the automated design and the analysis of finite elements [5]. Particularly, it enables to download the projects developed by SOLIDWORKS software tool and consider the various interactions.
During modeling, certain forces are used on the body and reported speeds that determine interactions between the bodies [6]. At this stage it is possible to make many measurements that will serve as a basis for further improvement of the working organ.
