Phytoliths are particles of hydrated silica produced in the cell wall and intercellular spaces of plant leaves, flowers, and fruits. They have several advantages over other biological indicators commonly used for paleoenvironmental reconstruction (Gu et al., 2013, Sangster et al., 2001): (i) They are well preserved in sediments, possessing high resistance to oxidation and high temperatures. (ii) They are usually deposited in situ, and thus they are able to reflect local plant communities and provide environmental information about the immediate vicinity of a sampling site. (iii) Many genera and species have diagnostic phytoliths, enabling plant communities to be reconstructed by identifying these morphotypes present in sediments (Mccune and Pellatt, 2013, Strömberg, 2004, Das et al., 2013).
Precise taxonomic classification is a precondition for using phytoliths to reconstruct the paleoenvironment. Early phytolith studies used simple observation and description to show that many woody plants and grass produce diagnostic phytoliths, particularly species in the taxa Poaceae, Cyperaceae, and Asteraceae (Gao et al., 2016). The Cyperaceae produce siliceous pores, while the Asteraceae uniquely produce hair phytoliths (Guo and Jie, 2012, Morris et al., 2009). The phytoliths of Poaceae have been a major focus of study owing to their high production and numerous morphotypes (Prat, 1936, Piperno, 1985). Since the 1930s, when the phytoliths of Panicoideae and Pooideae were first classified, the phytoliths of Poaceae were divided into four classes (Twiss et al., 1969), and then into eight classes (Brown, 1984), nine classes (Kondo and Sase, 2015), even 14 classes by Chinese researchers (Wang and Lv, 1993). This initial research had a major impact on the establishment of a taxonomic system for the phytoliths of Poaceae (Wang and Lv, 2012, Lu et al., 2002, Huan et al., 2014, Li et al., 2017, Li et al., 2005). Many woody plants, such as Pinaceae and Arecaceae, have been found to contain diagnostic morphotypes, which occur in epidermal cells, vascular tissue, and hair cells (Lu et al., 2007, Xu et al., 2005, Montti et al., 2009, Morris et al., 2009, Das et al., 2013, Albert et al., 2015).
However, due to the “redundancy” of phytoliths, the fact that many common morphotypes occur not only in different species of grass but also in woody species (Rovner, 1971, Li et al., 2013, Vrydaghs et al., 1993, Murungi et al., 2016). It is not sufficient to study only diagnostic morphotypes of phytoliths for detailed paleoenvironmental reconstruction. Furthermore, the differentiation of common morphotypes has relied upon qualitative observation and description. For example, many Poaceae species contain the dumbbell morphotype, but the appearance of dumbbells of Stipa capillata is different from those of the Panicoideae and Oryzoideae, allowing differentiation of Poaceae subfamilies by using qualitative observation and description (Huang et al., 2004, Honaine et al., 2009). In addition, the saddle phytoliths of Chloridoideae and Bambusoideae and the bulliform morphotype of Phragmites spp. and Oryza sativa can also be qualitatively distinguished (Iriarte, 2003).
Beyond qualitative observation and description, the use of quantitative approaches can provide a more reliable basis for differentiating phytolith morphotypes. Morphometric parameters have been used to differentiate wild rice and cultivated rice to study the evolutionary history of rice cultivation around the Yangtze River during the Neolithic period (Gu et al., 2013, Wu et al., 2014). A morphometric approach has also been used to distinguish dumbbell phytoliths from Pearl millet and sorghum, and the size of long-saddle phytoliths has been used to distinguish different species of Bambusoideae (Out and Madella, 2017, Li et al., 2005). However, elongate psilate and tabular rectangle phytoliths (Pl. S1), which are common morphotypes in the surface soils from different vegetation types in NE China, cannot be differentiated by this morphometric approach (Gao et al., 2017).
Image analysis is increasingly being applied in diverse areas, such as fingerprint identification, facial recognition and the classification of insects, pollen grains, and a wide range of other entities (Zhou et al., 2007a; Lan, 2011, Liang, 2010; Bonhomme et al., 2013, Timothy et al., 2020). The combination of traditional phytolith geometric shape parameters with emerging shape/texture descriptors into one user-friendly image processing system is also a new quantitative approach to the study of phytolith morphology (Evett and Cuthrell, 2016). Ball et al. (2016) presented a framework for phytolith morphology research and noted the potential importance of a computer-assisted approach. Digitized phytolith images and a machine learning numerical approach to automatically classify and distinguish phytoliths have been demonstrated, suggesting that computer-assisted image processing technology has great potential in research on phytolith morphology (Wu et al., 2006, Cai and Ge, 2017). We have advanced new technology to the study of surface phytoliths for the first time by analyzing their texture characteristics and Hu invariant moments.
The texture is an essential cue to describe a specific image (Haralick, 1978). The development of computer technology makes it possible to extract the texture of the object surface through different technical approaches, and then effectively distinguish objects with tiny texture difference that can not be distinguished by the naked eyes. In fact, texture analysis has been utilized in different fields such as remotely sensed image analysis, medical image analysis, industrial surface inspection, etc. (Christodoulou et al., 2003, Herlidou-Meme et al., 2003, Siew et al., 1988). In addition, Hu invariant moments also play an important role in the description of images. Since Hu (1962) firstly proposed seven Hu invariant moments with the properties of rotation invariability, translation invariability, and scaling invariability, they have provided assistance for research in many fields, such as image recognition, character recognition, and industrial quality inspection, etc. (Dudani and Breeding, 1977, Sluzek, 1995, EI-Khaly and Sid-Ahmed, 1990). Therefore, the new methodology provides the potential for the differentiation of similar-shaped common phytoliths. Our principal objective was to test the ability of this new methodology to provide a more quantitative and precise basis for reconstructing vegetation variations in the forest and meadow steppe.
