The study of corrosion is one of the hottest topics in chemistry because of the direct and indirect losses caused by this scourge. At the economic level, more than a quarter of the world's steel production is degraded due to a corrosion problem [1]. Low-cost mild steels are used as the preferred construction material across industries and are considered the more economical option than the costly corrosion-resistant alloys. Mild steels in general are susceptible to corrosion over time, which can be quite dangerous and shorten the life of the steels themselves. The use of corrosion inhibitors as a means of protection is necessary in many industrial cases: surface preparation, transport and storage of metals, cooling circuits, rehabilitation of reinforced concrete, painting and cathodic protection. The current trend is towards synthetic inhibitors and green or friendly inhibitors of the environment [2,3]. These inhibitors must be non-toxic and capable of ensuring good protection of metals and alloys. The use of the inhibitors is governed by constraints which take into account the conditions of use, the nature of the surface to be protected, the material and inhibitory efficacy. The use of organic inhibitors particularly, N-heterocyclic is among the most economical and practical approaches for retarding corrosion of metals during several industrial processes [[4], [5], [6], [7]]. The protective power for this type of molecules is often consequent to their adsorption physically and/or chemically onto the metal interface [8]. A major challenge for the application of inhibitors in industries is that most of these molecules are toxic to environment and the humans [9,10]. So, it is necessary to find non-harmful compounds on first hand and second hand have a good behavior to corrosion. In recent years, increasing attention has been paid to Schiff bases as corrosion inhibitors for various metals in typical acidic environments [11]. In parallel with their good efficiency potentials, the process of synthesis of Schiff's base is relatively simple and one can introduce groups with hetero atoms and can tune the desired properties of molecules. Some of the researchers reported the enhanced corrosion inhibition of Schiff's bases compared to their parent amine and/or aldehyde due to the introduction of azomethine group (-CN-) in the molecule [12].
Recently, the density functional theory (DFT) calculations have proved to be a very powerful tool to predict the adsorption sites and explain the mechanism of corrosion inhibition effects by calculating the molecular structure and electronic parameters. The energies of the molecular orbital border (EHOMO), and (ELUMO), energy gap (ΔE) and fraction of electrons transferred (ΔN) from inhibitor molecule to the metal surface based on density functional theory, were considered in order to investigate the corrosion inhibition mechanism and the corresponding protective powers of organic compounds.
As part of the research and development of new organic compounds with better inhibitory property, this work explores the systematic study of inhibition effect of Schiff base derivative, namely, 4-((2,3-dichlorobenzylidene) amino)-3-methyl-1H-1,2,4-triazole-5(4H)-thione on the corrosion of mild steel in 1.0 M HCl solution using experimental measurements, theoretical methods and technique surface analysis. The electrochemical techniques are used to study the electrode/electrolyte interface. The theoretical study of the structure-reactivity relationship of corrosion inhibitors is an innovative and promising approach. This approach not only explores the intrinsic electronic properties of each inhibitor but also allows their modes of adsorption to be modeled on the metal surface.
