According to the World Health Organization (WHO, 2013), the number of people affected by obesity worldwide has almost doubled since the 1980s. A recent review on childhood obesity (Wang & Lim, 2012) suggests that about 20% of school-age youngsters in Europe struggle with overweight, and that 5% of these youngsters can be classified as obese. Additionally, many obese youngsters will remain obese in adulthood. A review from the early 1990s suggests that about a third of obese preschool youngsters and about half of obese school-age youngsters become obese adults (Serdula et al., 1993).
There is a clear need for programs capable of reducing overweight and obesity, especially in youngsters. Oude Luttikhuis et al., (2009) reviewed sixty-four studies on the treatment of childhood obesity and found that most of them reported positive effects. More in-depth investigation made the authors conclude that treatment programs combining the different facets of diet, physical activity and behavioral change have the most positive outcome. However, it should be noted that these results might be skewed towards the positive because many studies suffered from a high drop-out rate and had to deal with missing data during follow-up. It is assumed that most youngsters regain weight after treatment and therefore decline participation during the study. Several other studies have shown that it is especially amongst the severely obese youngsters that drop-out rates are high and weight regain during follow-up is significant (Braet et al., 2004, Goossens et al., 2009, Levine et al., 2001). Therefore, it is indicated to research new ways to improve the currently existing treatment programs.
One explanation for the modest results of existing treatments is the decreased behavioral control capacities of obese individuals. The dual-system model used in addiction research (Bechara, 2005, Strack and Deutsch, 2004, Wiers and Stacy, 2006) could be helpful to understand these problems. The idea behind a dual-system model is that self-regulatory behavior is influenced by two different but interactive systems: one is a fast, impulsive and associative system that evaluates and processes stimuli on their emotional and motivational value (bottom-up), while the other is a slow, reflective and knowledge-based system that controls and inhibits responses in a conscious deliberation (top-down). Similarly, Appelhans et al. (2011) suggested that also regarding overeating two important neuro-behavioral processes are involved: a strong food reward system (bottom-up) and a less developed inhibitory control system (top-down). When both processes are not in balance, strong food responses are observed; and this can explain the lack of resisting temptation that is typical for obese youngsters (Guerrieri, Nederkoorn & Jansen, 2008). Consequently, it is assumed that improvement of their self-regulatory capacity will be crucial so that they are better able to resist immediate temptations and will better adhere to treatment recommendations.
Enhancing the self-regulatory capacity implicates strengthening different Executive Functions (EFs) underlying all kinds of controlled behaviors. EFs are neuropsychological processes that activate and regulate goal-directed behavior and responses to the environment (Riggs, Huh, Chou, Spruijt-Metz, & Pentz, 2012). EFs involve cognitive control tasks, such as planning and execution of behavior, attention, and inhibitory control, all essential for successful self-control. Based on recent research we can now say that failure of self-regulation in obese youth is at least partially based on underlying deficits in EFs needed to overrule automatic behaviors (Riggs et al., 2012). Although future research could show that other EFs are also important, at this moment, evidence is overwhelming on the role of at least two different EFs: inhibitory control (IC) and attention (Appelhans, 2009, Loeber et al., 2011, MacLeod et al., 1986, Nigg, 2000, Verbruggen and Logan, 2008).
First, inhibitory control (IC) contributes to the self-regulation of behavior as it creates a delay in which one can think before acting. IC refers to top-down processes for intentional control in the service of higher order or longer term goals (e.g., resisting temptations, delaying gratification), and is believed to be at the heart of impulsive behavior (Davids et al., 2010). It becomes particularly manifest when observing people's restraint standards. The fact that we can restrain ourselves in the presence of palatable food while still finding this food very tempting indicates that the capacity to resist eating is a distinct process. This suggests that inhibiting food intake is not simply a matter of reducing the drive to eat: it involves active self-regulation of behavior despite the strong drive to eat (Nigg, 2000). Several longitudinal studies have shown that toddlers who are less able to inhibit their impulses are more likely to be overweight later on in childhood (Graziano et al., 2010, Seeyave et al., 2009). Behavioral studies in obese youngsters suggested that compared to average weight youngsters, obese youngsters have problems with behavioral inhibition, as assessed with two well-validated computerized measures to assess behavioral inhibition: the Stop Signal Task and the Go/No-Go Task (Appelhans, 2009, Logan et al., 1984, Verbeken et al., 2009). Additionally, it was shown that difficulties with impulse control obstruct weight loss during treatment (Nederkoorn, Jansen, Mulkens, & Jansen, 2007), and that subjects leaving the treatment program score higher on impulsiveness and lower on inhibition (Hjördis & Gunnar, 1989). Research in adults also demonstrate that poor inhibitory control is associated with higher body weight and leads to more failure in resisting food temptations (Guerrieri et al., 2008, Verbruggen and Logan, 2008).
Second, behavioral self-control is also related to bottom-up attentional salience of food cues and impulsive approach behavior. Calorie-rich food stimuli automatically capture attention (Freijy et al., 2014, Loeber et al., 2011, Mann and Ward, 2004, Nederkoorn et al., 2009) and drive action-tendencies to approach and consume palatable food (Kemps et al., 2014, Kemps et al., 2013, Kemps and Tiggemann, 2014). Recently, new studies indeed confirmed that some children have strong reward traits, related with strong food responsiveness and approach behavior which is associated with overeating and weight gain (Verbeken, Braet, Lammertyn, Goossens, & Moens, 2012). The assumption that in obese individuals overeating is triggered by exaggerated reactivity to stimuli associated with high-caloric food, is also supported by neuro-imaging research. Compared to average weight controls, in obese individuals a greater activation was found to high-caloric food images within a wide range of brain regions mediating motivational and attentional salience of food cues (Brignell et al., 2009, Yokum et al., 2011). Furthermore, a high brain activation to high-calorie food pictures in obese individuals predicts less weight loss during therapy and poorer weight-loss maintenance post-treatment (Stoeckel et al., 2008). Consequently, previous findings suggested that obese people have a high attentional bias for food-cues, which is detrimental for their weight control.
Interestingly, recent pilot studies suggest that cognitive self-control indeed can be trained in a highly feasible and effective way. The largest amount of evidence for this statement can be found in literature about obese adults. For example, a number of authors found that active inhibition training significantly facilitated weight loss in (young) adults (Veling et al., 2014, Stice et al., 2017, Lawrence et al., 2015). It appears that those inhibition trainings create automatic stop-associations, that reduce the direct evaluations of unhealthy food items (Veling, Lawrence, Chen, van Koningsbruggen, & Holland, 2017). In the field of attention training, there are also studies to suggest the effectivity of EF-training. For example, Bazzaz, Fadardi, and Parkinson (2017) found that a Food Attention Control Training Program (FOOD-ACTP) significantly reduces food-related attentional biases, diet failures and weight gain (Bazzaz et al., 2017).
Even though the evidence in children and adolescents is rather scarce, there are recent studies that show EF-training can be also relevant in a younger target group. The study of Folkvord, Veling, and Hoeken (2016) shows that children who completed an inhibition game (with the go-no-go task) only once, already consumed fewer calories directly after it (Folkvord et al., 2016). In the field of attention training, a study with obese youngsters participating in an attention modification program (AMP) or control program (CC) showed that in a free access session, youngsters in the CC condition significantly increase their caloric intake over time whereas youngsters in the AMP group demonstrate decreased caloric intake, providing evidence for the effects of such a training on eating behavior in obese youngsters (Boutelle, Kuckertz, Carlson, & Amir, 2014).
Furthermore, there is also evidence that EF-training for children can book success even for a longer period. Verbeken, Braet, Goossens, and van der Oord (2013) reported that adding an inhibitory control training indeed results in better weight outcomes in obese youngsters. Enhancing EFs helped them to maintain their weight loss more effectively, at least for a period of two months after their inpatient treatment (Verbeken et al., 2013).
However, Guerrieri et al. report that focusing on inhibitory control alone will not be enough, without taking into account also attentional and approach bottom-up processes (Guerrieri et al., 2008). This is also in line with the view of Rollins, Dearing, and Epstein that bottom-up processes may be a more powerful independent predictor of food intake than the ability to inhibit (Rollings, Dearing, & Epstein, 2010). Therefore, with the present study we aim to evaluate the feasibility, acceptability and initial effectiveness of a cognitive-bias training focusing on both bottom up and top down processes for weight maintenance in obese youth after following an inpatient weight control program.
To conclude, as obese youngsters have both strong attentional bottom-up reactivity and a decreased top-down ability to inhibit the automatic impulses (Nigg, 2000), they are at highest risk for the plaything of environmental stimuli. For them, a CBT weight control program will not be sufficient. Hence, it is meaningful to evaluate a training to strengthen EFs in this specific patient group of obese youth.
