Tangent categories, introduced by Rosický in [23], provide an category-theoretic setting for differential structures in geometry, algebra and computer science. A tangent structure on a category C comprises a functor T:C→C together with associated natural transformations—for example a natural transformation p:T⇒1 making each TM into an object over M—which capture just those properties of the “tangent bundle” functor on the category Man of smooth manifolds that are necessary to develop a reasonable abstract differential calculus. The canonical example is Man itself, but others include the category of schemes (using the Zariski tangent spaces), the category of convenient manifolds [2] and, in computer science, any model of Ehrhard and Regnier's differential λ-calculus [10].
A more powerful category-theoretic approach to differential structures is the synthetic differential geometry developed by Kock, Lawvere, Dubuc and others [9], [18], [22]. It is more powerful because it presupposes more: a so-called “well-adapted” model of synthetic differential geometry is a Grothendieck topos E equipped with a full embedding ι:Man→E of the category of smooth manifolds, obeying axioms which, among other things, assert that the affine line R=ι(R) has enough nilpotent elements to detect the differential structure. In particular, in a well-adapted model, the tangent bundle of a smooth manifold M is determined by the cartesian closed structure of E through the equation ι(TM)=ι(M)D; here, D is the “disembodied tangent vector”, which in the internal logic of E comprises the elements of R which square to zero.
Any model E of synthetic differential geometry gives rise to a tangent category, whose underlying category comprises the microlinear objects [22, Chapter V] of E (among which are found the embeddings ι(M) of manifolds) and whose “tangent bundle” functor is (–)D; see [6, Section 5]. This raises the question of whether any tangent category can be embedded into the microlinear objects of a well-adapted model of synthetic differential geometry; and while this is probably too much to ask, it has been conjectured that any tangent category should at least be embeddable in a representable tangent category—one whose “tangent bundle” functor is of the form (–)D. The goal of this article is to prove this conjecture.
Our approach uses ideas of enriched category theory [17]. By exploiting Leung's coherence result [20] for tangent categories, we are able to describe a cartesian closed category E such that tangent categories are the same thing as E-enriched categories admitting certain powers [17, Section 3.7]—a kind of enriched-categorical limit. Standard enriched category theory then shows that, for any small E-category C, the E-category of presheaves [Cop,E] is complete, cocomplete and cartesian closed as a E-category. Completeness means that, in particular, [Cop,E] bears the powers necessary for tangent structure; but cocompleteness and cartesian closure allow these powers to be computed as internal homs (–)D, so that any presheaf E-category bears representable tangent structure. It follows that, for any (small) tangent category C, the E-categorical Yoneda embedding C→[Cop,E] is a full embedding of C into a representable tangent category.
Beyond allowing an outstanding conjecture to be settled, we believe that the enriched-categorical approach to tangent structure has independent value, which will be explored further in future work. In one direction, the category E over which our enrichment exists admits an abstract version of the Campbell–Baker–Hausdorff construction by which a Lie algebra can be formally integrated to a formal group law (i.e., encoding the purely algebraic part of Lie's theorems). Via enrichment, this construction can be transported to any suitable E-enriched category, so allowing a version of Lie theory to be associated uniformly with any category with differential structure. Another direction we intend to explore in future research involves modifying the category E to capture generalised forms of differential structure. One possibility involves non-linear or arithmetic differential geometry in the sense of [5], which should involve enrichments over a suitable category of k–k-birings in the sense of [25], [3]. Another possibility would be to explore “two-dimensional Lie theory” by replacing the cartesian closed category E with a suitable cartesian closed bicategory of k-linear categories, and considering generalised enrichments over this in the sense of [13].
Besides this introduction, this paper comprises the following parts. Section 2 recalls the basic notions of tangent category and representable tangent category, along with the coherence result of Leung on which our constructions will rest. Section 3 extends Leung's result so as to exhibit an equivalence between the 2-category of tangent categories and a certain 2-category of actegories [21]—categories equipped with an action by a monoidal category. Section 4 then applies two results from enriched category theory, due to Wood and Day, to exhibit these actegories as categories enriched over a certain base E. Then, in Section 5, we see that this base E is complete, cocomplete and cartesian closed, and using this, deduce that the desired embedding arises simply as the E-enriched Yoneda embedding. Finally, in Section 6, we unfold the abstract constructions to give a concrete description of the embedding of any tangent category into a representable one.
