
“Data Science is the science of dealing with data …” (Naur, 1974)
In recent years, we have observed an increasing popularity of Data Science methods that seem to be in the focus of many organizations, including those interested in a better comprehension or management of environmental systems. Data Science is already widely used in business to design successful strategies and policies, and the economic sector is facing a significant transformation as a result of the penetration of data-driven innovation in the business core. We believe that a similar transformation is underway within many scientific disciplines, among them those within the Environmental Sciences, to investigate the benefits that can be realized through use of appropriate Data Science approaches.
In this paper, we analyze the origins of Data Science as a new discipline that is diverse enough to be applied to any domain, including those within the Environmental Sciences. The potential of Data Science to advance our knowledge of the laws governing complex environmental phenomena is enormous. The technological development requisite for collecting the volume and resolution of data required to study these phenomena is mature, but classical data analysis methods are, in many cases, insufficient to cope with the size, speed and diversity of information sources providing evidence under the variety of forms (text, videos, audio recordings, numbers, images) that require global analysis and local tuning to elicit the hidden, relevant knowledge to support higher level decision making. Many investigators are already investigating how Data Science can address this deficiency.
We present the contributions of Data Science, together with an analysis of the new, specific skills associated with its inherent multidisciplinarity. As there is no common definition of Data Science, in the paper we present several definitions that have been used in the past and a propose a new conceptualization of what Data Science means. A discussion is also provided regarding its contact points with other emerging disciplines, such as Big Data Analytics. Emerging opportunities for new applications in Environmental Sciences are described. While not an exhaustive description of the opportunities for Data Science in Environmental Science applications, a wide perspective in the area is provided. Being an emergent field, a number of open issues envisage fertile areas for new research in the near future. The paper also provides some highlights, challenges, and trends with the aim to push the development of the Data Science field in general, and in Environmental Sciences in particular, where it can be of help.
The structure of the paper is as follows: In Section 2, the origins and a brief history of Data Science are provided. In Section 3, the added value of applying Data Science techniques to real problems using real data is discussed. Section 4 highlights the new skills required to become a qualified data scientist and the need to develop specific new curricula to provide appropriate training. Section 5 provides a more modern, contemporary view of Data Science, and Section 6 provides a general overview of how Data Science is being applied in Environmental Sciences. Section 7 identifies the main current challenges in the area. Section 8 provides a concluding discussion.
