Among women, breast cancer is the most common type of cancer and the second most common cause of death, after bronchus cancer (Hortobagyi et al., 2005). According to the data provided by the World Health Organization, in 2011 more than 508 000 women worldwide died due to breast cancer (WHO, 2013). In 2013, 1.8 million women worldwide were diagnosed with breast cancer (Global Burden of Disease Cancer Collaboration, 2013). In 2017, in the United States of America alone, forecasts predict about 252 710 new cases of diagnosed invasive breast cancer and 63 410 new cases of non-invasive one – carcinoma in situ (Breast cancer statistics, 2017). The total risk of breast cancer increases ca. 1% per year for the whole population of women.
Breast lesion may be benign or malignant, depending on the characteristics of cells that form the tumor (Abeloff et al., 2008). Breast cancer is the result of uncontrolled replication of tumor cells, which usually occurs in mammary gland lobes (Abeloff et al., 2008). A group of rapidly dividing tumor cells in the breast may eventually form a lump. Early detection improves survival rates, as the breast cancer may be removed before the metastases develop. Imaging of breast lesions is currently the primary method for the detection and initial clinical suspicion of malignancy (Zhang et al., 2012). In order to confirm the suspicion of breast cancer malignancy identified on the basis of medical imaging, biopsy samples are subjected to cytologic tests or histopathological verification. Mammography (MMG) and conventional ultrasound imaging (US) currently remain the standard and primary imaging techniques used in breast cancer screening and in the evaluation of cancer symptoms. In postmenopausal women, MMG offers better cancer detection compared to US. This technique, however, may bring discomfort, as the breast must be mechanically compressed (Lambertz et al., 2008), and exposed to X-radiation (Berrington de Gonzalez et al., 2009). In young women, due to their higher breast density and in patients with breast implants, mammography is not fully reliable method due to frequent false negative results (Saarenmaa et al., 2001, Kopans, 2002, Boyd et al., 2007, Kolb et al., 2002), which significantly delay cancer detection. Moreover, mammography results are affected by pre- or postmenopausal conditions and by a hormone replacement therapy (Kerlikowske et al., 2013). Mammography also involves the potential risk of accumulating the effects of ionizing radiation, and risk of inducing cancer increases ca. 1% per ca. 5 mammography tests. For these reasons, medical societies do not recommend carrying out mammography tests more frequently than every 2–3 years and to women under 40 years of age. Supplementing mammography screening tests with conventional ultrasound imaging significantly increases the chances of early cancer detection, especially in the case of dense breast tissue (Berg et al., 2008, Hooley et al., 2012). In this case, however, high sensitivity of ultrasonography (Zonderland et al., 1999, Stavros et al., 1995) is limited due to its low specificity (Berg, 2004, Corsetti et al., 2006). False positive results, in turn, entail a large number of unnecessary biopsies (Saarenmaa et al., 2001, Goddi et al., 2012). According to recent data in literature, conventional ultrasound imaging does not allow for precise detection of isoechoic lesions in the surrounding fat tissue (Nakashima et al., 2013). The above described limitations of mammography and ultrasonography contribute to the fact that breast cancer still too often remains undiagnosed at its early stage despite regular screening tests.
From the clinical point of view, an important aspect is to identify the lesion’s position in the surrounding tissue and to describe the lesion characteristics like size and shape in relation to Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS). BI-RADS criteria are used in MMG and US to estimate the level of tumor malignancy (Mendelson et al., 2013). A basic description of breast lesion includes the information on its transparency and contour of its margins, orientation and shape, distal echoes, texture echo and echogenicity (Stavros et al., 1995, Karimi and Krzyzak, 2014, Bassett, 2000, Tohno et al., 1994). Lesion compressibility and vascularity may also be evaluated. Benign breast tumors are usually round or minimally oval, hyperechoic on borders and isoechoic in the center (Stavros et al., 1995, Benson et al., 2004, Adier et al., 1991), while malignant breast tumors lack circumscribed margins or borders, have heterogeneous echo patterns and an increased anterioposterior dimension (Stavros et al., 1995). The conventional ultrasound imaging may be used to describe the physiological and pathological characteristics of palpable and non-palpable lesions (Stavros et al., 1995, Benson et al., 2004). Nevertheless, this technique does not provide fundamental quantitative information about the tissue’s elastic properties, which are of great clinical significance, as cancer tissue is harder and stiffer and hence less elastic and compressible than healthy breast tissue (Gennisson et al., 2013, Sarvazyan et al., 1995). Ultrasound elastography (USE), which has been intensively developed in recent years (Hooley et al., 2013, Ricci et al., 2014, Doyley and Parker, 2014, Balleyguier et al., 2013, Barr et al., 2012), offers an improvement to conventional ultrasound breast scanning in that it allows an estimation of tissue stiffness based on tissue deformation.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been recently acknowledged as a preferred method of breast screening tests for women with high cancer risk. MRI tests provide substantial aid to MMG and US in estimating the size of breast tumor and its growth pattern (Lehman et al., 2007, Uematsu and Yuen et al., 2008). The potential of MRI in breast cancer tests is significant, as it offers high sensitivity and moderate specificity for tumor masses greater than 5 mm, including ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) (Warren et al., 2005). MRI enables the analysis of breast morphology and hence provides qualitative and quantitative data about tumor vascularity, thus allowing differentiation between benign and malignant tumor mass (Wiener et al., 2005). However, high purchase price of MRI devices, the need to install them in specially-designed rooms, and the fact that their service and operation requires skilled employees make MRI scanning a cost-intensive procedure. Moreover, in most cases a contrast agent must be administered intravenously, that can both penetrate to extravascular space or cause an allergic reaction. Many contrast agents are not recommended in patients with kidney or liver diseases. These disadvantages along with the high costs of MRI scan, limit its application as a breast diagnostics method and a commonly available screening test procedure.
In order to improve breast cancer detection rates, new and better imaging methods are required. Ultrasound tomography (UST) of breast is a novel hybrid method that has a potential to overcome the above described disadvantages of MMG, US and MRI. Advanced works aimed at implementing the prototype of an ultrasound computer-assisted tomographic scanner for breast imaging are currently underway in several research centers worldwide: the group of Nicole Ruiter and others (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology in Germany) (Jirik et al., 2012, Birk et al., 2016), the group of Krzysztof Opieliński and others (DRAMIŃSKI S.A. company in cooperation with Wroclaw University of Science and Technology in Poland) (Opieliński et al., 2015, Opieliński et al., 2016), as well as the North-American centers like the group of Nebojsa Duric and others (Karmanos Cancer Institute in cooperation with Delphinus Medical Technologies, Inc.) (Duric et al., 2007, Duric et al., 2013), the group of Michael Andre, Steven Johnson, James Greenleaf, and others (TechniScan, Inc.) (Wiskin et al., 2013), the group of Vasilis Marmarelis, Jeong-Won Jeong and others (Alfred E. Mann Institute for Biomedical Engineering of University of Southern California) (Marmarelis and Jeong et al., 2007). Although the methods used by these teams are similar, the developed devices have significant differences. A brief description of the advanced prototypes of these devices was presented for comparison in another publication (Opieliński et al., 2015).
The results of in vivo breast studies, presented and analyzed by a team of acousticians and medical professionals participating in this research, were obtained from the model of the ultrasound computer-assisted tomographic scanner which has been developed for several years by DRAMIŃSKI S.A. company, a Polish manufacturer of ultrasound scanners, in cooperation with the Laboratory of Ultrasound Technology at the Chair of Acoustics and Multimedia in Electronics Faculty of Wroclaw University of Science and Technology. The ultrasound tomography scanner is currently being implemented in the Polish market by DRAMIŃSKI S.A. company, as part of a project co-financed by the European Union. The UST device developed in Poland has the following advantages: an ability to obtain high quality images, short scanning time, quick data acquisition, quick signal processing and image reconstruction, and very efficient design of both the ultrasonic transducer array and electronic circuitry. The device developed by DRAMIŃSKI S.A. should be much less expensive in final production, as compared the devices developed in other research centers, and is intended for use primarily in screening tests.
Ultrasound breast tomography is a very promising hybrid diagnostic method, as it offers multimodal ultrasound imaging. Using both a pulse ultrasound wave transmitted through each of the breast coronal sections and a wave scattered on the structure heterogeneities of these sections in numerous directions around enables the tomographic reconstruction of at least three complementary ultrasound images. Each of the images shows the distribution of a separate acoustic parameter which differentiates the tissue and its lesions in the specific way. The combination of these images allows a comprehensive, both qualitative and quantitative characterization of breast tissue. A set of such images is obtained for each coronal section, which enables the visualization of the complete breast volume. Moreover, ultrasound tomography is not only non-invasive, as there is no need to mechanically compress the breast. It is also safe, as no ionizing radiation is used, while the intensity of ultrasonic waves used in this method does not induce tissue changes.
The aim of the presented study was to analyze the results of in vivo ultrasonic tomography imaging of female breast tissue with regard to the local distributions of relevant acoustic parameters, to allow recognizing and distinguishing the specific inner structures and lesions. Ultrasound transmission and reflection tomography images are a barely researched type of visualization for the structure of breast tissue. They represent the structure differently than standard images created with the currently used diagnostic devices: ultrasound B-mode scanners, X-ray mammography scanners or magnetic resonance tomography scanners. The clinical significance of ultrasound tomography imaging of female breast has not been well documented. No database containing ultrasound breast tomograms is available, no atlases or medical manuals describe the diagnostic approach. Only about a dozen publications present the cases of clinical in vivo examinations of women’s breast with the use of single unique ultrasound tomography scanners. These reported cases are mainly the examinations performed in the recent years by the above mentioned research centers involved in developing the prototypes (Opieliński et al., 2016, Duric et al., 2013, Hoppa et al., 2016, Ranger et al., 2012, André et al., 2012, Zografos et al., 2013).
This work is innovative in that it offers a pioneer, comprehensive approach to diagnosing breast lesions in women, based on the analysis of 3-modal ultrasound tomograms obtained in initial in vivo screening from a large group of patients.
