Over the past few years, Twitter alongside other social media has had an increasing popularity. This in return, has generated an enormous research concernment as well as new opportunities for studying the reciprocal actions of different groups of people. Community detection and sentiment analysis are two such instances, comprising a popular topic in the investigation and better understanding of social networks. As for community detection on the one hand, it tries to analyze a social network with the capital objective of detecting clusters of associated and related users in it, while on the other hand sentiment analysis endeavors to settle upon the users’ behavior on emotional level and consequently specify their attitude on a diverse number of topics, such as to recognize how individuals feel.
Being of the utmost fundamental aspects of the social network analysis, the determination of user behavior in each one of the arising communities as well as in the whole network is a vibrant concept of analyzing the exact way that users are associated for creating social communities. In order to explain social dynamics of interaction among groups of individuals, it is imperative that we study the community structure of a network. Based on this principal, there are research efforts in the literature that point to this direction [5]. A topic of extremely high research interest with wide range applications is the efficient analysis and the accurate specification of communities.
Community detection approaches could greatly assist in the economical and marketing domain. The accurate discovery of concrete communities and the analysis of each one could ameliorate the performance of advertising initiatives of the marketing industry by specifying and addressing the appropriate groups of users in a specific network. In this line, an effective way to offer to users recommendations adapted to their behavior and interests would be to utilize aspects of the structure of users’ behavior and use the affiliations of the communities of the users [8].
People’s decisions and attitudes as well as their social relationships can be affected and shaped by public stance in social networks, and since public opinion and emotions are essential to all aspects of human lives, their recognition is quite important [28]. Recognizing emotional status in user generated content in social networks is a very challenging and interesting topic in social networks and in microblogging area [3]. The analysis is necessary for understanding people status and for providing a number of indicative factors regarding public attitude towards different events. In this line, the accurate specification of the emotional content of users can potentially describe the emotional status of a community, a town or even a whole country [24].
Although users’ emotional behavior as an important parameter for understanding public behavior most of the existing research efforts and methods for specifying structured communities in social networks do not utilize it. However, emotional aspects of people behavior and their opinions could provide indicative factors and assist in detecting more concrete and structured communities in terms of density.
In the present work, the main contributions concern the following aspects: Initially, a method for the analysis of user generated content and the specification of users’ emotional behavior on Ekman’s psychometric scale [6] is presented. Furthermore, a method for examining users’ actions and their posts in social networks while calculating their influence based on their behavior and modeling a conversation as an emotional graph, is introduced. Finally, we present a method for specifying the most influential communities of users that are formulated based on each user’s emotional behavior and their analytics profile in the network. Specifically, each user profile can be considered as the union of the two aforementioned characteristics, i.e. emotional profile and analytics profile.
The rest of this manuscript is structured as follows: Section 2 presents background topics in emotional detection and sentiment analysis as well as community detection. Section 3 presents our proposed methodology while in Section 4, details of the implementation are introduced. Furthermore, in Section 5, the evaluation study conducted and the results gathered regarding the community detection proposed schema are presented. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and provides directions for future research.
