Nowadays, computational intelligence techniques are applied in many science and engineering applications for information processing, decision-making, and optimization objectives. In the last decades, there are many techniques and algorithms that are developed in different fields such as genetic algorithms, artificial neural networks, evolutionary and fuzzy algorithms. It is expected in the next few years that the intelligent optimization algorithms will be more effective in solving different problems in engineering, scientific, medical, space and artificial satellites for anomaly and failure detection areas.
The behavior of some insects or groups of animals in the nature such as colonies of ant's flocks of birds, swarms of bees, and schools of fish have attracted the attention of computer science researchers to solve several problems in science and engineering. Swarm intelligence is a subfield of artificial intelligence which is concerned with the intelligent behavior of biological swarms by the interaction of individuals in such environments to solve real-world problems by simulating such biological behaviors. In particular, animal and insect colonies groups provide a rich environment to develop optimization algorithms. Swarm intelligence is defined as the designing of intelligent algorithms which are simulated by the behavior of different animal societies [1]. Also, it has several characteristics such as adaptation, scalability, speed, autonomy, parallelism and fault tolerance. There are some key important characteristics of swarm intelligence such as self-organization and working division. As animals and birds biological behavior, each in the group is responsible for a specific task individually, and sometimes they work together to achieve a given task.
In computer science, a metaheuristic is developed to find optimization algorithms that can solve given complex problems. Metaheuristics optimization algorithms which are simulated or inspired by biological behaviors of animal or birds and have been used to find the optimal solution to a given problem. A meta-heuristic is a strategy for heuristics to solve complex optimization problems. In mathematical programming, a metaheuristic refers to a procedure that searches a solution to an optimization problem. Metaheuristics use a heuristic function to help the search process. The heuristic search can be either blind search or informed search. Meta-heuristic optimization algorithms are turning out to be increasingly well known in different applications because of their nature since they are: (i) based on simple ideas to be easy for implementation; (ii) no need to use inclination of data; (iii) can find optimal neighborhood solution; (iv) finally, it can be applied in different areas of applications.
The optimization process is concerned with finding the optimal solution (s) to a specific problem. To perform this purpose, the choosing of the adequate algorithm is an important issue. However, there are some problems that have a complexity which makes difficult to search for all possible solutions. In the literature, there are several metaheuristic algorithms developed to mimic the biological behavior of animal or insect groups by defining deterministic or random rules to be applied in solving different optimization problems. This paper focuses on recent nine optimization algorithms of the literature that have been developed recently which are based only on the behavior of some animals to simulate the biological behavior of animals in fighting for food and mates. Also, to mimic their behavior and reaction in a different situation in nature as in getting their foods to introduce an alternative method to develop solutions to the complicated problems by stimulating analogical reasoning and thinking of these animals. Therefore, people can learn from the behaviors of such animals to design optimization algorithms to solve complicated. For example, Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) algorithm [2] simulates the collaborative behavior of bee colonies, the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm [3] simulates the biological behavior of fish schooling and bird flocking, the Krill Herd (KH) method [4], [5], which mimic the mating behavior of firefly insects, WOA [6], [7], which emulates the behavior of humpback whales, grey wolf optimizer (GWO) [8], [9], which mimic the hunting technique and social leadership of grey wolves, the Social Spider Optimization (SSO) Algorithm [10] and Lion Optimization Algorithm (LOA) [2] that mimic the behavior of lions and their characteristics of cooperation.
In this paper, nine of recent nature-inspired algorithms, namely GBC, FSA, CSO, WOA, AAA, ESA, CSOA, MFO, and GWO algorithms have been presented and analyzed. The application areas of each algorithm have been proposed.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents and discusses in details nine of the most recent bio-inspired algorithms in the literature. This II describes the inspiration and mathematical model for each algorithm. In section III, we introduce the overview of the evolution of the bio-inspired algorithm over the last ten years. In section IV, we identify the application areas of the nine proposed bio-inspired algorithm in this paper. Section V concludes this paper and highlights the future work.
