The increasing availability of full text from scientific articles in machine readable electronic formats is a development with the potential to greatly impact citation analytics and to significantly improve the accuracy of models of the structure of science. Full text contains information not only on the exact locations of in-text citations within articles, but also on the context in which a citation to previous work is made. Specific problems that can be addressed using full text data include classification of in-text citations by type and function, and improving measures of impact by weighting of citations based on polarity, typology, function, citing location, and perhaps other features as well. Weighting of citations also has the potential to impact our knowledge of the structure of science, in that document clustering (and the resulting maps) could be based on a more accurate measure of the relatedness between documents. These applications, although beyond the scope of this paper, motivate the current work, which studies the characteristics of in-text citations (and associated features) in two large full text databases. A solid understanding of the characteristics of in-text citations is required before advanced applications of full text data, such as those mentioned, can be most fruitfully pursued.
Study of in-text citations and related text from scientific documents using full text sources has a long history. Although both positional (the location of references) and semantic (the meaning of references) studies have been pursued, here we focus primarily on the positional aspect. The terminology used in previous studies of in-text citations is not consistent. Thus, to avoid confusion, we define our terminology here. A reference is an item in the bibliography or reference list of a document. An in-text citation is a mention of a reference within the full text of a document. A reference can be mentioned one or more times in a document. Each mention is an in-text citation. We use the terms in-text citation and mention interchangeably in this article.
Our work examines distributions of in-text citations for two large full text datasets – the PubMed Central (PMC) Open Access subset and a large portion of the Elsevier full text corpus. Using these large and disciplinarily broad datasets, we will show that there are significant variations in the distributions that have not been reported before. We specifically investigate field-level dependencies and report citation count distributions as a function of text progression.
The paper proceeds as follows. We first review relevant literature and then describe our datasets and analysis methods. Results are then reported along with key observations. The paper concludes with a summary, mention of limitations and suggestions for additional work.
