Heteroaggregation of colloids is a versatile method for synthesizing materials such as advanced ceramics, pharmaceuticals and biological products. In heteroaggregation, two populations of colloids of different species are introduced in the same suspension. Very often, the colloids are chosen in such a way that they charge with opposite signs. Because of that, heteroaggregation hugely relies on controlling electrostatic interactions between colloids, because these are dominant in determining the stabilization and destabilization of the suspension itself. Since few years, heteroaggregation in suspensions involving particles with opposite charges and very different sizes has received a growing interest [1]. For example, these suspensions have been used for designing new porous ceramics [2], [3] or new anisotropic particles [4]. In these domains, understanding the microscopic behavior of the suspensions is a key step to achieve the appropriate structure in view of specific applications.
Different studies have shown that heteroaggregation can lead to structures which were not previously accessible by single-component aggregation. In fact, two-component systems present a wider set of parameters which can be used to tune the structure of the resulting aggregates. In the literature, there are several experimental results on suspensions composed of two kinds of particles with high size asymmetry. This large size difference between the colloids allows the formation of very specific aggregate structures, which can be tuned by various parameters such as the relative abundance of the particles, the ionic strength, and the pH. Typically, when a large amount of small particles is present, heteroaggregation can allow the formation of a coating on the large particles, which can stabilize the suspensions [2], [5]. On the contrary, when the small particles are not sufficient to obtain a coating of the large particles, the suspension is aggregated. Rollié et al. have clearly shown that in this case, the large particles are linked thanks to the small ones, which are making ‘bridges’ between them [6]. Experiments have also shown that the suspension stabilization is affected by an increase of the ionic strength [7]. In this case, the heteroaggregate structures become more compact [8]. Recently, Lee et al. have also studied the effect of surface potentials in a binary system composed of 530 nm polystyrene latex and 12 nm alumina coated silica particles. [5]. They point out the fact that the structures of aggregates strongly depend on the surface potential of smaller particles. In the case of heteroaggregation, if the small particles are stable, short bridges are observed between the large particles otherwise when small particles are not stable the bridges are long. These complex behaviors, which depend on the interplay of several parameters, are not yet fully understood and rationalized into a coherent picture. To this end, computer simulations can be very useful, since they allow to analyze separately the effects of the variation of each parameter with great details.
In this paper, we propose to examine systematically the influence of such parameters on heteroaggregation by means of Brownian dynamics simulations. We particularly focus on the local structure of aggregates and more precisely on the mutual arrangement of the colloids. The knowledge of the particle repartition can indeed be very important when suspensions are used in colloidal processes for example in the ceramic field [9], [3]. We consider a system composed by two populations presenting considerable size asymmetry, by a factor 5: a population of large alumina particles (positive charge) is mixed with a population of smaller silica particles (negative charge). The solvent is treated implicitly and the interactions between the colloids are described by the Derjaguin Landau Verwey Overbeek theory (DLVO), which has been repeatedly shown to reproduce experimental results on alumina-silica heteroaggregation quite accurately [10], [11], [12]. In Brownian dynamics simulations, the aggregate structures are often kinetically controlled. For systems where heteroaggregation occurs between particles of the same size, it is indeed experimentally observed that aggregates do not crystallize [13], contrary to what it is expected from an energetic point of view. This shows the importance of kinetics in determining the experimental structures. From this point of view, Brownian dynamics differs from other simulations used to study colloidal aggregation such as Monte Carlo type simulations (cluster-cluster aggregation simulations [14], [15] or basin-hopping simulations [16]) or such as the thermodynamic model proposed by Dickinson [17], which consider the system at equilibrium. More complex simulations including fully the hydrodynamic interactions, such as the dissipative particle dynamics simulation (DPD) [18] or the ‘stochastic rotation dynamics-molecular dynamics’ (SRD-MD) simulations [19], can also be used to study the structure of the heteroaggregates. However, these simulations can be very cumbersome for large-scale systems. Moreover, Brownian dynamics simulations are often sufficient to qualitatively understand the behavior of dilute or semi-dilute suspensions where aggregation is quasi irreversible, which is the case in this study [10], [11], [12].
Even though we make explicit reference to the alumina-silica system in our calculations, we believe that our model is indeed of general character since it is based on simple physical ingredients which can be easily transferred to model other types of size-asymmetric colloids. For this reason, we show in the following that our simulations are able to rationalize the different experimental behaviors reported in the literature for several types of size-asymmetric heteroaggregation. Moreover, computer simulations can be very helpful not only for interpreting experimental results but also for suggesting new experiments. In fact, simulations allow to analyze selectively the role of the different parameters in a fully controlled way, to an extent that would be very difficult to achieve experimentally.
In this paper, the process of aggregate formation is studied on a much larger scale than in previous studies [11], [12] by means of a new algorithm allowing fast large scale simulations. Contrary to our previous works, here we analyze the long-range properties of large ramified aggregates, including a study of their percolation threshold. This study is now possible thanks to a recently developed algorithm [20] which allows to correctly reproduce the diffusion coefficient of large particles also when several small particles are adsorbed on them. In fact, previous Brownian dynamics simulations of suspensions with highly-size asymmetric particles have shown that the diffusion of large particles is artificially slowed down by a caging effect due to the adsorbed small particles [12]. This artificial slowing down of diffusion hinders the formation of aggregates containing many large particles.
First, in this paper, the interaction model and the simulation method will be introduced. This is followed by the investigation of the role of the chemical surface properties and of the presence of salt on the aggregation and more precisely on the aggregate structures. Finally, the mechanism of heteroaggregate formation and the role of the small particle mobility will be discussed.
