Leaf analysis has very important and extensively used area in the field of plant taxonomy to understand, recognize and analyze leaf patterns and plant recognition. The Automatic plant retrieval based on leaf have been widely explored, based on leaf shape, color, leaf texture and other geometric features have been used widely (Green et al., 2014, Salve et al., 2016). Recently the most significantly studied feature is shape, venation and spectral signature indices of the leaf, also referred to as main feature due to its homogeneity in venation patterns as well as spectral signature patterns. Leaf venation patterns possesses leaves characteristics with a specific structure, which may be useful to identify plant species. The important factor is to effectively extract the leaf structure and acquire leaf spectral signatures; with regard to, few techniques have been proposed to efficiently extract leaf vein structure. However, there have been few efforts to evaluate and correlate leaf venation and leaf spectral signatures; furthermore, numerous methods exploited manually or semi-automatic leaf venation extraction from leaf samples.
Leaf vascular bundles are correlated with the taxonomic groups of plants and with the shapes of leaves. Which possesses characteristics like length of primary veins, number of secondary veins, its area, perimeter, convex hull etc. Along with geometric features it also provides visual textual information, color information, pores on the leaves but among all the characteristics veins are consider to be more significant due to its uniqueness. Varying in the density of the network and the distance between the larger veins. In addition, the number of loops in the pattern can also help determine the leaf species.
1.1. Related workVarious approaches have been implemented in order to achieve state-of-the-art plant identification. We have studied and categorize the plant classification approaches based on feature selection techniques. This section provides the review of most commonly used methods based on venation, geometric + morphological and spectral data based approaches adopted by many authors.
1.2. Venation basedNorbert Kirchgeßner et al. (2002) have proposed a technique for robust extraction of leaf veins on plant leaf samples. Authors have proposed and utilized structure tracking by taking leaf image spatial information. The b-spline have been adopted to show the resultant leaf venation patterns as its contains the hierarchical information of leaf vein system. Experiments have been carried on short images with 480*640 pixels. To measure the direction of veins quality measure of first and second order have been adopted. The stopping criteria for vein search is marked by masks which indicates the region where the veins found.Ḿonica G. Larese et al. (2014) classified legume leaf images of soybean, white bean and red bean plants, proposed an algorithm able to considering only the leaf vascular patterns. Other geometric and visual characteristics have been excluded. Leaf images have been captured with a standard scanner and vein segmentation has been achieved by using the Unconstrained Hit-or-Miss Transform (UHMT) with the help of adaptive thresholding. They have measured many morphological features on the vascular network and classify those using Random forests. Many morphological features have been. Many other venation traits have been measured on the segmented leaf, further classification have been done by using four different classifiers random forests, penalized discriminant analysis, support vector machines using both linear and Gaussian kernels.To extract leaf veins a new approach that combines an artificial neural network (ANN) classifier and a thresholding method is proposed by H. Fu et al. (Fu and Chi, 2006). Firstly carried out to coarsely determined vein regions then intensity histogram has been used firstly for the leaf image segmentation. Trained ANN classifier has been used for the segmentation purpose and used each object pixels used as a inputs, then features have been extracted using a window centered on the pixels. H. Fu et al. have compared with other methods and concluded, the combined approach is capable of extracting more accurate venation modality of the leaf for the subsequent vein pattern classification.Firstly by analyzing leaf venation, JinKyu Park et al. (2008) and used for leaf categorization. Then found similar leaves using extracted and utilized leaf shape features from the already classified group of leaf dataset. Authors have used the same approach as blood vessels extraction. Jin Kyu Park et al. have proposed scope corner detection method.Density of the feature points have been measures using a non-parametric estimation of the density then selected points have been categorized. Lastly concluded that the proposed techniques effectiveness by performing several experiments on a prototype system.Anne-Gaëlle Rolland-Lagan et al. (2009) have used rosette leaf of Arabidopsis thaliana to quantify leaf venation patterns throughout a series of developmental stages of the plant. Characterized the shape and size of venation patterns and its areoles (loops), which increases and get twisted while the growth of the leaf. Also observed a distal to proximal gradient of loop shape its length or width ratio which varies over time and margin-to-center gradient in loop sizes. it observed that there is two-link amongst theoretical models of leaf shape patterning and molecular experimental work to study the vascular patterning while development of the leaf.Xiaodong Tang et al. (2009) proposed a leaf vein extraction algorithm to extract the sample leaf from the images with complicated background. The marker-controlled watershed segmentation technique has been adopted and the three channels of HSI color space have been separated and produced the gradient images individually. The solidity (integrity) measure have been utilized to estimate the segmented images for extraction of the sample leaf and verified the final leaf extraction results.James S Cope et al. (2010) Genetic algorithms have been utilized to regress a set of classifiers to find the leaf veins. the proposed technique is able to extract the vascular structure from leaf sample. The analysis of the produced classifier have been performed by qualitatively and quantitatively. The neighborhood around the current pixel was measured by 11*11 size window to compute the local gradient direction of pixels. Further those pixels considered as vein points. The proposed method is able to achieve primary and secondary venation patterns with having slight noise around it. Finally results were also compared to ant colony algorithm.Joanna Sekulska-Nalewajko et al. (2010) The quantitative analysis approach have been adopted to segment the leaf venation. The leaf background colour have been utilized to differentiate the foreground leaf as a target object in various colour space. The hue or saturation channel have been used to segment the leaf blade by thresholding HSV color space or by thresholding luminance image.Jinane Mounsef et al. (Mounsef and Karam, 2011) have proposed a technique to extract the spatial leaf venation patterns from leaf images automatically. Leaf vein density vein reticulation (loops) sizes and shapes have been utilized as a features (Price et al., 2011). The experiments have been carried out on leaf of Arabidopsis thaliana while leaf have been developing. The size and shape of the leaf network reticulation which increases and get twisted by new vein as a leaves develops, have been characterized by skeletonization and other imaging techniques. The approach enables interactive way to the users to batch process a throughput of data.Price, Charles A., et al. (2011) have been developed the Leaf Extraction and Analysis Framework Graphical User Interface (LEAF GUI), semi-automatic software tool that allow users to study the improved empirical understanding of leaf network structure. It takes a leaf image as an input and enhances leaf veins relative to the background. then follows the consequent steps of the interactive thresholding and cleaning steps, it returns the qualitative and quantitative analysis results of leaf vascular structure and venation loops. The statistics measure includes the dimensions of the network, position and connectivity of all network vein, of the areoles they surrounded by.
1.3. Leaf characteristics based approachSnehal Shejwal et al. (2015) have developed Smartphone application which is used for plant classification. Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN), Support Vector Machine and Fuzzy logic, k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) classifier have been adopted for classification purpose. Open Source Database SQLite was used and embedded in Android device.Nursuriati Jamil et al. (2015) have proposed low level features for inter and intra-class plant identification, 455 leaves of herbal medicine has used to carry out the experiments. The dataset is divided into 70% & 30% ratio for training and testing respectively. Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) was used to extract shape features, color moments used for color features, and Segmentation-Based Fractal Texture Analysis (SFTA) for texture features (Wang et al., 2014). Results demonstrate that single texture feature outperformed colour, or shape feature achieving 92% accuracy. While, fusion of three features (SIFT + SAFTA + color) got 94% recognition rate.A. C. Siravenha et al. (Siravenha and Carvalho, 2016) was adopted leaf textures features by combining a multi-resolution technique, Discrete Wavelet Transform (2D-DWT), statistical models and Gray-Level Co-occurrence Matrices (GLCM), were used to perform classification. Flavia database have been used to carry out the experiments. An overall classification accuracy was achieved 91.85%.
1.4. Leaf spectral signature basedYachao Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2014) have used five different types of discriminant analysis classifiers viz. Linear, Quadratic, DiagLinear, Diag Quatic and Mahalanobis, with data reduction based on principal components analysis (PCA) and independent component analysis (ICA). Proposed classification model achieved accuracy is about 98.35% with dimension 25 reduced from 2500.A. B. Varpe et al. (2015) proposed plant species recognition system based on non-imaging hyperspectral data and designed own database for experiment. The overall accuracy 91% was achieved through SVM.
