Rehabilitation is a complicated and active process by which those affected by injury or disease achieve a full recovery or, if a full recovery is not possible, realise their optimal physical, mental and social potential that allows them to regain much of their independence and quality of life [1]. It is agreed that intensive, repetitive, and goal-oriented rehabilitation process improves motor function and cortical reorganisation in stroke patients with both acute and long-term (chronic) impairments. However, this recovery process is typically slow and labour-intensive, usually involving extensive interaction between one or more therapists and one patient [2]. Motor disability does not only cause limitations in functional motor control, muscle strength, and range of motion (ROM) but can limit the ability to perform daily tasks, that could cause isolation, and reduce participation in community activities [3], [4]. Participating in repetitive exercises can help these people to overcome the limitations they experience, but lack of action and isolation stops them to perform recommended practices thus, become weaker, and cause obesity-related chronic health conditions and so on. Presumably, every person participating in rehabilitation hopes to be happily situated, productively occupied, and efficiently supported throughout the process [5]. A lack of motivation is another impediment that stops them to participate in physiotherapy sessions regularly.
Studies in computational neuroscience have shown that virtual reality (VR) rehabilitation techniques could create an environment that recovers health conditions as well as community integration [6], [4]. A study by [6] among post-stroke patients was conducted to investigate the effects of the two treatment methods: (I) combined VR and conventional therapy and (II) standard therapy alone. Their findings showed that the first process (combined VR and traditional treatment) was more efficient than the other. The past decade has witnessed the creation of a vast number of successful VR based rehabilitation, educational and commercial video games. They use new technology to simulate realistic features of the real world, [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]. [19] conducted the application of VR in psychology as an assessment tool considered as a highly sophisticated form of adaptive testing. [20] reviewed the applications of VR in the field of motor rehabilitation. They reported that the people with disabilities appear capable of motor learning within VR environments and the movements learned in VR are transferable to real-world equivalent. [9] investigated the effects of training of the lower extremity using a robot coupled with virtual reality (VR). They also showed that movements learned in a VR environment are transferable to real-world similar motor tasks. [21] have used interesting VR scenarios to reshape cortical networks in patients which resulted in significant improvement in controlling the body, a decrease in neuropathic pain, and an increase in muscle strength.
The ReHabgame was developed based on the neuromuscular rehabilitation system that assists players to combat the physical impairment and improve the upper limb performance. It is a flexible, non-immersive, low-cost VR system that does not use any head mounted devices but simulates the VR features integrating off-the-shelf devices such as the Kinect V2 (Microsoft in 2014)1 and Myo armband (Thalmic Labs in 2016). This system encourages motor impaired participants to interact with virtual objects which are spawned in the scene. This system provides an easy and engaging rehabilitation process compared to using other haptic devices. It could be used by patients for long-term recovery which leads to better rehabilitation outcome. It was developed in Unity game engine that integrates the motion/gesture capture, image processing, skeleton tracking, IR emitter, inertial measurement units and EMG sensors capabilities into the games. The postural control/balance, gestures and range of motion (ROM) of the upper body was tracked through this marker less system. It facilitates the calibration of joints orientation, position of the leading joints and muscle activities throughout the gameplay. The ReHabgame was built as a single-player (the clinician's avatar instructs the patient's avatar to copy the exercises) and two-player game (two patients play at the same time and compete against one another). All the data were collected and saved in the background (hard drive) through the devices and were used for qualitative and quantitative analysis.
In this study, we define VR as a computer-based, interactive, multi-sensory environment that occurs in real-time. It provides enhanced feedback about movement characteristics, and advanced motor task learning and execution. Our study shows that the use of interactive VR system improves upper limb rehabilitation and habilitation which concurs with findings in literature including [19], [22], [20], [23], [24]. Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of the system with its components. Two algorithms were adapted to acquire the gameplay to players ability using MCTS algorithm and Random Object Generator (ROG). Players interact with the virtual objects in the virtual park through three scenarios (case studies) such as; (I) “Reach-Grasp-Release fruits game”, (II) “Reach-Press-Hold buttons game” and (III) “Reach-Press buttons game” which are analysed together as the ReHabgame. An Engagement Questionnaire (EQ) was developed and administered to a group of 20 subjects to assess subjectively the effectiveness and efficiency of the ReHabgame using item response theory (IRT). The results of the Rasch analysis of the outcomes of this experiment are presented in this paper. To our knowledge, this is the first study that proposes an instrument to measure the subjective experience and employs Rasch analysis to evaluate the engagement in a motor rehabilitation game. Three features of game engagement were considered: flow, presence and absorption [25], [26]. The Rasch model analysis of the gameplay shows that there is an appropriate balance between skill and challenge (flow). Participants feel present in the game and perceive a high-level of control (presence), which in turn offers a raised degree of engagement, thus, distracting them from the pain associated with the impairment (absorption).Download : Download high-res image (157KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. The ReHabgame diagram and its components with MCTS algorithm.
