Mobile learning (M-learning) has become an attractive trend such that many researchers are willing to investigate its features and to examine its acceptance by learners and educators. Empirical evidence indicates that M-learning can support students in learning across many subjects, including education (Y. Liu, Li, & Carlsson, 2010), business (K Mac Callum & Jeffrey, 2013), and information technology (Hamidi & Chavoshi, 2017). With the increase in the affordances offered by M-learning systems, there has been a growing interest in examining the purpose of M-learning in education at one hand (Laurillard, 2007) and the factors that affect its acceptance on the other hand (Al-Emran, Mezhuyev, & Kamaludin, 2018b; Althunibat, 2015).
The implementation of any Information System (IS) is costly in addition to the required time and efforts for its deployment. IS scholars are always striving to identify the factors that affect the acceptance of any system in order to ensure its successfulness. Those factors are usually banded together in one model for efficiently analyzing the usage and acceptance of such systems. Many IS models were evolved for accomplishing this aim. One of such models is the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) that was developed by (Davis, 1989). According to (King & He, 2006), it is reported that due to adaptability, simplicity, and soundness of TAM, it became one of the most commonly used models for measuring the IS acceptance so far. In terms of M-learning, TAM has witnessed a lot of modifications and enhancements which in turn contribute to enhance the M-learning acceptance.
The growing body of research has concentrated on various perspectives with regard to the TAM development. Several review studies were carried out to provide a substantial understanding of the TAM (King & He, 2006; Legris, Ingham, & Collerette, 2003; Marangunić & Granić, 2015; Mortenson & Vidgen, 2016). We believe that each of those reviews affords a constructive synthesis of TAM, but further investigation is required based on various research perspectives. The existing literature reviews overlooked the investigation of TAM with regard to M-learning studies in general, and to classify those studies from the standpoint of research purpose, research methods, country distribution, disciplines/contexts, educational levels, and TAM studies distribution across their year of publication in specific.
The present systematic literature review finds out that those issues are highly important to understand the research trend of TAM with reference to M-learning studies. Moreover, due to the reason that research indicated that the determinants of M-learning acceptance are still not clear and one of the ongoing and critical issues by IS scholars (Almaiah, Jalil, & Man, 2016; Althunibat, 2015; Y. Huang, 2014; Mohammadi, 2015), this study tries to analyze the collected studies by shedding the light on the factors that affect the acceptance of M-learning systems. Understanding the factors that influence the M-learning acceptance in the collected studies will assist the M-learning researchers to plan forward to investigate the impact of other factors that were missed in the existing body of literature. Overall, this study systematically reviews and synthesizes the TAM studies related to M-learning in order to provide a comprehensive analysis of the collected studies. More specifically, this review study poses the following six research questions:
RQ1: What are the main research purposes of the selected studies?RQ2: What are the main research methods of the selected studies?RQ3: What are the active countries in the context of the selected studies?RQ4: What are the main disciplines/contexts of the selected studies?RQ5: What are the main educational levels of the selected studies?RQ6: In terms of TAM progress, how the M-learning studies are distributed across their year of publication?
