Computational thinking (CT) was first presented by Papert (1990), and since then its definition, teaching, and evaluation have been discussed by various scholars (Grover & Pea, 2013). Wing (2006) emphasized that CT is one of the daily life skills that everyone needs, rather than just being a programming skill used only by computer scientists. Wing (2010) further defined operational thinking as the process of problem-solving, so that the message processing agent can be effectively executed and the problem solved. Computers can help us solve problems via the following two steps: First, consider the steps to solve the problem, then use technical skills to control the computer to help solve the problem. For example, one must understand mathematical formulas and explain the problem, and use simple methods or formulas to solve the problem via the computer's computation. Besides, when creating animation, the designer must plan the story and ways of shooting before drawing the computer animation, and complete the task using the computer software and hardware. In these two examples, CT is the thinking process one needs to engage in before beginning the computer and machine operation.
CT describes the processes and methods used to operate a system. It focuses on how people solve or research problems using computers (Wing, 2008), rather than on the computer hardware or imitating the computer's thinking mode. Moreover, Wing (2008) considered that CT is not only the center of problem solving, but also develops and identifies the problems. It is also reminiscent of early innovation in STEM and other subjects (Cheung, 2013), meaning that it not only lets the computer understand the way to solve problems, but also helps people to understand the solutions and problems. In other words, CT does not necessarily require machines, but people can produce CT processes by manipulating machines (Wing, 2008). Therefore, Wing (2008) considered that CT is no longered just essential for the learners in the departments related to computer science, but also indispensable to the learners in other domains. The current educators have to create and promote facilities for learning computational thinking.
With regard to the development status of CT, of the 21 countries in Europe, 17 participated in a survey which indicated that many of them were attempting to incorporate CT courses into their K-12 education curricula (Balanskat & Engelhardt, 2014). For example, the UK has implemented a complete set of CT courses, including computer science, information technology, and digital literacy throughout all disciplines (Brown, Sentance, Crick, & Humphreys, 2014). However, not all countries use computing in all subjects. Several countries have introduced an alternative to CT. The main reasons are: 1. Many teachers have been familiar with the teaching process and methods for many years, so it is difficult for them to change the original curriculum and adopt the new teaching content. However, in order to improve students' learning interest, teachers need to adopt new teaching methods. 2. To improve students' practical experience, teachers should apply programming in different subjects to improve the lower-achieving students' interest and level of achievement. 3. CT courses have become increasingly important in various fields, and many teachers have begun to introduce CT learning concepts in other courses (Angeli et al., 2016).
Take Australia as an example. A CT course was introduced into Australia's primary and secondary school curricula several years ago, and CT training was set up as one of its national teaching courses (Falkner, Vivian, & Falkner, 2014). According to the original promotion of combining digital technology (DT) courses with CT courses, the DT course is a multidisciplinary course that includes such subjects as English, mathematics, science, and art. From the basic training of first grade to the program development courses of ninth grade, children become familiar with using technology to solve complex problems and abstract concepts over a number of years (Armoni, 2012). Another example is Poland, where computer courses were divided into three phases in 1999. The first stage begins by training elementary school students in basic computer writing, painting, and reading. In the second stage, secondary school students are trained in the ability of computer computing, CT, and problem-solving. By the third stage, the computer course is one of the important subjects for the high school final examinations (Sysło & Kwiatkowska, 2015). The main goal of these three stages is to help students understand and analyze problems, use computers or other computer equipment to solve problems, and also apply CT to society or to their own lives.
South Korea has also developed a new curriculum for students. They started to promote computer education courses in 1971, with more than 34 h of computer courses in each grade of K-12 (Heintz, Mannila, & Färnqvist, 2016). At first, they only focused on teaching computer theory and the concepts of information science, but later they changed the curriculum to include the training of children's digital literacy, CT, and programming skills. South Korea has always been a textbook-based education culture; thus, they also reorganized the textbook for students in 2018 (Heintz et al., 2016).
From the CT literature review, it can be seen that it is currently an important subject of national education in many countries. Some countries have even classified CT as a national program or have prepared new teaching content and textbooks. From childhood, children have been trained in the abilities of CT, independent thinking, and problem solving. CT is no longer just an independent discipline or an independent area of teaching, but can also be applied to different disciplines or to daily life.
As for the future study directions of CT, the benefits of the implementation of CT have been widely recognized by scholars and educators. However, it is more important to think about how to successfully promote CT learning activities (Denning, 2017). At the same time, Denning (2017) mentioned that teachers were already familiar with the original teaching methods, and it was very difficult for them to change their teaching materials in a short period of time. For example, mathematics teachers are accustomed to solving mathematical problems using formula. The child's learning situation is to copy the teacher's formula so as to be able to come up with the correct answer in the examination. However, this approach limits the students' thinking and logic in the learning process. Denning (2017) proposed two steps to help educators and scholars examine the implementation of the situation. The first step emphasizes the educator's CT cognition. It can activate CT teaching activities completely, because of the correct concept of CT. The next step is learning about the CT assessment methods. If the teachers can correctly assess the effectiveness of students' CT, it is helpful for them to design learning activities and modify their teaching strategies. Simultaneously, teachers can help the students to complete the learning tasks according to their learning progress.
Heintz et al. (2016) indicated that CT is conducted in computer courses or other courses to train students' CT in many different countries. It is difficult to model or copy the CT development methods because of the differences in the national educational systems and culture. Therefore, many countries have begun to cultivate CT capability, programming ability, and digital skills in elementary school. However, the key to implementing CT is the teachers who have to train the students. The government needs to train the teachers in how to design CT activities and learning content so that the students can actively participate in the activities, improve their high-level thinking, and apply CT capabilities to other subjects (Orvalho, 2017).
From the CT literature review, the implementation of CT is still continuing to develop in many countries. Nevertheless, different aspects of performance have not been clarified in the past studies, including the countries, the age of learners, teaching strategies, and learning effectiveness. Therefore, in order to understand the development and application of CT in education, including subjects, age groups, learning strategies, and programming languages, in this study, we analyzed the related CT literature from 2006 to 2017. Possible research trends and issues are then proposed as a reference for future research in this area.
