The launch of Google Scholar (GS) in November of 2004 brought the simplicity of Google searches to the academic environment, and revolutionized the way researchers and the public searched, found, and accessed academic information. Until that point, the coverage of academic databases depended on lists of selected sources (usually scientific journals). In contrast, and using automated methods, Google Scholar crawled the web and indexed any document with a seemingly academic structure. This inclusive approach gave GS potentially more comprehensive coverage of the scientific and scholarly literature compared to the two major existing multidisciplinary databases with selective journal-based inclusion policies, the Web of Science (WoS) and Scopus (Orduna-Malea, Ayllón, Martín-Martín, & Delgado López-Cózar, 2015).
Although citation data in Google Scholar was originally intended to be a means of identifying the most relevant documents for a given query, it could also be used for formal or informal research evaluations. The availability of free citation data in Google Scholar, together with the free software Publish or Perish (Harzing, 2007) to gather it made citation analysis possible without a citation database subscription (Harzing & van der Wal, 2008). Nevertheless, GS has not enabled bulk access to its data, reportedly because their agreements with publishers preclude it (Van Noorden, 2014). Thus, third-party web-scraping software is currently the only practical way to extract more data from GS than permitted by Publish or Perish.
Despite its known errors and limitations, which are consequence of its automated approach to document indexing (Delgado López-Cózar, Robinson-García, & Torres-Salinas, 2014; Jacsó, 2010), GS has been shown to be reliable and to have good coverage of disciplines and languages, especially in the Humanities and Social Sciences, where WoS and Scopus are known to be weak (Chavarro, Ràfols, & Tang, 2018; Mongeon & Paul-Hus, 2016; van Leeuwen, Moed, Tijssen, Visser, & Van Raan, 2001). Analyses of the coverage of GS, WoS, and Scopus across disciplines have compared the numbers of publications indexed or their average citation counts for samples of documents, authors, or journals, finding that GS consistently returned higher numbers of publications and citations (Harzing & Alakangas, 2016; Harzing, 2013; Mingers & Lipitakis, 2010; Prins, Costas, van Leeuwen, & Wouters, 2016). Citation counts from a range of different sources have been shown to correlate positively with GS citation counts at various levels of aggregation (Amara & Landry, 2012; De Groote & Raszewski, 2012; Delgado López-Cózar, Orduna-Malea, & Martín-Martín, 2018; Kousha & Thelwall, 2007; Martín-Martín, Orduna-Malea, & Delgado López-Cózar, 2018; Meho & Yang, 2007; Minasny, Hartemink, McBratney, & Jang, 2013; Moed, Bar-Ilan, & Halevi, 2016; Pauly & Stergiou, 2005; Rahimi & Chandrakumar, 2014; Wildgaard, 2015). See the supplementary materials1, Delgado López-Cózar et al. (2018); Orduña-Malea, Martín-Martín, Ayllón, and Delgado López-Cózar (2016), and Halevi, Moed, and Bar-Ilan (2017) for discussions of the wider strengths and weaknesses of GS.
A key issue is the ability of GS, WoS, and Scopus to find citations to documents, and the extent to which they index citations that the others cannot find. The results of prior studies are confusing, however, because they have examined different small (with one exception) sets of articles. A summary of the results found in these previous studies is presented in Table 1. For example, the number of citations that are unique to GS varies between 13% and 67%, with the differences probably being due to the study year or the document types or disciplines covered. The only multidisciplinary study (Moed et al., 2016) checked articles in 12 journals from 6 subject areas, which is still a limited set.Table 1. Results of studies that analysed unique and overlapping citations in GS, WoS, and Scopus.NA = not analysed in the study.Cells with more intense background color represent higher percentages of citations within the same sample of documents.
The fields previously compared for citation sources (Table 1) are Library and Information Science (5 out of 10 articles analyse case studies about LIS documents/journals/researchers), Medicine (3 papers, analysing oncology, general medicine, and dentistry), Physics (2 articles: general and condensed matter), Chemistry (2 articles: general and inorganic), Computer Science (2 articles: general, and computational linguistics), Biology (2 articles: general, and virology), Social Work, Political Science, and Chinese Studies (1 article each). From this list it is clear that most academic fields have not been analysed for Google Scholar coverage. The studies used small samples of documents and citations (9 out of 10 papers analysed less than 10,000 citations), probably because of the difficulty of extracting data from GS, caused by the lack of a public API (Else, 2018; Van Noorden, 2014). Moreover, the most recent data in these studies was collected in 2015 (three years before the current study), and the oldest data is from 2005 (13 years ago).
Given the limited nature of all prior studies of citing sources for GS and the need to update all previous research, a comprehensive analysis of citation sources in GS, WoS, and Scopus across all subject areas is needed. This information is important for those deciding whether to use GS citation counts for informal or formal research evaluations. The following research questions drive this investigation.
•How much overlap is there between GS, WoS, and Scopus in the citations that they find to academic documents and does this vary by subject?•Do the citing documents that are only found by GS have a different type to non-unique GS citations, and does this vary by subject?•How similar are citation counts in GS to those found in WoS and Scopus, at the level of subjects?
