Now a common trend around the world, Web 2.0 technologies have allowed citizens greater involvement in public affairs (Sivarajah, Irani, & Weeerakkody, 2015) and their use by governments has created more affordable, participatory and transparent public sector management models (Kim & Lee, 2012). These technologies are forcing a reconsideration of the administrative structures of governments and the fostering of open, user-driven governance (Bertot, Jaeger, & Grimes, 2010) and have emphasized the idea of citizen engagement and participation in public affairs (Mintz, 2008).
Thus, in recent years, research in the e-Participation field has experienced continued growth, stimulated by increasing attention from both practitioners and academics/researchers (Medaglia, 2012; Susha & Grönlund, 2012). This growing body of literature has confirmed the interdisciplinary field of knowledge of e-Participation research (Medaglia, 2012; Freschi et al., 2009), comprising a large number of academic disciplines and existing in a complex social and political environment (Macintosh, Coleman, & Schneeberger, 2009). In other words, research in the field of e-Participation is fragmented, so it is impossible to obtain a single point from which to access this research topic, due to the large diversity of research disciplines involved.
This problem does not enable a broad view of the research area or the evolution of the topics in this field to be known, which makes it difficult to provide useful and non-biased insights for future research. Comprehensive reviews are therefore needed to integrate contributions and to provide a critical outlook in this field. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to explore its intellectual core in order to understand the construction of theoretical support underpinning the question of e-Participation, by analysing the cumulative body of knowledge (Holsapple, 2008; Medaglia, 2012).
In the academic literature we can find previous studies on e-Participation based on using different approaches, frameworks and techniques (Medaglia, 2012; Susha & Grönlund, 2012; or Molka-Danielsen, 2010a,b; for example). Although valuable, most bibliometric projects (Freschi et al., 2009; Macintosh et al., 2009; Rodríguez Bolívar, Alcaide Muñoz, & López Hernández, 2012; Susha & Grönlund, 2012;) show a limited view and could lose the interesting lens of e-Participation research in terms of citizen engagement and e-democracy, which have been studied from several approaches. They also do not provide the possibility of looking at the evolution of this research field.
In fact, although Medaglia (2012) has carried out a systematic effort to understand the directions that the field of e-Participation is taking in its development over time, this study has many limitations that need to be addressed. In addition, prior research has not carried out a performance analysis in order to measure, quantitatively and qualitatively, the contribution of the e-Participation field, which limits its significance for analysis and future research.
Thus, it is necessary to use performance analysis and science mapping in order to deal directly with sets of terms shared by documents, mapping the literature directly from the interaction of key terms, and showing the evolution of the field of e-Participation. In this context, the science mapping approach displays the structural and dynamic aspect of scientific research (Cobo, López-Herrera, Herrera-Viedma, & Herrera,2011), and is a spatial representation of how disciplines, fields, specialities and individual papers or authors are related to one another (Small, 1999). It is focused on monitoring a scientific field and delimiting research areas to determine its cognitive structure and its evolution (Cobo, López-Herrera, Herrera-Viedma, & Herrera, 2011b) through measuring continuance across consecutive sub-periods and to quantify the research field by means of performance analysis (Cobo et al., 2011a, Cobo et al., 2011b). This longitudinal study based on co-words allows us to analyse the evolution of research topics, and a longitudinal study based on co-citations allows us to analyse the continuity of the intellectual base. In addition, it detects the most prominent, productive and highest-impact subfields (Cobo et al., 2011a).
Therefore, this paper seeks to perform co-word and performance analyses with the aim of examining the concept’s evolution and the impact of the research themes of the e-Participation field of knowledge. To achieve this aim, this article presents a general approach to analysing the thematic evolution of the e-Participation research field. This approach combines performance analysis of science mapping for detecting and visualizing conceptual subdomains with a methodological tool performed by Cobo et al., 2011a, Cobo et al., 2011b to achieve this. It allows us to quantify and visualize the thematic evolution of this research topic, as well as to update the state of the art of scientific literature on e-Participation.
