As the major capital goods that underpin manufacturing, services, trade and distribution, complex products play a critical role in modern industrial and economic progress [1]. These products greatly enhance the efficiency of human activities, whether for civil or military purposes. With a high use ratio and rapid technical improvement, these complex products generally are large scale and highly integrated, leading to the maintenance and support of these products becoming a big issue. Maintainability is an important built-in characteristic of complex products. From a high-level point of view, the maintainability can be defined as “the probability that a failed item can be restored to an operational effective condition within a given period of time” [2].
From a more operable perspective, maintainability refers to measures or steps taken during the product design phase to include features that will increase the ease of maintenance and ensure that the product will have minimum downtime and life cycle support costs when used in a field environments [3]. The issue to improve the maintainability is becoming increasingly more important than ever before because of the alarmingly high costs of operation and support and the incidents and accidents caused by incomprehensive maintainability design [4]. Good maintainability design enables the maintenance process to be conducted efficiently. Furthermore, good maintainability design can reduce costs throughout the product life cycle and reduce the incidents and accidents. Poor maintainability design will lead to the frequent replacement of components and long downtime of products; this outcome will lead to significant economic loss. The study shows that nearly 70% of the total product life cycle costs are determined in the early design stages [5], in which maintenance costs occupy a large part. and For example, the industry in the United States spends over $300 billion on plant maintenance and operations [6]. The annual cost of maintaining a military jet aircraft is approximately $1.6 million. Approximately 11% of the total operating cost for an aircraft is spent on maintenance activities [7]. Therefore, the cost of maintenance will be greatly reduced during the service stage if the product has a rational maintainability design, which will put great value on both users and enterprises. Another significant issue that needs significant attention is that the maintainability design is strongly associated with personnel security, especially for the fields that have a high degree of potential for accidents such as aviation, nuclear and mining industries. In civil aviation, maintenance is a crucial routine function in day-to-day operations. We investigated air crashes worldwide from 2001 to 2012. The incident and accident causes are classified as flight crew (FC), airplane (AI), ATC & Navigation (ATC&N), weather (WE), maintenance (MA), external factors (EF), landing/takeoff (L/F), unexpected result (UR), security (SE), cargo occurrences (CAOs), fire (FI), unknown (UN) and collisions (CO). Graph 1 shows the death toll caused by incidents and accidents, showing that the airplane is the second leading factor causing deaths (1539 deaths), and maintenance is the third leading factor in deaths (1220 deaths). Maintainability design has a strong correlation with both maintenance and airplane factors. Comprehensive maintainability design in early design stages of airplanes enables the maintainer to conduct the maintenance task in an efficient and comfortable way. The maintenance errors will be substantially reduced, meaning that the damages resulting from the maintenance errors will be kept to a minimum or totally avoided.Download : Download high-res image (158KB)Download : Download full-size imageGraph 1. Comparison of the death toll due to various accident and incident factors.
Regarding the significance of the maintainability of complex products, the maintainability design should be conducted more effectively in the early design stage. VR is a state-of-the-art of computer science. In many fields, VR has played effective roles both for academic research and industrial application [8]. In this paper, an immersive maintainability verification and evaluation system (IMVES) is proposed. The dual aims of IMVES are to verify the feasibility of applying VR to assist maintainability design and further, to develop a timely and effective approach to help the designer make better design decisions in early design stages. IMVES is purposefully designed to generate and conduct an immersive maintenance simulation, in which the designer can interact with virtual objects according to preplanned procedures, and the data related to the maintenance process can be collected to make further maintainability evaluations. IMVES has a general framework, which means it can be used in different design situations after proper modification. In addition to the description of the system architecture and functional components of the IMVES, this paper also describes two cases in which IMVES was used to help the designers to make design decisions for an aero-engine and a helicopter in the early design stages. Based on the analyses of the evaluation results by IMVES and later physical verification, the paper thus highlights that VR is feasible for practical product design and an effective approach to help designers make reasonable decisions.
