The power generation sector (e.g. fossil fuels and coal-fired power plants) is one of the main contributors of CO2 emission in the atmosphere. As reported in the IPCC report (2014), the power generation sector accounts for 35% of total greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions, in which CO2 is one of the main GHG emitted. Due to an increase in energy demands and world population, the growth of economies, and limited alternatives sources of energy, fossil fuels will continue to contribute a major proportion of future energy worldwide, especially in developing countries (IEA, 2013). Based on this scenario, it is expected that the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere will keep increasing if no action is taken to mitigate the CO2 emission in the atmosphere. This will have an adverse effect on the environment and contribute towards increasing global warming effects. A short-term approach is required to alleviate the emission of CO2 into the atmosphere, whilst other alternative sources of green energy (e.g. renewable energy and low carbon fuels) are commercialised to replace the use of fossil fuels in the power generation sector. This can be realised through the implementation of Carbon Capture Storage (CCS) in the power generation sector since CCS helps to produce energy with near-zero CO2 emissions. As stated by Leung et al. (2014), CCS can capture up to 90% of CO2 from the point of emission source in the power generation sector.
There are three main types of CO2 capture technologies associated with different combustion processes, which are post combustion, pre-combustion, and oxyfuel combustion (Leung et al., 2014). Post combustion carbon capture (PCCC) technology involves the separation process of CO2 from the flue gas after the combustion of fossil fuels and before its emission into the atmosphere. In pre-combustion carbon capture, the fuel is pre-treated with air and steam through the gasification reaction and water gas shift reaction before the combustion process. This process is most suited for application in coal gasification plants. Meanwhile, in oxyfuel combustion technology, during the combustion process, the fuel is reacted with pure oxygen gas instead of air. The nitrogen gas is separated and removed from the air at the early stages in order to facilitate the capture process by producing high concentrations of CO2. This study focuses on PCCC since it is the best and most mature technology for capturing CO2 from flue gas emissions of fossil fuel power plants. Besides, PCCC technology can easily be integrated or retrofitted to any existing power plant.
Several methods have been proposed by previous researchers to separate CO2 from flue gas based on PCCC technology including absorption using physical or chemical solvents (Wu et al., 2014), adsorption onto solid sorbents (Zhao et al., 2007), cryogenic distillation (Tuinier et al., 2010), and membrane separation (Khalilpour et al., 2015). The selection of the method of separation depends on the concentration of CO2 emissions. Since flue gas has a low concentration of CO2, which is around 4–14 w/w% (Olajire, 2010), chemical absorption by solvents is considered to be the most promising method. Chemical absorption is highly selective with very high carbon capture efficiency even at low CO2 concentrations and low CO2 partial pressure. This is due to the addition of reaction driving force between CO2 and solvents, which help to increase the absorption capacity of CO2. The current commercialised solvent used in this process is monoethanolamine (MEA).
However, despite all the advantages of this technology, chemical absorption PCCC processes are still recognised as economically unattractive (Wang et al., 2011). This is due to the characteristics of the solvent used in the chemical absorption process. As reported in a previous study, although MEA is a cheap solvent, has a high reactivity rate towards CO2 and a high absorbing rate (Rao et al., 2004), it still possesses some disadvantages. For example, high energy is required during the regeneration process of the MEA solvent, which contributes to a high energy penalty (Han et al., 2013). Besides, MEA is a volatile solvent that can easily degrade at high operating temperatures with detrimental effects on human health and the environment (Mertens et al., 2013). The chemical degradation of the MEA solvent also occurs in the presence of oxygen (Zaman and Lee, 2013) and contributes to the increase in equipment corrosion rate (Yu et al., 2012). All these disadvantages of MEA solvents inadvertently lead to an increase in capital and operating cost for CCS (Hasaneen et al., 2014). This hinders the commercialisation of large-scale application of chemical absorption PCCC plants (Bandyopadhyay, 2011).
Therefore, to ensure PCCC is competitively placed as one of the cost effective options for CO2 emissions mitigation measures, the solvent used in the process needs to be improved or replaced with other potential solvents. The search for, and development of new alternative solvents have gained more attention in recent years, mostly through experimental studies. For example, Goto et al. (2009) developed three high performance and low cost amine-based solvents for the carbon capture process. The three designed solvents have different criteria: Solvent A had a high CO2 absorption capacity, Solvent B had low regeneration energy, and Solvent C had a high absorption/desorption rate. Chowdhury et al. (2011) synthesised and selected new hindered amine to reduce the regeneration energy and cost of the CO2 capture process. The authors found two hindered secondary amines (2-isopropylaminoethanol (IPAE) and 2-isobutylaminoethanol (IBAE)) and two hindered tertiary amines (1-Methyl-2-piperidineethanol (1M-2PPE) and 2-isopropyldiethanolamine (IPDEA)) as promising solvent candidates. Van Der Ham et al. (2014) evaluated the performance of concentrated aqueous piperazine as the CO2 captured solvent. Several studies were also conducted on the design of blended aqueous amines solvents. Singh et al. (2013) conducted an experimental pilot plant study to synthesise energy efficient amine-based solvent blends. Two new promising solvent blends were introduced in their study (e.g. Blends of 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol (AMP) + hexamethyldiamine + H2O). Conway et al. (2015) synthesised a blended aqueous amine solvent from a combination of primary amine solvents (e.g. MEA) with tertiary or sterically hindered amine solvents (e.g. AMP). El Hadri et al. (2015) performed an experimental study to design a novel solvent to replace MDEA as the co-solvent in a blended aqueous amine solution.
Besides the amine-based solvents, other examples of alternative chemical solvents that have been introduced for absorption of CO2 are ammonia (Molina and Bouallou, 2015), potassium carbonate (Jayaweera et al., 2014), and recently, the ionic liquid solvent (Ozkutlu et al., 2016). Unfortunately, the disadvantages in designing new solvents using purely experimental work is that it is time consuming and would use up resources if the experimental work were not systematically planned. Apart from this, an experimental approach cannot handle a large amount of solvent candidates since it is cost intensive and it is almost impossible to run experiments for all solvent candidates. Therefore, a more efficient solution strategy is needed to overcome these drawbacks. The CAMD approach is an alternative method that can be applied at the early stages of solvent design, to narrow down the search region, resulting in focused experimental work on promising solvent candidates only (Hashim et al., 2017).
The CAMD approach can predict the nature and properties of molecules or mixtures, which will later perform the desired activities. From the definition of Achenie et al. (2003), CAMD can be recognised as a reversed engineering approach where a set of target properties are specified, following which the molecular structure that meets the targeted properties are determined. The advantage of using the CAMD technique is that it can quickly identify the potential molecular structures (Eslick et al., 2011) and eliminate all the infeasible alternatives at the early stage of design based on the defined target properties. Furthermore, by applying this CAMD technique, a large number of potential candidates can be considered in the design process (Achenie et al., 2003). Another advantage of the CAMD technique is that it can reduce the required number of experiments, since CAMD has already performed the screening process, experimental work will be conducted on potential candidates only (Yunus et al., 2014). As a result, CAMD will help save resources, minimize the cost for experimental work, and reduce the time to market the product.
Several studies have successfully applied the CAMD technique to develop novel material based on the given desired target properties. For example, CAMD was used as a systematic and powerful tool for the design of refrigerant mixtures (Churi and Achenie, 1997), solvents and extractants (Wang and Achenie, 2002), skin care cream (Cheng et al., 2009), paint and insect repellent (Conte et al., 2012), gasoline blends and lubricant base oil (Yunus et al., 2014), tailor-made biofuel blend from palm biomass (Hashim et al., 2017) and ionic liquids as an energy efficient entrainer in the separation process (Kulajanpeng et al., 2016). The CAMD approach was also employed in the development of solvent for the carbon capture process. Qadir et al. (2014) used the CAMD framework to simultaneously design an optimal solvent and optimal process conditions for the pre-combustion carbon capture process. The aim of their study was to formulate a solvent that can minimize the energy requirement in the pre-combustion carbon capture process. They developed an optimal pure and binary solvent blend in their study through solving a MINLP optimization problem. Another work that used the CAMD approach in the development of solvents for the pre-combustion process is that of Pereira et al. (2011) in which the author integrated the development of a solvent with process design for the high pressure separation process of CO2 from methane using a SAFT-VR thermodynamic model.
Recently, the CAMD technique has been extended to include the designing of solvents in the PCCC process. Chong et al. (2015) applied the CAMD framework to design ionic liquid as a solvent for enhanced post combustion carbon dioxide capture. Group contribution and a UNIFAC model was used in their study to estimate the properties of ionic liquids and the solubility of CO2 in the ionic liquids. Valencia-Marquez et al. (2016) used CAMD to obtain the optimal molecular structure for ionic liquids as potential solvents for CO2 capture and integrated with a multi-objective optimization framework to deal with conflicting design objectives related to process economics and sustainability issues. Zarogiannis et al. (2016) also developed a systematic framework for the selection of mixtures as a post combustion solvent candidate using the CAMD approach. The authors identified the solvents from a large pool of potential candidates. A simple property model was used for screening potential solvent candidates at the early stages of design and a SAFT equation of state model was used as a rigorous evaluation to predict the non-ideal interaction between CO2, water, and solvent.
However, the mechanism of reaction that occurs between reactive solvents and solute (unknown reaction stoichiometry) has not been addressed in previous studies associated with the molecular design approach. Most research only consider the physical absorptive contribution of the solvent and assume that no reaction will occur between solvent and solute (Chong et al., 2015). This will lead to difficulty in evaluating the chemical absorption process performance of the reactive solvent, in which information on reaction stoichiometry is essential for the evaluation of the energy for solvent regeneration, chemical absorption rate and chemical absorption capacity of the reactive solvent. This study addresses this limitation by considering both reactive and physical absorptive contributions of the solvent in order to design an energy efficient reactive solvent for the chemical absorption PCCC process through the CAMD approach.
