Scientific applications in various domains such as high-energy physics, cosmology, genomics, etc., generate large datasets that need to be transported over the network for a variety of reasons. In order to support these applications, federal agencies in different countries fund organizations to build and operate high-speed research and education networks. These networks are typically overprovisioned so that all science users continue to have adequate network resources even at times of peak load. Thus, they are underutilized most of the time. Research and education networks (RENs), such as Internet2, have a policy of operating their networks at light loads (25%–30%) to allow the networks to absorb surges in traffic  [1]. Other RENs such as ESnet and GEANT are also engineered to operate at similar average load levels.
Several recent studies project that, given predictions of science traffic’s exponential growth, it may not be feasible to continue such overprovisioning  [2], [3], [4]. Recent reports on science network requirements note that different transfers have different needs  [5], [6], [7]. Some transfers, such as those in which remote analysis result of one experiment is used to guide the next, are time-critical and have tight constraints. In contrast, some transfers, such as certain data replication, backup, and archiving use cases, have more flexibility and may only need to be completed within a window several times longer than the transfer time under average load. Under the current mode of free access to RENs, the traffic at peak load may include a combination of different types of transfers including some that are less time-critical. We argue that measures to spread the load and keep the peak under control are important, and use simulations based on real traffic traces to quantify the benefits that may be gained from such measures.
The two main contributions of this study are as follows: 
•We characterize how data transfers are impacted when the gap between peak and average throughput is reduced by increasing the average network load while keeping network capacity at the current levels.•We determine how these impacts change when data transfers are classified as either on-demand (ones that are time-critical) or best-effort (ones that are less time-critical), with on-demand transfers getting a relatively larger share of the bandwidth.
These results suggest that the utilization of research networks can be increased significantly with modest or no impact on the performance of deadline-sensitive data transfers, simply by identifying deadline-sensitive transfers as such.
We use transfer logs from production GridFTP servers for our study. Our results indicate that when load is doubled with network capacity fixed at the current level, the gap between peak and average load decreases by an average of 18% and the average slowdown experienced by data transfers is still less than 1.5×. For the logs in which the peak load is 5× or more than the average load, average slowdown experienced by the data transfers is under 1.1×. Under the same scenario of doubled network load with the same network capacity, when the transfers are classified into on-demand and best-effort, on-demand transfers experience almost no slowdown and the slowdown experienced by best-effort transfers is under 2×, even when 50% of transfers were treated as on-demand and on-demand transfers are given a reasonably higher share (70%) of the bandwidth. For the logs in which the peak load is 5× or more than the average load, the average slowdown experienced by best-effort data transfers is under 1.2×.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 introduces the two characteristics of contemporary networks and science workloads that motivate our research. Section  3 presents the problem our research addresses and the metrics we use to evaluate our results. Section  4 defines the algorithm we developed for our research. Section  5 evaluates the results from our experiments. Section  6 describes the testbed experiments and their results. Section  7 discusses how this research can be generalized. Section  8 examines related work. Section  9 discusses the conclusions from our research.
