Leading technology companies such as Google are investing in methods and systems of robot personality development (Independent.co.uk, 2015). Moreover, a robot developed at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in New York has passed a basic self-awareness test on July of 2015 (Popsci.com, 2015). Whilst these developments are impressive, they are still far from matching humanoid robots equipped with artificial intelligence like those portrayed in movies such as “I-Robot”, “Automata” and more recently “Ex-Machina” and “Chappie”. These movies portray intelligent humanoid robots (a robot with its body shape built to resemble that of the human body) that display human-like self-awareness and have a mind of their own. In doing so, these movies pose the question if such developments are just science fiction, or if there are reasons to believe that in the near future science will prevail over fiction and humanoid robots equipped with self-aware artificial intelligence (AI) might (a) take an active role in society and (b) even become actual consumers of products and brands?
Since the mid-1950s, AI research has been focused on creating “thinking machines” but developments in the 20th century were slower than anticipated (Baum, Goertzel, & Goertzel, 2011). However, over the last few years there has been a resurgence of research interest on the original goals of AI; that is, creating AI with human-like general intelligence as well as robots that will be hosting this AI (Cassimatis, Mueller, & Winston, 2006; Llargues Asensio et al., 2014; Shrobe, 2014). Experts suggest that AI will be fully self-aware within the next few decades, have a sense of self and be able to engage in self-expression (Baum et al., 2011; Kurzweil, 1999; Lewis et al., 2011). In other words, a humanoid robot with AI will have a conception of its self (or self-concept) and be able to use information and make decisions that reshape its self as an active member of a social environment.
This article aims to contribute to discourses on the social and psychological implications of technology-mediated relationships such as human-robot interactions (e.g., Baron, 2015; Clarke, 2014; Cortés & Serratosa, 2016; Tay, Jung, & Park, 2014; Yeoman & Mars, 2012). Building on the aforementioned studies, this article argues that the emergence of humanoid robots will have vast implications for society, retailers and marketers in the present future. Moreover, looking further ahead, the article argues that once humanoid robots with AI develop human like self-awareness, the notion of the consumer should potentially be extended from humans to robots, as robots with AI may also use brands as a means of self-expression. In the light of these arguments, the objective of this article is twofold. First, after briefly discussing the notion of self-awareness and self-expression from a human and robot perspective, the article presents the roles that robots will potentially have in society. These implications are focused on the healthcare, educational and relationship sectors. Second, the article discusses potential future implications on how the emergence of humanoid robots will affect retailers and marketers, including some examples that consider robots with human like self-awareness and self-expression capabilities. In addition, the article offers examples of how such robots may even evolve to be considered consumers themselves. Finally, the conclusion section summarizes the article and briefly outlines what society can do to prepare for these upcoming changes.
