Being literate in information technology is increasingly essential in the digital age. Algorithmic thinking, one of the fundamental skills of working with information technology, has gradually increased in importance (Katai, 2015, National Research Council, 1999). Algorithmic thinking is not only a component of competence in information technology (Zsakó & Szlávi, 2012) but is also the key to understanding computer science (Futschek, 2006). Algorithmic thinking is a specialized problem-solving skill that uses several different abilities (Katai, 2015). The fundamental purpose of algorithmic thinking is to construct algorithms that can solve given problems (Futschek, 2006). This qualifies as puzzle-based learning, which seeks to engage students in thinking about how to scaffold and solve problems (Falkner et al., 2010, Michalewicz et al., 2011) and enhance students’ critical analysis skills and problem-solving techniques (Merrick, 2010). The ultimate goal of puzzle-based learning is to help students become effective problem solvers in daily life (Falkner et al., 2010). Recognizing that learning algorithmic thinking is consistent with the nature of puzzle-based learning because both focus on critical analysis, logical reasoning and abstract reasoning to improve problem-solving skills, this study used puzzle-based learning as a fundamental strategy to develop an online learning system to help students learn algorithmic thinking skills.
Although puzzle-based learning can be used as a fundamental strategy when developing an online learning system, it remains essential to have a proper strategy or mechanism that can further increase students’ motivation and engagement when they are solving and practicing puzzles. Engaging students in repeatedly solving a puzzle not only ensures that they truly understand how to solve that puzzle but also helps students practice the essential skills of puzzle solving. Integrating game-based learning with puzzle-based learning to create a puzzle-based game learning system that could make puzzle solving identical to game playing may help to fulfill the above requirements of repetition and practice.
Some researchers have suggested that game-based learning can support problem-based learning by enabling students to apply their own strategies and prior knowledge to solving problems (Cicchino, 2015, Kim et al., 2009, Papastergiou, 2009). In fact, Kim et al. (2009) indicated that engaging students to implement problem-solving strategies in a game-based learning environment may be the primary factor in promoting learning outcomes. This aspect provides support for integrating game-based learning into puzzle-based learning, which is regarded as a type of problem-based learning to engage students in solving and practicing puzzles. In addition, many researchers have suggested that digital game-based learning can promote students' engagement, motivation and learning outcomes (Chang et al., 2014, Jong, 2015, Kim et al., 2009, Papastergiou, 2009, Su and Cheng, 2013, Tuzun et al., 2009). Engaging students to learn by games that embed educational objectives and learning materials not only raises students' learning motivation and outcomes (Chang et al., 2014, Gee, 2005, Prensky, 2003, Sung and Hwang, 2013) but also renders students' learning more interesting, enjoyable, learner-centered, and thus more effective (Kafai, 2001, Malone, 1980, Papastergiou, 2009, Prensky, 2001). These aspects provide support for integrating puzzle-based learning and game-based learning to create an online puzzle-based game learning system to enhance students’ engagement and motivation.
However, because enjoyment and entertainment are not the primary purposes of educational games, educational games generally are not as attractive or engaging as commercial games (Kim et al., 2009, Webb et al., 2015). Although a puzzle-based learning game may engage students for several minutes at a time, it is essential to identify a manner in which to persistently maintain students’ interest and motivation (Abdul Jabbar and Felicia, 2015, Csikszentmihalyi, 2008, Fullerton, 2008, Klopfer et al., 2009). Many studies have indicated that in addition to designing a game with basic game characteristics, using game mechanics to maintain motivation and promote certain behaviors may be the critical strategy (Alaswad and Nadolny, 2015, Bunchball Inc, 2010, Figueroa Flores, 2015, Hull et al., 2013). This study sought to integrate game-based learning and puzzle-based learning to create an online puzzle-based game learning system that would not only support puzzle solving but also use game mechanics to engage students in voluntarily attempting various puzzles and in repeatedly solving puzzles they had previously solved. By encouraging students to practice solving puzzles repeatedly, this system helps students master the basic concepts and problem-solving skills of algorithmic thinking.
To ensure that the puzzles in this online puzzle-based game learning system include the concepts and skills that students need to learn, the puzzles are traditionally generated by teachers. However, some studies have stressed the importance of allocating some of the responsibility for generating questions to students (Barak and Rafaeli, 2004, Brown and Walter, 2005, Dillon, 1990, English, 1997, Silver, 1994, Yu, 2009). Allowing students to produce questions for their peers to answer – that is, a student-generated questions strategy – would encourage students to reflect on what they have learned; this content could then be applied to the construction of personal knowledge (Bangert-Drowns et al., 2004, Papinczak et al., 2012, Rosenshine et al., 1996, Yu, 2009). A student-generated questions strategy can promote improvements in comprehension, attitudes, motivation, problem-solving abilities, and flexible thinking (Abramovich and Cho, 2006, Barak and Rafaeli, 2004, Barlow and Cates, 2006, Brown and Walter, 2005, Dori and Herscovitz, 1999, Whitin, 2004, Yu and Liu, 2005, Yu, 2009). These effects, particularly on problem-solving abilities and flexible thinking, will be highly beneficial in promoting algorithmic thinking, which is considered to relate to problem-solving abilities (Futschek, 2006, Katai, 2015). Furthermore, a student-generated questions strategy not only enhances student performance but also diversifies the sources of questions (Brown and Walter, 2005, English, 1997, Silver, 1994, Yu, 2009). Thus, some studies have suggested that questions should be generated by both teachers and students (Barak and Rafaeli, 2004, Dillon, 1990). Based on the above, in addition to integrating game-based learning and puzzle-based learning, this study attempted to further integrate a student-generated questions strategy into an online puzzle-based game learning system that supports not only puzzle solving but also puzzle designing to promote algorithmic thinking skills.
1.1. Background1.1.1. Algorithmic thinking skillsAlgorithmic thinking has received increased attention in recent years. Many studies have indicated that algorithmic thinking is one of the most important competences in computer science (Cooper et al., 2000, Futschek, 2006, Sysło, 2015, Zsakó and Szlávi, 2012). An algorithm is a procedure or formula comprising a series of finite and implementable operations for solving a problem step-by-step (Futschek, 2006, Zsakó and Szlávi, 2012). Algorithmic thinking is considered to be associated with the skills of processing and creating algorithms (Katai, 2015). Futschek (2006) defined algorithmic thinking as the ability to construct new algorithms for solving given problems. Furthermore, the field of algorithmic thinking can be extended to daily life (Amorim, 2005, Hubalovsky and Korinek, 2015, Katai, 2015). Hubalovsky and Korinek (2015) indicated that algorithms arise in the common activities of daily living. Therefore, algorithmic thinking is not only an important part of computer science but also an important part of our daily lives (Amorim, 2005, Futschek, 2006, Katai, 2015, Zsakó and Szlávi, 2012). These arguments underscore the importance of promoting algorithmic thinking skills.However, several factors render it difficult for students to develop algorithmic thinking skills (Katai, 2015). Algorithmic thinking incorporates many cognitive tasks, such as abstract thinking, logical thinking, structural thinking, and creative thinking (Futschek, 2006, Katai, 2015). The abstractions of computer algorithms generally render it difficult for students to relate algorithms to real-life experiences (Katai, 2015, Ramadhan, 2000). Futschek and Moschitz (2011) noted that novice learners of algorithmic thinking generally have trouble with the abstraction of a programming environment and with thinking through executive steps abstractly. Additionally, the differences between the ways computers work and the ways that humans think can increase students’ difficulties. Computers enable algorithms designed for machines to execute limited sets of fundamental instructions sequentially; however, humans naturally process large sets of high-level instructions in parallel (Futschek and Moschitz, 2010, Katai, 2015). Students need more support in overcoming the difficulties of the abstraction of algorithmic thinking and in transforming the ways they think by problem solving.To address the problem of abstraction, Futschek and Moschitz (2011) suggested that providing a manipulation and visualization tool was appropriate for helping students connect the real world to a programming environment. This study uses Logo, which meets the requirements mentioned above, as the medium for learning algorithmic thinking skills. Logo is a well-known educational programming language that uses a turtle (an on-screen cursor) to produce line graphics (turtle graphics) by giving the turtle movement commands and drawing instructions. Many studies confirm that Logo may benefit students in not only fostering programming skills but also providing experiential learning, enhancing geometric concepts, developing spatial abilities, and promoting other higher-order thinking skills (e.g., critical thinking skills, problem-solving skills, reflection and self-monitoring) (Clements and Sarama, 1997, Clements, 2002, McAllister, 1991, Miller, 1998, Papert, 1980, Ratcliff and Anderson, 2011, Vasu and Tyler, 1997, Yeh and Chandra, 2015). Logo provides a programming environment in which abstract ideas can be expressed, handled, and dynamically tested to help students internalize the transformation between abstract ideas and concrete models in cognitive processes (Papert, 1980, Swan and Black, 1990). In the interactive programming environment, students can test, observe, and correct their strategies and then learn from trials and mistakes (Miller, 1998, Ratcliff and Anderson, 2011, Sharp, 1993). By providing a constructivist learning environment, Logo promotes the development of reasoning, logic, and procedural and debugging skills that are essential to algorithmic thinking skills (Miller, 1998, Poulin-Dubois et al., 1989). In addition to using Logo to address the problem of transformation, Futschek (2006) suggested that the fundamental and practical strategy for teaching algorithmic thinking skills was allowing students to solve multiple problems. Therefore, this study used puzzle-based learning as its fundamental strategy to help students learn algorithmic thinking skills. By the arrangement of moderate and progressively more difficult problems, students can be guided to solve problems step-by-step.To teach algorithmic thinking skills, it is first necessary to determine what concepts should be included in algorithmic thinking. Many studies have proposed various concepts that should be included (Futschek and Moschitz, 2011, Futschek, 2006, National Research Council, 1999). Cooper et al. (2000) proposed that the general algorithmic concepts include functional decomposition, repetition, basic data organizations, generalization and parameterization, top-down design, and refinement. Futschek and Moschitz (2011) proposed that the basic algorithmic concepts include basic commands, sequence commands, iteration commands, alternative commands, and abstraction commands. This study followed the suggestion of Cooper et al. (2000) and Futschek and Moschitz (2011) to incorporate basic algorithmic concepts into the online learning system developed by this study for young learners.Although several studies have sought to teach algorithmic thinking skills to students (Cooper et al., 2000, Futschek and Moschitz, 2011, Katai, 2015), some have noted the need for more research before conclusions can be drawn regarding how best to help students learn algorithmic thinking skills (Cooper et al., 2000, Katai, 2015). In investigating the issue of teaching algorithmic thinking skills to elementary school students, this study attempted to develop an online puzzle-based learning system that can support students in learning algorithmic thinking skills at any time and in any location.1.1.2. Game-based learningIn recent years, game-based learning has attracted increasing attention because of its positive effectiveness in promoting students’ engagement, motivation, and learning outcomes (Games and Squire, 2011, Jong, 2015, Kebritchi and Hirumic, 2008). Game-based learning is generally defined as engaging students in a type of game to play with distinct learning goals that seek to develop their cognitive abilities (Erhel and Jamet, 2013, Plass et al., 2015, Shaffer et al., 2005, Webb et al., 2015). Game-based learning considered to have potential in the learning environment is based on several central aspects: providing students with challenges or difficulties to overcome, enabling students to combine prior knowledge from different aspects to make meaningful decisions, and encouraging students to predict what will result from their decisions and actions (Bouras et al., 2004, Cicchino, 2015, Kim et al., 2009, McCall, 2012). These aspects are consistent with the essential elements of constructing a puzzle-based learning environment and provide support for integrating game-based learning into puzzle-based learning to create a puzzle-based game learning system (Connolly et al., 2012, Klymchuk, 2017).With the wide application of technology in education, digital games holding the inherent characteristics of goals, interaction, feedback, and entertainment have been given distinct educational purpose and developed to promote students' cognitive and intelligent abilities (Abdul Jabbar and Felicia, 2015, Alaswad and Nadolny, 2015, Kim et al., 2009, Su and Cheng, 2013, Webb et al., 2015). However, it is not sufficient to simply transform puzzle-solving into the form of a puzzle-solving game that only possesses the inherent characteristics of digital games. Kim et al. (2009) indicate that because they are developed specifically to achieve learning objectives, educational games are usually not as attractive or engaging for students as commercial games. Moreover, puzzle-based learning games are usually not as entertaining as other types of games. Although puzzle-based learning games can be played for some minutes at a time because they invoke the concept of flow, puzzle-based learning games still require game mechanics to persistently maintain students' interest and motivation (Abdul Jabbar and Felicia, 2015, Csikszentmihalyi, 2008, Fullerton, 2008, Klopfer et al., 2009). How to drive and maintain the students’ engagement and attempts to solve puzzles is an important issue when designing a game-based learning environment for puzzle solving.When implementing game-based learning, many studies have attempted to introduce systematic mechanisms for designing a game-based learning environment, including game characteristics (the common characteristics that most games have) or game mechanics (the control mechanisms that are used to initiate and maintain interest in gaming activities) (Alaswad and Nadolny, 2015, Bunchball Inc, 2010, Figueroa Flores, 2015, Hull et al., 2013). Hamari, Koivisto, and Sarsa (2014) reviewed several studies and proposed ten of the most popular mechanisms that can promote engagement: providing clear goals, providing challenges, arranging a story or theme, providing feedback, using levels, allotting points, displaying progress, awarding rewards, granting badges, and showing leaders on leaderboards. Providing clear goals, providing challenges, arranging a story or theme, and providing feedback are game characteristics that may apply to creating a puzzle-based learning game; using levels, allotting points, displaying progress, awarding rewards, granting badges, and showing leaders on leaderboards are game mechanics that may engage students when they are playing the puzzle-based learning game. Cugelman (2013) suggested that these systematic mechanisms might be used to interact with students in online learning systems to increase engagement. However, how to apply not only game characteristics to transform puzzle solving into a type of game playing but also game mechanics to design an online puzzle-based game learning system to engage students in learning algorithmic thinking skills is an issue that is worth exploring.1.1.3. Student-generated questions strategyA student-generated questions strategy is regarded as an important cognitive strategy that may contribute to fostering and monitoring comprehension and to self-regulatory cognitive development (Abramovich and Cho, 2006, Barlow and Cates, 2006, Brown and Walter, 2005, Palinscar and Brown, 1984, Papinczak et al., 2012, Rosenshine et al., 1996, Yu, 2009). Generating questions does not directly guide students to comprehension in a step-by-step manner, but rather engages students in analyzing learning content, identifying main concepts, and combining this information during the process of generating questions (Craik and Lockhart, 1972, Rosenshine et al., 1996). By requiring students to recall learning content, become aware of the key points of learning content, generate answers to self-designed questions, and reflect on what they have learned, the student-generated questions strategy allows students to identify and resolve incomplete or inadequate comprehension and monitor the state of their own comprehension (King, 1994, Palinscar and Brown, 1984, Wong, 1985). Furthermore, students may benefit from generating the questions that will be answered by their peers. Psychological studies have noted that having an audience affects the effort and interest of students, who will then view tasks as more meaningful and relevant, thus promoting better performance (Cohen and Riel, 1989, Redd-Boyd and Slater, 1989, Ward, 2008, Yu and Chen, 2014). For the above reasons, this study hypothesizes that integrating a student-generated questions strategy into an online puzzle-based game learning system that could support puzzles designed by students will further engage students in a deeper understanding and processing of the basic concepts and problem-solving skills of algorithmic thinking.Several studies have provided empirical evidence to support the hypothesis that a student-generated questions strategy could contribute to the learning process (Rosenshine et al., 1996, Yu and Chen, 2014, Yu, 2009). In addition to enhancing the cognitive learning process (Drake and Barlow, 2008, Yu and Liu, 2009, Zohar and Dori, 2003), student-generated questions also help students in the affective domain by enhancing learning motivation (Chin & Brown, 2002), promoting active learning (Liu & Yu, 2004), and encouraging positive attitudes toward learning new content (Keil, 1965, Perez, 1985). Nevertheless, most studies of the student-generated questions strategy have focused on inquiring about the effect of text-based questions, and few empirical studies have been conducted on using this strategy to promote algorithmic thinking. Allowing students to construct questions using a form of turtle graphics to promote algorithmic thinking is an issue that must be addressed.
1.2. Purpose and questionsThis study used an online puzzle-based game learning system that integrates puzzle-based learning, game-based learning and a student-generated question strategy to promote algorithmic thinking skills. However, how to use the game mechanics to maintain students’ engagement and motivation rather than creating a puzzle-solving game that only possesses game characteristics requires further investigation. Furthermore, the effect of using a student-generated questions strategy to allow students to design puzzles on a puzzle-based game learning system is another important issue. To examine the effect of using game mechanics and a student-generated questions strategy, three types of system mechanisms – using a puzzle-based game learning system that only possesses game characteristics as a fundamental strategy – were developed to encourage students to engage in puzzle-solving activities to learn algorithmic thinking skills: without game mechanics, with game mechanics, and with game mechanics plus the student-generated questions strategy.The research questions for this study were as follows:●Are there differences among students who use the three types of system mechanisms with regard to algorithmic thinking skills?●Are there differences among students who use the three types of system mechanisms with regard to puzzle-solving performance?●Are there differences among students who use the three types of system mechanisms with regard to attitudes toward learning activities?
