Many huge complex systems such as biological and chemical networks or large social and communication systems take the form of networks, sets of nodes joined together in pairs by edges [1]. An important problem in network analysis is discovering communities that are also named groups, modules, partitions or communities [2]. Network systems consist of several communities that have much fewer connections to the rest of the network than inside the same community. Networks can be represented by graphs and communities are subgraphs. Community detection problem is to identify a set of meaningful dense subgraphs in a given graph.
A graph is mathematical representation of a network. A graph G(V,E) has a set of nodes V=(v1,v2,…,vn) that models objects and a set of edges E=(e1,e2,…,em) which connect pairs of nodes that interact in complex systems or they have just enough similar attributes, or they are connected as in citation networks or in world wide web pages. Individual two nodes can be connected with an edge that describes a certain degree of similarity between them. Communities are subgraphs defined as groups of densely interconnected nodes that are only sparsely connected to the rest of the network. Community detection methods find the partition P=C1⋃C2⋃⋅⋃Ck where C1,C2,…Ck are set of nodes called clusters or communities that can be disjoint or can overlap. Graph partition is NP-hard and different community detection methods have been proposed that seek to identify natural groups of related nodes in networks [3].
The community detection problem is increasing in importance, because of increased interest in studying many real complex systems such as social networks or World Wide Web structures [4]. Identifying and knowing communities can have practical importance. Community members have more common properties among themselves than with non-members of a community and identification of community structure can help in analyzing of functionality of networks and may discover not only similarity structure that is hidden, but also internal organization and how systems work [5].
In this paper, we use more measures in the process of forming communities. In contrast to many existing methods, a key feature is the ability to detect also small and/or sparse communities. One community is extracted at a time, while the remainder of the network has no influence on the forming of a community. So the extraction process allows the remainder of network to contain any number of weakly or tightly connected communities.
We propose a community detection algorithm that bases on the integration of more different measures that can fast identify communities of different sizes and densities. We use node degree centrality, strong similarity with one node from community, maximal similarity of node to community and separation measures. Each measure has its own strength and weakness. Thus, combining different measures can benefit from the strengths of each one and eliminate encountered problems of using an individual measure.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section contains a review of related work. Section 3 defines community detection model and Section 4 describes the proposed framework and outlines the proposed algorithm. Section 5 presents experimental results and compares the proposed methods using synthetic and real-world social networks. The final section contains conclusions.
