This paper offers an analysis of the current position of forensic science in the specific context of UK government audits of University research quality.
It begins by considering the broader forensic science environment, including the forensic science economy and government policy in forensic science, and moves on to focus on University research quality assessment.
The paper presents an analysis of research outputs submitted to the previous two UK University research quality assessments, the Research Assessment Exercise 2008 (RAE 2008) and the Research Excellence Framework 2014 (REF 2014). In the absence of a specific Unit of Assessment (UOA) for forensic science, indirect methods of quantification are employed, which have the advantage that they offer a comprehensive picture of broadly relevant research submitted to these exercises and the disadvantage that they introduce risks of under- and over-estimation of the quantity of forensic science research submitted.
The methods capture forensic research outputs as they are commonly conceived—that is, in the scientific, mathematical and computational disciplines, along with investigative or court-related complementary behavioural and social research, which extend beyond traditional boundaries.
The methods used follow those applied in other systematic reviews of research and assessments of research quality in transdisciplinary contexts and allow the range, quantity and quality of research outputs submitted to be measured.
The same methods were applied to research outputs in the archaeological, environmental, pathological and craniofacial sciences to provide internal comparative controls.
To assess the approximate representativeness of research outputs submitted to the RAE 2008 and REF 2014 audits as a proportion of wider forensic science research publications, a provisional tally of UK affliliated papers published in four leading international peer-reviewed forensic science journals was also taken.
The results show UK Universities produce a spectrum of auditable quality forensic—as broadly defined—research outputs that are loosely comparable in quantity with those of more traditional and mainstream subjects, incorporating both forensic science research as it is commonly conceived, as well as research offered in other fields of study relevant to investigation and the courts.
Comparison with papers with UK affiliated authors published in four leading forensic science periodicals over the same period typically, but not exclusively, reflected their focus on the forensic sciences as traditionally conceived. These results also showed the major and growing proportion of publications in these journals produced by the Universities relative to other public and private sector forensic science organisations, and the significant contribution that was made by the Forensic Science Service prior to its closure
Direct assessment of the quality profile of forensic outputs submitted to RAE 2008 and REF 2014 is difficult in the absence of a forensic science UOA (Unit of Assessment), as these typically represent a small proportion of the total submissions to a given non-forensic UOA. In REF 2014, however, the facility to return Impact Case Studies does show evidence that forensic outputs—including those from forensic science subjects as they are commonly conceived—are contributing to submissions highly rated for quality.
The results are discussed with reference to proposals for the treatment of forensic science research in REF 2021, and the wider implications for forensic science research policy and strategy.
There are good reasons to be optimistic about forensic science research in UK Universities, but the medium and long-term health of the field requires this research to be more visibly imbedded in the academic mainstream. In Europe, independent research institutes and University Medico-Legal Institutes offer solutions that combine education and research goals.
In the UK, where research is undertaken predominantly in Universities, somewhat greater and more visible representation in research orientated traditional Institutions would complement that undertaken in admissions orientated former Polytechnics, where research quality is presently under-developed. The absence, however, of a forensic science UOA in these research audits creates a ‘vicious circle’, which introduces a disincentive to Universities to support forensic science research and employ quality research active staff.
The absence of a forensic science UOA also makes the quality ratings assigned to forensic science outputs almost impervious to direct assessment, except in part via Impact Case Studies.
In the UK and other jurisdictions where government audit of University research quality assessment is undertaken, it is strategically vital to ensure that forensic science research has a commensurate presence and visibility relative to the other sciences.
1.1. The forensic science economy—funding forensic science provisionIn the UK, forensic science provision devolves to the separate jurisdictions of England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. In Scotland, laboratory forensic services are the responsibility of the Scottish Police Authority (SPA). In Northern Ireland, they are provided by Forensic Science Northern Ireland (FSNI), which is part of the Ministry of Justice. These structures follow a common model whereby services are provided in government laboratories and by the police, who are responsible for scene of crime work and some forms of technical examination—such as fingerprint comparison. In England and Wales, however, forensic science provision is delivered via a mixed economy of policing organisations with in-house laboratories and private companies.Contrary to the thriving image conveyed in the media, forensic science is a small and poorly resourced sector of the economy, forming a tiny proportion overall expenditure on policing, prosecution and defence. For illustration, in 2015–2016 the aggregate amount paid to the 39 police forces in England given in the Police Grant Report was £7.4 billion [1]. The police workforce in England and Wales in 2015 amounted to about 200,000 individuals, including about 127,000 police officers. The Crown Prosecution Service, responsible for criminal prosecutions in England and Wales, reported departmental expenditure of about £490 million in 2015–2016, when it employed about 5800 staff [2]. In the adversarial criminal justice system of England and Wales, the defence is typically financed via the Criminal Legal Aid scheme delivered by the Legal Aid Agency, sponsored by the Ministry of Justice (MOJ). In the fourth quarter of 2015, the MOJ reported a Criminal Legal Aid workload of 1.3 million cases and an expenditure of £871 million [3]—roughly equating to 5 million cases and £3.5 billion expenditure per annum. These cases include work carried out in police stations and in courts in relation to people accused of or charged with criminal offences, or who are being investigated for a crime, or who are in prison. More serious cases, heard in the Crown Court, amount to about 17% of the overall caseload. In 2009, a survey of 1800 firms of solicitors working in Criminal Legal Aid at that time found each firm employed 3.4 individuals on average in Criminal Legal Aid work—amounting to about 6120 employees in total [4]—not including higher court advocates and barristers.Expenditure on forensic science is notoriously difficult to establish, given the distribution of services between police, government laboratories and private companies. In 2003, a National Audit Office (NAO) report on the Forensic Science Service—then a GovCo laboratory— found that it employed 2700 staff who had analysed 135,000 cases, and achieved an operating income of £128 million—over 90% of which came from work for the police [5]. Contraction due to falling crime rates and expenditure cuts to policing following the 2008 economic recession, however, meant that by 2012 the loss-making Forensic Science Service, which had entirely ceased to be economically viable, was closed [6]. While some provision moved to the private sector, a substantial proportion was reabsorbed ‘in-house’ by the police.The 2014 NAO report found the proportion of the market now serviced by the private sector via a national framework had declined to £60 million per annum, whereas the police internal market had grown from £113 million in 2012–2013 to £122 million in 2014–2015 [7]. Furthermore, police expenditure on third-party services outside of the framework may have amounted to up to an additional £80–90 million. The reported noted, however, that data on spending on forensic science was limited, incomplete, inconsistent and difficult to access—especially regarding police expenditure.Current estimates of the number of employees working in forensic science is similarly difficult to establish—especially in the police sector, but near the time of its closure the Forensic Science Service staff head count had fallen to 1600 employees in total and the largest private laboratory—LGC Forensics—employed 500 [8]. In addition to forensic science provided by the police and private laboratories, there is a small, but not insignificant market of individuals and enterprises typically providing services to the defence and funded via Criminal Legal Aid (see above).Assuming the police service have similar numbers of staff working in forensic science relative to the size of the market, it could be estimated that forensic science in England and Wales employs about 6500 people and is worth about £300 million per annum—including police services, police funded third-party services, framework funded private sector laboratory services, and legal aid funded defence services.The forensic science economy might be characterised as equivalent to about one percent of that of policing, prosecution and defence in total value, employing about 5% of the number of people.
1.2. Forensic science policyForensic science thus clearly represents a very small proportion of the criminal justice system. The annual reports of the police and prosecution [1], [2] make no reference to science. In England and Wales—where the total criminal justice workload amounts to over 600,000 cases annually [2], most cases involving forensic science proceed uneventfully.These observations may go some way to explaining why, paradoxically, forensic science appears to be in a recurrent state of crisis in many Western jurisdictions.Backlogs, procedural failings and flawed forensic science practice underlying miscarriages of justice perpetually feature in the media and academic literature [9], [10]. While they represent a very small proportion of cases overall, wrongful convictions are perhaps the most unacceptable of these failings and, given the fundamental role of physical evidence as an arbiter of truth, problems in forensic science are matters of considerable concern amongst policy makers. Ultimately, forensic science scandals undermine public confidence in the justice system—regardless of the overall size of the sector or of the number of cases affected.When the role of forensic science in miscarriages of justice related to the IRA mainland bombing campaign of the mid-1970s came to light [11], the House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee [12] criticised the management and funding of the Forensic Science Service and recommended laboratories should be able to charge the police for services. This led to the establishment of the Forensic Science Service as a GovCo and the opening of the forensic market to competition [13].Substantial government investment into the Forensic Science Service with the advent of forensic DNA profiling did not prevent problems arising, including backlogs and other procedural issues. The House of Commons Science and Technology Select Committee 2002–2003 report ‘The Scientific Response to Terrorism’ [14] raised criticisms of the scientific culture in the Home Office. Its 2004–2005 report, ‘Forensic Science on Trial’, questioned the transparency of the transition to a GovCo [15]. Subsequent reports following the closure of the Forensic Science Service in 2012 have expressed concern that the police had become a customer and competitor in the market [16], that police expenditure was hidden and was threatening market stability [17] and—most damningly—that the government had ‘no meaningful strategy’ for forensic science [18].
1.3. Forensic science researchWhile many classical and historical antecedents are known, the earliest systematic use of forensic science in criminal investigation is widely attributed to the ‘Lyon School’ of Alexandre Lacassange (1843–1924), Professor of Legal Medicine at the University of Lyon, whose assistant Edmond Locard (1877–1966) formulated the principle ‘every contact leaves a trace’. The first systematic approach to human identification was also developed in France, the ‘méthode anthropométrique’ of Alphonse Bertillon.Much fundamental work in the forensic sciences has been developed by British scientists, however. Richard Mead FRS (1673–1754) is credited with writing the first book in English on toxicology—‘A Mechanical Account of Poisons’—in 1708. John Smeaton FRS (1724–1792) first introduced scientific evidence into court in relation to a civil engineering dispute. The Regius Chair of Forensic Medicine at the University of Glasgow was founded in 1839 by Queen Victoria. Early work on the identification of criminals by dermatoglyphic fingerprinting was undertaken by Henry Faulds (1843–1930), Sir William Herschel (1833–1917) and Sir Francis Galton FRS (1822–1911). DNA profiling for forensic purposes was first described by Sir Alec Jeffreys FRS in 1985.Despite these major contributions to knowledge, research in forensic science in Britain has progressed in a somewhat piecemeal fashion that has mirrored the faltering trajectory of government policy for forensic science delivery.The period between 1931 and 1967 saw the establishment of a national forensic science service managed by the Home Office and offered via six regional laboratories and a central research laboratory. A single police laboratory remained—the Metropolitan Police Forensic Science Laboratory in London, which was also ultimately absorbed into the government service. Notwithstanding these organisational arrangements—and the establishment of a dedicated central research laboratory—inadequacies in forensic science research have been a common feature of policy. The Runciman Report [19] produced following the exposure of infamous miscarriages of justice of the 1970s recommended the development of research in the Universities as well as in professional laboratories. Despite this pluralistic recommendation, however, the Forensic Science Service—who had formal responsibility to ‘perform advisory functions to Home Office Ministers’ (see Ref. [5])— affected a monopoly in forensic science research funding in the UK, underpinned by research budgets of circa £8 million per annum.The perhaps predictable consequences of this questionable policy became apparent following the closure of the Forensic Science Service, which eliminated the major single conduit of funded UK forensic science research. In its 2010–2012 report, the House of Commons Science and Technology Select Committee highlighted this issue and recommended a national research budget for forensic science [16]. The Home Office Chief Scientific Advisor responded with a comprehensive review of research, including that undertaken in the Universities [20]. This was not sufficient, however, to satisfy the Science and Technology Select Committee—who in its 2016 report again remarked on the pressing need for more forensics research [17]—or Sir Brian Leveson, whose ‘Review of Efficiency in Criminal Proceedings’ [21] also recommended more research in the forensic sciences.Most recently, the annual report of the Government Chief Scientific Advisor ‘Forensic Science and Beyond’ [22] proposed a wider view of forensic science and argued for much broader applications of relevant methods.
1.4. Forensic science in UK Universities and the Research Excellence Framework exercisesThe contribution of the Universities to research in forensic science in the UK is complex and arose at the earliest stages in the development of the discipline. Briefly, however, four key factors effected its establishment in the Universities. The first was—effectively—a Home Office policy decision to ‘divorce’ forensic science from legal medicine and establish it in public laboratories, which eventually became the Forensic Science Service [23], [24]. This policy represented a divergence from European Universities, many of which continue to house medico-legal institutes active in research, education and practice in forensic science. The second factor, as discussed above, was the Home Office policy decision to invest practically all forensic science research resources into a single entity—the Forensic Science Service.The third factor relates to the policies of the Universities themselves. On the one hand, several departments of forensic medicine in traditional research Universities have closed in recent decades. For example, the Department of Forensic Pathology at the University of Sheffield [25] was transferred to the Forensic Science Service in 2004 and closed with the demise of that organisation in 2012. On the other hand, a number of—mainly—former Polytechnics or ‘post-1992 Universities’ have at the same time introduced forensic science degree programmes to rescue admissions to moribund chemistry programmes. These degree programmes have attracted considerable criticism including from the House of Commons Science and Technology Select Committee. The 2004–2005 report, ‘Forensic Science on Trial’ drew attention to the 401 University courses with ‘forensic’ in the title and the questionable value of offering vocational degrees for which there is no demand. Clive Wolfendale, Deputy Chief Constable of North Wales Police gave evidence that these degrees were ‘a savage waste of young people’s time and parents’ money’ [15]. Although initiatives to impose standards have been introduced by groups of Universities [26] and the Chartered Society of Forensic Sciences has introduced an accreditation scheme [27], the issue of employability continues to arise as the number of graduates far exceeds the number of job opportunities [28]. Furthermore, forensic science laboratories generally prefer to recruit good basic science graduates from traditional Universities.The fourth contributing factor is the introduction by government of successive audits of research quality in the Universities. The UK research audits are the largest, most complex and longest standing of these exercises—see Auranan and Nieminen [29], for a recent discussion. The first to be conducted was the Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) of 1986, repeated in 1989, 1992, 1996, 2001 and 2008, and replaced by the Research Excellence Framework (REF) in 2014.Unfortunately, forensic science and medicine have never featured visibly in these exercises, which are a major strategic driver in University policy, and strongly influence investment in research resources and personnel [29]. Lack of funding for forensic science research in Universities exacerbated by the Forensic Science Service quasi-monopoly and the absence of a home in the ‘REF’ has combined with—or likely eventuated—the closure of forensic departments in traditional Universities.While the contraction of forensic science provision to the justice system has led to some forensic scientists joining the Universities—and bringing valuable experience with them—these staff tend to be case workers rather than researchers, and from declining disciplines rather than expanding ones. Their contribution to quality research and scholarship is understandably doubtful.Overall, this situation appears to reflect an unhealthy and paradoxical situation where research active Universities have little forensic science research and undergraduate programmes are offered by ‘rent seeking’ chemistry teachers and ex-practitioners in admissions-orientated former Polytechnics whose graduates have little prospect of employment in the discipline. It may be a classic example of where the self-interest of individual actors and agencies described in Public Choice Theory—see Butler [30] for an introduction—may lead in the absence of a more enlightened policy.The recommendations and expectations for forensic science research spelled out in the series of governmental and judicial reports referred to above have not been fulfilled.Among these were research to ensure services were cost-effective, adequately funded and staffed, operationally efficient, and organised to match caseloads [12]; to encourage the development of expertise and centres of excellence, embracing applied research, in the Universities as well as in public sector and commercial laboratories [19]; and to establish the validity of the forensic sciences [21], reflecting similar concerns expressed internationally—particularly in the United States [31], [32]. To support this research, further recommendations were made to establish a national research budget for forensic science [16]; for greater involvement of forensic scientists in REF research impact assessment and the establishment of forensic science as a strategic priority for the Research Councils [17], [20].The policy recommendations made for forensic science research—although laudable in their intent—do not recognize the reality that, in the contemporary UK context, the research base cannot grow in the absence of a mainstream academic research culture, the value of whose deliverables can be demonstrated in the REF. Without it, research active Universities will avoid investing in staff and infrastructure, research active academic staff will avoid pursuing it and Research Councils will not have quality research to fund or quality researchers to peer-review applications for awards. This ‘vicious circle’ will have to be broken for quality forensic science research to develop sustainably.The study presented below makes this basic assumption, argued above, that forensic science must deliver quality research as assessed with all other disciplines in the on-going audits of University research quality. The same could be argued for other jurisdictions, internationally, that are subject to governmental research quality audits.
1.5. Aims and approach1.5.1. Analysis of the range, quantity and quality of forensic science in RAE 2008 and REF 2014The study aims to measure the range, quantity and quality of forensic research submitted to the two most recent UK research audits, RAE 2008 and REF 2014, and to discuss the implications of the findings in the context of the policy issues introduced above.1.5.2. Approach takenSubmissions to the two most recent audits of research quality in UK Universities—RAE 2008 and REF 2014—are held online, having been uploaded by the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE). These submissions were downloaded for analysis using a systematic approach founded on text-based searching and non-random chain sampling that is thorough, transparent and repeatable. It uses methods reported in the evidence-based policy literature—e.g. Pullin and Stewart [33]—and in systematic reviews applied to research quality assessment—e.g. Belcher et al. [34].Forensic datasets for both RAE 2008 and REF 2014 were collated to permit a comparison of the range and quantity of submissions to each, revealing underlying patterns and trends, and allowing an assessment of University forensic science research quality. A further comparison with papers collated from four leading forensic science periodicals over the RAE and REF periods allowed the representativeness of the audited outputs to be assessed against a more general publication dataset.The results are discussed in relation to the strengths and weakness of the methods used, and their implications for forensic science education and research policy.
