In recent years, hyperthermia has emerged as a promising technique, becoming increasingly more common in cancer treatments. However, the thermal ablation procedures have a main limiting factor: the correct increase of the temperature in the living tissue, which in some cases can cause undesirable effects such as irreversible damages in the healthy tissue. In this way, numerical and computational tools are increasingly used in simulations of hyperthermia treatment with the goal of predicting the temperature field and, thus, guide the specialist more precisely before the actual medical procedure.
Among different hyperthermia techniques, one based on nanoparticles has been receiving great attention due to its potentiality and distinct features such as ultra-small size (average sizes below 100 nm), high reactivity, and unique interactions with biological systems [1]. In this way, the biocompatible base fluid with nanoparticles can be straightforwardly injected inside the tumor in a non-invasive manner. One of the major issue concerning the hyperthermia with nanoparticles stems from the correct way of controlling the amount of heat generation and the temperature rise. Thus, a number of different electromagnetic devices have been developed for this purpose [2].
Over the last decades, there has been a growth of researchers working on the application of numerical methods for the simulation of a variety of medical problems involving complex geometries with the adoption of methods capable of dealing with unstructured meshes. The most frequently used methods are the finite element method (FEM) [3] and the finite volume method (FVM) [4].
The FVM is very flexible to handle any type of control volume and any type of unstructured mesh. However, the procedures of generating unstructured meshes for complex geometries are still very time consuming and a topic of intensive research. This difficulty, however, can be minimized in parts by the use of OcTree meshes, which possess several advantages with respect to the use of computational resources and data structure. In the OcTree method, the description of complex geometries is accomplished by regular cubes (volumes) and the refinement takes place only in certain regions which need higher resolution (smaller volumes) while others can be described with larger volumes, giving rise to a nonconforming mesh. The use of sparse matrices as the OcTree mesh data structure allows the construction of simple and efficient discrete differential operators. This approach is widely used for modeling other phenomena such as fluid dynamics [5], electromagnetism [6], [7] and seismic waves [8].
A great deal of recent studies have used the FVM to construct computational models from Pennes' equation in many different applications. Das et al. [9], [10], [11] performed a study to estimate the location and dimensions of tumors from the surface temperature distribution of regions of the human body. Gwon [12] employed the FVM to numerically simulate the effects of contrast therapy. Thermal therapy for the treatment of several types of cancer is also the focus of numerous studies [13], [14].
The present work develops a computational strategy through the use of FVM to solve Pennes' bioheat transfer equation in three dimensions taking into account OcTree meshes. The technique presents a great reduction in the number of degrees of freedom in the studied model since regions with smooth solutions can be described with large control volumes, whereas in regions where there are high-gradient solutions or where complex geometries need to be accurately described, smaller volumes may be used. Therefore the use of computational resources, as well as the processing time, is greatly reduced. In addition, OcTree meshes like those used in this paper are easily constructed because they are treated as sparse matrices.
This paper is organized as follows. First, in the Numerical Formulation section, Pennes' bioheat equation and the formulation for the simulation of the thermal source generated by the nanoparticles are discussed. Criteria for construction of OcTree meshes and discretized differential operators is also presented. In addition, the implicit and explicit numerical schemes for the march in time are constructed. In the section Numerical Simulations and Discussion, a numerical example is shown, highlighting the potentialities of the proposed methodology. Finally, conclusions and future works are drawn.
