Attack modelling techniques (AMTs) – such as attack trees, fault trees and attack graphs, are used to model cyber-attacks and visualise the sequence of events that lead to a successful attack. AMTs are constructed using a combination of shapes – such as circles, rectangles and ellipses, to represent cyber-attack constructs such as preconditions and exploits. This is referred to as the visual syntax (Moody, 2010), visual rhetoric (Scott, 1994) or visual grammar (Kress and Van Leeuwen, 1996). The visual syntax configuration of modelling systems such as fault trees (IEC, 1990) and Petri nets (Peterson, 1977) is standardised. This is not the case for attack graphs or attack trees, and authors use self-nominated graph configurations to model the attack, resulting in more than 70 different attack graph and more than 20 different attack tree visual syntax configurations. Furthermore, there are very few empirical evaluations of the effectiveness of AMTs in aiding cyber-attack perception.
The study found that the attack graph method was more effective than the fault tree method. This was particularly notable given that attack trees (which are based on the fault tree method) are a competing methodology for presenting cyber-attacks.
A number of studies have attempted to measure the effectiveness of AMTs (Hogganvik, Stølen, Opdahl, Sindre, 2009, Stålhane, Sindre, 2007). However, these studies reveal a number of research gaps which the present study attempts to address relating to the AMT coverage, statistical significance, and the importance of grounding such studies with firm pedagogic underpinnings. The study by Lallie et al. (2018) was the first to investigate the effectiveness of attack graphs in aiding cyber-attack perception by undertaking a subjective evaluation of attack graphs and fault trees to determine which method was more effective in aiding cyber-attack perception. In the first study, ‘effectiveness’ was defined as the ability of a participant to respond correctly to a question requiring the interpretation of the visual syntax of a given AMT. This demonstrated an awareness of how attacks are perpetrated and an understanding of the attack modelling technique.
The study also outlined the need for further research and in particular to identify what further visual syntax improvements could be made to the attack graph method to increase visual congruency and yield better perceptive acceptance amongst cyber security practitioners.
The present research is motivated by the need to make cyber-security more ‘usable’ and the recognition that better techniques and methods are required to aid the perception and assessment of cyber-attacks. Quite often, observers find the analysis and understanding of complex patterns difficult and challenging (Kasemsri, Staheli, Yu, Crouser, Damodaran, Nam, O’Gwynn, McKenna, Harrison, 2014). Well designed diagrams and graphical systems can aid this process (Kang, Dabbish, Fruchter, Kiesler, 2015, Moody, 2007). AMTs have potential value in aiding the perception and assessment of cyber-threat and attack by enabling observers to search and recognise relevant information in a diagram (Dondossola, Pietre-Cambacedes, McDonald, Ekstedt, Torkilseng, RSE, 2011, Homer, Varikuti, Ou, McQueen, 2008, Keller, Tergan, 2005, Staheli, Yu, Crouser, Damodaran, Nam, O’Gwynn, McKenna, Harrison, 2014). AMTs can help remove the intellectual burden from security experts – who have to understand and evaluate numerous potential options and make evaluations of cyber-attack scenario likelihoods (Roschke et al., 2011). In such circumstances, AMTs provide effective tools and workspaces (Fink et al., 2009) to make this process clearer and simpler and thereby facilitate easier discussion and debate (Dondossola et al., 2011).
The present study considers the following research question: ‘to what extent does symbol usage and event flow in attack graphs affect perceptive preference in participants?’ The research question is answered through a conjoint study which attempts to understand whether practitioners prefer a particular visual syntax configuration over another and therein to identify an optimal attack graph configuration design.
The study makes the following two contributions. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first study to perform an evaluation of the effectiveness of attack graph configurations. The study adopts a novel method – conjoint analysis, not used in such evaluations before, in order to measure participant preferences.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 begins by outlining the theory of attack graphs before proceeding to explore and critique previous research into the effectiveness of AMTs. The section concludes by introducing the application of conjoint analysis to the understanding of participant preferences. Section 3 outlines the design of the study and in particular, the conjoint design used in the present study. Section 4 presents the results of the study.
