Clay is a complex colloidal system and refers to naturally occurring aluminosilicate layered minerals, denoted phyllosilicates. The clay platelet has a strong negative surface charge density compensated with interlayer exchangeable cations. The physiochemical properties, and also the colloidal behavior, are determined by the charge distribution, the volume, and the shape of the colloid. When dispersed in water, the clay platelet becomes ionized and a rising osmotic pressure in the solution causes the clay to swell [1], [2]. Semi-dilute dispersions can behave as gels, i.e. they have the ability to form yield stress materials [3], [4], [5], which are comprehensively used in various industrial applications, such as in paint, in drilling fluids, and in food as well as in cosmetic industry. For this reason, clay-solvent interactions have been extensively studied by evaluating the intracrystalline swelling of montmorillonite (mmt) in water [6], [7], in different organic solvents [8], [9], [10], as well as water/organic mixtures [11]. Theoretically, the understanding of the swelling behavior of Na+-montmorillonite (Na-mmt) in water and ethanol (EtOH) have been studied by Metz et al. [9] utilizing atomistic computer simulations. They have found that the initial solvation of dry clay with EtOH is energetically unfavourable by comparing the solvation energetics with the energy of the bulk, and that the formation of an EtOH monolayer is associated with a large energy barrier to move the first EtOH molecules into the interlayer region. Moreover, they found that the Na+ ions behave differently in EtOH compared to in water, where the density profiles showed that the ions aggregate at each clay surface in the former rather than being dispersed in the solvent. Experimentally, the intracrystalline swelling of Ca2+-montmorillonite (Ca-mmt) in water/EtOH mixtures was studied by Brindley et al. [11] using X-ray diffractometry. In their study, they found that for Ca-mmt the equilibrium basal spacing increased to about 35 mol percent of EtOH, and beyond the maximum expansion, the d-spacing diminished abruptly. Their explanation of the initial increase in basal spacing is due to an increased repulsion arising from the replacement of water molecules by the larger EtOH molecules, i.e. an excluded volume effect. Moreover, Brindley et al. concluded that the initial increase is not compatible with the accompanying decrease of the relative permittivity, due to the fact that it would cause an increase in the attractive electrostatic forces. However, to the authors knowledge, both effects can be present in the system, where the increase in basal spacing can be explained through an intricate balance of the partitioning of the solvent molecules, the electrostatic repulsive forces, and the enhanced ion-ion correlation forces.
The aim of this work is to study how the structural properties of the tactoids, and the intracrystalline swelling, are affected by changing the solvent i.e. by decreasing the relative permittivity for Na-, and Ca-mmt in water/EtOH mixtures. The focus is on describing under which conditions the structural properties of Na-mmt behaves as Ca-mmt, i.e. the possibility to tune the electrostatic interactions to obtain a transition from a repulsive to an attractive clay system via the solvent properties. For this purpose the experimental techniques, Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) and osmotic pressure measurements have been used. The experimental data are compared with theoretical models, such as: coarse-grained molecular dynamics (MD) bulk simulations, Monte Carlo (MC) simulations of two infinite parallel surfaces corresponding to two clay platelets, and with strong coupling theory.
Our main findings are that when increasing the concentration of EtOH, the attractive ion-ion correlation forces are enhanced, concluding that the structural properties of Na-mmt do indeed behave similarly as Ca-mmt. This is confirmed both experimentally and theoretically, where the transition from a repulsive to an attractive system is found. For Ca-mmt, a non-monotonic behavior of the intracrystalline swelling as a function of EtOH concentration was found experimentally, where the distance between the platelets and the osmotic pressure increased at low concentrations of EtOH, indicating that repulsive short-ranged interactions are dominating in the system. This behavior could, however, not be captured theoretically, probably due to the limitation in the continuum model, i.e. that the solvent is represented by the relative permittivity of the bulk solvent.
