Computer programs are increasingly mediating our existence. More and more, we are experimenting an algorithmic life (Sadin, 2015), as plenty of objects driven by software surround us and condition our interactions with reality (Manovich, 2013). Given this disruptive scenario, it is becoming indispensable to handle, in a broad sense, the language of computers to participate fully and effectively in the digital reality (Rushkoff, 2010).
Within this context, the term ‘code-literacy’ has been coined to define the set of actions of teaching and learning to read-write with computer programming languages (Prensky, 2008, Rushkoff, 2012). Thus, we consider that a person is code-literate when he/she is able to read and write in the language of computers, and to think computationally (Román-González, 2014). While code-literacy refers ultimately to an emerging read-write practice, computational thinking (CT) refers to the underlying problem-solving (only cognitive?) process that supports and allows it. In other words, computer programming is the fundamental way that enables CT to come alive (Lye & Koh, 2014), although CT can be projected on different kinds of problems that may not involve directly programming tasks (Wing, 2008).
Therefore, CT is becoming considered all around the world as a key set of problem-skills that should be acquired by the emerging generations of students (Balanskat and Engelhardt, 2014, Bocconi et al., 2016, García-Peñalvo, 2016, García-Peñalvo et al., 2016). However, up to now there is no consensus about a formal definition of CT (Gouws et al., 2013, Kalelioglu et al., 2016). We are also witnessing disagreements on how CT should be incorporated in educational curricula (Lye & Koh, 2014), and there is a lack of tools to measure and assess CT (Grover and Pea, 2013, Grover et al., 2014, Kalelioglu et al., 2016). Furthermore, in psychometric terms, CT is still a poorly defined construct, given that its nomological network has not been established yet. That is, the correlations between CT and other psychological variables, whether cognitive or non-cognitive, have not been completely reported by the scientific community.
In a previous paper we started to address this issue studying the correlations between CT and some fundamental cognitive variables (Román-González, Pérez-González, & Jiménez-Fernández, 2017). There, we reported statistically significant correlations at least moderately intense between CT and problem-solving ability (r = 0.67), reasoning ability (r = 0.44), and spatial ability (r = 0.44). Overall, the primary mental abilities could explain only 27% of the CT variance. This result led us to affirm that CT is, to some extent, an independent psychological construct, distinct from the traditional aptitudes; and to wonder about the unexplained remaining 73%. In summary, this first work empirically corroborated the conceptualization of CT as mainly a problem-solving ability, linked with g or fluid intelligence; a fact that had been theoretically stated by many other authors in earlier years (Brennan and Resnick, 2012, Lye and Koh, 2014, Wing, 2006, Wing, 2008). Moreover, these prior results are consistent with the framework just described by Kalelioglu et al. (2016), in which CT is defined as a complex and high-order thinking skill involved in problem-solving processes. Finally, they are also consistent with recent theoretical proposals (Ambrósio, Xavier, & Georges, 2014) linking CT to some components of the Cattel-Horn-Carroll (CHC) model of intelligence (McGrew, 2009, Schneider and McGrew, 2012), such as fluid reasoning (Gf), visual processing (Gv), and short-term memory (Gsm).
Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge no empirical research has been conducted studying the correlations between CT and non-cognitive variables. In order to fill this gap, we have already presented a preliminary study (Román-González, Pérez-González, Moreno-León, & Robles, 2016), which will be significantly extended along the present paper. Thus, in this work we specifically attempt to answer the following research questions:
▪RQ1: Does CT correlate with self-efficacy?▪RQ2: Does CT correlate with personality?▪RQ3: What are the personality profiles of top and low computational thinkers?▪RQ4: How much variance of CT can be explained by personality?
These questions are plausible since in the literature there is prior evidence of relationships between cognitive and non-cognitive variables, such as self-efficacy and personality, which are described in 2.2 Self-efficacy, 2.3 ‘Big Five’ model of personality. In addition, answering these research questions, even tentatively, is relevant as it may contribute to extend the nomological network of CT and consolidate its consistency as an emerging psychological construct. Finally, the answers may help to understand better which non-cognitive factors underlie CT, in order to promote and optimize its development in educational settings.
