The security of critical services has been granted for a long time through the restriction of their communication networks, and the deployment of specific and proprietary technologies (protocols, devices, software, ...): the so called air-gap principle. However, the recent ongoing adoption of common technology (such as the Internet protocol), the increase in the number of interconnections between different types of networks, and the emergence of sophisticated cyber-attacks [23] have jeopardized this security strategy and have increased the need of novel standardization and technical practices.
Therefore, it is not possible to solve security issues by considering only a single Critical Infrastructure (CI) (i.e., essential service or domain) but it is fundamental to consider a set of interconnected infrastructures, such as power grid, water distribution network, gas pipelines and telecommunications.
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition(SCADA) systems for CIs are frequently deemed vulnerable due to a mix of mindset preconceptions, design faults, and insecure technologies [2]. Moreover, Industrial Automation and Control Systems(IACS) security requires a domain-specific security approach that cannot be effectively achieved through the straightforward adoption of Information and Communications Technology(ICT) security mechanisms, tools and techniques [27].
Similarly, for Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)-based IACS security solutions, they were found to be lacking in scalability and cyber-physical awareness; moreover, they over-rely on ICT-oriented solutions. In fact, the Industrial Internet of Things(IIoT) requires the use of event processing mechanisms able to scale beyond the capacity of existing conventional Security Information and Event Management systems, which are frequently based on correlation engines with constrained or inexistent scaling capabilities. The complexity of protecting CIs is increased due to the existence of dependencies among physical equipment of essential services. The lack of awareness about the physical side effect of cyber-attacks compromises the supervision and/or the control of the physical processes thus leading to cascading effects. Finally, ICT-oriented approaches, such as perimeter-based defense, have proven to be inadequate to protect IACS [1].
It is also worth noticing that vulnerability management is usually a long process and many known vulnerabilities often remain unpatched for long periods even in CIs for many reasons. Mostly it is due to old legacy software/hardware and non automated updating procedures, but also for the need of a scheduled maintenance window, to avoid service disruption. During this period, CI’s owners continue to rely on vulnerable hardware and software. New solutions were devised to decrease the impact of cyber-threats through timely warning of the stakeholders and by forcing them to react in time [36]. However, the current vulnerability management system solutions still have several limitations. Most of them are related to specific sectors to grant their commercial sustainability and this is not applicable in the case of large infrastructures. Besides this, technical deployment constraints are often difficult to adapt to the specific CI environment. Finally, many solutions have limited connection to other security systems such as risk assessment and monitoring tools [6], [7]. Actual regulations, national standards, or guidelines are only suggestions and checklists for critical services providers. They do not supply a platform for detecting cyber-threats and evaluating their consequences on the physical process allowing also reaction capabilities [34].
An effective solution to ensure an adequate level of resiliency while accommodating the diffusion of new technologies into CIs, is presented in the Advanced Tools to assEss and mitigate the criticality of ICT compoNents and their dependencies over Critical InfrAstructures(ATENA) project [3]. It is focused on the definition of ad-hoc methodologies for controlling physical flow efficiency while improving resilience of interconnected CIs against Cyber-Physical attacks. These objectives are achieved by developing:

•New anomaly detection algorithms and risk assessment methodologies specifically designed for a distributed Cyber-Physical environment. Traditional computer security focuses on how to protect information. Here, a novel perspective is adopted, considering how attacks affect estimation, control and monitoring algorithms, how they affect the plant, and the decision made by the human operators.•A suite of integrated ICT networked components for detection and reaction in presence of adverse events. They are devised to define a resilient control system according to the security-by-detection paradigm. The Software Defined Network (SDN) is used to redirect the malicious network traffic and to protect the system.
The ATENA architecture, presented in this paper, provides a framework for the development of these tools in a scalable and distributed way to cope with the IIoT challenges.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents previous related works, Section 3 illustrates the overall ATENA system architecture, while Sections 4 – 6 detail each component. Finally, in Section 7 the discussion on future developments is presented and the conclusions are drawn.
