The objective of this paper is to bridge the fields of computer science and building science, and suggest new methods for exploring field-based datasets in order to make sense of its complexities, and quickly identify patterns of performance that would help focus subsequent, more detailed statistical analysis. In particular, the methodology uses decision tree induction, and shows how to choose a set of feature attributes relevant for thermal performance analysis.
Field data of building performance can often be messy, suffering in part from issues inherent to sensors such as data incompleteness and inconsistency, presence of erroneous records, and inaccurate values. It thus requires extensive data pre-processing for the subsequent analysis to be effective and meaningful. Pre-processing of monitored data aims to improve data quality and assess its “fitness for use”, which is a measure of data quality that assesses if the dataset is suitable for the purpose of the analysis [1]. Data quality comprises multiple factors including accuracy, completeness, consistency, timeliness, believability and interpretability. As a first step, data-cleaning tasks are typically applied to the datasets to isolate missing values, smooth noisy points while identifying outliers, and correct inconsistencies in the data. The subsequent step requires making sense of the dataset in order to proactively assess its fitness for use with reference to the overall research objectives. This process is particularly crucial for complex field datasets where the monitoring process might involve multiple buildings and span across multiple years. Moreover, building monitoring can be affected by a variety of limitations including technological issues connected to the deployed sensors, constraints imposed by the building owners and occupants, etc. Once the monitoring is finished, and before analysis begins, it is necessary to check if and how these limitations might have affected the dataset, and eventually the analysis results.
The exploratory methods presented in this paper utilized a dataset developed as part of the U.S.-India Joint Center for Building Energy Research & Development (CBERD) [2]. This dataset was collected during a complex field study involving multiple buildings located in different climate zones in India, where each adopted a different set of climate responsive strategies. The broad purpose of the field study was to investigate the performance of climate responsive buildings in terms of their indoor thermal environments, the potential impact on occupant thermal comfort, and the effectiveness of combining both natural ventilation and low-energy mechanical systems in “mixed mode” buildings. The monitoring process included instrumenting each building with multiple sensors, collecting data about air temperature, relative humidity, surface temperatures for selected façades, as well as microclimate information from a weather station close to the site. Each building was monitored for one year and the monitoring process was specifically tailored to each building's specific passive strategies and design features. The monitoring of the whole set of buildings lasted for several years and created a wide, multi-faceted, complex dataset. Future publications will focus specifically on lessons learned about the building performance. This paper is intended to use some of the data simply as a vehicle to explore some of the unique analysis methods one might use when faced with complex datasets such as this one.
