There is currently much ongoing research in mobile health, body-area sensor networks, and wearable computing to sense human body and behaviors. As one of the most important organs, the human brain has drawn special attention. While there is an established category for Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI), the full capabilities of these systems are yet to be realized, especially using portable devices only. Our vision of the future includes brain sensing systems that have a profound impact on daily life. Users will be able to read each others thoughts and emotions directly as a completely new method of communication. However, the first step to building such systems lies in our ability to extract information from the brain using current portable technology. This step allows us to begin understanding how the brain functions, and what is required to interface with it. In this paper we strive to build a system that senses the human brain using portable BCI devices. Our goal is to maximize the bit-rate between the brain and the physical world.
A BCI is a direct communication between the brain and an external device. For instance, a person who cannot physically use a keyboard may “type” by simply thinking of typing or gazing at a computer monitor. For example, the great physicist Stephen Hawking is cooperating with some scientists in NeuroVigil Inc. to establish faster communication through BCI technology (Low and Hawking,). Furthermore, BCI applications are recently emerging for a wide range of areas, such as gaming, entertainment, and secure channel. The information source used in BCIs is electroencephalography (EEG), which records the electrical activities of the brain through the use of sensors along the scalp. Several EEG signals, such as event-related synchronization/desynchronization, slow cortical potential, P300, visual evoked potential, and steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP), are commonly harvested for BCI control. Among these, SSVEP has received much attention due to several well-known advantages, such as high information transfer rate, short training time and simple system configuration. SSVEP is a brain response from the visual cortex in the rear scalp, induced by a repetitive visual stimulus that flickers at a constant frequency. In an SSEVP-based BCI, stimuli with different frequencies are simultaneously displayed on a monitor, with each stimulus associated with a distinct symbol. To choose a symbol, a user gazes at the corresponding stimulus for a certain time, during which EEG signals are collected. By processing the collected EEG signal, the stimulus that the user is gazing at can be determined, so is the symbol the user intends to choose.
Current SSVEP-based BCIs, however, are built with specially designed devices. These devices are non-portable due to their huge size and unwieldy wired sensors, and mainly utilized in laboratories. Furthermore, these devices are very expensive; for example, Biosemi ActiveTwo devices (Biosemi ActiveTwo,) range from $20,000 to $100,000. Therefore, they are not suitable for personal daily use. In this paper, we aim to build a high rate SSVEP-based BCI system with portable devices, which has been seldom investigated so far. Our BCI system consists of an EEG device and a laptop or a smartphone, which are portable and friendly for personal use. The EEG device is an Emotiv headset (Emotiv Epoc,), which costs only about $200. We believe headsets like this will become even cheaper if they are manufactured in mass.
When using portable devices, we find that the experience of portable devices is much different from that of expensive devices in many aspects, and we encounter many challenges and difficulties. As a result, we cannot apply existing work directly on BCI systems using portable devices only. First, compared to expensive devices, the cheap devices have much less sensors and sample at much lower rate. Second, due to the quality of the sensors and the loose contact, the EEG signal is much noisier and weaker than that from expensive devices. Third, during our experiments, we have found that some existing principles with expensive devices are not valid for cheap devices, which substantially complicates the entire system design. Finally, there are many factors that affect the bit rate, and it is non-trivial to find the optimal configuration of these factors to boost the bit rate. In summary, it is very challenging to build a high bit rate BCI system with portable devices.
We have managed to overcome these challenges and built a prototype of SSVEP-based high bit rate BCI system. In summary, we make the following contributions:
•We have built a prototype of the SSVEP-based BCI system with portable devices and have demonstrated the feasibility of obtaining high bit rate with such system.•We have designed a novel optimization framework to process the weak and noisy raw data, which boosts the bit rate notably.•We have identified and solved several challenges that come along only with portable devices.•We have investigated several factors that affect the bit rate, and figured out the best configuration through extensive experiments.•We have extensively evaluated our BCI system. Our system can achieve a bit rate of 54.8 bits/min on a computer monitor, which is very close to the best result from expensive devices and almost doubles that from similar devices, and 17.3 bits/min on a smartphone screen, which is the first work of such.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We review the related work in Section 2, and the architecture of our BCI system in Section 3. Section 4 presents the result by implementing an existing work directly, showing that direct re-implementation dose not work with cheap devices, and describes three main challenges. 5 Data processing, 6 Frequency assignment, 7 Configuration design solve these three challenges, respectively. We present the evaluation in Section 8 and conclude the paper in Section 9.
