Many developing countries depend on other countries for more than 80% of their electricity import. Taking the Palestinian Territories as an example; although they have the lowest total energy consumption in the region (0.79 MW h/inhabitant) but they have the highest energy cost in the Middle East. On the other hand, the Palestinian Territories, as many of other developing counties, have high solar energy potential, about 3000 sunshine hours per year. This encourages the research to take advantage of the solar energy for different applications [1, 2].
Photovoltaic (PV) panels are one of the main sources for power generation from solar energy. For solar electricity providers, it is essential to accurately predict solar power generation for demand planning in an electrical grid. However, this prediction is a challenging task because solar power generation is weather dependent. So, with the incremental power generation from solar energy, the prediction of PV panel's power generation has gained big attention [3].
In the literature, different numerical models have been developed to forecast weather and solar power. Among them, Heinemann et al. [4] presented different approaches to solar irradiance forecasting on different time scales. Maini et al. [5] developed and implemented a system for forecasting maximum and minimum temperatures for 12 locations in India based on the perfect prog method (PPM) approach. However, these models require a robust computing system and afterwards they proved to be unstable in handling the various changes in weather conditions.
Besides the conventional methods [4, 5, 6], there are some more advanced techniques like the genetic algorithms, and the artificial neural networks (ANNs), which has the ability to represent the nonlinear systems with high efficiency [7, 8]. With neural networks (NNs), any continuous nonlinear function can be approximated with one or more hidden layers. More, NNs have a parallel architecture that is composed of many processing elements with a simple structure, which is useful for implementation using embedded systems.
This give rise to the usage of NNs to forecast various criteria [9]. In [10, 11] the authors developed an ANN model to predict solar radiation. The results showed the feasibility of this approach for forecasting solar radiation. Chen et al. [12] amended the ANN to forecast the power generated from solar panels. Devi et al. [13] applied the ANN for temperature forecasting, and find out that this model can be used in complex modeling for different factors. The authors in [14, 15] mentioned that feedforward neural network (FFNN) is the best model of neural network for real-time forecasting due to the least training time and fast response. In [16, 17] the authors applied four types of neural networks for prediction of photovoltaic power output. Their research was based on FFNN, general regression neural network (GRNN), recursive neural network (RNN), and a gamma memory (GM). Based on their research, the FFNN has shown a better performance comparing with the other topologies.
Although there has been research into the prediction of some parameters such as temperature and solar radiation [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21], there has not been comprehensive research into the hardware implementation of the neural network in PV-systems [22, 23, 24]. Mekki et al. [25] implemented a PV panel based on ANNs and VHDL language. They used two hidden layers during their implementation. The used ANN network is not small, which make it unsuitable to run on low cost microcontroller as this will increased the execution time. The implementation using VHDL assumes the use of an FPGA. Although FPGAs are known for their speed due to parallel execution, their cost and power consumption is considered high when compared to low cost microcontrollers. Baptista et al. [26], also used FPGA for implementing ANNs to predict the energy production of a photovoltaic system. The results show that the PV panel can be accurately modeled based on data from a nearby meteorological installation and the hardware implementation produces precise results. Algarín et al. [27], implemented a low-cost maximum power point tracking system based on neural network inverse model controller. Results demonstrated that the proposed implemented model tracks the maximum power point of a PV panel in a more efficient way than the traditional P&O algorithm. Their main novelty was the use of the inverse neural network based on the low cost platform with a buck converter as a control device.
In summary, all previous studies have shown that most of the implementation tryouts tackled only one type of PV panels with no regard to different manufactured PV panels. In addition, these tryouts uses expensive systems, such as FPGAs. In this paper, we present a PV panel's output power model based on small artificial neural network. We also present a real and efficient hardware implementation of the model on low cost microcontroller. Moreover, we show that the used approach has the ability to model heterogeneous PV (HPV) panels' output power with very high accuracy and fast response time. This allows the hardware implementation to be used as a module in a real-time PV panels monitoring system. The paper is organized as follows: section 2 discusses the mathematical model of the PV panel and presents the database used in this study. Section 3 provides the ANN architecture used to model the HPV panels; also, it describes the implementation of the HPV-ANN topology using the ATmega2560 microcontroller. Results and discussion are presented in section 4. Finally, section 5 concludes the work.
