Nowadays, robots can be found in numerous applications, replacing monotonous human work that allows us to concentrate on higher challenging tasks. It is highly remarkable that robots are increasingly entering everyday lives whether in industry, economy or even in education. Several associations, such as the Japan Robotics Association (JRA), the United Nation Economic Commission (UNEC), and the International Federation of Robotics, have reported the growing number of personal and social robots in education [1], [2]. Thus, it is a key competence to know how robotic platforms operate, how to control them, what kind of capabilities they have and where possible future applications could have a technological breakthrough. As such, it is of high importance to study robotic platforms, their hardware and software capabilities, and innovative future applications already in schools, and integrate them to regular educational classes at different age groups. Moreover, robots may play a main role to provide students the ability of coupling their theoretical concepts with real-world experiments of STEM1 [1], [2], [3]. STEM jobs are highly valued with a high number of job positions available.2 It is also projected that the number of STEM jobs will grow 13 percent between 2017 and 2027 [6]. Thus, STEM is an important economic driver, and it is of high responsibility to offer additional skills that motivate and encourage already students to make their educational decision [7]. As indicated in [6], [7], [8], [9], educational robotics can be a promising tool for STEM engagement.
Robotic platforms have different kinds of capabilities locally on-board, including processing, communication, sensing, and acting. Hence, they are able to operate in a dynamic and autonomous way. Typically, there is not a single robot performing one task: multiple robots process the retrieved data locally, exchange the data, and thus collaborate. Systems of robots are even more complex, hard to design and to control. One approach is to understand such a system as a swarm of robots. To handle the complexity in swarm robotics, nature can serve as inspiration. Natural systems have evolved over millennia to master NP-hard problems [12]. We can summarize the following typical properties that characterize a swarm [13]:
•Simple, relatively homogeneous individuals with basic capabilities,•Simple rules are executed locally,•No central control, and•Emerging behavior through their interactions.
Using swarm robotics platforms in education have following advantages over single-robot platforms:
1.Affordable: Typically, swarm robotic platforms are smaller and cheaper. The total cost should be reasonably low, less than a 100 Euro. Otherwise, equipping a full class of, e.g., 20 students, becomes financially infeasible.2.Swarm-oriented: To support swarm robotics, many robots communicate locally and cooperate to achieve a common goal. This also strengthens the collaboration among students.3.Customizable: For example, additional sensors can be added to support different requirements.4.Open-platform: The related information for a platform (incl. source code and layout plan) should be freely available in order to allow interested people to use, reproduce or modify (also outside of the classroom).5.Easy to use: It is always important to provide a user-friendly programming of robotic functions to motivate students.
Robots that have been developed to be suitable for teaching children of different age can be categorized as the following:
1.Robots without a written programming language (e.g. BeeBots3): The programming is done using buttons or symbols. They can already be used by preschoolers, because programming them does not require reading. Nevertheless, the possibilities are very limited.2.Robots with a block-based programming language: The language prevents for instance syntax and typing errors and lets the students first learn about concepts (control structures, variables, etc.) and semantics.3.Robots with a text-based programming language: The robots can be programmed with a limited amount of commands. Some educational robots can be programmed using both a block-based or text-based programming language (e.g. LEGO Mindstorms).
When teaching students how to program, there are two basic approaches: Some start with a visual/block-based programming language and later switch to a text-based programming language. However, the decision of which approach should be used is dependent on the age of the students and the purpose of the course/workshop. Both approaches can foster learning gains and interests in programming and computer science courses [14].
In this work, we study the effect of using Spiderino platform [15], a lowcost platform for swarm research, in education. The research was guided mainly by two research questions, which are Did the workshops directly influence students’ interest in informatics (computer science)? and What benefits are perceived by teachers of the students? While the first research question has been attested high relevance and variants of that question have been treated in different settings [14], [15], the teachers’ perspective has been addressed fewer times, as for example in [16], [17], [18]. Addressing the stated research questions will thus contribute to highly relevant and well recognized issues in the field for STEM robotics education. For that matter, five practical workshops, 4 h each, have been done with 69 students, 13 to 18 years old. We investigate if using such a platform in the classroom influences students in terms of self-concept, their personal motivation, and interest in computer science. Our proposed approach measures such effects by conducting two, quite similar quantitative questionnaires that are filled out by students before and after each workshop. Furthermore, since in each workshop the teacher of the participated students monitors them during the workshop, a qualitative questionnaire is distributed for him/her to collect his/her feedback about the acceptance of students, their previous knowledge, and personal impression about the workshop.
The paper is organized as follows: The next section gives a review on related work. Section 3 presents the methodology and the used materials, with subsections introducing our research model and objectives along with the used instruments in this work. The results about the five workshops have been done are presented in Section 4. Conclusions are drawn in Section 5, together with discussion, limitations, threats to validity of the presented work, and an outline of future work.
