In Chinese language, new characters tends to be created by combining used words, while English words tend to be formed by absorbing new words, which constitutes a major difference between the formation of English words and Chinese words in modern times (Li, 2017). The significant differences between Chinese and English vocabulary make it difficult for Chinese native speakers to acquire English vocabulary. As for morphologically similar Chinese characters, different Chinese intonations couple with different meanings. Intonations exert a great influence on meanings of Chinese vocabulary, while English vocabulary semantic inferences have less to do with intonations. Thus, it is reasonable to find that Chinese native speakers feel it hard to learn English vocabulary which relies heavily on morphology and alphabetic sequence rather than intonations. The distinctive comparisons of Chinese characters are affected by the number of these orthographic units and, for “different” judgments, by the proportion of mismatching units, but not by the number of individual strokes (Chen, Allport, & Marshall, 1996). English, alphabetically spelled, is distinguished by different combination of morphemes.
Vocabulary acquisition plays an important role in language learning and teaching. Rapid development of science and technology has greatly changed the settings of English language learning and teaching in recent years. The popularity of mobile applications has exerted a far-reaching influence on traditional language learning and teaching approaches (Rezaei, Mai, & Pesaranghader, 2014).
English vocabulary, sourcing from various languages such as French, German, and Chinese, is large in its range, which increases difficulties in acquisition. Learning English is in need of proper learning strategies in order to increase English language competence of learners (Meschyan & Hernandez, 2002). English language learners have attempted to adopt a number of learning strategies, as well as cognitive approaches in the process of English acquisition (Magogwe & Oliver, 2007).
As an important complement to learning strategies and cognitive approaches, mobile technologies such as PDA, laptops and smart phones, have played an increasingly effective role in English language learning. Mobile applications made vocabulary learning less difficult while more convenient. Therefore, this study aims to identify the influence of mobile applications, i.e. serious games, on English vocabulary learning effectiveness.
The traditional pedagogical approach has been conducted in a classroom setting with a lecturer giving lectures and students sitting around to listen and take notes, where interaction between lecturers and students is deemed significant (O'Malley & McCraw, 1999). The traditional English vocabulary learning approach is operationally referred to as the English vocabulary learning method via traditional tools such as textbooks, vocabulary pronunciation and spelling drills, listening, speaking, reading and writing exercises, etc. Students are required to take notes and write down language points to enhance the memory.
The notion of “vocabularies” was used to mean “words” as opposed to a list of words with definitions or translations in a particular subject (see Oxford English Dictionary). Interactivity is operationally referred to as the learning process where learners share opinions with others, or learners gain knowledge via learning materials such as textbooks, mobile devices or notebooks. Effectiveness is operationally defined as the learning outcomes of English vocabulary. A serious game is defined as a computer application for which the original intention is to combine with consistency, serious aspects, in this case learning, with playful elements taken from the video game (Alvarez & Djaouti, 2011).
Similar to the traditional approach, in the serious game-enhanced approach, interaction between students, teachers, and learning materials is considered essential. We thus selected two serious games that are more interactivity-prone than the other pair in order to determine the role of interactivity in serious game-enhanced English vocabulary learning.
