Concept mapping is an important tool used in science learning. Constructing concept maps can help students assimilate and understand fundamental concepts and how they are related (Wandersee, Mintzes, & Novak, 1994). Nodes represent unique major concepts within a field or domain and connections are drawn between them to illustrate relationships between the concepts. Concept maps focusing on causal relationships between factors have been used to good effect in ecosystem science instruction (Biswas, Leelawong, Schwartz, Vye, & The Teachable Agents Group at Vanderbilt, 2005).
EcoMUVE is a multi-user virtual environment (MUVE)-based middle school science curriculum that supports learning about the causal dynamics of ecosystems through observation and exploration of a virtual pond ecosystem (Metcalf et al., 2011, Grotzer et al., 2013). As a culminating activity, each student team engages in construction of a concept map as a representation of their hypotheses about the ecological scenario, including the factors and causal relationships relevant to the phenomena. EcoMUVE supports situated learning (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989) where students conduct scientific inquiry while immersed in a richly represented ecological setting, collecting and analyzing data while interacting with virtual people and organisms.
EcoXPT builds on EcoMUVE to add authentic ecosystem science experiments for student to run to test their hypotheses (Dede et al., 2017, Grotzer et al., 2017). In EcoXPT, students investigate an ecological mystery, explore and observe the 3D virtual world, collect and analyze data, and conduct lab- and field-based experiments to generate confirming and disconfirming evidence for causal claims about the ecosystem. There are curricula that support the use of simulations in inquiry-based instruction (e.g., Kafai, Quintero, & Feldon, 2010) and there are tools that act as stand-alone virtual experiments for science learning (e.g., De Jong, Linn, & Zacharia, 2013). EcoXPT is different in that it embeds epistemologically authentic experimental tools within an immersive simulation of a pond ecosystem, allowing both to be used simultaneously, and for experimental evidence to be seamlessly be collected, stored, and made sense of within the immersive virtual environment.
With the massively increased amount of evidence students can generate via experimentation, the EcoXPT researchers wanted to design additional supports for concept mapping to promote deeper learning. In prior research with EcoMUVE, students were instructed to create a poster on paper that included their concept map, printouts of evidence from the virtual world, and a paragraph to explain their reasoning. It was often difficult for students to bring together all their ideas and evidence into this concept map poster. The format and organization of these final artifacts differed widely between groups with regards to overall structure and organization of the map, the presence or absence of labels on nodes and links, and individual drawing style. This heterogeneity made comparisons of findings difficult and time-intensive.
It was hypothesized that students in EcoXPT might be better supported with an integrated computer-based concept map tool. After review of relevant literature (as discussed below), a structured tool for concept mapping was developed that could scaffold students' construction to support deeper learning about the causal relationships in the system. By integrating the tool with the virtual environment, students might make deeper connections between data collection, data analysis, and hypothesis constructing activities than they would with pencil-and-paper concept maps not embedded in the virtual world. Including pre-defined nodes might help students think about what factors are important to include and increase the salience of less-obvious causes. Rubric-based assessment of students' more consistent concept maps as a final representation of their groups' knowledge would be facilitated, giving teachers tools to assess student learning. Additionally, longitudinal data on how the concept map changed over time could reveal when certain novice-expert shifts took place or the processes by which specific misconceptions were disconfirmed.
This paper presents results of a Design-Based Research (DBR) study using EcoMUVE with a pilot version of the EcoXPT concept map tool to compare paper and electronic approaches to concept mapping. First, relevant literature on inquiry-based instruction, deeper learning, scaffolding, and concept mapping is explored. Next, an overview of the EcoMUVE curriculum is provided to elucidate how the virtual world is used by real classes. Concepts maps are evaluated for the presence or absence of certain structural features as well as their correctness as compared to an expert model. Finally, these findings are shown to inform the design of the next iteration of the curriculum.
