Advancements in computing power and data storage at modern chemical plants have led to the build-up of large amounts data in historical databases which store sensor measurements from past process behavior. Recent research has led to process monitoring strategies which use the large output of process data to improve process safety and quality enhancement [1], [2], [3]. Data based process monitoring requires minimal process knowledge to perform this task, in contrast to model based approaches that require detailed mechanistic models.
Unfortunately, many of the best methods for data-driven fault detection and diagnosis are “supervised”, meaning training these algorithms require data organized into labelled groups, such as “faulty” or “normal”. In real plants labelled data is seldom available and creating properly labelled databases for training process monitoring algorithms can be a time consuming task. This task requires an engineer to assess multiple operating states, a large amount of sensors, and data from months or years of operations. This task also requires familiarity with the process to judge which measurements are abnormal under differing operating regimes. Reducing the difficulty of this initial step could lower the time and money required to create advanced fault detection and diagnosis systems and expand their application in industrial settings.
“Unsupervised” learning strategies can help discover groups of data automatically that might otherwise be buried in the sheer volume of data. Approaches to unsupervised learning include dimensionality reduction and data clustering. Learning patterns and extracting information about a process from data clusters or dimensionally reduced data can be called knowledge discovery or data mining. In order to expand the application of supervised process monitoring algorithms, a software framework must be constructed to: a) separate fault data from normal data, b) train a model based on statistics or supervised learning techniques for fault detection and c) assist with the identification and management of new faults. Each of these tasks must be performed in a way that is simple to understand for non-experts in data science and easy to deploy on multiple units around a plant with low overhead. The normal-faulty knowledge extracted using unsupervised learning can then be exploited to train supervised learning approaches for process monitoring.
Unsupervised learning is a widely studied topic in computer science [4], [5] and chemometrics [6], but many clustering techniques beyond K-means have seen relatively limited application in process monitoring situations. Process data clustering has been previously shown to be effective in semiconductor manufacturing [7], high speed milling [8], and other applications [9], [10]. Research in chemical process monitoring has also used data clustering concepts. Wang and McGreavy [11] performed an early study in clustering chemical process data from a fluid catalytic cracker simulation with a Bayesian automatic classification method. Bhushan and Romagnoli [12] utilized a self-organizing map for unsupervised pattern classification and with an application on a CSTR model for a fault diagnosis problem. Strategies integrating principal components analysis (PCA) and data clustering have also seen success. Maestri et al. [13] developed a fault detection strategy for multiple operating states based on PCA supported by data clustering. Zhu et al. [14] used a k-ICA-PCA modelling method to capture relevant process patterns with an application to monitoring the Tennessee Eastman process. Singhal and Seborg [15] developed a modified K-means methodology to cluster multivariate time-series data from similarity factors based on PCA. Barragan et al. [16] used a clustering strategy based on a wavelet transform and novel similarity metric to cluster data from the Tennessee Eastman process, but only study one process fault. Thornhill et al. [17] studied an approach for visualizing and clustering data based on PCA and hierarchical clustering.
This study uses traditional techniques for dimensionality reduction (DR) and data clustering from the computer science literature to extract faulty data and knowledge about process states from chemical process databases. Instead of focusing on how to detect and diagnose faults, this research focuses on how to create the data sets used to train conventional supervised process monitoring algorithms. We compare how effectively combinations of DR and data clustering techniques recreate fault labels on two case studies: the benchmark Tennessee Eastman process and an industrial separation tower.
An advantages of the workflow we propose is that it is relatively simple to use because each DR and clustering combination requires the specification of only one or two parameters and techniques. Additionally, we expand on previous research by considering innovative and proven clustering techniques such as DBSCAN, BIRCH, mean shift clustering that have been widely applied in computer science but are untested on fault data discovery. We also study the role of DR because of the prominent role it plays in visualization and feature extraction. As an example, Ding [18] explores the close relationship between unsupervised learning and DR and provides a theoretical basis for the use of PCA to enhance K-means clustering. The DR techniques considered include not only several techniques already adapted to fault detection and process monitoring (principal components analysis (PCA) [19], independent component analysis [20], kernel PCA [21]), but also non-linear manifold preserving techniques like Isomap and spectral embedding.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes our overall approach to data mining; Sections 3 and 4 introduce dimensionality reduction and data clustering respectively, providing a brief introduction to the techniques used in this study; Section 5 discusses how we decided the parameters of the DR and clustering techniques used; Section 6 considers a case study on the Tennessee Eastman process where unsupervised learning is leveraged to discover faults from sets of data; Section 7 studies the clustering of a real event on an industrial scale separation tower; Section 8 contains a brief review of the challenge of time series clustering; and Section 9 concludes and summarizes this research.
