Time series lie at the heart of population biology and are increasingly used in conservation applications such as adaptive management of marine stocks and population viability analysis. Using traditional linear modelling approaches, abundance can be modeled as a function of covariates such as time (capturing trends in abundance) or environmental conditions thought to control survivorship or reproduction (Geissler and Noon, 1981). While population models are often driven by the causal mechanisms underlying population change, this is neither necessary nor always sufficient for precise forecasts of future abundance (Shmueli, 2010). In fact, forecast uncertainty for covariates can contribute to forecast uncertainty for abundance, an important consideration when building population models from which future abundance or population viability assessments will be derived (Dietze, 2017).
Phenomenological approaches have many advantages, not the least of which is a reliance on the data in hand rather than a priori knowledge of the underlying ecological or biological system, the need for which narrows the scope of inquiry only to domain experts intimately familiar with the system. Autoregressive-(integrated)-moving-average (AR[I]MA) models have been used for ecological time series for some time (Goldman et al., 1989; Ives et al., 2010), whereas machine learning algorithms like random forests (Breiman, 2001; Cutler et al., 2007; Prasad et al., 2006) or generalized boosted regression models (Elith et al., 2008; Friedman, 2002) are more recent additions to the population ecologists' toolbox. So-called ‘deep-learning’ methods (e.g., long short-term memory neural nets) have shown great promise in various ‘big data’ applications (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) but are rarely applicable to animal population time series. Understanding which of these tools are useful and practical for population time series is a growing challenge.
While several excellent public databases exist (e.g., Global Population Dynamics Database) with population time series that ecologists might use to explore different time series methods (Ward et al., 2014), there are relatively few opportunities to test and compare the forecasting accuracy of time series models. This is partly because model development often comes after data collection has ceased. It is also, in part, a reflection on the discipline of population ecology, which lags other disciplines such as terrestrial ecosystem, biogeochemical, or climate modelling in terms of formalized procedures for model comparison and validation. To address this shortfall in the context of Antarctic ecology, we developed the Mapping Application for Penguin Populations and Projected Dynamics (MAPPPD; Humphries et al., 2017), an open-access database of all known data on the breeding abundance and distribution of Antarctic penguins (Adélie [Pygoscelis adeliae Hombron & Jacquinot], gentoo [P. papua Forster], chinstrap [P. Antarctica Forster] and emperor [Aptenodytes forsterii]). While far smaller in taxonomic scope than the Global Population Dynamics Database, MAPPPD was assembled specifically to assist in conservation planning and management of Antarctic resources and, being geographically complete for all known penguin breeding locations south of 60 °S, is one of the most spatially and temporally comprehensive sets of population census data for any taxonomic group.
One of the species included in MAPPPD is the Adélie penguin which, having a circumpolar distribution and widely considered one of Antarctica's ‘canaries-in-the-coal mine’, is by far the most well studied of the Antarctic penguins (Ainley, 2002; Ainley et al., 2010; Boersma, 2008). For at least the last 40 years, researchers have debated why Adélie penguin populations have been changing and, to a lesser degree, what drives interannual fluctuations in abundance at the breeding colony (Che-Castaldo et al., 2017 and references therein). Accordingly, several major efforts to model the population dynamics of Adélie penguins have been developed (Ainley et al., 2010; Che-Castaldo et al., 2017; Fraser et al., 1992; Jenouvrier et al., 2009; Lynch et al., 2012; Lynch and Larue, 2014; Trivelpiece et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2001). Reflecting the logistical challenges of collecting census data in the Antarctic, population models are often parameterized using data from a small number of neighboring populations with a focus on understanding past events rather than predicting future abundance. Unfortunately, Adélie penguin dynamics are spatially heterogeneous because the Antarctic is comprised of many disparate biogeographic zones and penguins breeding in each region face different bottlenecks on their survival and reproduction. Adélie penguin populations are increasing in the Ross Sea region and in Eastern Antarctica (Che-Castaldo et al., 2017; Larue et al., 2013; Lyver et al., 2014) even as they decline in parts of the Antarctic Peninsula (Cimino et al., 2016; Lynch et al., 2012). These disparate trends are further complicated by significant inter-annual fluctuations in abundance not easily tied to environmental drivers (Che-Castaldo et al., 2017).
While much attention has been paid to the Adélie penguin, even less is known about the detailed population dynamics of gentoo or chinstrap penguins, despite the relative ease of access afforded by their concentration on the Antarctic Peninsula. Gentoo penguin abundance has surged in recent decades, while chinstrap penguin abundance has notably declined at most sites (Lynch et al., 2012; Trivelpiece et al., 2011). As with the Adélie penguin, these long-term trends have emerged over decades amidst significant year-to-year variability in abundance at each site, which challenges short-term forecasts even where trends are unambiguous. Until MAPPPD, there was no dynamic central database for the abundance of Antarctic penguins, which has precluded the development of models to understand how the individual results emerging from different research groups fit together into an integrated understanding of penguin population biology.
Despite years spent modelling penguin population dynamics, we (GH, CC, HL) were frustrated by the relatively poor performance of models built using our own biological knowledge of the system. Decades of analysis by the community had produced a suite of models with reasonable explanatory power, but there has been no way to compare different population models in a quantitative setting or explore the extent to which inferred causal drivers in one region could be transferred to another. Moreover, significant unexplained process error made it difficult to forecast abundance for any given breeding population (Che-Castaldo et al., 2017) and, as such, there was no way to link a dynamical model for abundance with long-term predictions of suitability under climate change (Cimino et al., 2016). This led us to question our own methods and whether there were other, perhaps newer, approaches available that we should be using. To address these concerns and generate a larger suite of models that could be used to understand the impact of model uncertainty, we leveraged the opportunities afforded by a data science competition.
Data science competitions are an up-and-coming trend among data scientists. These competitions offer prizes to teams who can solve a problem, the results of which are typically assessed by predictions on held-out subsets of the data. While their popularity has vastly increased alongside the growth of data science as a discipline, competitions for time series modelling are not a new idea. In this regard, Weigand and Gershenfeld's (1994) classic description of a modelling competition from 1991 remains surprisingly relevant; while computing has changed radically over the last 25 years (datasets no longer have to be distributed by floppy disk, for one), we are still facing many of the very same difficulties building good predictive time series models as we always have (e.g., non-stationarity and non-linearity, missing data) despite a surging interest in ‘data science’ and prediction algorithms based on machine learning. Online platforms such as Driven Data (http://www.drivendata.org), Kaggle (http://www.kaggle.com), and Top Coder (http://www.topcoder.com) engage data scientists and other quantitative experts from around the world in building models for a combination of prize money, recognition, practice, and real-world impact. The challenges enable participants to try out thousands of models for a given problem using whatever backgrounds, skills, and approaches they see fit, with the solutions that perform best (by predicting held-out data) rising to the top of the leaderboard. This approach represents a parallelization of effort and vastly improves the efficiency of the modelling process, as many models are developed and tested simultaneously (analogous to multiple cores of a computer working on the same problem). Examples of such competitions can be found throughout scientific literature (e.g., Ben Taieb and Hyndman, 2014; Glaeser et al., 2016; Narayanan et al., 2011). Such competitions offer the ability to explore new, and potentially better, ways to approach modelling problems (Bull et al., 2016; Carpenter, 2011).
Antarctic penguin population ecology is a good test case for harnessing the power of data science competitions and community modelling in ecology; while the data are spatially comprehensive (including all 660 known penguin colonies in the Antarctic), their shortcomings (e.g., only 30–40 years in length, lots of missing data) are stereotypical for time series of animal populations. Given the ongoing debate regarding key drivers of penguin population dynamics in Antarctica and the urgent need to understand how management of fisheries may impact penguin populations, the need for better time series models is clear.
The goal of this paper is to describe a data science competition focused on population time series modelling of Antarctic penguin abundance, identify and describe which techniques performed well and should be considered for other ecological applications, and demonstrate the application of ensemble-based approaches for ecological prediction. We will discuss how relatively “domain agnostic” (i.e. general) statistical approaches might be used for rapid assessment even as information required for more biologically-motivated mechanistic models is being collected, and how data science competitions can vastly expand our understanding of model uncertainty in ecological and conservation contexts.
