It is a big challenge for people to find an appropriate travel path in a strange environment. Nowadays, users usually learn about the surroundings with navigation instrument. It is helpful to find destination and the spatial position relationship between the current position and the destination. This method is convenient and the applications of navigation system become widespread. Most of current navigation systems deliver navigation information with visual feedback or audio feedback. However, visual and audio channels are often occupied with the first task (driving the car or walking on the street). It is dangerous to distract users’ attention from traffic information (traffic lights or foot-passengers). Therefore, vibration feedback is proposed to supply navigation information in this scenario.
Tactile vibration has been used to provide haptic feedback on touch screen equipment [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. When users touch the target on the screen (such as buttons, drop-down menus, etc.), the vibration motors of device will produce vibration feedback. This method can help users determine whether they touch the target object or improve the interactive experience. The expression of vibration technology is an effective mode of human–computer interaction and information delivery methods [6]. As an important delivery channel of information, it is very important to improve the shortcomings of visual and audio feedback in specific conditions. For example, when users are in a noisy environment and public places, the navigation voice supplied from navigation system and other sounds of surroundings mix together. It is hard for users to receive the information clearly. When users walk on the street with navigation instruments, it is dangerous and hard for users to stare at screen and follow the navigation path for a long time. Even for a short time, the limited navigation information is delivered to the user. When headphones are used to supply audio feedback, it will limit audio feedback from the surrounding environment. A recent report [11] shows that 62% of smartphone users under the age of 30 encountered serious car accident case when they used mobile phones and ignored traffic information. The much more important fact is 43% of people know this potential threat but still do that. It is necessary and important to drag user's attention from screen to the street with “strong” and “intuitive” feedback. In this case, the use of visual and auditory navigation system has been greatly restricted. And an auxiliary navigation system can be of great help, such as driving tasks [12], [13], [14] or pedestrian navigation tasks [15], [16]. Vibration feedback technology is a good choice for the auxiliary navigation system. The vibration feedback technology can not only help people with normal vision, but also have great help for people who have a disability. This technology can also be used in many ways, such as driving, walking, and other navigation applications.
We found a navigation path by a hand-held device to delivery navigation path information to their user. We adopt this kind of form mainly because of the current mobile device and the widespread existence in our daily life, and that can make this kind of technology have great adaptability. Our navigation system includes two types of feedback: speech (semantic) feedback and vibration feedback. They are supplied to users and provided path information between two exact locations.
We design and implement a vibration navigation system, which provides navigation path information to users by vibration feedback in many different situations. Our navigation system is composed of a mobile device with a touch screen and a hardware device that generates vibration feedback. This device supplies vibration feedback with 4 vibration motors and they are mounted on the four corners. When the user takes the device, it can generate different vibration modes according to the different positions of the palm and fingers.
In this paper, we first discuss the research on the information related to the mobile touch screen device and the vibration feedback technology. Secondly, we will describe our prototype system and various vibration modes in this project. Thirdly, we will conduct two experiments to detect whether a user can accurately distinguish different vibration modes with different walking speeds. Finally, we summarize the whole paper and give the limitation and future work.
