For most professionals of the Earth Sciences, fieldwork plays a relevant role. Since outdoor activities require to construct accurate and precise records, fieldwork demands the use of specialized equipment. Moreover, when it comes to complex processes involving observation and interpretation such as geological folds analysis, on-site activities requires a careful study, persistence and experience. Field sketches are commonly used to assist during the thinking process. Nevertheless, folds analysis and interpretation of features become a really challenging activity even for experienced professionals (Coe, 2010).
This scenario becomes an excellent opportunity to incorporate immersive technologies. Thanks to the tremendous increase of availability to mobile hardware, it is possible to use technologies such as Augmented Reality (AR) in the field. Nowadays it is usual that professionals carry smart phones or tablets in addition to their work specific devices. AR opens up the possibility to complement fieldwork performed by geologists complementing the real environment with virtual or digital information (Milgram et al., 1994; Azuma, 1997). This technology allows to visualize information in the actual context where it is needed. For instance, pointing the device to the desired location could trigger contextual information. In fact, AR not only provides passive data exploration, but it also allows to generate new on-site information (e.g. storing or recording geo-tagged field data). Connecting the real world to a virtual representation allows to provide digital information seamlessly integrated to the environment, and it also helps to intuitively interpret and analyze the spatial relationships among data (Schall et al., 2009).
AR has been applied to the Geosciences in terms of geological visualization of data in the field (Lee et al., 2015; Pierdicca et al., 2016). Examples of it are its use for interactive geological maps visualization (Westhead et al., 2012) or geological subsurface structures (Mathiesen et al., 2012). It also has been used to provide specialized software to visualize and interact with borehole data (Lee et al., 2015). Nevertheless, this context is still in lack of a comprehensive framework shaped from scratch to be extensible and adaptable to different fieldwork applications. An AR application that could be used to complement the geologist fieldwork should exhibit enough flexibility to be adapted to the current needs. For instance, constraints such as no internet access or GSM coverage must be taken into account.
Based on a multidisciplinary work between professionals of Geosciences and Computer Sciences, an AR system named ARGeo1 was designed and developed. The system is aimed to operate in mobile Android devices and its design allows to easily extend its functionality tailored to the needs of the community. Moreover, we developed the system according to a case study focused on fieldwork observation and analysis of geological folds (i.e. planar orientation data collection). In addition to the basic virtual elements such as Points of Interest (PoI), we showed how it can be specialized to provide dedicated features to this context. We proposed an interactive dipping plane measurement from distant points of view and a back-in-time visualization of previous recorded positions, to help to understand the spatial relationships among the recorded samples.
ARGeo was evaluated under a pilot study with geologists, using a Samsung Galaxy Tab S with a 8.4” display. These studies reflect the potential of ARGeo and also provide useful information for possible upgrades, as well as the future research lines which the proposed system enables. The main contributions of the manuscript can be summarized as follows. (1) An extensible framework-based system for AR applications oriented to geological fieldwork. (2) The specialized features to assist the geologist in the interpretation and analysis of fold structures.
