Simulations are used in a plethora of diverse research domains — from the life sciences through earth sciences over physics to social sciences. Corresponding data creation and analysis on a large scale demands for high-performance computing (HPC) infrastructures to efficiently perform such tasks or to even enable them at all in a reasonable timeframe. The demand is met with a wide range of resources in on-campus, national or international infrastructures such as EGI  [1] and PRACE  [2] in Europe or XSEDE  [3] in the US. However, the access to such resources as well as processing simulations often require several steps via command line. Domain researchers are in general not IT specialists though and may prefer graphical user interfaces to be able to focus on their research topic instead of investing time in becoming familiar with utilizing a certain infrastructure. Science gateways offer per definition an end-to-end solution with a central point of entry to distributed data, job and/or workflow management across organizational boundaries, especially increasing the usability of applications in complex infrastructures. Science gateways have evolved into a new era since 2014 when providers of distributed computing infrastructures reported the first time that the computing and storage resources have been applied more often via science gateways than via command line  [4]. Part of this success can be credited to the development of reliable and mature science gateway frameworks over the last decade  [5]. Especially the rise of larger data amounts and the importance of workflows for user communities have been recognized and sophisticated data and workflow management solutions  [6] have found their way into such frameworks.
The challenges for developers of specific science gateways, which apply HPC infrastructures, are manifold: from intuitive user interfaces for the targeted research domain and security features through efficient job, data and workflow management to parallelization of applications employing parallel and distributed architectures. The knowledge about existing science gateway technologies and their distinctive features and strengths helps developers to select a suitable framework or API without the need to re-invent the wheel and to start the development of a specific solution from scratch.
In the area of science gateways several sources are available to get a well-informed impression of the state-of-the-art technologies and novel developments. Yearly science gateway workshops are established in Europe, the US and Australia, which are partnering and form an international platform to shape future directions for research, foster the exchange of ideas, standards and common requirements and push towards the wider adoption of science gateways in science  [7], [8]. The peer-reviewed publications of the workshops and the joint special issues reflect the international standard in this field  [9]. IEEE has also observed the importance of science gateways and the IEEE Technical Area on Science Gateways is a further source of information on events, publications and projects  [10]. Besides such community-driven resources, the US National Science Foundation (NSF)  [11] ​–as one of the main funding bodies in the US–has recognized the significance of science gateways and is funding the Science Gateways Community Institute  [12]. The Science Gateway Institute provides among other services an excellent contact for general information on projects and technologies  [8].
In the following section we will outline the background for science gateways, give an overview on and examples of science gateway technologies. We will present a suggestion for a checklist template for science gateway developers before we conclude with an outlook.
