Citizen science has the potential to improve communication and understanding relating to peoples' lives. As online maps increasingly became research tools (Fox & Hendler, 2011) simultaneously, the citizen science actions start to adopt WebGIS applications to support research fields such as ecology (e.g. Bell et al., 2008, Dickinson et al., 2012, Kelling et al., 2009, Miller-Rushing et al., 2012) and urban studies (Cuff et al., 2008, Paulos et al., 2008). Furthermore, the increasing complexity of urban environments leads not only to the necessity of accurate and real-time spatial information, but also generates new mapping challenges. Besides interesting topics such as citizens well-being (Mac Kerron & Mourato, 2013), citizens emotion (Gartner, 2012, Hauthal and Burghardt, 2016, Pánek and Benediktsson, 2017) public preferences (Jankowski, Czepkiewicz, Młodkowski, & Zwoliński, 2016) or cityscape perception (Salesses, Schechtner, & Hidalgo, 2013) we focus our attention on compounded effect of clustering, excess and disorder of out of home (OOH) advertisements in urban landscapes, or visual pollution (definition discussed in Section 2.2).
It turns out that the visual pollution, described among others by Iveson (2012); Gomez (2013); Portella (2014) Bonenberg (2015) and Chmielewski, Lee, Tompalski, Chmielewski, and Wężyk (2016) so far haven't been taken up as a citizen science task. Moreover, there are no existing online tools for visualizing this urban phenomenon. As far as we are concerned, a cityscape visual pollution caused by OOH media needs to be investigated not only in the traditional way by landscape studies but also by citizens participating in research through WebGIS tools. To achieve this, we have designed a cloud-based WebGIS application to collect, analyse and display crowdsourced data of opinions on visual pollution. We also propose an original mapping approach to visual pollution with the use of basic urban structural units (discussed in Section 2.3) instead of a typical crowdsourced point symbol or heat map style.
The reliability (Brown, 2012, Brown et al., 2015, Goodchild and Li, 2012, Lechner et al., 2014, Sui et al., 2012) and usefulness (Jankowski et al., 2016, Laatikainen et al., 2015) of crowd sourced mapping platforms seems to be accepted, but there are still some technical and hardware infrastructure conditions that limit the widespread implementation of citizen science mapping applications. Typically, a GIS server based infrastructure, enterprise geodatabases, server-side software, and professional programming skills are necessary to launch real time analytical functions of crowdsourced mapping data (e.g. Auer et al., 2011, Bugs et al., 2010, Jankowski et al., 2016, Kalabokidis et al., 2013, Kulkarni et al., 2015). Alternatively a simpler way is to run citizen science on SaaS (software as service) WebGIG platform, but then the choice of the right SaaS platform can also be a cloudy task as SaaS providers offers price dependent capacity and very basic (if any) geoprocessing (some pros and cons of different SaaS solutions are highlighted in Section 2.4). Therefore, in the most recent works, Smith (2016) as well as Kong, Zhang, and Stonebraker (2015) pointed out the necessity of such analytical function as well as user friendly interface development as inherent for citizen science web map experiences. Contrary to typical Public Participation Geographic Information Systems (PPGIS), real time feedback to participants on how their data contributes to the analysis and final scientific outcomes is crucial for citizen science projects (Newman et al., 2012). To meet those three criteria (WebGIS geoprocessing, IT architecture simplicity, user friendly and intuitive interface) we have designed a cloud-based online mapping application supported by desktop GIS plugin.
Our solution is based on the Esri cloud SaaS platform - ArcGIS Online (AGOL), which ensures Webmap wizard, data storage and end-user friendly interface. A link between the cloud and desktop GIS is hosted by a Python script implemented as toolbox for ArcMap. Our toolbox allows the mapping application administrator to download, quality check, geoprocess and sum up the crowd sourced data and finally serve it back as updated Webmap content. Through this application architecture, citizens are able to receive immediate results on their collaborative efforts as citizen scientists.
The objective for this paper is to present a new solution for providing desktop GIS geoprocessing services through a cloud-based WebGIS using OOH media visual pollution in Lublin city (E. Poland) as a use case. The motivation behind this use case is to support the decision makers who are interested in public participation in urban design.
