The widely used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit the cyclooxygenase enzymes (COXs) and are clinically used as treatment of inflammation (chronic arthritis), pain (Limongelli et al., 2010), and cancers (Yadav et al., 2018). At least two isoforms of this cyclooxygenase has been determined: COX-1, or prostaglandin H1 synthase, and COX-2, or prostaglandin H2 synthase. These two enzymes are identical at about 60% in terms of amino acid alignment, and their catalytic regions are widely conserved (Bouaziz-Terrachet et al., 2010; Picot et al., 1994). The COX-1 called the “housekeeping’’ enzyme (Al-Turki et al., 2015), expressed in most tissues and controls physiological processes such as kidney function, gastric cytoprotection, and platelet aggregation, and it is stimulated by growth factors and hormones. COX-2 is an inducible enzyme (Yadav et al., 2018) its expression is tightly regulated and increases in response to pathological stresses, like inflammation (Sud’ina et al., 2008). The available evidence shows that the anti-inflammatory effect of the classical NSAIDs is due to the inhibition of COX-2, whereas the gastric toxicity side effect occur from the inhibition of the COX-1 (Kurumbail et al., 2001). The presence of a side pocket in COX-2 increases the active site volume about 20% compared to the active site of COX-1, this deference was considered as the key structural basis for COX-2 inhibition by selective NSAIDs.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs class such as coxibs are among the most important and widely used drugs in the world as a treatment of complicated and chronic pain (Hegazy and Ali, 2012). Although, these drugs cause several serious side effects, particularly gastrointestinal injury (Laine, 2001) and renal toxicity comprise fluid retention and hypertension, and NSAIDs may also precipitate a congestive heart failure and renal failure in some patients (Micklewright et al., 2003).
In the last years, natural compounds derived from different organisms have a great importance in pharmacology and medicine and have limited side effects. In recent years, many research groups showed a particular interest in the functional role of natural compounds. These compounds have historically been an important source of new medicines and new drugs. About half of all drugs used today are derived from natural sources (Kingston, 2011).
The ability to interact with various specific targets within the cell (like enzymes) was the inspiration factor of the majority of approved drugs from the Food and Drug Administration Agency (FDA) (Mishra and Tiwari, 2011).
Wherefore, in the recent years, several virtual databases comprising collections of natural compounds from different organisms have been developed and reported, and some of these have been exploited in virtual-screening studies (Harvey et al., 2015). These chemical databases are a libraries of compounds (thousands to millions), today over 10 million molecules (Bruno et al., 2007) can be obtained in special electronic format, such as the so called Structural Data file (.sdf) (Lagorce et al., 2011). Scientists can find many commercial or free databases and can have access to several free chemical collections. For example, Chinese Universal Natural Product Database (UNPD) contains more than 197,201 natural compounds from plants, animals and microorganisms. These compounds have been compared with FDA-approved drugs in many characteristics, and have been also explored for their potential use as chemical library for drug discovery using both experimental and computational results (Gu et al., 2013).
Generating a focused-library or target-oriented library of natural compounds can be accomplished using entry-point criteria such as, pharmacophore and/or the 3D structure of the target (Lagorce et al., 2011). Pharmacophore methods have developed progressively to be one of the most powerful and successful tools in drug discovery field in recent years. 3D pharmacophore methods are now usually applied as part of most complex workflows in drug discovery, and have been extensively and successfully used in virtual screening approaches (Braga and Andrade, 2013). These approaches are integrated into a number of virtual screening software packages such as GALAHAD, Phase and LigandScout (Dixon et al., 2006a; Richmond et al., 2006; Wolber and Langer, 2005).
Perceiving a pharmacophore is the first essential step to understanding the binding mode and interaction of ligands in their target receptor. When a pharmacophore is carried out, a valuable use of it, is 3D database screening to identify novel compounds that would match the pharmacophore (Güner et al., 2004).
In the current study, we have achieved and discussed an atom-based pharmacophore model for cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors and generate 3D-Quantitative structure activity relationship (3D-QSAR) model based on this pharmacophore to better understand the relation between structure and inhibitory activity against COX-2 and to reveal new natural lead-compounds as potential COX-2 inhibitors. Furthermore a cleaned and filtered library of collection of natural compounds was also prepared using physico-chemical properties, this library was extracted from the universal natural products database (UNPD) (Gu et al., 2013), and then a virtual screening using pharmacophore-based and molecular docking were performed to explore new lead-compounds as potential inhibitors of COX-2.
As a final step, a molecular dynamic simulation was carried out and analysed to test the stability and observe the binding interactions of the top most ranking compound in the complex 5KIR-UNPD100208 compared to the reference results obtained from molecular dynamic simulation of co-crystallized Rofecoxib-5KIR complex.
