Animal biometrics is an emerging research field of computer vision, wildlife science, and pattern recognition [1]. Animal biometrics-based recognition system develops quantified and efficient recognition methodologies for representing extracted visual features, detecting discriminatory features for identifying the phenotypic appearance of species or analysis of individual animal’s behaviours based on its morphological image pattern and animal biometric characteristics. The phenotypic presentations consist of the composite of an organism's observable morphological features [1], [2].
Animal biometrics-based recognition system is a pattern recognition system. The recognition system extracts the prominent animal biometric features from the morphological image, biometric characteristics and phenotypic appearances of different species or individual animal.
In animal biometrics, identification of cattle based on biometric features has been one of the current and future research frontiers in the modern livestock for registration, tracking and breed associations of cattle.
Based on available literature, animal identification methodologies can be categorized into following groups: (1) permanent recognition method, (2) semi-permanent recognition method, and (3) sketch pattern-based marking recognition approach [1], [2], [5]. The permanent recognition method includes the making based animal identification schemes. These marking schemes are as ear-tattoo-based identification techniques, embedded of microchips-based marking approach invasive, hot-iron and freeze branding of livestock. The ear-tattoos-based animal marking schemes are the manual marking technique to identify the massive number of livestock animal’s herds and other species. The sketch patterning-based marker methods are not used to identify the solid colour breeds of livestock (especially cattle breeds).
The ear-tattoos-based marking techniques are highly applicable for tracking and identification of several cattle breed associations such as Brown Swiss, Red Poll, and Milking Shorthorn breed associations [5], [6]. The distinct artificial marking techniques, such as embedding of microchips, ear-tattooing and hot-iron techniques are required for identifying individual cattle, but these techniques give the defects on the cattle [6], [7].
On the other hand, the collar-id and ear-tagging based identification techniques are the examples of semi-permanent animal identification approaches for identification of individual animals [8], [9]. According to authors Wardrope [6], Johnston and Edwards [10], the ear-tagging based verification and identification techniques are not competent to identify individual cattle. The monitoring and tracking of individual cattle based on embedded unique tag numbers can be easily lost.
The ear-tagging based techniques suffer from the major problems for verification and identification of animals. These major problems of ear-tagging based techniques are mainly-(1) integrated labels in the ear-tags can vanish easily (2) different integrated labels can also be eventually damaged and (3) the ear can gradually be corrupted due to long-term usage [6], [7], [8], [9], [10].
The sketch based patterning techniques perform the design and different patterning of different colour on the body of livestock. The sketch patterning and design-based techniques depend on individual drawing skills. The major problem of patterning technique is that it lacks standards [7]. Due to the enormous amount of human resource requirements, the classical animal identification approaches need more cost for the tagging of cattle’s ear. The ear-tagging based systems suffers from the venerability loses due to duplication, fraudulent and forged of embedded standard ear-tags [2], [3], [5], [12]. The embedded RFID chips based techniques are also applied for the identification and tracking of individual cattle. However, the implementation and management of RFID protocol, RFID-chips, and scanners at various checkpoints have been reported the major challenging problems for monitoring of the massive number of livestock animal and other species throughout the world [12].
1.1. MotivationTowards successful operation of any farm, an effective livestock management is essential. Efficiency, affordability, and scalability of livestock management and solutions play a significant role in the modern farm houses. As the number of farms decreases in the country, but the numbers of livestock on each increases every year. Dairy livestock needs better monitoring for breed associations, milking, health monitoring of animals, weighting and other activities. Therefore, the ability to reliably tracking and identifying individual animal in herds is an important for cattle registration and recognition.The cattle recognition using manual identification approaches has been a major problem for breeding association, registration and health monitoring of the livestock (especially for cattle) in the classical animal identification systems, livestock based monitoring frameworks, and non-biometrics-based capture- recapture marking methodologies [3], [4].The classical animal identification framework and identification paradigm provides non-invasive technique for identification of individual cattle in the heard. The non-invasive identification techniques such as visible ear tagging based identification, freeze brandings, marking the animal body with hot-iron, embedding of microchips are applied for cattle registration. Moreover, the labelled ear-tags with RFID devices have been also incorporated for cattle identification. The labelled ear-tags are scanned electronically because of cost, and most ear-tags use low-frequency (LF) RFID. Therefore, the RFID scanner systems must be deployed within a few inches of the labelled ear-tags. The users (e.g., farm workers, parentages, owners of cattle and others) require operating the scanned devices by personal with every animal for reliable scanning of embedded ear-tags.The RFID based ear-tagging of individual cattle has been widely adopted throughout the world. For example, dairy farms in the Europe, USA, and Asian countries are more reluctant to perform the identification of cattle so due to costs of the ear-tags, and the lack of national standards.In the classical animal identification approaches, animal recognition and livestock framework-based systems provide manual procedures or methods for verifying the registered (e.g., insurance animal) and imposter animal based on registered unique ear tag numbers of livestock, embedded number in hot iron, and marked number in the ear-tattoos on body surface of animal. The embedded unique numbers can be easily duplicated, and forged for creating the false registered number. The users (parentage, owners and others) claim number of false insurance claims by replacing the previous registered unique number. In the available literature, the classical animal recognition and livestock framework based systems cater the manual methods for verifying the registered (e.g., insurance animals by government and insurance provider organizations) to find the imposter animals. These recognition systems use the manual approaches such as ear tags, hot iron, and ear tattoos. Therefore, classical identification methods are unable to provide the satisfactory level of security for owners and verification of cattle breed associations in the farmhouses throughout the world.Animal biometrics-based cattle recognition system gives the efficient methodologies for registration of livestock animals using its biometric features. The cattle recognition system also caters the better method for monitoring, and traceability of individual cattle in the farmhouses [2], [4]. Moreover, the recognition system plays a vital role in the verification of false insurance claims and registration of livestock, tracking, breeding monitoring, and breeds production. Nowadays, non-registration and the massive number of livestock animals are transported across the border, and cattle recognition system provides efficient methods to stop the kind of activities of border transfer of livestock animals for slaughterhouses [5], [6].Currently, deep learning approach is an emerging field of computer vision for detection and representation of phenotypic appearances and visual biometric feature of species and individual animals. Deep learning has gained more attention as of the most powerful approaches for the feature extraction and representation of different species or individual animal in the recent years [7], [8], [9]. With efficient learning capacity for feature representations, the deep learning based learning frameworks are used to learn the extracted sets of biometric feature of species for the representations and identification [10], [11]. The different layers of the deep learning framework are used to model and represent the complex data variations for animal recognition [12], [13].The well-developed deep learning approaches and frameworks are applied to propose a cattle recognition system to solve the above issues by learning the muzzle point feature its representation and classifiers jointly for a particular task tasks [14], [15].In this paper, we address the problem: how to recognize cattle based biometric feature characteristics of muzzle point image pattern (nose image pattern) using deep learning-based recognition approaches? To address this problem, we use a 30 megapixel camera for capturing the image of muzzle point pattern of cattle.The muzzle point image pattern consists of rich and dense texture features. The proposed cattle recognition system recognize the cattle based on texture feature of muzzle point image. The system uses the deep learning based recognition frameworks.The cattle recognition system captures the image of muzzle point pattern (nose pattern) of cattle. After that, the captured image of muzzle point pattern are pre-processed using the low pass filtering technique to remove the noises and other artefacts from the captured muzzle point image database. The texture features are extracted from the muzzle point image database. The extracted features are classified using deep learning approaches to identify the individual cattle.Based on overall observations and our acknowledgment, there are no such animal biometrics-based recognition and verification systems present in animal biometrics literature or public domain to cater the better methods for identification and registration of cattle based on primary biometric characteristics.
1.2. Research contributionsFollowing are important contributions of this research:1.The unique and immutable bead and ridge pattern as biometric characteristics of muzzle point image of cattle leads to interesting challenges for an animal biometrics-based recognition system for cattle identification. Considering the non-intrusive nature of muzzle point biometrics pattern, this research explores the new possibility of determining the unique identity of individual cattle using deep learning approaches. Motivated from animal biometrics research across multiple domains and interdisciplinary researches, we discuss the major challenges and opportunities of the cattle recognition system. For recognition of individual cattle, novel deep learning based representation frameworks and matching schemes are proposed in this paper. It is customized towards recognition of cattle and yields current state-of-the-art results.2.In this paper, a novel deep learning-based stacked denoising auto-encoder framework is used to encode and decode the extracted set of salient texture feature of muzzle point image of cattle for recognition of individual cattle.3.The deep learning framework-based approaches are suitable to address the significant variations of muzzle point images of cattle in the unconstrained conditions due to low illumination, body dynamics and blurred images due to the head movement and body dynamics of cattle, and the poor image quality of muzzle point images. We proposed a Convolution Neural Network (CNN) and Deep Belief Network (DBN) deep learning approaches to learn the muzzle point texture feature of cattle for better representation into different deep neural network layers with deep learning framework.4.A deep belief network (DBN) is the graphical deep learning model is used to learn the extracted features of muzzle images for hierarchical representation of the training datasets by stacking of Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) based classification technique for classification and identification of cattle. It is trained in a greedy manner for learning of feature extraction and representation from the given large unlabelled image database and updating the loss function of DBM by including low rank regularization. Finally, a multilayer deep learning neural network has been used as classifier to achieve the identification decision for cattle.5.A database of muzzle point image of cattle over 5000 images pertaining to over 500cattle is contributed to the research community in the animal biometrics. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest muzzle point image dataset publicly available for research on cattle recognition. Moreover, the performances of existing handcrafted texture feature extraction technique and appearance-based feature extraction and representation algorithms systems are compared and evaluated the experimental results across various gallery sizes of muzzle point images on a standard identification settings and benchmark.The remaining parts of the paper are as follows: Section 2 illustrates the literature review in the direction of cattle recognition. Section 3 provides the database preparation and description of muzzle point images of cattle. Section 4 detailed the proposed deep learning based recognition system of cattle followed by the feature extraction and representation of muzzle point image features using deep learning approaches. Stacked Denoising Auto-encoder is presented in Section 5. Section 6 provides the Pre-Training and generalizability of proposed model in brief. The experimental results and brief analysis of the work is reported in Section 7. Further, it includes the performance evaluations and comparative analysis of proposed approach. Finally, the conclusions and future directions are provided in Section 8.
