Academic libraries have an increasing need to demonstrate their contribution to the institutional mission. In 2009, the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) requested a comprehensive review of best practices for demonstrating the value of academic libraries. The resulting report (Oakleaf, 2010) offered a set of recommendations for librarians who wished to demonstrate value, one of them being to “track and increase library contribution to faculty research productivity” (p. 15). One possible path toward achieving this goal is to collaborate in research projects conducted by faculty. Such collaboration may ideally culminate in co-authorship of the resulting publications. Some academic libraries “are applying the embedded librarian model in working directly with the faculty they serve as collaborators on research projects or as an integral part of a research team” (Carlson & Kneale, 2011, p. 167). Similarly, a recent blog post (Ekstrøm, Elbaek, Erdmann, & Grigorov, 2016) described the research librarian of the future as a “co-investigator” and Brandenburg et al. (2017, p. 272–273) observed “an increasing emphasis on librarians as partners within research collaborations” in a paper discussing three projects that were “examples of contributions to research that redefine librarian roles and help rewrite librarian stereotypes”. In a similar fashion, Bedi and Walde (2017, p. 314) described the evolution of the role of the academic librarian toward that of a “research partner”, partly because researchers aim to diversify their research teams to achieve greater success in grant competitions.
Conducting research benefits librarians in several ways. Research in Library and Information Science (LIS) is necessary to build new knowledge and contribute to the development of the profession. At the same time, conducting research improves librarians' problem-solving and decision-making skills and makes them critical consumers of academic literature. In some cases, carrying out research and publishing are compulsory for librarians to advance on a tenure track in their professional career.
In addition to conducting research in their own professional discipline, carrying out research in partnership with faculty offers librarians the opportunity to gain valuable experience in how research operates. This knowledge is useful for providing better library research support services. In the words of Powell, Baker, and Mika (2002), conducting research “better equip[s] librarians to provide optimal information services to researchers in other fields.”
Beyond benefits to librarians' professional careers, research collaboration with academics may also help to improve the image of library services. Faculty will probably feel greater appreciation for the services librarians provide if they view them as contributors to knowledge creation, beyond their traditional tasks in disseminating information. Librarians' skills can be helpful not only in solving researchers' information needs, but also in improving faculty research practices by creatively contributing to research designs, adding to the knowledge base or supporting data analysis.
This study leaves aside the contribution of faculty and practitioners to library issues, in order to explore the contribution of librarians to the scholarly output published in non-LIS journals as well as their collaboration practices with faculty that result in the co-authorship of academic publications. To date, numerous studies have analysed the publication patterns of librarians, but they have mostly focused on their contribution to LIS literature, frequently propelled by tenure and promotion requirements, especially in the United States. Specifically, longitudinal data collected during the past 20 years suggest a decline in the volume of publications by academic librarians (Blecic et al., 2017). The reasons for the trend are not clear, but the authors suggest that it might be attributed to staffing reductions and the aging of the library workforce, resulting in fewer untenured librarians, who are the ones with the most incentive to publish. Other studies have explored collaboration patterns between librarians and faculty but focusing on the partnership between librarians and LIS academics. These studies have observed a widening gap, resulting in a low level of joint authorship between practitioners and academics (Ardanuy & Urbano, 2017).
Very few studies have explored the collaboration patterns between librarians and scholars on research topics other than LIS. The nature of these partnerships has hardly been explored, with the possible exception of the medical literature, where librarians have frequently been involved in the preparation and publication of systematic reviews (Foutch, 2016). In fact, librarian and information specialist authorship has been associated with better-reported systematic review search quality and reproducibility (Rethlefsen, Farrell, Trzasko, & Brigham, 2015). Desmeules, Campbell, and Dorgan (2016) also observed an increasing demand for academic health librarians in Canada to be involved in systematic reviews. However, little consensus was observed in relation to how their work was recognised, ranging from being co-authors of the resulting publications to being acknowledged to receiving no formal recognition at all.
Beyond the medical literature, Folk (2014) explored the visibility of librarians as authors in scholarly teaching and learning journals. She suggested that publication in these venues could be a way for librarians to make themselves more visible in higher education and to demonstrate a commitment to the values and priorities of higher education institutions. Her results showed that librarians, especially those based at research universities, were likely to publish articles about information literacy that were usually more theoretical than empirical.
The purpose of this paper is to explore the contribution of librarians to scholarly journals in fields other than LIS and the nature of their partnerships with researchers resulting in co-authored publications. The study is underpinned by two research questions:
1.What is the amount of research published by library-affiliated authors in fields other than LIS?2.What types of scholarly output do librarians co-author with researchers in non-LIS journals?
