Implementation of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) has brought about increased focus on the use of cognitive strategies in the science classroom (Lee, Quinn, & Valdes, 2013). While this emphasis on cognition is a substantial step toward understanding student learning, both at a behavioral outcome level and a process functional level, there is little in the way of research methods in education that allow for direct examination of cognitive processing (Forzani, 2014). This creates a two-fold need, (1) to establish methods to integrate neuroimaging to better understand the process of learning in education and (2) to examine claims around the effectiveness of modes of presentation. Thus, there is need to analyze claims regarding the cognitive basis for varied disciplinary approaches used by science teachers, including video lecture, virtual reality (VR), Serious Educational Games (SEGs) and hands on activities.
As educators focus on cognition and their understanding of its role in learning, greater understanding of cognitive strategies related to constructs such as cognitive demand and cognitive dynamics, which are thought to influence the underlying functional status related to learning is required (Reuter-Lorenz & Park, 2014). In order to address the need to understand the cognitive aspects involved in learning, the authors make use of neuroimaging as a means to examine the functional aspects of learning processes. This neuroimaging study examines four modal approaches thought to create positive learning outcomes related to science content knowledge.
1.1. Operational definitionsSince this study makes use of neuroimaging techniques which may not be familiar to educators this section contains operational definitions to clarify the key concepts related to cognition and measurement of cognition as referred to in this study.Cognitive Demand: the relative amount of mental processing effort required to complete a specific task or action (Kurzban, Duckworth, Kable, & Myers, 2013).Cognitive Dynamics: the interplay of multiple signals and processing units of an individual when engaged in the processing of information while completing tasks (Lamb, 2016).Hemodynamic Response: the rapid delivery of blood to neural tissue in order to activate specific areas of the brain for engagement in cognitive processing (Aslin, Shukla, & Emberson, 2015). This response is a proxy for Cognitive Dynamics and Cognitive Demand (Bardin et al., 2011).Functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS): a non-invasive neuroimaging method involving the quantification of chromophore concentration, in the case of this study, hemoglobin (Scholkmann et al., 2014).-Hbi: Symbol for deoxygenated hemoglobin.O2Hbi: Symbol for oxygenated hemoglobin.Serious Educational Game (SEG): a game designed with specific pedagogical approaches to teach specific skills and content (Annetta, Lamb, Bowling, & Cheng, 2011).
1.2. Computer technologies and the classroomInformation and computer technologies are considered to be some of the most powerful teaching tools used to support student learning in the sciences (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2013; Lamb, Annetta, Firestone, & Etopio, 2018). In the near future, the contribution of VR and SEGs, as a subset of information and computer technologies in education, hold some of the greatest promise for students and teachers (Dede, 2014). In the science education as with other fields, aspects of the relationship between positive learning outcomes and technology are often assumed (Schmid et al., 2014). Simultaneously, cognitive factors that mediate or moderate the successes and shortcomings of various technologies in science education are often taken for granted and left unexamined (Ellis & Goodyear, 2016). Specifically, policy makers, teacher educators, preservice teachers, and teachers often assume that all technology formats e.g. software, computers, tablets, and other technologies, are equally effective at facilitating student learning in the classroom (Delgado, Wardlow, O'Malley, & McKnight, 2015). In contrast, the same stakeholders often assume that ‘hands-on’ activities are superior to VR and SEG based environments (Zimmerman & Croker, 2014).Despite the rapid advances and adoption of multiple technologies using multiple modes of presentation, there is little understanding of the means by which these modes influence underlying student cognition and by extension the functionality of the learning technology (Cummings, Mason, Shelton, & Baur, 2017). For many students in the sciences, navigating the demands of complex topics such as deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) replication is difficult and when the technology is layered on top of the complex content, technology based modes of presentation may create more barriers to learning (Wong, Chai, Zhang, & King, 2015). Recognition of these challenges has led science educators to value hand-on activates as a primary means to teach complex topics as opposed to making use of other modes of instruction (Zeichner & Liston, 2013). However, recent technological advances have generated multiple platforms, providing opportunities to practice dynamic interactions that may be comparable to hands-on activities in terms of cognition. These platforms include, SEGs and VR.
1.3. Cognition and educationPsychologists see individual cognition as a means to embody a set of processing and mechanisms through which a person understands the world (Gallotti & Frith, 2013). Educators often view cognition from a more functional perspective i.e. outcomes on school work. Functional cognition involves the activities and mechanisms of information acquisition specifically in reasoning and memory as they are applied to education (Lamb et al., 2017). However, the linkage between the structure and function of the brain as it related to task authenticity in science education demands that one's cognition situates into the context of the learning modes e.g. video lecture, VR, SEGs, and hands on activities specific to content tasks (Prins, Bulte, & Pilot, 2016).Most learners have a system of skills that are rooted in their perceptual process such as critical thinking and memory that develop throughout their early life (Lamb, Annetta, & Vallet, 2015). These processes develop into a set of complex procedures used in parallel to process information from the environment (Moreau, 2013). Lamb (2014) defines these functional cognitive components which retain specific characteristics of individual cognitive processes as cognitive attributes. These attributes include the ability to comprehend and produce written and oral statements, and describing the interaction of complex variables such as those found in science. Other cognitive attributes of interest in the sciences are critical thinking, the ability to retrieve from memory, calculate, and estimate outcomes from simple and complex problems (Finn et al., 2014). Neuroimaging studies illustrate simultaneous activation and refer to the multiple activations of cognitive attributes as cognitive systems. Researchers have identified the cognitive systems that play a role while learning science primarily to involve critical thinking, (Kolkman, Hoijtink, Kroesbergen, & Leseman, 2013), verbal production (Buchanan & Dean, 2010), inference (Alfieri, Brooks, Aldrich, & Tenenbaum, 2011), reading (Ozuru, Dempsey, & McNamara, 2009), and memory (Göbel & Snowling, 2010).Conceptualization of the underlying cognitive architecture in mathematical and science processing skills is the focus of intensive research and discussion across several fields including education, neuroscience, and psychology (Antonenko, van Gog, & Paas, 2014). Research discussions center on the extent to which the distinct attributes exhibit local independence from other superordinate and subordinate cognitive attributes as students engage with particular modes of instruction. Second, there is disagreement around the specific degree to which mathematics and science processing are specific to individual encodings due to experience (Phillips, Macnab, & Norris, 2010, pp. 19–34). To resolve some of these concerns, research in fields such as cognitive science, make use of neuroimaging technologies such as fNIRS and Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). Examinations of individual students using techniques such as fMRI indicates mechanisms of action in learning which are functionally distinct. These distinct processes activate in parallel and interact to provide solutions to presented problems in learning. As the functional systems activate in parallel they become shared when completing science-based tasks allowing for the transfer between tasks (Anderson & Reid, 2016, pp. 148–162).1.3.1. Cognition related to the cognitive attributes of critical thinking and memoryPsychologists and educators define critical thinking as the formation of conclusions, inferences, or judgments based upon stimulus input (Neisser, 2014). In turn science educators suggest that critical thinking is a key attribute used in the science learning process (Erduran & Dagher, 2014, pp. 1–18). Neuroscientists using fMRI in studies of reasoning tasks illustrate activation occurring in the areas of the brain associated with executive functioning (Barbey, Koenigs, & Grafman, 2013). These areas of localization are congruent with Optodes 1 and 2 in the fNIRS optode system. Fig. 1 provides and overview of optode locations and the configuration of the sensors and detectors. The more generalized attribute of critical thinking manifest as behavioral components see in perception, expectation, and inference (Ren, Schweizer, & Xu, 2013).Download : Download high-res image (145KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Optode detector (red) and infrared source (blue) locations. The second illustration provides placement for the fNIR and the VR headset. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)In addition to critical thinking, a second area of interest to science education is that of memory. Memory allows activation of affect and provides students with a means to make use of prior experience and knowledge (Lamb & Annetta, 2012; Lamb, 2014). An individual is able to retrieve a memory when the specific neurons that serve as a sensory reminder of that specific thought or event are activated. The ability to remember semantic and episodic memories from the past are known as retrospective memory (Cabeza & Moscovitch, 2013). Areas of the brain associated with memory retrieval are located among areas in the prefrontal cortex and are congruent with fNIRS Optodes 13 and 14 (Jasińska & Petitto, 2014). Beyond providing basic information around cerebral blood flow, fNIRS allows direct examination of inaccessible structures and real-time functional analysis as students engage with particular modes of instruction. fNIRS provides a useable tool to link structure, function, and behaviors. The accuracy of fNIRS effectiveness as a tool to examine cognition has been demonstrated such that neurosurgeons make use this equipment as a functional measure during the treatment of individuals with Parkinson Disease using a VIM Thalamotomy (Lipsman et al., 2013) and as a means to monitor patients during the administration of anesthesia for other types of surgery (Zheng et al., 2013).
1.4. Theoretical frameworkThe underlying notion and framework of this study is that of the brain microstate. Within this framework, brain hemodynamic responses consist of a time varying measurement of oxygenation and deoxygenation in areas of the brain responsible for processing cognitive inputs. Inputs can range from internal representation such as memory to external stimulus such as those resulting from varied modes of instruction such as video lecture or SEGs. Neuronal tissue oxygenation states reflect the functional dynamics of the state of the brain and allow the authors to resolve where and when activations occur. The ability to determine functional states and their temporal sequence constitutes the core of measurements for researchers making use of measurement tools such as magnetoencephalography (MEG), fMRI and fNIRS. In essence, the authors of this study suggest that each microstate, or brain activation, is associated with time-limited information processing moments as an operation of a distinct cognitive process (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2015). For example, hemodynamic response related to information processing speeds and movement of oxygenated blood is reflected in a consistent time delay of 8 s between stimulus and response as underlying cognitive processes are activated. The process activation are correlated with task presentation as a means to establish a relationship between the stimulus and the hemodynamic response. In this framework both the individual localized responses and the global patterns of hemodynamic response for specific tasks remain stable over a fixed period before changing to another state in response to a new stimulus. The ability to translate each of the hemodynamic states into sets of distinct information processing states is necessary to achieve a linkage between the stimulus and response. The translation of hemodynamic states into functional states progresses through the activities of the researchers from a state of descriptive actions to a study of underlying mechanisms of action that promotes a casual understanding. By translating hemodynamic activity into information processing states, the authors are able to gain an understanding of the stages at which information is processed and not just the flow of blood related to brain activity. This framework suggests that the time sequence of microstate activity is a coherent casual model of activations occurring during learning and task engagement (Jerath & Crawford, 2015).
1.5. Assumptions of functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)Functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is a portable, non-invasive prefrontal cortex imaging technology, using light in the near infrared spectrum. fNIRS depends on the following characteristics and assumptions: (1) human tissue is transparent to light within a narrow near infrared spectral range (NIRs). The range is from 600 nm to 1000 nm. (2) Light emitted in the NIRs range is absorbed by pigments known as chromophores such as hemoglobin which is the chromophore of interest in this study. Light that is not absorbed by the chromophores is scattered by surrounding tissue. (3) The scattering of light is approximately 100 times more probable than absorption (Scholkmann et al., 2014). (4) fNIRS is also able to discriminate between large blood vessels, greater than 1 mm, and small vessels due to the near complete absorption of light by the large vessels. It is under these assumptions that the authors make use of and process the resultant data from the fNIRS system. This allows the collection of data in real-time as opposed to retrospectively as students engage in working with content knowledge in the sciences.Reports of content knowledge and questionnaires are contingent upon an assumption that the content adequately reflects the functional cognitive processing occurring as the student answers questions (Perry-Smith, 2014). In both cases, ratings are collected immediately after each task (e.g., Leppink, Paas, Van der Vleuten, van Gog, & van Merrenboer, 2013). Thus, self-reports and content tests do not provide insight into fluctuations in cognitive processing over time (i.e. functional status), unless these measures are applied repeatedly within the task, however, continued assessment as described disrupts the primary cognitive activity and reduces the accuracy of these measurements as a measures of process (Ayres, 2006). Importantly, even when these retrospective measures are applied multiple times, it is unclear whether self-report measures provide a continuous measure of cognitive dynamics; such as those found in fNIRS or simply a retrospective summation. In addition, working memory processes involve interaction with long-term memory schemas, which become automated with practice and may be unavailable for introspection through talk-aloud and other forms of processing measurement (Peleg-Raibstein, Philipp, Feldon, & Yee, 2015).In addition to above characteristics and assumptions the fNIRS makes use of the following physiological conditions associated with the brain. The arterial blood volume fraction of the brain is 30% of the total blood volume in the body. Due to the brains high demand for oxygen when metabolizing glucose during cognitive processing there is rapid cycling of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood through the neural tissue (Kim & Ogawa, 2012). Given this volume of blood in the brain, fNIRS provides a way to obtain information about the presence and absence in localized oxygenated blood hemoglobin (O2Hbi) in the prefrontal cortex with relatively high resolution. The absorption spectrum of hemoglobin is dependent on the level of oxygenation in the hemoglobin chromophore. This provides a means to examine the relative level of oxygen consumption by localized tissues in the brain and allows researchers to examine the intensity of the activation. Mechanically fNIRS uses a set of 16 light emitting diodes (LED) attached via fiber optic cables emitting light in the 650 nm. This light from the LEDs interacts with surrounding tissue and blood. The light is reflected back to four sensors (detectors) by deoxygenated hemoglobin denoted as −Hbi at 750 nm while other emissions are absorbed. Each of the four sensors then detects the change in wavelength and is expressed as a ratio. The ratio between the oxygenated and deoxygenated blood is provided as a standardized measure in the data collection software. The use of fiber optics and LEDs allows researchers to measure oxygenation and deoxygenation in any head position and posture (Ayaz et al., 2013). This ability to have movable head positions makes fNIRS an ideal portable neuroimaging measure for natural environments such as the classroom without the need for restraint and sedation (Ayaz et al., 2013).1.5.1. fNIRS as a measure of cognitive dynamicsExamination of the prefrontal cortex was specifically chosen as it involved several functions of interest to educators. Functions that can be examined using fNIRS imaging of the prefrontal cortex include problem solving, memory, language, impulse control, and social behavior (Szczepanski & Knight, 2014). Areas of specific interest to the authors are critical thinking and memory considering these are important in the field of science education and understanding learning related to science and education in general (Entwistle & Ramsden, 2015). Multiple research groups have found a positive correlation between the increase of oxygenated blood and the increase in cognitive effort. Other research groups have established fNIRS as a means to examine the localization of functional processes (Johnson & De Haan, 2015). Banville and Falk (2016) illustrated that the accuracy of fNIRS-based classification of mental workload and localization reached 82% when distinguishing two-workload classes and 60% when distinguishing three classes. In a similarly designed study, Harrison et al., (2014) were able to predict whether a subject was experiencing no workload, low workload, or high workload using fNIRS. Additionally, they were able to distinguish between mental workload on low working memory tasks and high working memory tasks with 70% average accuracy. In another study (Herff et al., 2014), showed that frontal cortical oxygenation as measured by fNIRS increases with working memory load and task engagement. Specifically, average oxygenation changes due to task engagement at Optode 1 and 2 were associated with task difficulty and increased monotonically with increasing task difficulty. The role of Optodes 1 and 2 as a measure of difficulty and working memory load have been implicated in several processing studies using fNIRS (Gefen, Ayaz, & Onaral, 2014) and triangulated with Positron Emission Tomography (PET) (Justen, Herbert, Werner, & Raab, 2014) and fMRI (San Martin & Huettel, 2013). Given these findings, fNIRS appears to hold great potential for the monitoring and assessment of localized cognitive dynamics associated with critical thinking and memory.
1.6. Purpose, research question and hypothesisThe purpose of this study was two-fold the first to investigate the effect of differing modes of presentation related to video lecture, hands on activities, VR, and SEGs. In this study, hemodynamic responses are used as a proxy for cognitive action as student complete modules on DNA replication. The second is to provide a methodological “road map” for future studies using fNIRS in education. The authors of the study contend that the different modal approaches, specifically those requiring large amounts of unstructured processing, such as video lecture, generate less dynamic response within the prefrontal cortex. The decreased demand is due to lesser attendance to content and prior knowledge activation leading to less critical thinking and memory retrieval. Modes such as VR and SEGs may result greater hemodynamic response due to greater attendance and systemic recruitment related to prior knowledge and critical thinking when compared to other approaches such as video-based lecture. This study also investigates differences in the level of hemodynamic response as it relates to the four different pedagogical approaches for understanding DNA replication in biology. The first pedagogy made use of video lecture and was delivered in a video-based format in which students took notes. It is notable that the students in this condition did not move beyond the conceptualization phase of the Mayer-Fowler model (Mayes & Fowler, 1999). This limitation is discussed later in this study write-up. The other approaches used an immersive Serious Educational Game and a VR environment in which students completed a module on DNA replication. In the fourth approach, a hands-on activity, students engaged in a DNA replication module with the same concepts found in the Serious Education Game and VR condition. The authors used neuroimaging to examine hemodynamic localization and intensity to measure relative cognitive dynamics associated with each of the conditions.The research questions addressed in this study are:Research Question 1: Are participant hemodynamic responses to each condition significantly different from the individual baseline hemodynamic responses?Research Question 2: Are outcomes related to each of the condition, Serious Educational Game play, hands on laboratory learning, video lecture, and virtual reality significantly different in hemodynamic response when compared to one another?Research Question 3: Where does the localized hemodynamic response occur when participants are engaged in the four conditions of Serious Educational Game play, hands on laboratory learning, video lecture, and virtual reality condition?Consideration of the research questions and potential outcomes results in the following hypothesis:Hypothesis 1 (H1)Hemodynamic responses for each participant will be significantly greater during stimulus presentation when compared to the baseline condition due to increases in attention and recruitment of cognitive system processes.Hypothesis 2 (H2)Hemodynamic responses will vary by modal condition. Conditions such as video lecture requiring greater information organization and less systemic recruitment will result in significantly less overall cognitive dynamics as evidenced by less intense hemodynamic response.Hypothesis 3 (H3)Localized hemodynamic responses will occur in varied locations based upon condition.Substantiation of the hypothesis provides means to understand the relationship between each of the conditions and intensity of activation. Greater activation for a specific condition would indicate that there are differing levels of recruitment of cognitive systems when examined as a function of cognitive dynamics. These insights may provide a greater understanding and identify a potential mechanism of action explaining differences in outcomes related to each condition. In addition, these outcomes will provide evidence for modes of instruction which result in greater cognitive engagement in classroom based tasks and promote student learning. The primary means to address these questions will be with neuroimaging technologies in the form of functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) and examination of content tests.
