There are many optimization problems in engineering applications and computer science, such as, transportation, image processing, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) route planning, disease prediction and so on. Generally, these real-world optimization problems are multiobjective optimization problem (MOPs), which involves several conflicting objectives. By evolving a population of solutions, multiobjective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) are able to approximate the Pareto optimal set in a single run. MOEAs have attracted a lot of research effort during the last 20 years, and they are still one of the hottest research areas in the field of evolutionary computation. In Ref. [1], research work on MOEAs has been surveyed. Due to the conflicting nature of the objectives, there may exist many optimal solutions which are called the Pareto-optimal set. Therefore, solving MOPs is to find a set of optimal solutions (i.e., Pareto set) which satisfies all constraints as much as possible to the decision-makers [2]. Vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW) is a representative optimization problem, which has been extensively studied in both computer science and transportation engineering literature. Many problems can be abstracted as VRPTW, see e.g., transportation, logistics distribution, electric power dispatching problems. In VRPTW, some vehicles with limited capacity are to be routed from a central depot to a set of geographically dispersed customers with known demands and predefined time windows. The problem is solved by optimizing routes for the vehicles so as to meet all given constraints as well as to minimize the objectives of traveling distance and number of vehicles. Hence, VRPTW can be considered as a multi-objective problem, that is to say, it aims at obtaining a set of Pareto optimal solutions rather than finding a single solution so that decision maker can choose a final plan according to actual demand.
During the past few years, researchers have done a lot of research in the field of multi-objective VRPTW. Since the multi-objective VRPTW is NP-hard, and as the problem scale increases, it is impractical to solve the problem with exact methods [4]. Moreover, in the multi-objective VRPTW two sub-objectives (number of vehicles and traveling distance) are tied together and cannot be separated or solved in sequence, the exact methods for solving multi-objective VRPTW may be invalid. Therefore, to obtain higher quality solutions, some researchers have developed more powerful heuristic algorithms for solving the multi-objective VRPTW by building on previous work [5]. Tan et al. [3] proposed a hybrid multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (HMOEA), which combines various heuristics to do local exploitation, and uses the concept of Pareto's optimality to solve multi-objective VRPTW. Gambardella et al. presented a type of multi-objective implementation of VRPTW by minimizing a hierarchical objective function, the first objective is to minimize the number of vehicles and the second objective is to minimize the travel time. Ant colony system (ACS) is adopted to solve the problem. In Ref. [6], Ombuki et al. used a hybrid search technique based on metaheuristics to solve VRPTW, and obtained good results. The approach was divided into two stages: in the first stage, a GA was used to set the number of vehicles, and then, in the second stage, a local tabu search was employed to minimize the total traveling distance. Iqbal et al. presented a new model and solution for the multi-objective vehicle routing problem with soft time windows using a hybrid metaheuristic technique, which is developed on the basics of a new swarm based artificial bee colony algorithm combined with two-step constrained local search for neighborhood selection [7]. Recently, many new methods have been designed, see e.g., memetic algorithm [8], genetic algorithm [9], [10], ant colony optimization [11], [12], simulated annealing algorithm [13], particle swarm optimization algorithm [14], [15], [16] and tabu search algorithm [17]. Among all these heuristic approaches, discrete glowworm evolution mechanism (DGEM) is a new kind of intelligent bionic swarm optimization algorithm [18] and many studies have indicated its global search ability on district optimization problems [19], [20], including TSP [21] and VRP [22]. Nevertheless, the literature about the multi-objective VRPTW is very scant. In addition, the local search ability of DGEM still needs to be improved, while variable neighborhood evolutionary mechanism (VNEM) is a local search algorithm with powerful local search capability [23] but weak in global search. We assume that if these two algorithms are combined together, they will produce better results. The VRPTW techniques mentioned above, however, are based on a single objective heuristic approach that incorporate penalty functions or combine the different criteria into a weighting function. The preferences of customers and decision makers are not taken into account. The solution obtained by these algorithms is just a point on the entire Pareto optimal front, not the entire Pareto optimal front. Even they can find more than one solution in some instances, and the quality of their solutions may be excellent, few of them has given a complete Pareto optimal front.
In recent years, as a new computing method, membrane computing (MC) has been widely used in multi-objective areas. MC was first proposed by Gheorghe Pǎun, also known as P system. It abstracts computing ideas from the living phenomena or biological systems, e.g., biological cells, tissue or organs. In general, MC are used as distributed parallel and nondeterministic computing devices, and they can be classified into three types based on the computing models, that is, cell-like P systems, tissue-like systems and neuron-like P systems [24], [25]. In a tissue-like P system, different cells delimit the environment into different regions and evolution rules are used to optimize the objectives in each region [26], [27]. As a branch of natural computing, most membrane computing models can handle a rich problems [28]. It has been shown that many variants of P systems are universal (i.e., equivalent to Turing machines), and P systems were also used (theoretically) to solve the computational difficulties in a reasonable time [29]. Even there are many articles and theoretical achievements focusing on the study of theories in MC [30], [31], there are only several results about the use of MC in engineering problems [32], [33], [34], [35], [36]. And the problem of solving the multi-objective optimization using membrane computing remains pretty much open [37], [38]. There are only a few works trying to solve the MOPs, especially multi-objective VRPTW. Huang et al. (2007) firstly proposed a P system based on the multi-objective optimization algorithm PMOA to solve the MOPs with two objectives. Zhang et al. (2010) presented a membrane algorithm MOMA based on quantum-inspired evolutionary algorithm for solving multi-objective knapsack problems.
To address above deficiencies of existed methods on solving multi-objective VRPTW, in this study, an evolutionary algorithm which combines DGEM and VNEM in a tissue P system, termed PDVA, is proposed to handle the multi-objective VRPTW, where the local search and global search abilities are maintained by these sub-algorithms. The tissue P system which consists of three cells is applied to build the computing framework. And in the tissue system, DGEM and VNEM are applied in two of these three cells as sub-algorithms respectively, and the last cell is used as the output cell, in which a elitism strategy is applied to update the population with better solutions. Between each two cells, cell communication rules are adopted to exchange information between different cells or between a cell and the environment. Despite of the use of tissue P system, the motion equations and related motion rules of glowworm in DGEM are improved to optimize the performance of DGEM, and the search boundary for VNEM is relaxed to enhance its global search ability. Besides, the Pareto-based approach is employed to deal with the two conflicting objectives. Compared with existed approaches for multi-objective VRPTW, the proposed PDVA is capable of obtaining a set of non-dominated solutions, which provides the decision maker sufficient choices for final decision.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the details of the constructed multi-objective VRPTW and its mathematic formulation is illustrated. Then the scheme of the tissue P system involved in PDVA is demonstrated in Section 3. The performance of our PDVA by comparing with several state-of-the-art methods for multi-objective VRPTW optimization are presented in Section 4. Finally, the paper ends with some conclusions and future work in Section 5.
