Computer and Internet technologies have made data digitized and networked, bringing big data new connotations. Arthur (2011) believed big data is an inexhaustible and constantly enriching resource. In recent years, big data has caused the scientific community to reexamine its methodology of scientific research and has triggered a revolution in scientific thinking and methods (Hey, 2012, Chen and Zhang, 2014). All of these changes bring a considerable amount of attention to big data to enhance the security and reliability of research and operation (Mayer-Schonberger and Cukier, 2013, Cuzzocrea, 2014, Thomson et al., 2014). Nature and Science have published special issues dedicated to discussing the opportunities and challenges brought by big data (Staff, 2011, Lynch, 2008). Huang et al. (2017) thought it is no secret that in big data research and applications, industry is ahead of academia, and Jin et al. (2015) concluded that there could be such two essential driving forces as industrial demand and the requirements on making better use of the data.
It is clear that big data has numerous potential applications (e.g. Srunswicker et al., 2015, Shi and Abdel-Aty, 2015, Nuaimi et al., 2015, Wang et al., 2016), so as in the field of safety science (e.g. Sakthivadivel et al., 2013, Batarseh and Latif, 2016; Guo et al., 2015, Walker and Strathie, 2016). Current works and research projects in this field have generated some literature that highlighted the importance and feasibility of big data in supporting safety science applications and services. For example, new accident causation and prediction models were put forward through mass typical accident statistics and analysis (Cuardras and Arenas, 2011, Al-Shanini et al., 2015). In addition, big data technology enabled risk and emergency management software, enterprise EHS control platform, safety service products like accident emergency equipment. Some paid attention to SBD application to special safety field, such as coal mine safety (El-Nasr and Shaban, 2015), traffic safety (Chen et al., 2016, Shi and Abdel-Aty, 2015), oil and gas safety (Sakthivadivel et al., 2013) and healthcare (Batarseh and Latif, 2016). Besides, some works started from the influence factor of safety data acquisition and sharing to propose some measures or develop new platforms (Zayed and Mahmoud, 2013, Tao and Jochen, 2013). It is safe to say that there is a fascinating outlook with far-reaching consequences. And in many situations, it is possible to bring safety up to the necessary level by adding more safety data which will smooth out errors of human or machine to avoid or reduce accident.
However, there exist still many problems that cannot be ignored when big data is applied to safety science. It’s important to realize that safety data is becoming exponentially un-analyzable with traditional statistics methods, most of whose contributions fail to move beyond existing theories and routine application to tackle the dynamic and complex issues in terms of volume, intensity and complexity, forcing a rethink on how to exploit the vast values of safety data efficiently (Klous and Wielaard, 2016). More specifically, there are four concrete manifestations as below: (i) data plugging, mainly due to inconsistent standard of data format which makes it hard to seize useful information, (ii) data separation, referring to scattered or redundant data storage in different parts with little associated integration, (iii) slow data, mainly result from weak supporting environment in data acquisition, and lack of practical tools and informationization ability to safety data analysis, and (iv) data missing, referring to important and unrecoverable data that fails to acquire and update in time.
Meanwhile, it is not enough for big data to be viewed as a strong enabler for safety science applications. First of all, big data is not mature enough to resolve perfectly some safety dilemma as it may bring noise accumulation, spurious correlation and incidental homogeneity, creating issues in computational feasibility and algorithmic stability (Fan et al., 2014). Then as for those small and simple safety problems it is enough just to apply traditional safety statistics. Furthermore, the most significant aspect of all is that there is lack of universal supporting theory that guides big data application in safety science field. In the context of the development strategy of big data, from the perspective of safety science theory, exploring how to achieve effective SBD application has an important practical significance.
From what has discussed above, the main objective of this study is to explore the methodologies and principles of SBD application. In what follows, we proceed by first comparing SBD with traditional SSD from four perspectives including theoretical research, typical research method, specific analysis method and processing mode. Next, we put forward the new definition of SBD and give a detailed description of its connotation. Then, this paper discusses the universal rules and interoperable methods of SBD and SSD. The following section sums up the nine basic application principles of SBD and constructs their theory architecture and working framework in data processing flow. Finally, this paper expounds the prospects and challenges of SBD application.
