The rising of the population will increase the demand for food and other agricultural products of more than 3% per year (Baniya, 2008). Increased population was also accompanied by increasing in non-agricultural land use that put pressure on agricultural land resources (Widiatmaka et al., 2016). That is led to an imbalance between the condition of demand for food with the condition of existing farmland. Such as in soy farming. In Indonesia, the land area of soybean crops has been decreasing over the last 20 years ie in 1995 with an area of 1,476,284 hectares of arable land until 2015 at only 614,095 hectares of the arable land area (Global Agricultural Information Network, 2016). From the data of land area in 2015, it only able to produce 963,183 tons of soybeans productions per year (BPS, 2016a,b). The total production was not able to meet requirements the national soybean consumption that reached 2,870,000 tons/year (BPS, 2016a,b). The lack of land use due to a decrease in the land area of soybeans from year to year influence the soybean production. In addition, according to Pilvere et al. (2014) land use that does not suitable will have implications on the low production, which will have an impact on the utilization of land resources is not efficient (Widiatmaka et al., 2016). One effort to increase the agricultural production especially soybean crops is allocated the crops on suitable land (Widiatmaka et al., 2014). Make planning for land area in the form of land suitability assessment is important to allocate soybean cultivation in suitable areas so that it can to optimize the land use resources (Dengiz et al., 2015) and increase soybean production (Zhang et al., 2015; Rathi, R. & Acharjya, D.P., 2018).
Analysis of land suitability assessment can help develop strategies for planning the development of productivity in the agricultural sector (Neupane et al., 2014; Pramanik, 2016). In addition to productivity purposes, land suitability assessment also considers the element of protection (FAO, 1993; Wali et al., 2016). Protection means to conserve natural resources from the damage such as prevent soil degradation or erosion due to land management processes continuously (FAO, 1976; Elaalem et al., 2011). Soil should be used in accordance with their capacity to meet human needs to ensure the sustainability of the ecosystem (Gamew, 2012).
In the land suitability assessment process, many factors must be considered (Akinci et al., 2013; Khoi and Murayama, 2010). In addition, there is no specific standard about the number of criteria that must be considered when assessing the potential of land suitability (Akinci et al., 2013). That is because each of the criteria that affect of land suitability has a level varying interests (Zhang et al., 2015; Elsheikh et al., 2013). To determine the importance level of each criterion can be done by weighting such as research (Gamew, 2012; Tsiko and Haile, 2011). With the weighting for each criterion can reflect the relative importance and have a better impact on the result later (Tsiko and Haile, 2011). There are many methods of weighting that can be used to determine importance level of criterion. One method that is often used to assess land suitability is AHP (Analytical Hierarchy Process).
The use of conventional methods are based on manual procedures in the process of crop selection and prediction that is a hard method and also it has a weakness because it takes a long time and large funds (Kamkar et al., 2014). The use of AHP method in the assessing land suitability can replace conventional methods in order to determine and reduce the weight-related criteria influential and combined with the map layers suitability as a linear additional relation to the processing of raster data in mapping land suitability using GIS (Geographic Information System) (Deng et al., 2014; Ayehu and Besufekad, 2015). In addition, the weighting using AHP through pairwise comparison is much better than direct assignment of weight because it has advantages for checking the consistency of the weight by calculating the ratio of consistency (Tsiko and Haile, 2011). AHP method used in the decision-making process assuming that the ratio of the two elements from several criteria, real-time importance (Neupane et al., 2014).
In addition to a scoring, in land suitability assessment process is also necessary to standardize of each criterion used. The purpose of standardizing is to classify the relative importance of each criterion into suitability classes (Baniya, 2008). The value of weights and standards used to derive land suitability index (Zhang et al., 2015; Deng et al., 2014). The process of standardization of criteria for the land suitability assessment usually is done by manual method that is based only on the opinions or knowledge of some experts, farmers and several reviews of the literature through the determination using the specified scale (Baniya, 2008; Dengiz et al., 2015). It is considered less than optimal to determine the value of standardized criteria, because of disuse of an exact calculation of a specific algorithm. Choosing the most appropriate algorithm for assessing land suitability is important for land use planning that will be carried (Zhang et al., 2015). Fuzzy sets used in process of standardizing the criteria because of it has potential to provide better evaluation than using a discrete approach as it introduces subjectivity and ambiguity in the analysis (Papadopoulos et al., 2015). Fuzzy sets method had been selected because it has an excellent mechanism to change the numerical data of various magnitudes (Zhang et al., 2015; Anitha, A. and Acharjya, D.P., 2017). By using fuzzy in the standardization process, the range of values of land suitability classes will be equal for each criterion at range 0–1 (Suh and Brownson, 2016).
Implementation of Fuzzy sets and AHP has been widely used in several studies of decision making. In the study by Tsiko and Haile (2011), the best choice for the construction of water reservoirs indicate that the implementation of Fuzzy and AHP provide better mechanisms and transparent for the results compared with the conventional method. The study from Mokarram and Najafi-Ghiri (2016) show that the implementation of Fuzzy and AHP has high accuracy for evaluating the percentage of potassium saturation percentage (KSP) in the study area. The study by Ezzabadi et al. (2015), application of Fuzzy and AHP method can efficiently improve the performance of the European Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM) model-based power plant in Iran. The study by Li et al. (2014) on evaluation of the efficiency of transit vehicle shows that the resulting model is more applicable and has good efficiency. Research by Elaalem et al. (2011) shows that Fuzzy AHP approach for modeling land suitability evaluation is better than Ideal Point approach because of the Ideal Point approach has some bias, while specifically for the implementation of Fuzzy and AHP on the land suitability assessment in some studies of Zhang et al. (2015), Wali et al. (2016), Deng et al. (2014) showed that Fuzzy and AHP are a powerful combination, effective and has a very good mechanism in the process of assessment of land suitability. From these studies, proved that implementation of combination methods of Fuzzy and AHP effective to be an alternative in the decision-making process.
Based on the data from the soybean land area (BPS, 2016a,b), there is a decrease in the soybean land area during the period of the last few years. Less optimal of soybean land use due to a decrease in land area and influential at the decline of soybean production (Global Agricultural Information Network, 2016). It required an effort to increase the land use through land suitability assessment. The objective of this study is to optimizing of the land use and soybean production's through land suitability assessment using Fuzzy and AHP. Fuzzy sets and AHP methods applied to be able to replace the manual scoring method which is still applied in some studies. In this study, Fuzzy sets used to calculate the value of standardization of criteria while AHP method will be applied to the process of weighting the criteria. The results of the calculation of the value of standardization using Fuzzy and weighting criteria using AHP is used to calculate the suitability index and then used to the overlay process of making land suitability map for the soybean crop.
