In the information age, the innovation of education is essential for countries to ensure prosperity and competitiveness and the integration of information and communication technology (ICT) into education has been recognized as key enablers for the educational innovation (Brečko, Kampylis, & Punie, 2014; Pérez-Sanagustín et al., 2017). Therefore, many countries have invested in ICT infrastructures in schools and issued policies regarding the integration of ICT into education, endeavoring to innovate student learning environment (Skryabin, Zhang, Liu, & Zhang, 2015; UIS, 2009). Correspondingly, ICT has been widely used in educational settings. Given the situation, quite a number of studies have been conducted to examine whether ICT advances students' learning (e.g., Cheung & Slavin, 2012, 2013; Erdogdu & Erdogdu, 2015; Harrison et al., 2002; Luu & Freeman, 2011). These studies have unraveled the potential influences of various ICT factors on students’ academic performance in different domains.
Despite the substantial efforts in understanding the relationship of ICT and student learning, more research along this line is needed for two reasons. First, previous research has mainly focused on identifying school- (e.g., school ICT availability) and student-level (student ICT use at home) ICT factors that might influence student academic performance (Balanskat, Blamire, & Kefala, 2006; Condie & Munro, 2007; Cox et al., 2003; Zhao & Frank, 2003) without taking into account of nation-level ICT factors. National ICT development level can not only influence school and family ICT richness and educational stakeholders' ICT competence (ITU, 2015; Skryabin et al., 2015), but also act as an important stimulus for educational reforms (Bocconi, Kampylis, & Punie, 2012; Kozma, 2005; OECD, 2017b). However, despite the importance of nation-level ICT factors, little research has been conducted that incorporated the effect of country-level ICT factors into the picture in understanding the impact of ICT on student academic success. Second, the ICT landscape has gone through drastic changes in recent years and it is necessary to constantly monitor the effect of ICT-related factors on student academic performance. According to OECD statistics, among its member countries, the average percentage of households with internet access at home increased from 74% in 2012 to 88% in 2017 (OECD.Stat, 2018). Student access to ICT at schools and homes has also become more convenient due to the increase in national ICT investment and the decline in the prices of ICT facilities (Istance & Kools, 2013). Student computer ratio at schools is also increasing for most countries (especially for developing countries) except those already with almost all students owning computers (OECD, 2015). As ICT may either benefit students’ learning or distract students from learning, it remains to be seen whether the increased access to ICT at home and at schools could augment or impede student academic achievement. Furthermore, new and revolutionary ICT products are getting normalized in the education (Johnson et al., 2014). Taking social media for example, as Twitter becomes ubiquitous nowadays, it is also widely used by teachers and students for educational purposes (e.g., communication, collaboration, assessment, and so on) (Tang & Hew, 2017). Thus, the constant changes in ICT landscape make it necessary and important to revisit the relationship of ICT with student learning.
The present study examines the relationship between ICT and student mathematics, reading, and scientific literacy. Specifically, we: (1) conceptualize ICT as multi-level (national-, school-, and student-level) constructs to comprehensively unravel the influential pattern of ICT on student learning attainment; and (2) employ the latest PISA data (PISA 2015 database) encompassing 44 countries to present state-of-the-art evidence about the relation between ICT and student academic performance.
