In the past, knowledge among scientists has mainly been passed on by word of mouth among peers and colleagues, and across personal relationships built upon mutual respect, trust, and shared interests (J. Bartlett and Neugebauer, 2005, Kaye et al., 2009). The emergence of the World Wide Web has provided a solution of knowledge dissemination (Neumann & Prusak, 2007). Knowledge networking, which can be defined as “a special case of social networks in which the links of the network represent shared or related knowledge” (Jones, 2001), has increasingly become more and more prevalent across a number of data-intensive technical and scientific domains including computer and information science, biology and genomics, climate science, neuron science, and high energy physics. In today's online environment, knowledge sharing is not limited to acquaintances or colleagues within specific organizations, but further includes a growing number of geographically dispersed individuals who share knowledge with comparative strangers in online communities.
Awareness of benefits of knowledge networking is rapidly growing in health and life sciences research communities (De Silva & Vance, 2017) First, knowledge networking enables scientists to confirm research findings with minimal processes (Krathwohl, 1993; Neumann & Prusak, 2007). Scientists can learn more from each other by combining their specialized knowledge with new insights, alternative views from other competent experts in a timely manner (De Silva and Vance, 2017, Sonnenwald, 2007).
Secondly, knowledge networking is well-suited for encouraging collaborative scientific discovery and creativity in research communities (De Silva and Vance, 2017, de Matos et al., 2013, Neumann and Prusak, 2007, Ward et al., 2013). It is obvious that knowledge networking helps reduce the cognitive burdens of scientists associated with uncertainty and data complexity (Neumann and Prusak, 2007, Ward et al., 2013). Thus, there has been a dramatic increase in knowledge networking platforms to support health and life sciences research communities such as open-access journals (e.g., PLoS, PubMed or ResearchGate), scientific resource sharing platforms (e.g., myExperiment or Galaxy), and collaborative discussion forums (e.g., SEQanswers or BioStar).
Even with recent advances to further support health and life scientists to share knowledge online, the fact is that the vast majority do not actively share. For instance, a recent empirical study by Park and Gabbard (2013) identified that only a small portion of health and life scientists are actively engaged in online knowledge networking regardless of age or years of research experience. A considerable number of these scientists were identified as lurkers; who consume shared knowledge, but do not contribute to the knowledge base (Preece, Nonnecke, & Andrews, 2004).
For the most part, previous literature has focused on sharing data (Birnholtz, 2007, Field et al., 2009, Kaye et al., 2009) even through in practice scientists do indeed share both data and acquired knowledge from educational training and practical experience, as well as understanding and interpretation of data and information. Since knowledge empowers people to chose from larger sets of actions in the face of uncertain and unusual situations (Neumann & Prusak, 2007), knowledge sharing behavior in scientific communities deserves special attention.
It is time to understand why scientists do or do not engage in knowledge networking and how their motivations, perceived benefits, and perceived barriers affect their sharing behavior. This inquiry in turn, can help user experience (UX) communities that are willing to promote the benefits and mitigate the perceived risks and ultimately encourage a knowledge sharing culture.
The current study therefore aims to (1) examine significant factors that influence knowledge sharing behavior, and to (2) discuss how each of the factors can be addressed to get scientists to share different types of knowledge within virtual communities. We first address differences between data, information, and knowledge as well as the types of knowledge that can be shared in online environments. We show the significance of online knowledge networking among scientists in current data-intensive research processes. We then present hypotheses developed to determine key factors (i.e., determinants) of knowledge sharing behavior and to develop a predictive research model that describes why scientists choose to share or not share the different types of knowledge. We describe our survey instrument and analyze survey responses using Partial Least Squares (PLS) to understand how hypothesized determinants influence scientists' intention to share knowledge in open scientific communities. Based on our results, we distill and discuss (1) what factors influence scientists' motivation and hindrance related to knowledge sharing and how these factors influence scientists’ intentions, and (2) how motivation and hindrance perspectives influence sharing of certain knowledge types. Lastly, we present design implications to encourage and reinforce knowledge sharing motivations.
