The computer malware (i.e., computer virus, worm, trojan horse, retrovirus, botnet) [2] development and its impact on the society are quite contextual in computer science and computational intelligence research. It is possible to see a mutual fusion of both the technologies, i.e., computer viruses and computational intelligence. Antimalware technologies can use various kind of heuristics (e.g., artificial neural networks [3],…) to recognize the unknown and new malware code. To understand malware technologies and its strategies it is essential to monitor1,2,3 and analyze them. The evolution of the malware and antimalware technologies is almost balanced today. The development of antimalware systems reflects changes in malware updates and to be ready for new threats, it is important to predict, model and experimentally verify the possible antimalware improvements.
Contemporary, various research papers, discussing malware dynamics and spreading, are published today. The most significant directions represent the study of the malware dynamics (mostly based on mathematical models) that for example adapt the epidemiologically compartmental models and also research that discuss what malware behavior can be expected on real networks (i.e., social, mobile, computer,…). For example, in Ref. [4], authors adapt the epidemiologically compartmental models to study the computer virus contagion. The authors derived a mathematical model and determined the potential edges on which contagions can take place. The paper of Xulong and Chenquan [5] discuss the combined impact of countermeasure and network topology on virus diffusion and optimal dynamic countermeasure, that leads to the heterogeneous propagation model. Consequently, its optimal control problem is proposed and analyzed. Another paper [6] discusses research on a model, that is based on the fractional epidemiological model. The model and the whole approach is theoretical (i.e., it does not work with real malware) and analysis of the epidemiological model to describe computer viruses with an arbitrary order derivative having a non-singular kernel are done there. The numerical simulations are performed over this model and demonstrate the impact of the arbitrary order derivative of the model.
Another approach is in Ref. [7], that studies malware behavior via specific model applied on Barabasi-Albert network, to determine how the infection rates affect virus propagation through the traffic flow in different virus phases. Another approach, based on a theoretical model, in this case, based on Lyapunov functions combined with the Volterra-Lyapunov matrix properties is in Ref. [8], while in Ref. [9] an epidemic threshold is investigated as well as the existence and uniqueness of the virus equilibrium, again, based on an idealized model. The standard tools like locally and globally asymptotic stability, by applying Routh-Hurwitz criterion and Lyapunov functional approach, are used there. An interesting combination of theoretical models and complex networks is in Ref. [10]. That research discusses the spread of viruses in the scale-free network with different topologies. That spreading is based on the Susceptible Infected External model. The paper discusses results that show that the network structure influences the virus spreading.
Several research papers have been published discussing malware contagion in different platforms, like [11] (using analytical techniques to understand the behavior of malware like e-mail viruses and worms) [12], (a novel differential equation-based model is used to analyze malware spreading via networks of end-to-end messaging services via personal social communications) [13], (modeling Botnet propagation using time zones) [14], (this paper simulate malware propagation in networks of smart cell phones) [15], (malware propagation via email “network”) or [16] (here is used agent-based modeling of malware dynamics in heterogeneous environments).
The works mentioned above are based on mathematical models, their analyses, or on agent-based simulations. It discusses malware dynamics and contagion in computers or its systems (various networks, from physical to social). Our approach, presented in this paper, is different, and as we hope, is a counterpart of today's research on malware behavior and structure (as of [13,16]). In this paper, we describe how the behavior of the computer virus can be based on the swarm algorithms and its propagation and visualization of its spreading, in fact, reflecting its dynamics, can be visualized as the network. The approach presented here is not based on a single instance of the classical virus spreading and contagion, but more on hypothetical swarm virus and its dynamics of spread in single PC at the moment.
This idea is based on a fusion of swarm algorithms and a classical computer virus. The latest development of virus code shows that C&C (command and control technology) has been used as in the case of Stuxnet [17] virus or Botnet malware [13]. It is logical to expect that development of the viral code will never stop at this level, but will continue up to viruses that will evolve according to the Darwinian theory of evolution and will mimic swarm intelligence in nature, such as the swarm algorithms [18] already do. The aim of our research is not to develop a fully functional swarm virus, but its prototype (no payload present and contagion is controllable and limited). The behavior of such prototype, as we show, can be then visualized as the network structure and thus likely can be controlled and stopped. The same methodology can be used not only in laboratory conditions on a single PC but also on virus spreading over the network or the Internet if real data are available.
Thus, in comparison with contemporary research papers cited above, this paper is not based on theoretical models and its numerical simulations, but on real experiments with real malware in a secured virtual machine, real-time observations, data recording, visualizations and some basic analysis. Also, comparing to contemporary research, ideas presented here did not discuss dynamics of independent virus instances spreading over the PC systems and networks as in many papers [[5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]], but here we show/discuss the prototype of swarm virus, that is created by population of virus instances that communicate amongst themselves and travel through computer system (or can via networks). This communication and swarm movement via system then create a network, that is visualized, analyzed and discussed here. Thus, the proposed swarm virus creates a network for its behavior. Swarm virus is the logical step in C&C kind of malware and as our paper demonstrate, with a very rich level of variability and complexity in the point of view of used swarm philosophy, hierarchy, internal communication, and visualization. The main principle of underlying the proposed idea is in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (416KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The main idea of the swarm virus and its visualization.
The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. Section Malware and swarm algorithms discuss a very brief overview of malware to introduce this exciting field as well as its possible fusion with swarm algorithms. This is more discussed in the section Motivation. The main reasons for our proposal with referencing to contemporary state on the field of swarm algorithms and modern computer virus technologies are discussed there. It is followed by section Swarm virus - evolution, behavior, and networking. A possible way how to model and visualize swarm virus is proposed there. The conditions of experiments reported here are given in section 5 and followed by the discussion of the achieved results.
