Mankind’s aggregate knowledge continues to be digitized and stored as news, scientific articles, and books [1]. The major sources of topical scientific knowledge are conferences and scientific journals. The International Conference on Computational Science (ICCS)1 is a yearly conference that unites specialists and researchers from computational disciplines to discuss problems and solutions in the area, to identify new issues, and to shape future directions for research. ICCS has been publishing papers on various application areas from researchers who are pioneering computational methods in sciences such as physics, chemistry, the life sciences and engineering, as well as in the arts and humanities [2], [3], [4]. Since its inception in 2001, ICCS has attracted on average 370 papers and 350 participants every year. It is an A-ranked conference in CORE classification, and one of the most cited events in the field of Computational Science.
The proceedings series have turned into a noteworthy scholarly asset for computational science specialists, which serves to both characterize and propel the cutting edge of the field, and we believe that analysing the underlying contents is as valuable as organising the conference. In order to examine and comprehend this rapidly growing collection of textual data, we apply topic modelling techniques [1] together with analysis of authors’ keywords [5]. In addition to this, we also study the results as static and dynamic networks that may help us to understand the relationships between the topics. In other words, the static and dynamic networks of topics depict multidisciplinary research and collaborations among scientific communities, where connectivity, grouping, and distances between the topics can be analysed in detail. Similar techniques have been applied to other types of networks related to knowledge dissemination processes, such as citation [6] and collaboration [7] networks.
Topic modelling is a statistical [1] and text mining [8] method that examines the tokens of documents to detect themes or topics that run through them. The results can be used to analyse how the topics relate to one another, and how they evolve over time [1], [8], [9]. Topic models are based on the idea that documents are constituted as collections of topics, where a topic is defined as a probability distribution over words [10], [11]. Therefore, the main objectives of this study are to answer the following questions: What are the underlying topical structures of ICCS papers? How do these topics evolve over time? Do topics relate to one another? Does the relationship between topics change over time? Can we identify viable communities of topics? Does ICCS facilitate collaboration among researchers/participants? This paper presents an extended version of our conference publication [12] invited to this special issue. We present the following extensions: we have collected and analysed more data (conference papers for seventeen years, 2001–2017); identified the growing and disappearing topics over time using trend analysis; studied the correlation of topics; investigated how ICCS facilitated new collaborations among researchers and organisations using collaboration network analyses of ICCS participants after the conference.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 describes related work; Section 3 outlines data collection and preprocessing; Sections 4 and 5 report the static and dynamic topics of ICCS; Sections 6 and 7 illustrate the analysis of static and dynamic networks of topics and authors’ keywords; Section 8 analyses the collaboration networks; and Section 9 presents conclusions and recommendations.
