Industrial Ecology is a relatively new synthesis of human interaction with the environment (Graedel and Allenby, 2003). One version of the field has the goal to make industrial systems more like natural ecosystems in terms of cycling and recycling of products made and used by humans. The view of the founding industrial engineers was that natural ecosystems completely cycle materials, such as plant nutrients, and that this level of cycling performance should be a goal of industrial production. According to the editor of the Journal of Industrial Ecology (Brattebo, 2002), “IE is not an academic discipline. It is a scientific concept, or some would say a scientific field, that is working across established disciplines. It is also a way of thinking and a strategy that may be applied at different scales in society, and is founded on a set of theories and methods. IE is therefore oriented toward describing, analyzing, understanding, and improving systems.”
A conceptual advancement of the field was to consider that man-made products have a life-cycle, like living organisms. This thinking has led to life cycle assessment which is a major new accounting approach for material balances, energy efficiency and environmental impact. In the ecosystem at the end-of-life, organisms die but the elements they are composed of recycle back to support the next generation of organisms. Much of Ecology deals with studying how elements cycle, which requires a system approach of pathways and rates of movement of elements through the network of living and non-living components of the ecosystem. In contrast to natural ecosystems in the industrial systems at the end-of-life, human-made products are typically disposed of in landfills as waste. The elements in the products are lost and cannot be used to support the next generation of the human-made products. McDonough and Braungart (2002) coined the metaphor “cradle to grave” to describe the one-way, linear dynamics of industrial systems and “cradle to cradle” to describe the cycling dynamics of natural ecosystems. In this paper we describe a teaching exercise in which students disassemble a used computer for hands-on experience on material cycling in consumer electronics. Most discussions of Industrial Ecology education involve the design of multi-course curricula (Marstrander et al., 2000; Ning et al., 2007; Geng et al., 2009; Shi, 2016) or broad concepts such as life cycle assessment (Cooper and Fava, 2000; Hawkins and Matthews, 2009). This type of literature takes an overall top-down approach to the issue of Industrial Ecology education. In this paper we use a bottom-up approach of describing a single laboratory exercise in a university Industrial Ecology course that has been successful at engaging students.
