Drug discovery and development are expensive and time taking processes (Prashansa, 2014). Computational methods have been helpful in predicting the druglikeness of proposed compounds before wet-lab stage. Drug relevant properties include several parameters like oral bioavailability, toxicity risk assessment etc. An ideal drug compound should be efficacious, selective in its action, and should have good oral absorbance (Egan et al., 2000). The main target of drug development process is to search for a molecule which possesses good pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties (Egan et al., 2000). Among the various softwares used for predicting mutagenic and tumorigenic toxicities, reproductive risks and other drug relevant properties such as calculated LogP (cLogP), solubility, MW and topological molecular polar surface area (TPSA); Osiris Property Explorer is one of the most popular and accurate web-based tools (Verma, 2012). Molinspiration is yet another online based software which is used to predict bioactivity of compounds towards several receptors like GPCR ligands, ion channel modulators, kinase inhibitors, nuclear receptor ligands, protease inhibitors and other enzymes. Other molecular properties like hydrogen bond donors and acceptors, number of rotatable bonds, number of heavy atoms, MW etc., can also be calculated using Molinspiration (Husain et al., 2015). Evaluation of druglikeness is based on certain rules of which Lipinski’s rule of five holds prime importance (Lipinski et al., 1997). The rule describes molecular properties of a compound required for estimating important pharmacokinetic ADME parameters. The rule is useful during lead optimization to increase the activity and selectivity of a likely drug candidate (Ertl et al., 2000). There are other filters like Veber, Ghose and leadlikeness which are fastest methods for evaluating the drug-like or lead-like properties of a designed compound to characterize its medicinal potential.
Transition metals and their complexes have evoked much interest due to their inherent biopotency (Haiduc, 1990; Das and Livingstone, 1978). Hetero-ligand complexes of thiosemicarbazones have been used as probes for DNA in bioinorganic chemistry and some of these compounds also possess interesting anticancer properties and may be prospective drug candidates (Erkkila et al., 1999; Liu et al., 2008; Schatzschneider et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2010). There has been a growing interest in the formation of hetero-ligands chelates involving ligands containing atoms such as sulfur, nitrogen and/or oxygen of different oxidation states (Tsukahara et al., 2003; Elajaily and Maihub, 2003; Prasad et al., 2003; Yao et al., 2004). Hetero-ligand complexes are also of considerable importance in the field of metallo-enzymes and other biological activities (Saha et al., 2003; Saha et al., 2004). Hence, a large body of co-ordination chemistry of hetero-ligands with transition and non-transition metal ions has been reported recently (Fenton et al., 2002; Ali et al., 1988; Ghosh et al., 2005). In the presented study, eight different hetero-ligands were used to design hetero-ligand complexes with metals of first transition series in their most common oxidation state (+2). The designed complexes were tested for their medicinal properties on different parameters. On the basis of the results obtained, Fe complexes were synthesized using four different ligands viz. py, bpy, 2-picoline and 1,10-phenanthroline. The complexes were tested for their anticancer activity against MDA and A549 cell lines using MTT assay. The complexes were also evaluated for their antioxidant activity using DPPH assay. Additionally, complexes of other transition metals have also been synthesized and their anticancer potential against human lung carcinoma cell line A549 has also been tested. This data has been presented as Supplementary material.
