Tropomycin receptor kinase A (TrkA) is a member of Tropymcin receptor kinase group of enzymes (Three homologous subtypes A, B, and C). Trk receptors are known to be transmembrane glycoproteins. They are tyrosine kinases with an extracellular ligand-binding domain containing multiple repeats of leucine-rich motifs, two cysteine clusters (C1, C2), two immunoglobulin-like domains (Ig1, Ig2), and a single transmembrane domain [1].
TrkA is activated by a neurotrophin named as Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) [2], and like all other tyrosine kinase enzymes, TrkA dimerizes upon activation, which results in consequent intracellular phosphorylation of tyrosine residues and further cellular activation processes [3]. Moreover, TrkA is known to stimulate a variety of cancerous and cellular activities including malignant cellular transformation, chemotaxis, metastasis, migration and invasion [2,4]. hence, TrkA is strongly associated with the development of pancreatic and prostatic cancers [5]. Per se, TrkA is a promising target for future treatment of cancer [3].
Trk and its natural activator (NGF), are known to hava a unique structural interactions, NGF is believed to activate TrkA by joining two TrkA monomers, leading to TrkA transphosphorylation [6]. Thus, the TrkA receptors exist as inactive, homodimers prior to NGF binding. The NGF binding induces the rotation and twisting of the transmembrane domains of TrkA receptor dimers, resulting in rearrangement of the cytoplasmic domains for activation [6].
On the other hand, kinase enzyme inhibitors are catagerized into three different types: type I inhibitors which are ATP-compititors that bind to the hinge region with at least one hydrogen bond. Type II inhibitors which are also ATP-inhibitors but their binding with the ATP binding site occurs at the extended region, including a back pocket which contains a highly conserved Asp–Phe–Gly (DFG) motif; and finally type III inhibitors which are non-ATP-compititors that target the external allosteric site of the kinase protein [7,8]. As for the TrkA enzyme, type I inhibitors usually form a hydrogen bond with Met592 in the hinge region. Meanwhile type II inhibitors usually stabilizes the DFG-out state via several hydrogen bonds such as the ones with Lys544 in the β-strand, Glu560 in the αC helix, and Asp668 in the DFG segment [8].
Taking into consideration the complex nature of the dimer TrkA enzyme our present challenge in the process of development of a QSAR model that describes the activity of TrkA inhibitors is no longer in developing a model that is statistically able to predict the activity within the training set, but in developing a model with the capability to predict the activity of new chemicals from different chemical databases. Towards this aim we adopted the OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) principles to reveal what is meant to be an accurate and reproducible TrkA QSAR model [[8], [9], [10]]. These principles were agreed by OECD countries as the guidelines for the validation of QSAR models at the 37th Joint Meeting of the Chemicals Committee and Working Party on Chemicals, Pesticides and Biotechnology in November 2004 [9,11].
So, the purpose of the present work is to generate unique open-source Genetic algorithm and multiple linear regression QSAR (GFA-MLR-QSAR) workflow that engages several 3D (pharmacophoric) and 2D descriptors to predict a variety of steric and electronic features that represent the optimal interactions between active TrkA inhibitors and their binding pocket.
