In 1997, the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs of the Länder in the Federal Republic of Germany decided on Germany’s regular participation in international large-scale-assessments. Germany participates in the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) every four years at the end of primary school as well as in the Programm for International Student Assessment (PISA) every three years at the end of lower secondary education.
However, these studies only allow cross-sectional analyses and only address specific age groups. Until recently, no large-scale study measuring the development of competencies over the lifespan had been carried out in Germany. The National Educational Panel Study (NEPS; Blossfeld, 2008) which started in 2009 is the first German attempt to close this gap by assessing the development of skills and competencies over the lifespan (Hahn et al., 2013). NEPS strives to connect with national and international large-scale assessment studies to achieve a common interpretation of scores (Blossfeld, 2008). However, comparing test results from different studies is a challenge because they are based on different frameworks and their results are not reported on the same scale. Therefore, the test instruments have to be linked to a common scale.
This study examines the comparability of the Grade 9 NEPS science test with the PISA science test. Connecting both tests could extend the interpretation of their test scores. Until now, no proficiency levels have been defined in NEPS. Hence, the NEPS results cannot be interpreted and reported in a criterion-based manner. The link between the NEPS and PISA tests can allow for classification of the NEPS test scores in the criterion-based international reference framework of PISA which is well established in the public educational debate in Germany. The longitudinal design in NEPS could help to identify the determinants of competence acquisition which can predict the performance in the PISA test. Furthermore, the link between NEPS and PISA could be used to investigate in NEPS samples to what extent the performance on the international PISA scale can predict success in upper secondary education and the further professional career.
Due to the fact that the NEPS and PISA studies deal differently with missing responses, we also investigated how the different treatments of missing values affect the comparability of the test scores and the quality of the linking. To link the NEPS and PISA tests to a common scale, 1079 9th grade students took both tests in a linking study.
According to Kolen and Brennan (2004) the linking of test scores from different studies requires sufficient similarities of the tests with regard to:
•Inferences: To what extent are the scores for the two tests used to draw similar types of inferences? In other words, to what extent do the two tests share common measurement goals?•Populations: To what extent are the two tests designed for testing similar populations?•Characteristics and conditions of the measurement: To what extent do the two tests share common measurement conditions, for example, with regard to test format, administration conditions, test length, etc.?•Constructs: To what extent do the two tests measure the same construct?
To closely examine these aspects, the next section will look into the similarities and differences of the NEPS and PISA frameworks.
