In their discussion of the impact of the Maker Movement on education, Halverson and Sheridan [1] highlight significant challenges that hinder the use of Making for learning in the classroom. For instance, because most classrooms worldwide are ‘learning goals’ driven while Making is hands-on, exploratory, and creativity-driven [2], educators are reluctant to employ Making in the classroom and favor ‘instructionism’ to meet accountability goals and tests. Such challenges amongst others result in Making-oriented activities and kits being designed for and tested mostly in workshops and after-school programs, rather than in the classroom.
In this paper, we investigate how Making may have a role in the modern classroom to support scientific modeling. How do students engage with scientific modeling through the hands-on construction of interactive models of their science, and in so doing, engage in learning science topics that are in line with their school’s curriculum? For our investigation, we adopt the approach of deploying prototype probes of designed curriculum-based science Making kits and activities in the classroom, and analyzing the students’ engagement process to uncover themes of interest.
Our research engaged 4th and 5th grade students over two school years of science classes. These grades are an important turning point in many educational systems, for example, in the United States when schools typically transition toward the implementation of formal science curricula and testing. Developmentally, they fall into the Concrete Operational Phase [[3], [4]] where children begin moving beyond concrete modes of thinking to develop stronger abstractions. While some have raised questions concerning the rigidity of developmental staging [[5], [6]], most agree that general developmental progression does take place in the child, and the progression correlates generally with biological age [[6], [7]]. It is critical thus that students at this level begin to get a grasp of the role of models in science. This paper focuses on students engaging in Making-based curricula using three different types of models: simulation models, concept-process models, and illustrative models. Following, we provide an overview of the use of models in the learning of science, describe our study, and present our findings from qualitative video-based analyses, and discuss their relevance with respect to Making-based science learning in elementary education.
