1.1. Effect of document characteristics on citation impactMeasuring research impact using citation analysis has a long tradition in the field of scientometrics. Today, citation-based indicators are widely used and play a central role in the evaluation of scientific works. Despite their de facto use as proxies of scientific quality, citations are not able to fully capture the use and influence of scientific papers (MacRoberts & MacRoberts, 2017; Moed, 2005). Bibliometric research has also shown that a variety of factors can influence citation counts (Larivière & Gingras, 2011; Opthof & Leydesdorff, 2010; Waltman, van Eck, van Leeuwen, Visser, & van Raan, 2011). Such factors include, the document types and age of publications, their number of pages, the length of their titles and reference lists (Bornmann & Leydesdorff, 2015; Bornmann, Leydesdorff, & Wang, 2014; Vieira & Gomes, 2010); their different theoretical or methodological approaches (Antonakis, Bastardoz, Liu, & Schriesheim, 2014); whether they are open access (Hajjem, Harnad, & Gingras, 2006); the citation propensity of their fields and their interdisciplinarity (Yegros-Yegros, Rafols, & D’Este, 2015); or the Impact Factor of their publication journal (Boyack & Klavans, 2005).Numerous previous studies have analyzed whether citation impact is affected by various document characteristics. These studies have explored different characteristics at the article, journal, and author levels using correlation and regression analyses. For example, in the Natural, Life, and Health sciences (Thelwall, 2017a), papers with unusual and obscure titles were associated with lower citation impact. Mixed results were found regarding the effect of title length (Jacques & Sebire, 2010; Stremersch, Camacho, Vanneste, & Verniers, 2015), or titles that included non-alphanumeric characters such as hyphens or colons (Buter & van Raan, 2011; Haslam et al., 2008; Nair & Gibbert, 2016). Based on the assumption that longer articles with longer reference lists may reflect in-depth analysis and diversity of ideas, the number of pages and references have also been analyzed as factors that may affect citation counts (Fox & Boris, 2016). The results showed that papers with more references and more pages tended to get more citations (Ajiferuke & Famoye, 2015; Davis, 2011). Similarly, the number of authors, institutes, and countries involved in a given publication may indicate the extent of collaboration, which is again assumed to increase citation impact. However, results regarding the effect of collaboration on citation rates are mixed (for an overview see Onodera & Yoshikane, 2015) as regards variations by country of collaboration (Thelwall & Sud, 2016), level of collaboration (e.g. whether national, international, intra/inter institutional) (Leimu & Koricheva, 2005), or authors and disciplines (Williams, Stevenson, Nicholas, Watkinson, & Rowlands, 2009). For a recent review of studies analyzing factors affecting citation counts we refer to Tahamtan, Safipour Afshar, & Ahamdzadeh (2016).
1.2. Effect of document characteristics on social media visibilityIn the context of recently introduced altmetrics—or, more specifically, its subset of social media based metrics (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, blogs, Wikipedia, Mendeley)—the effect to which some factors influence social media activity remains understudied. One large-scale study examining the effect on social media metrics of typical document characteristics (including document type, discipline, number of pages, title length, number of references, and collaboration patterns) conducted by Haustein, Costas, & Larivière (2015). This study was based on Altmetric.com and Web of Science data and found that although effects were weaker than for citations, documents were more likely to be tweeted if they had longer reference lists and involving a greater number of authors, institutes, and countries. Correlations between social media metrics and document characteristics were, however, quite low to non-existent, which was mostly due to the skewed nature of social media events related to journal articles, with most of them having no metrics at all. Social media metrics (particularly Facebook and Twitter counts) correlated mostly among each other, indicating a circular relationship (Bourdieu, 1998), meaning that being picked up by one social media increases the chances of being picked up by another one. Haustein, Costas et al. (2015) also found that news items and editorials were among the most tweeted document types, which indicates that outputs that contain more condensed, novel, opinion-based and easy-to-understand pieces tend to be more popular on Twitter. The results contrast with the citation patterns for these types of documents, which are substantially less cited than articles and reviews. Overall, the study by Haustein, Costas et al. (2015) showed that characteristics that typically are related to higher citation counts had a smaller relationship with social media counts, sometimes even in an entirely different manner (for instance, longer titles were associated with higher citation counts but with lower Twitter mentions).
1.3. Mendeley readership and citation countsMendeley is an online reference manager that allows users to save documents in their own libraries and share their libraries with others. Statistics about how often a particular document is saved are made available via the Mendeley API as ‘readership’ counts. While this count is described by Mendeley as ‘readership’, it does not actually indicate that the user who saved the document has actually ‘read’ it, but simply that the user has saved the reference in the library. As such, Mendeley ‘saves’ are seen more as acts of access to documents than of their appraisal (Haustein, Bowman & Costas, 2016), indicating that the level of engagement captured by these acts is very low.However, Mendeley has been identified as the most prevalent and noteworthy altmetric source. It has been found that readership counts often exceed citations, and that there is a high representation of recent publications on the platform (Thelwall & Sud, 2015). Compared to other altmetric indicators, Mendeley readership counts were shown to have moderate to strong correlations with citation counts (for a review see Sugimoto, Work, Larivière, & Haustein, 2017), which reflects a greater similarity with citations than other altmetric indicators (Costas, Zahedi, & Wouters, 2015a). This can be explained by the large numbers of academic users in Mendeley, and the frequent use of Mendeley in a pre-citation context (Mohammadi, Thelwall, & Kousha, 2016). The number of Mendeley users who have added an article to their libraries has been suggested as an early indicator of citation impact (Thelwall & Sud, 2015), and Mendeley itself has been identified as a relevant tool with which to identify highly cited publications (Zahedi, Costas, & Wouters, 2017). Mendeley readership distributions have also been shown to be very similar to citation distributions (Costas, Haustein, Zahedi, & Larivière, 2016), and it has been suggested that field-normalized readership scores could be calculated in a similar fashion as for citations (Bornmann & Haunschild, 2016).Given these similarities between readership and citations, one might expect that Mendeley readership counts are also related to the same document characteristics as citations. While some characteristics, such as document age (Thelwall, Haustein, Larivière, & Sugimoto, 2013), disciplines (Haustein, Costas et al., 2015), topics (Costas et al., 2015a), or countries (Alperin, 2015) have been already explored for Mendeley, a systematic study of other quantitative document characteristics previously investigated for citations is still lacking in the literature regarding Mendeley readership. A recent study (Didegah, Bowman, & Holmberg, in press1) investigated the relationship between some factors (such as JIF, cited references, title length, country and institute’s prestige, and field type and size) with Mendeley and citation counts for a sample of Finnish WoS papers. However, a global large-scale disciplinary analysis of the relationship of these characteristics as well as some other factors is still missing in the literature.The present work represents the first large-scale analysis of the relationship between Mendeley readership and specific documents’ bibliographic characteristics. Specifically, this study aims to improve the understanding of the relationship between Mendeley readership and selected document characteristics, including document types, number of pages, title length, length of reference list, and number of authors, institutes, and countries of the papers. We study how the relationship between these bibliographic characteristics and readership is similar to and/or differs from that observed for citations and, how this relation varies across different fields.The selection of document characteristics represents only a limited number of quantitative variables, and we acknowledge that it does not consider other qualitative aspects that might affect the extent to which articles attract users on Mendeley. Nevertheless, this study will contribute to a better understanding of how Mendeley readership relates to basic document characteristics by providing a clear framework of this relation. This could contribute to the identification of document-related differences between Mendeley readership and citations that can help the future construction of appropriate and meaningful indicators based on Mendeley readership. The study builds on the work by Haustein, Costas et al. (2015) and Zahedi, Costas, Larivière, and Haustein (2016) by studying the same document characteristics, while taking into account longer citation and readership windows. Also, this study improves on these previous studies by including Mendeley readership counts and documents from several different disciplines and by using more advanced regression analysis (in contrast with the more basic correlation analysis employed in previous studies). The paper addresses the following research questions:•To what extent do document type and document characteristics (i.e., number of pages, length of title and reference list, and number of authors, institutes and countries involved) associate with the number of Mendeley readership?•How do these relationships between document characteristics and Mendeley readership vary across disciplines? And how do they compare with those observed for citations?
