The inclusion of contributors external to organizations' boundaries were found to be crucial for the production and sharing of knowledge (Boudreau and Lakhani, 2015, Brabham, 2010, Dahlander et al., 2008, Franzoni and Sauermann, 2014, Seidel and Langner, 2015). Advancements in information technology have allowed individuals to increasingly access and collaborate with scientists through the web, overcoming geographical, social, cultural, and physical barriers (Cappa et al., 2016, Laut et al., 2015). In this way, private and public entities can benefit from “crowd wisdom” (Surowiecki, 2006), that is, the knowledge dispersed among individuals outside the boundaries of the focal organization. These participants could be involved in a wide range of scientific aims, from data collection and analysis to problem solving, in exchange of a reward or just for the pleasure of completing the task (Franzoni & Sauermann, 2014).
One form of crowd participation is citizen science, which combines joint efforts of professional scientists and citizens toward the collection and analysis of data for scientific aims (Crain et al., 2014, Dickinson et al., 2012, Haklay, 2013, Riesch et al., 2013). As the word "citizen" suggests, participation is open to the general public, without any particular, preliminary knowledge required. Due to the growing size of scientific datasets that can be collected and analyzed for research purposes, citizen science is rapidly emerging as a promising approach to research by involving the general public (Arcanjo et al., 2015, Follett and Strezov, 2015, Land-Zandstra et al., 2015). The recent establishment of a Citizen Science Association in USA, funded by numerous institutional partners and a related annual conference (“Citizen Science Association,” 2016), offer further evidence for the growing interest around this emerging field. This interest is echoed by policymakers, as evidenced by the 2015 Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science Act, which was introduced in the USA (Coons, 2015) with the aim of fostering the integration of citizen science in federal programs.
In citizen science projects, citizens voluntarily collaborate with professional scientists in scientific research. At the same time, they have the opportunity to learn and generate knowledge (Franzoni & Sauermann, 2014), to enhance their scientific literacy, and to enjoy the experience (Bonney et al., 2009, Cronje et al., 2011). For professional scientists, the participation of a large number of contributors potentially helps expedite research projects (Haklay, 2013, Morais et al., 2015) and reduce their overall cost (Nov, Arazy, & Anderson, 2014). In addition to benefits for researchers and citizens, citizen science represents a potential means to raise social innovation by addressing problems of social interest through new aggregations of collaborating individuals (Cappa et al., 2015, Mulgan, 2006, Murray et al., 2010). In fact, citizen science is extensively leveraged in environmental monitoring where intensive data collection and analysis is needed, and citizens help is, actually, crucial to sustain the environment (Dickinson et al., 2012). Successful recent examples include “eBird” (Sullivan et al., 2014), “OPen Air Laboratories” (Silvertown, 2009) and “Forest-Watchers” (Arcanjo et al., 2015), where citizens help researchers in monitoring birds, air pollution, and deforestation around the world.
As citizen science requires large amount of data collection and analysis, many projects compete for attracting volunteers (Laut et al., 2017, Wald et al., 2016), and several online communities have failed over time (Iriberri and Leroy, 2009, Langner and Seidel, 2014). Hence, citizen participation and motivations represent major concerns for citizen science projects organizers (Nov et al., 2014, Tinati et al., 2017). User participation is commonly measured by the quantity of contributions and participants' engagement level (Aristeidou et al., 2017, Franzoni and Sauermann, 2014, Malinen, 2015, O'Brien and Toms, 2008, Preece et al., 2004, Wald et al., 2016), while motivation to contribute is assessed in terms of enjoyment in performing the task (Cappa et al., 2016). Due to the benefits brought about by the involvement of citizen scientists, i.e., common citizens participating in research projects led by professionals, scholars are paying increasing attention to the study of mechanisms to foster participation and contributor motivations, as well as to increase referral intention of people who joined the projects to attract more users (Nov et al., 2014). In particular, human-computer interaction studies emphasize the importance of design elements for increasing participation in citizen science projects (Aristeidou et al., 2017, Wald et al., 2016). With the aim of contributing to such an understanding, we empirically investigated the effects of rewards offered to citizen scientists on their participation, motivations and referral intention.
The relation between rewards and volunteer activities has been studied in the literature with respect to off-line activities, while the understanding of their impact on technology-mediated projects is considered to be in need of further deepening (Dal Bo et al., 2013, Fiorillo, 2011, Rommel et al., 2015). Recently, a few studies have analyzed the effect of rewards on contributor participation and motivations in technology-mediated crowd-based projects, such as open source communities and crowdsourcing (Brabham, 2008, Kaufmann et al., 2011, Krishnamurthy et al., 2014, Paolacci et al., 2010, Straub et al., 2015), while citizen science appears to be still largely unexplored in this context. In particular, the study of rewards in the emerging context of citizen science deserves particular attention, due to its uniqueness with respect to other technology-mediated activities in terms of actors involved (i.e., the common citizens without technical background required rather than experts), different outcomes (i.e., research projects for public good rather than commercial outcomes), and data disclosure (i.e., partial disclosure rather than open access).
In order to contribute to the understanding of the efficacy of rewards in citizen science, we used an already active citizen science project, Brooklyn Atlantis (www.brooklynatlantis.org), as the experimental setting to test the effects of rewards on contributors' participation (in terms of “number of contributions” and “engagement level”), motivations (“enjoyment level”), and “referral intention”. Enjoyment and engagement levels were synergistically measured with surveys and electroencephalography indices, in order to offer a better comprehension of participants' motivations. The outcomes of this study offer evidence of the effectiveness of two types of rewards, i.e., monetary and public online acknowledgement, upon volunteer citizens' participation, motivations, and referral intention. While previous studies concerning volunteering and crowd-based activities questioned the use of money as a reward in crowd-based projects (Fiorillo, 2011, Hertel et al., 2003, Krishnamurthy et al., 2014), our results contribute to the understanding of how this type of reward might be effectively offered to crowd-in participants in citizen science.
