Introduction of cameras in public places has been associated with the promise that they would contribute to a safer and more secure society. However, the amount of generated video is such that that pledge can only be delivered if CCTV operators are supported by video analysis tools which could identify, detect or, at least, suggest objects or actions of interest. Although state-of-the-art video processing algorithms have been the product of extensive work for decades, current approaches are still not sufficient to deal with the very wide range of data exhibited by CCTV imagery in real-life situations. Whereas most methods attempt to control the huge number of parameters affecting a scene, an alternative strategy would be to design methodologies addressing variability at their core. This motivates the proposal of a novel video analysis paradigm, ‘vide-omics’, founded on the principles of genomics where variability is the expected norm rather than an inconvenience to control.
Analogies can be drawn between genomics data and images in terms of structure and evolution. Similarly to an image which can be encoded as a set of pixel strings, genetic material has essentially a linear digital structure which is represented by strings of millions of characters, called sequences. Those sequences evolve over time through mutations of single and group of characters. Likewise, a continuous video can be interpreted as the capture of a single image evolving through time. Thus, video analysis could be addressed by detecting and quantifying image mutations over time. A benefit of the proposed paradigm is that it does not impose any constraint on the way videos are captured. As a consequence, it should be able to handle videos recorded by freely moving cameras. The ‘vide-omics’ paradigm aims at not only providing a novel way of describing video data where variability is the norm, but also to harvest the mature methodologies used for genomics analysis in order to apply them to video processing.
The objectives of this paper are, first, to introduce the video analysis paradigm, ‘vide-omics’, and, second, to provide a proof of concept by applying it to foreground extraction from videos captured by freely moving cameras. After introducing relevant genomics concepts and exploring their previous exploitation in computer vision, a review of the state of the art for foreground segmentation in the context of freely moving cameras is provided. Then, the ‘vide-omics’ paradigm is presented and its application to foreground extraction is described. Finally, it is evaluated on a set of standard videos recorded by freely moving cameras and performance is discussed.
