In today's society, information technology has changed people's traditional way of life, people's dependence on information technology continues to increase in recent years. With the increase in the amount of data explosion, cloud computing came into being, greatly improving people's work efficiency. Cloud storage is based on the development of cloud computing. The birth and development of Cloud storage services provide cloud users a lot of storage space, but nevertheless, cloud storage still has some shortcomings, such as data missing, data is tampered or deleted. So cloud storage data security issues become a key step in improving cloud storage services. With the development of quantum computers, it is necessary to design a signature scheme that can resist quantum computer attacks, because the difficult problems in the traditional cryptography system can be solved in the polynomial time, so that the security of various encryption schemes is threatened.
1.1. Research background of cloud storage integrityThe concept of cloud storage is based on the development and expansion of cloud computing. As a data storage and management as the core of the cloud computing system, cloud storage for the cloud era of large data processing provides a new solution. To occupy the core position in cloud computing, cloud storage platform construction is very important. In general, the cloud storage platform [28] is divided into four layers (user access layer, application interface layer, the basic management layer, storage layer), as shown in Fig. 1. Although cloud storage has been recognized by everyone, but there are still some of the advantages and disadvantages that we need attention [27], as shown in Table 1.Download : Download high-res image (508KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Cloud storage system architecture.Table 1. Cloud storage system advantages and disadvantages of contrast.AdvantageDisadvantageLow costThe possibility of user privacy disclosure is enhancedThe management authority is clearly assignedData missingProvide services on demandData tamperingNot subject to location constraintsStorage performance is affected by the networkAdapt to large data storageWith the continuous development of information technology and economic times, the arrival of digital society has become an inevitable trend. The traditional way of storage is not able to meet the current large amount of data clearly. Cloud storage came into being. Cloud storage security includes confidentiality, integrity, unforgeability. The first proposed validation data integrity is based on the integrity of RSA algorithm proposed by Ateniese et al. [5], but due to the large number of modulo exponents in RSA, so when we need to modify the data calculation efficiency will be very low. So it is not suitable for big data dynamic storage. Wang et al. [6] proposed in the cloud computing security background of the public verification method and dynamic storage, but it could not resist the quantum computer attacks.
1.2. Research background of lattice signatureThe rapid development of information technology has also brought about increasingly serious security issues. With the rapid development of computer technology and network technology, people's understanding of information security more and more profound, the information security requirements of the property is also increasing, from the initial confidentiality, to the present integrity, certification, non-repudiation. As well as availability requirements. In order to meet people's information security requirements, we usually need to adopt the most critical and most core technology is cryptography. Early cryptography security is often based on some complex mathematical difficulties. For example, large integer decomposition problems and discrete logarithm problems. In addition, the development of elliptic curve cryptography has received a lot of attention. Zhe Liu, Johann Großschädl, Zhi Hu and so on in the new elliptic curve is very innovative put forward their own ideas, and has a better realization. For example, in the article “On Emerging Family of Elliptic Curves to Secure Internet of Things: ECC Comes of Age [29]”, a study was conducted to study the calculation of the operation on a twisted Edwards curve with an effective computable internal shape, compared to conventional implementations, The number of points can be reduced by about 50%. Their design provides a variety of trade-offs and optimizations between performance and resource requirements. In the article “Elliptic Curve Cryptography with Efficiently Computable Endomorphisms and Its Hardware Implementations for the Internet of Things [30]” by defining an emerging lightweight elliptic curve family to meet the requirements of some resource-constrained devices and which has two optimized designs, High-speed version (HS) and efficient (ME) version.Based on the traditional cryptography system is faced with the risk of quantum attack, In 1994, Shor [1] found a polynomial time algorithm for solving factorization and discrete logarithm problems in quantum computer models, which prompted cryptographers to post-quantum time's cryptographic system analysis and design research. At present, under the quantum computer model, an effective algorithm for solving difficult problems has not been found, and many problems in lattice theory have proved difficult. Therefore, the analysis and design of the cryptographic system based on the difficult problem in the lattice theory has become one of the hotspots of the “post-quantum era cryptography system”. In 1996, Ajtai [2] gave a landmark conclusion on the basis of the issues of lattice problems, and proposed the possibility of constructing the cryptographic scheme based on the problem of lattice problem, and provided a new idea for constructing the new public key system. In 2008, Gentry et al. [3] proposed a lattice-based digital signature scheme, which became the basic tool for designing public key cryptography. In 2013, Wang [4] proposed a lattice-based linear homomorphic signature scheme based on GPV, but this scheme does not support data dynamic verification, Therefore, in the background of cloud storage applications, the data often need to be updated, so it does not have practical value.
1.3. Research background of Bloom filterWith the increasing amount of data, the query and modification of data become one of the core problems of cloud computing research. In the development of computer science, we often explore the question of how to improve efficiency, but often need to pay the time or space in exchange for. In 1970, Bloom Filter was proposed by Howard Bloom, which is a very long binary vector data structure. The main function is to query the collection of elements in the attribution of the problem. His obvious advantage is that it can efficiently meet the needs of the search. Bloom filter can not only represent the collection, but also can support the collection of elements to insert and query. Bloom filter Compared with the traditional hash table, in the Bloom filter hash table, an element requires only a few bits. So in 70 years after the emergence of Bloom filter, they received a warm welcome. But at the same time due to their own shortcomings and the development of the reality, bloom filter shortcomings are constantly emerging. Thus, the Bloom Filter was introduced in 2000, and the Bloom Filter was introduced in 2001. With the continuous extension and expansion of information technology, the Bloom Filter research has been deepened and various applications on Bloom Filter and improvement is also endless, I believe Bloom Filter will have a broader development. This paper mainly for Bloom Filter to achieve the dynamic integrity of the data validation.
1.4. Organization of the paperIn this paper, the present situation and research background of cloud storage and signature are summarized and improved in the existing scheme. In the new scheme, the first application is in the cloud storage background, the application of lattice signature, can better resist the quantum computer attacks, and the algorithm has been improved. Second, it combined with the Bloom Filter, in the third-party audit verification, do not need to verify a collection, but to verify the vector, and it can improve efficiency better. Structure of this paper: The first part introduces the research status of cloud storage, Bloom Filter and lattice signature. The second section introduces the related basic knowledge. In the third section, the data integrity verification scheme is described in detail. This paper analyzes the correctness and security of this scheme in the fourth section. In the fifth section, the algorithm's performance is analyzed. The sixth section leads to the conclusion of this paper.
