Biomedical images are acquired from humans or animals, and they are used for clinical diagnosis, treatment and patient management. Medical imaging makes it possible to observe the internal organs of humans without surgery. There are many methods of acquiring medical images and each technique has its own application area, strengths and weaknesses [2,4]. Some of the common imaging techniques are X-ray, ultrasound, Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Medical image analysis focuses on development of computational and mathematical techniques pertaining to medical images to make them useful for diagnosis, treatment and management of medical conditions. The recent advancements in medical image analysis have given birth to image-guided therapy [10], virtual reality, and augmented reality [11]; all these among other innovations have greatly improved healthcare delivery, improved quality of life and also saved lives. The high cost of some imaging equipment, e.g. MRI, makes them non-affordable in the developing world and this greatly reduces the benefit of such devices, most especially in Africa [1]. Also, image acquisition is very expensive globally, but particularly in Africa. Another challenge for medical imaging in the developing world is the shortage of medical image analysts. These coupled with limited collaboration between scientists and medical experts in the makes e-infrastructure very desirable. These amongst other factors have led to the recent idea of creating medical image repositories. Such repositories, even though they are available in some developed countries, are not generally available anywhere in Africa. Some of the common medical image repositories in the developed world are OASIS (http://www.oasis-brains.org/), ADNI (http://adni.loni.usc.edu/), NBIA (https://imaging.nci.nih.gov/ncia/login.jsf), and Brainweb (http://mouldy.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/brainweb/). The Neuroimaging Informatics Tools and Resources Clearinghouse (NITRC, https://www.nitrc.org/) and aylward (http://www.aylward.org/notes/open-access-medical-image-repositories) contain a more comprehensive list of the most popular medical image analysis repositories. A common limitation of all the existing repositories is that they were developed for sharing medical images, and hence they only have medical images, but they cannot be used for processing images. The implication of this is that laboratories without any image analyst or without access to the standard image analysis tools may not be able to obtain the best result from their medical images. Another limitation is that all the images in the existing repositories were acquired from non-African individuals. These imply that those interested in conducting research work on medical images acquired from Africans living in Africa will not be able to carry out their studies. To the best of our knowledge, there is no repository that contains medical images acquired from Africa.
The advent of a science gateway plus the recent advancement in data communication and network technology has produced web technologies which make it possible to offer Software as a Service (SaaS), thus making it possible for end users to access computer resources or specialized software tools remotely irrespective of their physical location. It is also possible to offer Platform as a Service (PaaS), providing users the privilege to exploit computing power remotely [5,12].
The focus of this project was to solve some of the aforementioned problems in medical imaging in the developing world by creating a platform that will allow investigators to share medical images from Africa, and also allow them to process medical images. In view of this, the aim of this project was to develop an e-infrastructure for sharing and processing medical images. The e-infrastructure, christened Medical Image Processor and Repository (MIPAR), is web-based and free for users. It combines the power of SaaS and PaaS because users will have access to some special image processing tools which run on a dedicated powerful server. MIPAR will be useful for clinicians and researchers interested in obtaining specific information from medical images. Post-graduate students will also have access to the tool, and can use it in their research work, either for guidance or as a tool for analyzing their images. The community will benefit greatly from this resource, because diagnosis can be faster and more accurate, and also patient management can be improved because experts will have a common platform to share expertise and experience, and case reports can also be shared. Medics and scientists at remote areas would not need to travel before having access to additional expertise; this could also lead to timely and improved diagnosis. It is our hope that such a useful and unique tool could encourage collaboration, improve diagnosis, improve patient management, and could also lead to increased life expectancy.
