The necessities of mobile robots for complex and dangerous environments have initiated the development of dynamic quadruped machines, which exploit the potential advantages of the legged locomotion and enhanced mobility in unstructured terrains [1]. Such a versatile system with high maneuverability should be labor efficient, cost-effective, and indispensable in industries. As its name suggests, Quadruped Robots have four legs or limbs and follow the gait patterns of quadruped animals. They are faster and more stable than biped robots. Depending on their leg structure, they can be broadly classified into two categories, Mammal-type and Sprawling-type. The Mammal-type robot, in its standard posture, has its legs in a vertically downward position from the base. Advantages of this leg-configuration include faster walking capability [2]. The joints in this configuration require a less amount of torque compared to its Sprawling-type counterparts. The shape also helps the robot to walk in a comparatively narrow region as it possesses smaller footprint. The Sprawling-type robot has the first segment of its leg, which is the thigh, placed in the horizontal direction and the second half, the shank, placed in the vertical direction. This configuration offers several advantages over the Mammal-type. They have better stability and also have a dynamic range of feet placement. Also, the moving direction is not constrained to a certain direction, rather they can walk in any of the four directions instantly. They have a low center of gravity and as a result, in case it topples over, the damage to the body is considered to be minimal [2]. This feature is of paramount importance if the robot is to be employed for carrying objects. Considering the stability and dynamic movement facility of the structure, the development of a Sprawling-type Quadruped robot is selected for this experiment.
In the early twenty-first century, Kimura et al. [3] developed an adaptive dynamic walking technique for a quadruped robot on both irregular terrain and natural ground [1, 3]. Later, an adaptive locomotion control for compliant quadruped robot was also developed and successfully experimented by Buchli and Ijspeert [4]. Their system was capable to constantly track body properties and readjust along with the gait parameters being dependent on the geometry and movement of the robot. During this time frame, Tekken, another quadruped robot was built by Fukuoka and Kimura to walk on irregular terrain with a medium speed [5, 6]. It included joints containing PD-controller, which inspired virtual spring-damper system similar to the visco-elasticity model of the muscle. These early initiatives encouraged Boston Dynamics to develop BigDog [7, 8, 9, 10], which could capture the mobility and speed of a natural four-legged animal. BigDog could move on very steep, rutted, rocky, wet, muddy and snowy surfaces and could be used to carry objects as well. At the same time, another quadruped robot named LittleDog [11, 12, 13, 14] was built which possessed negotiation capabilities with incoming obstacles of height up to 7.5 cm (about 40% of the robot's leg length). As the technology matured, a versatile quadruped robot named HyQ is developed that was able to perform highly dynamic motions using its 12 torque-controlled joints powered by hydraulic and electric actuators [30]. This hydraulic actuation allowed the powerful dynamic motions that were harder to achieve with the traditional electrically actuated robots [15]. In addition to the walking technique, another engineering concern is the design of the robot leg. A well-known contribution to this problem is the work of Boston Dynamics, in which engineers designed optimum leg mechanism to walk/run or climb in inclined and vertical surfaces [16]. Finally, an efficient physical system requires robust software, which should be built upon a peer-analyzed mathematical model. Ito et al. presented such model of the adaptation of locomotion patterns to a variable environment [17]. Among popular kinematics solutions, the Inverse Kinematics is often exploited in quadrupedal walking [18]. An efficient approach to derive Inverse Kinematics Solutions is to use Denavit-Hartenberg convention [19, 20, 21, 22]. Further controlling of velocity can be performed by using velocity kinematics solutions [23, 24, 25]. The underlying kinematics can be enhanced by introducing PID [26] or Fuzzy controller [27] to improve the movement of the robot. The objective of this paper is to design and develop the hardware for a Sprawling-type quadruped robot that has the ability to walk on a relatively smooth surface. The movement of the joints of the robot is controlled by using the Inverse Kinematics Solutions that are derived for that particular structure. The Inverse Kinematic solution is derived using Denavit-Hartenberg convention and employed to control the locomotion of the robot. After designing the structure of the robot, a custom-made simulation software is used to replicate the movement of the designed structure using the solutions. Successful results of the simulation indicate the applicability of the solutions, so the robot can be constructed as designed after that. In addition, obstacle sensing is of paramount importance to this work. Among many forms of detection technology, image processing camera, ultrasound sensor and infrared detector are more popular [28, 29, 30]. Despite the advantage of recognizing the surroundings by a camera, we have taken account the simplicity and the overall cost of the system and thus ultrasound sensors are chosen for this work. Finally, since Android-based smartphones and handheld devices are widely available, the feature to control the robot via an Android app [31] using Bluetooth technology is added. The Android-based control system is robust for control and manipulation and it increases the portability to test the robot in different environments. The robot proposed in this work is, at its conceptual level, interesting for experimental research.
Although better quality quadruped robots are available, the costs of those are beyond reach for general researchers from a developing country. Insufficient fund discourages students and general researchers to work on robotics and related field. The designed robot is very cheap compared to the similar robots available. This robot can be easily constructed from materials available locally. In addition, the hardware design and software is available publicly so that interested people can work on their related research using these resources. Other students are currently using the developed robot that is used for this paper, for research purposes.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we discuss the methodology of the system development. Section 3 presents structure design and system model, followed by the experimental details, results and analysis in Section 4. The concluding remarks are presented in Section 5.
