Environmental problems, including the degradation and depletion of natural resources, biodiversity loss and climate change, among others, represent some of the most critical challenges of our world today. To effectively address environmental problems, understanding how these system components affect one another is needed. Data Science (DS) is an emergent research field that helps better understand the complex mechanisms behind environmental phenomena. In Gibert et al. (2018) an overview of what can be called the field of Environmental Data Science is provided. The paper describes the DS process, and the role of Data Mining (DM) methods, which is identified as one of the most critical to transform data into added value and new knowledge for ESs. DM describes the search for hidden patterns or associations in data to aid understanding of systems and/or their processes. These patterns may help, for Example, determine the strength of relationship between variables, or predict future outcomes. DM methods include cluster analysis, factorial methods, decision trees, statistical modelling, time series forecasting, Bayesian networks, among others. There has been increasing interest in applying DM to environmental problems in recent years. However, its full potential in the environmental sciences has yet to be realized.
In Gibert et al. (2011), the main challenges of Environmental Data Science are identified and discussed to promote research in the area. One of these main challenges is the lack of guidance in choosing the right analytics method for a given problem. In fact, selection of the proper methods for effective process is difficult, and not much work has been done to establish consensus about which analytics methods are effective and appropriate for specific applications (Gibert et al., 2010). This paper tries to move one step forward in this direction, providing an innovative methodology to help non-expert data scientists identify DM methods suitable to properly analyze a certain kind of data when addressing a specific type of environmental question. It has been observed how several analyses of the same dataset can provide contradictory conclusions when analyzed by two independent data scientists without a common set of guidelines for conducting the analysis in the proper way (Baeza-Yates, 2017; Silberzahn et al., 2015).
This papercto contributes to generate greater awareness of the capabilities of DM in DS processes for a better understanding of ESs, and to extract valuable information from data to support decision-making. Information on the good practices required to ensure DM is correctly used in Environmental Data Science is also provided. Additionally, the paper aims to make DS and DM more accessible to a wider audience, in particular researchers and practitioners in the environmental sciences, and foster discussion of the ways in which DS could be used and encouraged in these science fields.
The paper will briefly introduce the main concepts of DS and the role of DM in the whole process, and illustrate how many DM methods can be valuable tools in the environmental and natural resource science fields. A major conceptualization effort was carried out to organize both environmental systems and DM methods, and to analyze the framework of the application and applicability of DM methods to solve environmental problems. A major contribution of the paper is the proposal of a new methodological framework to guide data scientists or practitioners in identifying the most suitable DM method for a given problem. The proposed methodology is based on two steps each one using a tool presented in the paper. The first tool is the DM methods conceptual map (DMMCM), which organizes main families of DM methods according the kind of to questions they can address. A second tool is the DM methods templates (DMMTs), which provides detailed information on the specific methods from a given branch of the DMMCM, and guide the selection of the most appropriate technique for the particular case in hand. In the first step of the proposed methodology, target environmental questions lead the decision. In the second step, specific implantation of results in the specific environmental situation adressed comes into consideration, as seen in Section 6. Also, an additional effort has been done to identify which kind of questions arises in each type of ES, and how the DMMCM and the DMMTs can be used to choose the DM technique that best fits a given real-world environmental application. Specific examples from the literature are also provided to illustrate the use of various DM methods for a variety of environmental problems, and a discussion regarding how these two elements interact (DM methods and target ESs) is raised. Finally, a reduced set of illustrative case studies show how the DMMCM and DMMTs can be used select a DM method for a specific problem. The paper ends with some conclusions, future work, and open challenges for better DM method selection.
