The 1950s witnessed rapid development of science and technology for the new People’s Republic of China. The Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) had only fifteen research institutes and three preparatory offices for institutes at its inception in 1949. By the end of 1955, the number of research institutes had grown to forty-seven. During the Great Leap Forward of 1958–1960,1 that number increased rapidly, at one point reaching as high as 242.2 The establishment of a large number of institutions, which required staffing and new research programs, highlighted the national shortage of scientific talent. Even those Chinese scientists with years of experience faced challenges adapting to the new social environment. Learning from the experience of the Soviet Union became an effective way to address these challenges in the short term.
In order to learn from the experience of the Soviet Academy of Sciences (SAS), CAS leaders decided to “study how to organize and lead scientific research efforts” by sending delegations, students, and scientists to the Soviet Union to build academic collaborations.3 At the same time, a large number of Soviet scientists were invited to China to provide vision and guidance to the new research institutes.
The precise number of Soviet scientists who worked in China in 1950s has puzzled historians. Soviet scientists worked in China in a wide variety of capacities, including as part of the “122 projects” for scientific and technological cooperation,4 in government employment, as part of partnerships between the SAS and the CAS, and on provisional invitations and temporary assignments. Even for scholars in CAS programs, visits to China often diverged from original plans due to the needs of actual work, making individual scientists difficult to track. Current estimates of the number of Soviet scientists in China vary according to the documentation used. Most documentary sources are vague on this point, or provide conflicting statistics.5 But this limitation need not represent an insurmountable difficulty for historians who wish to assess the impact of Soviet scientists, which lies in their results rather than in their number. Scientists invited by CAS institutes often took on influential roles, contributed to specific work projects the results of which are traceable in the historical record, and were invited to stay longer at their host institutes.
What kinds of roles did the Soviet scientists play? How did they work alongside their Chinese counterparts? What was their influence on the institutes’ scientific research in various disciplines? Little information has previously been available about what these scientists did during their interactions with the CAS. Soviet scientists were portrayed differently in different periods in China. In the 1950s, they were represented as heroes, in the 1960s as enemies (see Figure 1). In recent decades, the opening of various archives to the public has made more data available with which to answer these questions, but historians have yet to submit these materials to an in-depth, micro-level analysis.Download : Download high-res image (444KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. The image of Soviets: In 1950s (left), the slogan is “Great friendship, selfless help” (source: http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_4a9db36e01012fbs.html); in 1960s to 1970s (right), the slogan became “Overthrow Soviet revisionism and social imperialism” (source: http://www.xincheping.com/tribe/art/232117.html).
This paper analyzes the development of the CAS institutes in 1950s and discuss the roles Soviet scientists played in academic cooperation between the SAS and the CAS, as well as in the development of the CAS institutes. It further compares the positive and negative roles of Soviet scientists in different research fields. Existing literature has examined Chinese–Soviet collaboration in terms how of these relationships supported national-level scientific and technical planning during the Cold War,6 or the roles of Soviet experts as senior advisors in different professions.7 Our analysis supplements these accounts by exploring the details of the working relationships between Chinese and Soviet scientists as the former sought to learn from the latter, and showing how those relationships shaped the implementation of large scale, long term plans.
