Earthquake resistant building codes require earthquake engineering studies which, in order to be performed, need strong motion records as original input data. It is therefore important to make realistic selections and processing of the raw input strong motion records in order to calculate the seismic parameters which will help in the estimation of the dynamic response of the structure(s) to be designed. Various software programs have been developed for the selection of the strong ground motions which are used for the dynamic analysis and design of structure(s) [1, 2]. Among the most important seismic parameters of a strong ground motion are the various types of spectra (i.e. elastic response spectrum, constant ductility spectrum, constant-damage yield strength spectrum, Fourier spectrum, etc.) which result from the processing of the ground motion and which are used in various seismic design procedures, such as the Dynamic Response Spectrum Analysis (DRSA), the Uncoupled Modal Response History Analysis (UMRHA), the Modal Pushover Analysis (MPA) procedures for dynamic analysis [3]. Furthermore, by adjusting the Fourier spectrum of a strong ground motion, it is possible to control its frequency content. Therefore, the use of a robust and accurate strong motion processing software is critical for the proper seismic design of structures, including strategies for designing earthquake-resistant buildings to ensure the health, safety, and security of building occupants and assets during the structure's lifetime.
The concept of the elastic response spectrum was introduced by G.W. Housner [4], whereas [5] is a fundamental work on linear elastic response spectra. Since then a large research effort has been made for the evaluation of the seismic response of linear SDOF systems with particular attention to the effect of input motion and site conditions. Most studies on inelastic response spectra have focused on the selection of the elastic-perfectly plastic material behavior, on taking into account the effects of the duration of the motion and on scaling methods [6, 7, 8, 9]. In addition, [10] was among the first studies that systematically investigated the elastic and inelastic structural response to pulse-like excitations (typically not caused by earthquakes).
Many software programs, either free or commercial, have been developed for the processing of strong ground motion data. Some characteristic cases are presented below:
•SMA (Strong Motion Analyst Processing Software) is a commercial Windows-based tool designed to interactively process strong motion accelerograms, featuring instrument correction, data editing, filtering, ground motion integrations, Fourier and Response Spectra calculations, and V1, V2, V3 file format output. It has been developed by the Kinemetrics company.•EQ-TOOLS (latest version is 3.0) is a free closed source software for earthquake engineering education which allows the user to select, analyze, scale, and modify ground motions. The capabilities of selection and analysis as well as scaling of ground motion records against several types of target spectra, including the ASCE 7 spectrum, spectra from attenuation relationships, and conditional mean spectra are included. Ground motion history analysis, linear response spectrum analysis and Fourier amplitude analysis and a module that enables the modification of ground motions for consideration of site effects are provided. It has been developed by the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES).•PRISM (Processing and Review Interface for Strong Motion Data) is a free open-source software used for processing strong-motion records [11, 12, 13, 14]. It can be installed and run as a stand-alone system on common operating systems such as Linux, Mac and Windows and is flexible and extensible to incorporate new strong motion processing techniques. It includes capabilities for modification, correction, scaling, truncation and baseline correction of earthquake records and it can calculate a variety of strong motion parameters (Arias intensity, elastic and inelastic response spectra, acceleration, velocity, displacement and force-displacement response histories). Various hysteresis models are provided (linear elastic, bi-linear, tri-linear, modified Takeda, Bouc-Wen, and Al-Bermani)•SEISMOSIGNAL is an interesting, user-friendly and efficient commercial software for processing of strong motion data [15]. Among others, it can calculate the elastic, constant ductility, Fourier amplitude and power spectra and it provides for filtering of high and low frequency record content and estimation of other important seismological parameters, such as the Arias Intensity and the significant and effective durations.•OPENSIGNAL is a free closed-source software platform for the processing and selection of seismic records, signal processing, response spectra analysis, soil spectra analysis and more [16, 17]. It provides filtering uncorrected ground motion records and calculation of the main parameters of a record (Arias Intensity, duration, PGA, PGV, elastic response spectra, etc.).•USDP (Utility Software for Data Processing) is a computer program that can be used for strong ground-motion data processing by various filtering and baseline adjustment techniques and spectral calculations (Linear spectral analysis, Fourier spectral analysis, Constant strength, ductility and base-shear coefficient nonlinear spectral analysis) for a variety of stiffness and/or strength degrading hysteretic models [18]. It has been developed by the METU-Earthquake Engineering Research Center team and uses public-open Fortran source codes.•TSPP (Time Series Processing Programs) is a collection of FORTRAN programs that have been developed for processing and manipulating strong-motion accelerograms in terms of displacement, velocity and acceleration time-histories, response and Fourier spectra and filtering [19].•VIEWWAVE (v2.2.0) is a free closed source software for processing and viewing strong motion records. It can read a large variety of files in many formats and can calculate various waveforms, Fourier and power spectrum, as well as acceleration, velocity and displacement response spectra [20].
Apart from the above software, some other rather elementary programs have been developed in MATLAB programming language [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. However, none of these MATLAB implementations contains advanced time integration algorithms for the extraction of the displacement, velocity and acceleration time histories and the various response spectra. In the present study, a new MATLAB open-source software, called OpenSeismoMatlab, is presented which, compared to other similar software, has the following advantages and unique characteristics:
•It uses state-of-the-art time integration algorithms which are more robust and accurate [26, 27] compared to conventional integration techniques (Newmark, etc.) that are widely used by other software for strong motion data processing. The former algorithms belong to a general single step single solve family and can be adjusted through the specification of 14 independent integration constants to control numerical dissipation and dispersion, continuity of acceleration, and the order of overshooting in displacement and velocity. By adjusting a number of parameters, the user can select from a large family of time integration algorithms, according to [27] and this permits the manual configuration and optimization of the quality of the desired results (time histories, spectra, etc.).•It is completely free and provided together with its source code (open source). OpenSeismoMatlab is of high educational value, since it contains simply written MATLAB code with comments and is generally easy to be understood by the user. The rationale of the implemented methods is explained in detailed comments within the code. Apart from this, the open-source code format provides the opportunity of extending/upgrading or integrating the software in all possible ways.•Furthermore, the elastoplastic bilinear kinematic hardening constitutive model which is fundamental for the computation of the nonlinear spectra is accurately formulated and programmed in the software. No simplified versions of the elastoplastic bilinear kinematic hardening constitutive model [28, 29, 30] are used, as is usually the case in the literature.
In the following sections, OpenSeismoMatlab is presented, and then it is applied in a number of earthquake records for the calculation of the various response spectra and other quantities.
