The importance of STEM education for the competitiveness and sustainable development of a society is well known. In most countries, science education is usually set as a core element of the school curriculum. The goals of these curricula are usually to develop scientific knowledge, skills, and values and attitudes (e.g., in Hong Kong’s central curriculum, Curriculum Development Council, 2017a), and international large-scale assessments (e.g., Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study [TIMSS]) show that East Asian students constantly outperform their counterparts in other countries in science achievement (Martin, Mullis, Foy, & Hooper, 2016; OECD, 2016). However, what lie behind the high performance in East Asian students are below-average attitudes towards science. Previous literature indicates that student attitudes towards science are important because they are associated not only with student self-regulated learning strategies (Neber, He, Liu, & Schofield, 2008), science achievement (Lin, Hong, & Huang, 2012), and 21st-century skills (Choy, Deng, Chai, Koh, & Tsai, 2016), but that they also influence their future selection of STEM-related majors and careers (Guo, Marsh, Parker, Morin, & Dicke, 2017). Therefore, the importance of student attitudes towards science should not be ignored.
Despite the below-average attitudes of East Asian students toward science, insufficient research has been conducted into which factors influence student attitudes in East Asia. Furthermore, most of the literature focuses on the psychological determinants of their attitudes, such as conceptions of learning science (Tsai, Ho, Liang, & Lin, 2011) and epistemological beliefs (Lin, Deng, Chai, & Tsai, 2013), with little focus on the effects of contextual factors on student attitudes towards science (Cheng & Wan, 2016). Nevertheless, the influence of school, family, and personal factors on student attitudes towards science has been confirmed in the West (Osborne, Simon, & Collins, 2003; Simpson & Oliver, 1990). Therefore, this study reviewed the literature and analyzed student attitudes towards science and associated factors using the TIMSS 2015 database, with an indigenous focus on Hong Kong fourth-graders, to contribute to a clearer understanding of current science education in Hong Kong.
