With the rapid development of graphics processing unit (GPU) technology, realistic high performance computing systems become more powerful, and at the same time, more complex. For example, in the research field of nuclear simulation, we need to simulate the collision between various particles and different walls. In the field of particle accelerator field, the accelerated particles collide with other particles or the irregular wall. One of the most important factors to generate this type of simulative physical systems is to realize collision detection, especially when vessels are irregular. The term irregular vessel wall is the container used to store the particles to be accelerated and collided. In this paper, it is equivalent to irregular object, object, wall, and model.
Limited to the computing ability, traditional algorithms could only simulate collisions of tens of thousands particles. The reason was that with the growth of the particles number, the cost of computing would increase exponentially. Nowadays, GPU is more widely used in simulating computation to accelerate this type of simulation for its parallel property. In this paper, we design an algorithm to implement the collision detection between the particles and irregular walls. These particles are generally considered as spheres. Firstly, we divide the wall into small triangles that are surrounded by spheres. And then we make collision detection between these spheres and particles in parallel by utilizing GPU and space subdivision.
At the same time, as shown in Fig. 1, we implement a Web based platform to provide on-line simulation. Users will be able to share their simulation results and computation resources in this platform. The whole system is efficient and intuitive to end users who have a vision to share or present the simulations of large scale physics experiments. The computation resources of new simulation task is predicted by an artificial neural network (ANN) based general vector machine (GVM), which is instructive for resources scheduling.Download : Download high-res image (183KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Web-based simulation platform.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the basic concepts and prior work. We present our design and implementation of the collision algorithm in Section 3. Section 4 shows the design of the Web simulation service. In Section 5, we firstly present the experimental results of the collision algorithm, then give the analysis of our Web based system. The effects of different parameters on the algorithm are discussed. At last in Section 6, we conclude our research and address the future work.
