Background and significanceIntelligent cognitive assistants in the form of physical or virtual human-friendly collaborative robots (cobots) will become ubiquitous in a near future (Samsonovich, 2018, Veloso et al., 2015). They will serve as extensions of human minds and bodies into physical and virtual worlds, together facing challenges that today only humans can solve. One such challenge is represented by the domain of insight problems, the solution of each of which involves the “Aha!” moment (an insight experience). Insight problem solving is traditionally linked to general fluid intelligence (Jaeggi, Buschkuehl, Jonides, & Perrig, 2008): the ability to successfully deal with new, unexpected challenging situations, where prior knowledge does not help. Contrary to common belief, this natural human capacity can be enhanced by training of working memory (Jaeggi et al., 2008). It can also be augmented by scaffolding and guidance, provided by artificial intelligence (AI) tools such as computer-based learning environments (Azevedo, 2002, Desmarais and Baker, 2012, Roscoe et al., 2013) and cobots (Timms, 2016). The latter built for this purpose are frequently based on self-regulated learning (SRL) frameworks (Winne and Nesbit, 2009, Zimmerman, 2008) couched in a cognitive architecture framework (e.g., Samsonovich et al., 2008). It remains to add that many data from psychological studies suggest that emotionality plays a key role in development of insight (Malekzadeh et al., 2015, Wen et al., 2013). This observation encourages thinking of a potential for application of emotional cognitive architectures (Eidlin and Samsonovich, 2018, Hudlicka, 2011).
Toward a creative cobot-assistant: Previous work and the present taskOur general approach to designing the creative cognitive assistant of an insight problem solver in the form of a virtual cobot was outlined in the previous work (Kuznetsova & Samsonovich, 2018). In essence, it is based on a simplified form of the emotional Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architecture eBICA (Samsonovich, 2013, Samsonovich, 2018) with a weak semantic map (Ascoli and Samsonovich, 2012, Samsonovich, 2018, Samsonovich et al., 2010) at its heart. For the present purposes, the semantic map is built as a two-dimensional vector space, used to represent the cognitive-emotional flavor of the momentary psychic state of the problem solver. The same space is also used to map a database of available general cognitive strategies, that are potentially applicable to a cognitive problem of any sort. The cobot does not know the problem and its solution, and does not perceive the line of reasoning of the user whom it assists. All the cobot receives on input at each time step is the choice of a general strategy currently made by the user and the user’s self-evaluation of own progress and attitude toward the problem (with the possibility to add real-time psychometric and neuroimaging data). This information is processed and used to represent the current position of the user on the semantic map. The result in turn can be used to select map coordinates of the short list of strategies that will be offered to the user as a guidance. The process of selection is governed by the currently active cognitive schema in the cobot. The ultimate choice is made by the user, who can accept or reject the cobot advice. One of the goals for the cobot is to maintain a socio-emotional contact with the user, based on a mutual understanding and trust. The main objective for both, the cobot and the user, is to find a solution to the problem.This conceptual model has not been implemented yet. As the first step to its realization, in the previous work (Kuznetsova & Samsonovich, 2018) a list of strategies was collected from various sources. Then, the semantic map was constructed from them as follows. Each strategy was evaluated by human subjects on 10 different semantic scales: conservative-revolutionary, passive-aggressive, concrete-abstract, easy-difficult, detail-level vs. meta-level, condition-oriented vs. solution-oriented, weak-strong, opening-closing, basic-extra, prospective-retrospective. The resultant ten-dimensional distribution was reduced to two main principal components, that were selected as map coordinates. Semantics of these coordinates was evaluated by experts and used to interpret the map data (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (84KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Semantic map constructed of the 45 strategies (Kuznetsova & Samsonovich, 2018). Coordinates are main principal components of the distribution. The semantics of PC1 can be interpreted as Aggressiveness, Arousal, Activity. PC2 can be interpreted as Valence, Confidence. Strategies are represented by numbered dots and listed in text according to their numbers.The second step, which was the main task for the present study, was to accumulate and analyze phenomenological data on human behavior during insight problem solving, interpreted in terms of the semantic map. This study is necessary to formulate a set of cognitive schemas (see above) as hypotheses, that will be tested in future experimental studies with cobots-assistants. The second-step study was performed, yielding an interesting finding about human insight problem solving, and is presented below.
