Among several parameters causing enormous loss in the field of petroleum industry is the pipes corrosion. Hence, the consequences resulting from this drawback goes beyond loss in production, the cost of replacement, flammability and toxicity of transported products, which often at high pressure could therefore in the major cases influencing serious repercussions, particularly on people security and environment [1]. From this point of view, an inspection program and corrosion monitoring should be taken as an imperative necessity. However, once the cause of the degradation is well known and the severity of the damage is assessed during the inspection, the damaged part must be replaced, making repairs necessary in general. It should be noted, that the assessment and relevance of such an intervention on a system is not an easy task, where a damaged structure does not necessarily require repairs or maintenance. As its well-known, each degradation process occurs in different ways on steels, where its consequences on the functionality, security and integrity of hydrocarbon production plants depend in particular on its evolution over time, other deteriorations and conditions the structure is subject [2]. Thus, optimisation of interventions according to their immediate urgency requires deep analyses which remain therefore complex, even for experimented engineers. In view of the preceding, we developed an innovative methodology based on a new approach, which classifies corrosion damage systems in a rational and homogeneous manner in order to orientate the engineer and facilitates their task towards the required objective for an effective and adequate decision. Indeed, ECOR system has been developed through Expert System [3], also called Knowledge Based System (KBS) to evaluate specifically the damage caused by corrosion on pipeline of plants' hydrocarbon production with an objective base and platform guidelines. The system includes the knowledge acquired through the literature which englobes methods of damage assessment and expert's reports [4]. ECOR is therefore an information technology (IT) tool, with a decision support having for goal, the assessment of corrosive's damage protection and reparation of pipeline, It also serves to optimize the process required for the user by providing orderly data, up-to-date information and capitalizes on the technical knowledge of corrosive degradation of metallic materials [5]. Therefore, this software helps to identify potential causes of corrosive damage in pipeline structures, strictly following the protection system recommendations and the appropriate repair procedures. To achieve this task, the system uses then an integrated and systematic approach in two successive steps involving, a diagnostic module related to the damage assessment, and the other one for repairing.
