Emotion is an affective state encouraged by a specific event, object, or surrounding. It is an integral component of many aspects of an individual's life such as learning, decision making, motivational priorities, and communication. The link between motivation and emotion has been described by physiology theories of emotion [[1], [2], [3]]. For example, emotions like frustration and boredom can lower motivation and, thus, affect the ability to learn. On the other hand, excitement and meditation can increase motivation, which increases the interest to learn and practice [3].
Emotion measurement and assessment methods can be subjective and/or objective affective measures. Subjective measures use different self-report instruments such as questionnaires, adjective checklists, and pictorial tools to represent any set of emotions, and can be used to measure mixed emotions. However, self-report techniques do not provide objective measurements, where they measure only conscious emotions and they cannot capture the real-time dynamics of the experience. Objective measures, on the other hand, can be obtained without the user's assistance. They use physiological cues derived from the physiology theories of emotion. Instruments that measure blood pressure responses, skin responses, pupillary responses, brain waves, and heart responses are all used as objective measures methods. Moreover, hybrid methods combining both subjective and objective methods have been used to increase the accuracy and reliability of emotional states [[4], [5], [6]].
Accurate diagnosis and assessment of clients with speech disorders often present challenges for Speech-Language Pathologists (SLP); since subjective responses from clients during therapy sessions are influenced by mental affective states. Inferences drawn from objective techniques are a promising approach to address the variation of subjective assessments or variability in assessments across therapies [5]. BCI systems provide objective measures for the clinical, remedial and rehabilitation contexts. They are designed to measure brain activity and provide a detailed recording of brain dynamics related to communication disorders [6]. Thus, we were motivated by the belief or hypothesis that there is potential for this EEG-based BCI application to enhance speech therapy sessions by providing insights and visualizations of the affective state of the brain during the therapy session.
In order to craft an approach that will effectively augment the speech-language pathology diagnosis using objective measures of brain activities, our BCI system (Emo-in-Speech) is designed to integrate BCIs in clinical settings for assessing and diagnosing speech-language pathologies. Using wireless EEG headsets to extract brain signals, preprocessing, feature extraction/selection and machine learning classification, our approach develops a novel non-invasive passive BCI system that aids speech-language pathologists in objectively assessing and diagnosing speech disorders.
Emo-in-Speech is designed to be used in clinical settings with different use cases in speech and language pathology. One use case involves using the BCI system in a series of test cases with people who stutter (PWS), in which the flow of speech is interrupted by repetitions (st-st-stuttering), prolonging sounds and/or syllables (ssssstuttering), and abnormal stoppages (ST—stuttering) or blockades of sounds and/or syllables [10]. We focus specifically on children who stutter (CWS). Within this context, there are many theories about why children stutter and the factors behind it. Also, the emotional state of the client changes in different ways (e.g. visible frustration when the client is trying to communicate, or exhibiting signs of being tense during speech). Furthermore, avoidance behaviors such as fear and anxiety may happen with the CWS [7]. In our experiment, data were collected from 15 children who stutter and analyzed to identify what affective states were present during a speech therapy session. Visual stimuli were presented to evoke specific targeted emotional states such as excitement, meditation, boredom, and frustration. Power spectral density and frontal asymmetry features were extracted using frequency domain analysis methods. Deep neural network classifier was used to distinguish between the target affective states. In addition, participants' subjective ratings and speech pathologists' observation rating were obtained.
The contributions of this study include: (i) A framework that categorizes various ways in which BCI can improve and augment speech and language pathology. This framework suggests a methodology for augmenting speech and language therapy with BCI systems. The idea of this methodology is to start with real-time feedback of affective states and subsequently combine the objective metrics with the subjective assessments of speech and language progress metrics. (ii) Novel settings for BCI feature extraction and classification for emotion detection using EEG-based technologies that are aligned with speech therapy requirements. Specifically, we introduced new techniques for embedding BCI in clinical settings by augmenting the subjective assessments with real-time feeds of affective states of clients. Therefore, Emo-in-Speech system can be considered as a novel therapeutic\assessment tool for emotion detection in CWS by using an EEG headset to record the brain signals and detect the subjects' affective state during a therapy session.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, a brief stuttering background is presented. Section 3 discusses some related work. In Section 4, we describe the BCI system's analysis and design process. Section 5 describes the materials and methods used to conduct our experiment. Experimental results and discussion are described in Section 5. Finally, we conclude in Section 6 with a summary of contributions and future work.
