A plethora of scientific research has empirically shown that integrating digital technologies into science-learning media supports student comprehension (Abdullahi, 2014, Chang et al., 2014, Maharaj-Sharma and Sharma, 2017, Shively and Yerrick, 2014). Considering coherence among evidential support presented in the literature, Turkish education policymakers initiated the FATIH (Turkish acronym for Movement of Enhancing Opportunities and Improving Technology) project in 2010 to empower digital technologies in all levels of state schools. LCD touchable smart boards, together with internet connection and personal tablets for students and teachers, were distributed across the country, and in-service training for teachers was provided by the Ministry of National Education. The country allocated a large budget for this project. In November 2016, President Erdoğan stated, “We overcame the physical problems but could not enhance the minds at the same level.” Several days later, PISA 2015 results were presented, indicating that Turkish students' science literacy scores were ranked 52nd among 70 countries (OECD, 2016). A plethora of scientific research point out challenges, barriers and other issues to be considered about integrating digital technologies in education (Al-Bataineh et al., 2008, Ertmer and Otternbreit-Leftwich, 2010, Frederick et al., 2006, Honan, 2008, Hutchison and Reinking, 2011, Lim, 2007). For example Ertmer and Otternbreit-Leftwich (2010) focused on a lack of pedagogical support. Furthermore, Frederick et al. (2006) studied on insufficient skills of teachers. In brief, issues related to digital literacy remain on the agenda of many countries.
In this study, we address the issue from a psychological perspective, together with contributions from the lens of educational technology researchers. Specifically, we focus on pre-service science teachers' barriers regarding technology integration. Ertmer, 1999, Ertmer, 2005 explains that there are two forms of barriers: first-order and second-order. First-order barriers relate to the accessibility of hardware and software equipment and to pre-/in-service teacher training on how to use the equipment. As described above, this barrier was already addressed in Turkey. Second-order barriers involve intrinsic factors such as teachers' beliefs, knowledge and attitudes regarding technology integration. Turkish students' performance on international exams indicates that the problem relates to second-order barriers (Erdemir et al., 2009, Karaca et al., 2013, Pamuk et al., 2013). Therefore, we must empower pre-service science teachers with regard to technology integration.
Science education literature underscores the effects of pre-service science teachers' beliefs on their current and future teaching practices (Fives and Buehl, 2012, Pajares, 1992). Notably, there exists a hierarchy of beliefs because of the abundance of teachers' belief types (Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975, Rokeach, 1968). Pre-service science teachers' epistemological beliefs and conceptions of teaching and learning are reflected in their teaching behaviors (Bahcivan, 2014a, Bahcivan, 2014b, Bahçivan, 2016, Bahcivan and Kapucu, 2014, Hofer and Pintrich, 1997). Therefore, we suggest that these beliefs may affect pre-service science teachers' adoption of digital technologies in producing, learning and teaching science.
Regarding second-order barriers, another important issue is pre-service science teachers' digital literacy, which is considered a 21st century competency (Dede, 2010, Mishra and Kereluik, 2011, Voogt and Pareja Roblin, 2012). Digital literacy may be an indicator of pre-service science teachers' effective use of digital technologies in science learning environments (Martinovic and Zhang, 2012, Zhao et al., 2002) and may be related to the hierarchy of other beliefs. Therefore, these possible hierarchies of beliefs and their relation to digital literacy qualifications can help determine how teachers should be educated in undergraduate programs. In addition, knowing the reasons why and how these beliefs are linked to digital literacy will improve teacher education. In this regard, the purpose of this study is twofold: 1) to construct a science teaching belief system to address pre-service science teachers' epistemological beliefs and conceptions of teaching and learning, investigating the relations between these beliefs and digital literacy; and 2) to examine how and why these beliefs affect their digital literacy.
