There is a growing recognition of the need for more effective science education in the United States, starting in early childhood (Morgan, Farkas, Hillemeier, & Maczuga, 2016). Simultaneously, a national achievement gap exists between children from low-income backgrounds and their higher income peers (Magnuson, Waldfogel, & Washbrook, 2012). The gap begins in early childhood and increases throughout formal schooling (Ryan, Fauth, & Brooks-Gunn, 2006). Disparities are evident across academic domains but are even more pronounced in science readiness. The Head Start framework (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2015) identifies four academic readiness domains for preschoolers—language, literacy, math, and science—of the four, science is the lowest performing among preschoolers from low-income backgrounds served by Head Start (Greenfield et al., 2009). This is unfortunate considering science is an interactive content area that capitalizes on children’s natural curiosity about the world and relates positively to other school readiness domains (e.g. math, language, and executive functioning) and high-quality teaching practices for children from low-income backgrounds (Cabell, DeCoster, LoCasale-Crouch, Hamre, & Pianta, 2013; Fuccillo, 2011; Nayfeld, Fuccillo, & Greenfield, 2013). The Head Start framework defines science readiness as “the emerging ability to develop scientific knowledge about the natural and physical worlds, learn scientific skills and methods, and continue developing reasoning and problem-solving skills” (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2015).
Given the achievement gap in this population, recent research has focused on identifying domain-general skills that facilitate children’s learning, regardless of content area (Li-Grinning, 2007; McClelland et al., 2007). Approaches to learning are a set of domain-general skills that have garnered increasing attention and have been recognized by the Office of Head Start as one of the foundational school readiness domains (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2015). These skills involve persistence, motivation, and flexible thinking, and allow children to effectively engage in learning. Due to their domain-general nature, approaches to learning are difficult to teach in isolation, making it important to identify optimal learning contexts that provide opportunities to develop these skills.
Recent research suggests a unique link between science readiness and approaches to learning, such that children who have higher approaches to learning (i.e. persistent, focused, open-minded, and collaborative) make greater gains in science across the preschool year, as compared to gains in math and language (Bustamante, White, & Greenfield, 2016). This is an important finding suggesting that approaches to learning relate to children’s development of science school readiness. However, the inverse relationship (i.e., if science readiness relates to the development of approaches to learning) has not yet been determined.
This relationship is important to understand the unique connection between approaches to learning and science school readiness and to identify content domains that can potentially promote development in approaches to learning. This study extended existing research by examining the bidirectional relationship between science readiness and approaches to learning across the academic year in a sample of diverse children attending Head Start. A bidirectional relationship would demonstrate that approaches to learning and science readiness share a unique connection and could be intentionally supported together to help children develop both domain-general learning skills and content knowledge.
1.1. Background1.1.1. Approaches to learningApproaches to learning refer to a set of learning styles and behaviors that affect how children approach any learning situation (Kagan, Moore, & Bredekamp, 1995; Vitiello, Greenfield, Munis, & George, 2011). Seven core sub-domains of approaches to learning have been identified; strategic planning, effectiveness motivation, interpersonal responsiveness in learning, vocal engagement in learning, sustained focus in learning, acceptance of novelty and risk, and group learning (McDermott et al., 2011). The development of these skills is grounded in the idea that children’s learning experiences are greatly influenced by the motivational, attentional, and behavioral mechanisms they use to engage in learning tasks (McClelland & Morrison, 2003; McDermott et al., 2011).Linking this conceptual background on approaches to learning with sociocultural and constructivist perspectives of child development (e.g. Vygotsky, 1986), this set of cognitive and behavioral skills can serve as “mental tools” that enable children to engage in learning and construct new knowledge (Bodrova & Leong, 2007; Paris & Winograd, 1990). Vygotsky’s theory of sociocultural development also highlights the social context as critical for children’s learning, which are inherent to some of the components of approaches to learning discussed above (e.g. vocal engagement and group learning). Thus, theoretical and conceptual background on child development and learning suggests that these skills play a key role in early learning and one would expect direct relationships with children’s academic success.These relationships are indeed empirically supported through concurrent and predictive relationships between approaches to learning and academic outcomes in early childhood and beyond (Fantuzzo, Perry, & McDermott, 2004; Li-Grining, Votruba-Drzal, Maldonado-Carreño, & Haas, 2010; McClelland, Morrison, & Holmes, 2000; McDermott, Rikoon, & Fantuzzo, 2014; McWayne, Fantuzzo, & McDermott, 2004; Vitiello et al., 2011). For example, children rated by teachers as having higher approaches to learning also show higher competency in math, language, and fine and gross motor coordination (McWayne et al., 2004). Additionally, research shows that children with higher approaches to learning in preschool demonstrate higher proficiency in reading, vocabulary, language, math, and science in second grade (McDermott et al., 2014). Taken together, theory and evidence suggest that these skills set the foundation for learning early in childhood.Further, preschool is a particularly important time to examine the development of approaches to learning. Generally, the preschool years are recognized as a critical period in development due to the rapid cognitive changes that occur. During these years, the mental processes that support approaches to learning form and develop quickly, and set the foundation for future learning (Welsh, Nix, Blair, Bierman, & Nelson, 2010). This critical period in development often co-occurs with a child’s first experience in a formal school setting, which brings with it a number of novel learning experiences and challenges that elicit children’s approaches to learning. In order to effectively navigate these new contexts and optimize learning, children must learn to embrace challenges, work cooperatively with peers, and demonstrate sustained engagement, focus, and attention during interactions with both teachers and peers.Unfortunately, children from low-income families lag behind their middle to high-income peers in their approaches to learning, indicating that they demonstrate fewer positive learning behaviors than their higher income peers (Fantuzzo, Gadsen, & McDermott, 2011; McDermott et al., 2011). In addition to the challenges associated with the first school experience discussed above, these children are faced with a myriad of additional barriers to their school and life success (i.e. food insecurity, lack of materials and resources, less exposure to rich language in the home) (Heckman, 2006; Magnuson & Duncan, 2006). For these reasons, an even greater focus on approaches to learning should be made for children from low-income backgrounds during this critical period of development.As evidence for the importance of approaches to learning for children served by Head Start, curricular interventions centered on approaches to learning have demonstrated the malleability of these skills and positive impact on math and language achievement (Fantuzzo et al., 2011). In order to promote the development of approaches to learning in this population and simultaneously address the national science achievement gap, more research is needed to determine how approaches to learning and science readiness are related and if these mutual relationships could provide a framework to help facilitate positive learning behaviors and science readiness for young children.1.1.2. Early childhood scienceScience is now recognized as a key component of Head Start’s Early Learning Outcomes Framework (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2015), highlighting the need for more research that examines science education in early childhood. Science education, as defined by the National Research Council’s Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), encompasses science content knowledge (core facts and content of science; e.g. living things need water), crosscutting concepts (core concepts that unify the study of science; e.g. patterns, cause and effect relationships, structure and function relationships), and scientific practices (behaviors that promote engagement in science activity; e.g. observing, constructing explanations, analyzing and interpreting data), providing a framework for what students need to know to demonstrate sufficient and effective science learning (National Research Council, 2012). This approach to science is designed to help children build on and revise their knowledge through active engagement, and integrate this knowledge and these abilities in a continuous cycle of scientific inquiry and engagement.This newly defined framework of science education clearly relates to foundational theories of child development, such as sociocultural and constructivist learning (Paris & Winograd, 1990; Piaget, 1973; Vygotsky, 1986). For example, the behaviors children implement when engaging in science activities (i.e. scientific practices), can also be considered types of “mental tools” that help them think creatively and flexibly about the observations they are making and the content they are learning. As young children engage in hands-on science experiences (in contrast to more factual/rote learning), they implement these mental tools to help make sense of new phenomena, update existing schemas, and integrate new knowledge (Driver & Erickson, 1983; Howe, 1996; Piaget, 1973).In his views of how children’ develop science concepts in childhood, Vygotsky discussed how children’s science learning builds over time and becomes integrated to create a coherent system of conceptual understanding (over the course of multiple experiences and with proper guidance from more experienced learners/teachers), which also fosters the development of language in context (Vygotsky, 1986). This Vygotskian approach is consistent with the NGSS science framework that advocates for science education in which children use a variety of scientific practices to understand both specific science content and more general scientific crosscutting concepts (National Research Council, 2012). Thus, theory and conceptual background on science education would suggest that science engagement and learning may facilitate general child development across cognitive, language, and socioemotional domains.Indeed, the evidence suggests that science experiences support learning across multiple school readiness domains, including language development, mathematics, arts and executive functioning skills (Conezio & French, 2002; Nayfeld et al., 2013). Additionally, research shows that instructional support in the preschool classroom (i.e. advanced language modeling, high quality feedback, and use of open-ended questions and concept development) is higher during science instruction, as compared to other domains (i.e. language and math; Cabell et al., 2013; Fuccillo, 2011). These findings suggest that science is a useful content area for promoting school readiness and high-quality teacher–child interactions. Not only do early science activities inherently capitalize on young children’s natural curiosity about their world, empirical research also suggests it is engaging, developmentally appropriate, and benefits the development multiple school readiness competencies for young children (Conezio & French, 2002; Greenfield et al., 2009; Morgan et al., 2016).Science is ubiquitous in the preschool classroom as children explore and engage in their environment. For example, when children are building structures in the block area they are exploring early engineering and physical science. They also learn about earth science when they notice the changes in the temperature as winter approaches and connect this new knowledge to their own lives by understanding how this influences the clothes they wear. Children develop knowledge of life science when they plant seeds and document their growth over time, or feed the class pet on a daily basis. All of these examples provide context for preschool children to explore and learn new science content.To effectively learn this content, children must utilize science practices, which are actionable behaviors that include asking questions, developing models, planning and carrying out investigations, constructing explanations, and designing solutions (National Research Council, 2012). By engaging in these practices, young children construct content knowledge and understanding of crosscutting concepts by going through an iterative scientific process of hands-on minds-on learning (Greenfield, 2015, Chapter 16). During this process, children begin to understand their world by devising and testing hypotheses, which requires persistence, engagement, and working cooperatively with peers in order to draw accurate conclusions about how things work. These behaviors are core components of approaches to learning and highlight a unique relationship between science school readiness and approaches to learning.1.1.3. Connection between approaches to learning and science readinessEmerging research suggests that approaches to learning are particularly useful for children’s science learning across the preschool year (Bustamante et al., 2016), and predict science performance at the end of second grade (McDermott et al., 2014). There is also evidence to suggest that certain aspects of children’s approaches to learning in kindergarten (in this particular study, motivation) predicted later science achievement (Saçkes, Trundle, Bell, & O’Connell, 2011). Additional research with older children also supports the link between approaches to learning and later science outcomes. For example, Lavigne, Vallerand, and Miquelon (2007) developed an intervention for high school students centered around motivation and persistence (two aspects of approaches to learning) and found that it was effective in increasing students interest and success in science classes. Further, Singh, Granville, and Dika (2002) demonstrated that motivation and attitudes towards learning science were strong predictors of science grades in middle school. This is a logical connection given the behaviors that make up approaches to learning and the practices that help children engage in effective science learning.Consider an example in which a child is playing outside and trying to dig a big hole in the dirt. First, the child sits down and starts digging with her hands, but the soil is too hard and she does not make any progress. She finds a twig nearby and starts to use it to dig into the ground, but it soon snaps. Frustrated, she stands up looking around for other possible solutions, when her classmate approaches and asks what she’s doing. After explaining that she wants to dig a hole her classmate proposes they ask their teacher if they can go into the classroom and look for tools. The teacher takes them inside and they grab a plastic spoon and a metal pot from the dramatic play area. When they get back outside and utilize their new tools, they discover that while the plastic spoon digs into the ground, the metal pot can also be used and in fact holds much more dirt in a single scoop. The children conclude that the metal pot is the best tool to use and proceed to take turns using it to dig a hole.During this experience the two children learned science content, including concepts such as structure and function (the way a tool is built will affect how it is used), and the utility of different materials (fingers, wood, plastic, and metal) when trying to accomplish a specific goal. This example also highlights learning beyond science content, as the children drew upon and fortified their approaches to learning skills. The girl showed motivation, flexibility, and problem solving by brainstorming and testing multiple solutions to her problem. Throughout this process, she demonstrated persistence, building her tolerance for frustration and sustained focus in learning. Her willingness to engage with a friend to pursue a common goal allowed her to practice interpersonal responsiveness and group learning. Both children showed vocal engagement in learning when they asked the teacher to go inside to look for materials and they practiced their strategic planning when they decided which materials to take.The example above illustrates how approaches to learning skills help children navigate a science experience, and how science as a context allows children to develop their approaches to learning, suggesting a possible bidirectional relationship between these two domains of school readiness. This bidirectional relationship is in line with recent integrative theories of children’s school readiness that encourage researchers to examine interrelations between various domains of school readiness (Snow, 2007). Such integrative models suggest that while children’s competencies across specific domains are distinct, they develop dynamically and influence each other over time.When thinking more specifically about approaches to learning and science as school readiness domains, it is critical to pull on theoretical perspectives of how children learn in context – by doing (i.e. engaging with materials and other individuals) – to deepen conceptual knowledge and understanding, which is precisely the focus of high-quality early science education. Vygotsky asserts that development impacts learning (e.g. approaches to learning development impacting science learning), but also that learning can impact development (e.g. science learning influencing approaches to learning development; Bodrova & Leong, 2007). Thus, Vygotsky’s theory of learning and development, combined with more recent integrative theories of children’s school readiness, provide a solid foundation for examining the bidirectional relationship between science learning and children’s approaches to learning.To the extent that the relationship between gains in science readiness and approaches to learning is bidirectional, findings can offer support for more intentional experiences that simultaneously target these domains in the early childhood classroom. Ultimately, these experiences could provide children served by Head Start with rich learning opportunities that will promote a positive attitude towards learning, foster inquiry and curiosity about the world, and encourage higher order scientific thinking.
1.2. Current studyDespite theoretical support, no studies to date have examined whether the relationship between gains in science readiness and approaches to learning is bidirectional. The aim of this study is to test the bidirectionality of that relationship. Empirical evidence of bidirectionality would further support the unique relationship between young children’s approaches to learning and science readiness, and provide justification for future research exploring the use of science as an ideal context for fostering approaches to learning, which is a critical domain-general skill that is difficult to teach devoid of academic content.We hypothesized that residualized change in approaches to learning across the school year (the difference between actual change and the change predicted by our model) would significantly predict science readiness in the spring, controlling for age, gender, residualized change in vocabulary, and science readiness in the fall. Similarly, we hypothesized that residualized change in science readiness across the school year would significantly predict approaches to learning in the spring controlling for age, gender, residualized change in vocabulary, and approaches to learning in the fall. Hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) was utilized to control for the nested nature of the data.
