As coal is porous in nature, significant amounts of methane can be retained in coal bed, and coalbed methane (CBM) is both a potentially valuable energy resource and a hazard in active coal mines [1], [2], [3]. Understanding the methane gas migration in coal seams is essential for both CBM recovering and coal mine gas control. But, the CBM flow equation is usually formulated as a nonlinear partial differential equation (PDE), which can hardly be solved by purely analytical techniques [4], [5].
The unidirectional flow is one of the three basic patterns of methane gas migration in coal seams, while the other two are radial flow and spherical flow [6]. The unidirectional flow of methane gas is a kind of one-dimensional transient flow. It refers to the situation where the methane gas migrates towards a coal face, of which the height is equal to the thickness of the coal seam, as shown in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (27KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Unidirectional methane gas flow in coal seam.
For one-dimensional transient gas flow (without adsorption and desorption) in porous media, a traveling wave solution has been present by Hayek [7]. Because the CBM flow is usually accompanied by methane desorption [8], [9], and the coal methane content is nonlinearly dependent on the pore gas pressure [10], [11], the problem of CBM flow is more complex, and we have to solve it numerically using a computer program.
As is well known, there are many parameters controlling the methane gas flow in coal seams, such as gas pressure, coal seam permeability, adsorption coefficients, etc. While trying to investigate the effects of these parameters on the flow process, one needs to solve the flow model many times for different values of the parameters, and the computational cost rises rapidly as the parameter number increases. Moreover, and importantly, the conventional numerical analysis may be inconvenient for those, such as field engineers, field technicians, and so on, who might not have access to the computer program. Thus, the objective of this study is to seek a method for solving the flow model, which is simpler than the conventional numerical analysis, and is accurate enough, and can be done even without a computer. Of course, such a method can also be easily programmed to run efficiently on a computer.
