Distorted probabilities modify the shape of the distribution of a random variable. So, they provide a suitable framework to input information on the parts of the domain that, for some reason, seem to be more relevant than others. This is especially interesting in areas like risk management, where the main focus is on the extremes of the distribution rather than on the central part. Similarly, in business analytics, one may be willing to analyze profits and losses, but would rather be more worried about losses, or negative outcomes, than profits or positive gains. In fact, the distortion function must somehow reflect the concept of “importance” or “relevance”, whereas the original distribution is nothing more than reflecting the random behavior.
The distorted probability is a convolution of a probability distribution and a distortion function that produces a measure which combines the stochastic nature in each part of the domain of the distribution with the weight (or relative importance) of each region in the domain.
Many have contributed to this field [15], [17]. Denneberg [2] (1989 and 1990) was a pioneer in the context of insurance. He emphasized the fact that large economic losses are more important than small ones. He suggested that this simple idea can easily be implemented by looking at the distribution function in a different perspective by means of a distortion.
We aim at developing a theory for m-dimensional distorted probabilities using the results from the discrete case and fuzzy measures. In our examples we address two different ideas. Firstly, we simply show that distortions can operate on multidimensional regions, as opposed to intervals in the one dimensional case. Secondly, we show that the m-dimensional case can be used to cope with situations where a measure cannot be generated by a single one-dimensional distorted probability. It is known that in the discrete case fuzzy measures representable as one-dimensional distorted probabilities are a small fraction of the total. See, e.g., [6], [8] for details on how this is computed.
Our construction presumes that defining probability distributions on regions on continuous domains is easy, but that defining fuzzy measures on such continuous domains is not. So, an implicit goal is to use these distributions to define fuzzy measures by means of the distortion function, as we do in the discrete case. Observe that there are a few ways of defining probability distributions on continuous domains. There are, among others, the multivariate normal distribution, multivariate t-distribution, spherical and elliptical distributions. Some distributions based on the Choquet integral have been even introduced [11].
In this paper, we also propose a definition for hierarchically decomposable m-dimensional distorted probabilities. This type of measures can be seen as a natural generalization of m-dimensional distorted probabilities and of hierarchically decomposable fuzzy measures. This latter type of measures were previously defined in a discrete setting in [10].
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents notation and definitions. Section 3 provides the definition of distorted probabilities on random vectors, and introduces the new families of measures. Some properties of these new measures are analyzed. Section 4 shows some examples of splitting probability reference sets and Section 5 concludes.
