Over the last decade, large and multi-wavelength photometric surveys have taken center stage as one of the main research tools in Astronomy. The need for ever increasing volumes and homogeneous statistical samples for cosmological studies, the discovery of rare populations and time-domain studies, combined with the coming of age of large and efficient mosaic cameras, have motivated a number of optical and infrared surveys. Examples in the modern era include the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS, York et al., 2000), the Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS, Skrutskie et al., 2006), the Canada–France–Hawaii Legacy Survey (CFHTLS, Le Fèvre et al., 2005), the Cosmological Evolution Survey (COSMOS, Scoville et al., 2007), the VISTA Hemisphere Survey (VHS, McMahon et al., 2013), the Kilo-Degree Survey (KIDS, de Jong et al., 2013), the Panoramic Survey Telescope & Rapid Response System (PANSTARRS, Kaiser et al. (2010), Rest et al. (2014), Scolnic et al. (2014)), the Dark Energy Survey (DES, Flaugher, 2005), and will culminate with the 10-year survey to be conducted with the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST, Ivezić et al. (2008), LSST Science Collaboration et al. (2009)).
These surveys have had a profound impact on astronomy turning it from a data starved to a data-intensive science and forcing new methods in computer science to be developed to handle the large data volumes and complex procedures involved in preparing the data for scientific analysis. For example, SDSS is one of the most used and cited surveys in history in part due to data access interfaces like Sky Server (Szalay et al., 2002) and CASJobs (Li and Thakar, 2008), which provide access to the SDSS data releases to the public.
Other domains such as material science, plant biology, and genomics have been more active recently in developing portals, also known as science gateways, to their communities in support of reproducibility and open access Marru et al. (2013), Gesing et al. (2016). For Astronomy, a few science-as-a-service pilots are emerging, such as the container-based analysis platform SciServer (Raddick et al., 2017) and the Theoretical Astrophysical Observatory (Bernyk et al., 2016) focused on synthetic galaxy catalog production.
The DES collaboration is a 5-year program to carry out two distinct surveys. The wide-angle survey covers 5,000 deg2 of the southern sky in the (grizY) filters to a nominal magnitude limit of ∼24 in most bands. Also, there is a deep survey (i∼26) of about 30 deg2 in four filters (griz) with a well-defined cadence to search for type-Ia Supernovae (SNe Ia) (Kessler et al., 2015). The primary goal of the DES is to constrain the nature of dark energy through the combination of four observational probes, namely baryon acoustic oscillations, counts of galaxy clusters, weak gravitational lensing, and determination of distances of SNe. Once the data are collected, the DES Data Management (DESDM) system at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA,1 e.g., Desai et al. (2012), Mohr et al. (2012), Morganson et al. (2018)) processes the images, and produces a catalog of objects with a large number of measurements and associated masks. The subsequent analyses rarely use all of the measurements. It usually defines new masks and ancillary data products, and sometimes apply new calibrations to the ”raw” data to produce the refined catalogs that serve as input to the calculation of the science-relevant statistics.
In this paper, we address the issue of creating “science-ready” catalogs for DES Year 1 Annual Release in a manner that is traceable and reproducible given the many choices that go into producing them and the continuous evolution of versions of the data products involved. We describe the software infrastructure developed for this purpose which is part of the DES Science Portal (hereafter referred as “the portal”, da Costa et al. 2017, in preparation) a facility, complementary to the DESDM system, meant to support scientific analysis and enhance the usability of the DES data products.
In Section 2 we present an overview of our approach to create science-ready catalogs. In Section 3 we describe the input data products such as co-added products, ancillary maps and value-added products and how they are used. In Section 4 we describe how the portal automates the creation and characterization of lightweight catalogs, describing in detail the example of preparing a catalog for the study of Large Scale Structure. In Sections 5 Other lightweight catalogs, 6 Generic catalog, 7 Special samples we illustrate how the infrastructure that we developed can be used to create different types of catalogs. In Section 8 we discuss the operational benefits of this infrastructure and in Section 9 the future developments are mentioned. Finally, in Section 10 we summarize our results.
