Plain chest X-Ray (CXR) has extensively been utilized as a salient modality for diagnosing any pulmonary disorder in humans [1]. Based on the standard for protection against the radiation exposure on humans [2], the CXR screening is performed at an effective dosage; thus inducing a low level of radiation risk. An ENT (ear, neck, and throat) radiologist is trained to intuitively recognize any pulmonary disorder based on the particular discrepancies (e.g. nodule, mass tissue, or deformation) that occur within the lung regions [3], [4]. This subjective approach relies entirely on the condition and the experience of the examiner.
As the level of air pollution increases, the contingency of a person to suffer from a pulmonary disease shall increase. More patients will be advised by their physician to perform CXR screening, which adds more workloads to the ENT radiologist. Therefore, these circumstances will increase the possibility of false diagnosis simply due to fatigue. Staiger et al. [5] predict that this condition will potentially worsen due to the workforce shortage in most countries. Motivated by the aforementioned reasons, various computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems with a predefined scope of respiratory disease have been developed to extract any essential information such as the lung regions.
Prior studies [1], [6], [7] agreed that CAD-based systems increase the diagnosis quality by signifying the distinctive characteristics of any particular respiratory disease. The CAD systems also offer a remote solution for any area, where the presence of radiologists is minor. A robust CAD system able to endure various anatomical challenges, which are depicted in Fig. 1, such as 1) wide variance of pixels within the lung apices, hila, and the great vessels of heart; 2) attenuated lung boundaries caused by gaseous trachea and fundus in the upper respiratory tract and hemi-diaphragm, respectively; 3) local maxima patterns generated by rib-cages and clavicles; 4) convoluted structures over the costophrenic angles and vacillating shape of the lungs; and 5) any physical discrepancy.Download : Download high-res image (198KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The distinctiveness of CXR comprises numerous sections of chest relics: lungs (A), trachea (B), rib cages (C), clavicles (D), lung apices (E), hilum (F), aortic arch (G), heart (H), costophrenic angles (I), fundus (J), nodule (K), alienated unit (L) and breast tissue (M).
In the past few years, different studies have been conducted to develop CAD-based systems that are capable of segmenting the lung regions over the human torso on CXR images. The rule-based reasoning and the pixel classification-based techniques are two main folds of lung segmentation techniques, of which details and drawbacks are introduced in Section 2. Nevertheless, with recent development in GPU-based systems, more implementations of deep neural network techniques have been applied to develop the lung segmentation algorithm [8], [9]. Although the trade-off between the complexity and the segmentation accuracy on deployment can be minimized, the methods massively exploit the graphical memory and computing power of GPU-based system which limits the applicability to certain hardware specifications.
In this study, an efficient method for segmenting lung regions from the CXRs is proposed. The proposed method comprises of four stages: Initially, a contrast enhancement specifically increases the gradients between the lungs and their surrounding regions (both bony structures and other soft tissues). The foreground, which incorporates the upper torso region, is extracted using an intelligent block-based binarization [10], [11]. Then, lung regions are excluded from the foreground through a series of spatial-based processing: the first derivative of Gaussian, morphological analysis, and the statistical-based region growing. As the final stage, an adaptive graph cut technique is implemented to locally refine the preliminary lung boundaries.
The remainder of this research paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents few studies, which are related to this work. The proposed method is elaborated in details in Section 3. Comprehensive assessment of the proposed method through objective and subjective measures are presented in Section 4 with the discussion in Section 5. Finally, the conclusion is stated in Section 6.
