Lung cancer has high incidence rates and death rates. It is the major malignant tumor threat to human health. In recent years, the new cases and deaths of lung cancer have ranked first in malignant tumors [1]. Pulmonary nodule, the early manifestation of lung cancer, plays a key role in early discovering, diagnosing and treating lung cancer as well as improving the survival rates of the patient [2]. Clinically, the most common way for pulmonary nodules diagnosis is based on computed tomography (CT) images of the lung [3].
With the development of CT technology, the space between scanning layers is getting smaller and smaller. There is an increasing amount of information gained from the anatomical structure of the image, which requires more observation from doctors. The amount of data being processed is getting larger as well, causing doctors spending longer time for detection and diagnosis. According to the survey done by reference [4], it is a really difficult task for thoracic radiologists to use eyes only when finding pulmonary nodules in CT images and classifying them as benign or malignant. The missing rates and misdiagnosis rates both are very high. As a result, there is a necessity to use the pulmonary nodules computer aided diagnosis (CAD), which can help to reduce the missing rates and misdiagnosis rates and provide sufficient support to imaging doctors while diagnosing lung cancer.
In fact, the process of pulmonary nodules computer aided diagnosis is the simulation of how an imaging doctor reads the thoracic CT images and gives diagnosis about the benign and malignant of pulmonary nodules. Pulmonary nodules CAD first uses the techniques from computer vision and image processing to detect and segment pulmonary nodules [5], [6], [7], then extracts and analyzes the image features of pulmonary nodules [8], finally uses machine learning to classify them as benign or malignant [9], [10]. Therefore, one key to improve the testing accuracy of benign and malignant pulmonary nodules is the performance of machine learning. At present, among all methods used for pulmonary nodules computer aided diagnosis, the most common one is support vector machine (SVM) [11], PNN [39], MLP [40]. However, the training time and diagnosis accuracy still need improvement.
In 2004, Professor Huang Guangbin from Nanyang Technological University proposed the extreme learning machine (ELM) method, which is a simple, sufficient single-hidden layer feedforward neural networks (SLFNs) learning method [12]. For ELM, it only requires setting up the network hidden node numbers, and doesn’t have to change the input weight of the network and the offset of hidden elements and then produce the only optimized solution, the advantages of which including fast learning speed and good generalized character. The paper has proposed a pulmonary nodules CAD based on ELM to reduce doctor’s work load. We focus on the benign and malignant diagnosis of pulmonary nodules. Segmentation is beyond the scope of this paper. In order to clearly evaluate the experimental results, we selected the outline of pulmonary nodules marked by three or four experienced radiologists which is the most standard segmentation result. The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.
(1) When uncertain class data are used for training, they usually can be treated as benign and malignant class. But this operation is unreasonable. Because uncertain class data contains both benign and malignant data. In order to verify this idea, we have studied uncertain data intensively in this manuscript. First, we have treated uncertain class lung CT images as benign, malignant or discard class. Second, we have used these data and certain class data to train ELM, SVM, PNN and MLP. We have found when we have discarded uncertain class data, the experimental results are best. So to treat uncertain class as benign and malignant class is unreasonable. Finally, we have compared the performance of ELM, SVM, PNN and MLP. We have found whatever treating uncertain class data as benign, malignant or discard class, the learning speed of ELM is faster and the test accuracy of ELM is higher. ELM has better performance than other methods.
(2) First, we have found that to treat the uncertain class as benign, malignant and discard class is unreasonable and ELM has better performance than other methods. So we have treated the uncertain class data as unlabeled data and used SS-ELM to deal with uncertain class data. Second, We have compared the performance of SS-ELM with ELM. Finally, we have found SS-ELM has achieved better generalization performance at faster learning speed and higher testing accuracy than ELM. And to treat uncertain class data as unlabeled data is reasonable.
(3) Experiments have been conducted using 1018 sets of thoracic CT scans from the Lung Image Database Consortium and Image Database Resource Initiative (LIDC-IDRI). The results have shown that, compared with SVM, PNN, MLP, the pulmonary nodules CAD based on ELM method has an clear advantage in training time, testing accuracy as well as other evaluating indicators. Compared with ELM algorithm, the pulmonary nodules CAD based on SS-ELM has not only solved the problem of unlabeled data learning, but also optimized the accuracy.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the research progress of existing pulmonary nodules CAD methods and introduces basic principles of machine learning algorithms. Section 3 introduces the pulmonary nodules CAD based on ELM algorithm. Section 4 introduces the pulmonary nodules CAD based on SS-ELM algorithm. Section 5 discusses the experiment process and results. Section 6 discusses the performance of the methods. Section 7 concludes the work of the entire paper.
