High speed mobile network service has become possible with recent developments of communications technology, and Internet access is possible at any time and any place. In addition, with the spread of smart phones, mobile services have been replaced by data services rather than voice services. Mobile data services include web, chat, online gaming, and video services, etc. Mobile video accounts for the greatest proportion of mobile services, and this proportion is increasing. There are many service providers for mobile video. As high quality video content provided by multimedia companies is increasing, mobile video traffic will continue to grow at a faster pace, and in 2020 it is estimated it will account for 75% of total mobile data traffic [1], [2].
In Over the Top (OTT) services such as mobile video, wireless resources are becoming scarce as video traffic increases. Therefore, traffic management in wireless networks is becoming increasingly important. In particular, the importance of traffic and resource management in heterogeneous networks is increasing. For traffic management, existing technologies focus on network access control in heterogeneous networks consisting of cellular and WiFi networks. As 98% of video services use the hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), the HTTP Range Request function can be used [3], [4]. The HTTP Range Request function can request video data in a byte range to content servers [5]. This feature enables traffic management in heterogeneous networks. In general, cellular networks cover a wide area but the data rate can fluctuate. In contrast, because WiFi networks are only available in hotspots, they are subject to connectivity problems. That is, WiFi networks do not provide seamless connectivity for mobile terminals [6]. Therefore, proper traffic management according to the status of the access network is needed.
In the typical heterogeneous network, as shown in Fig. 1, a mobile terminal is a distributed system that is the subject of computing. For appropriate mobile services, the mobile terminal learns through statistical data as training examples. Although the technology of mobile terminals has improved, battery-based mobile terminals have limited computing resources. In addition, mobile terminals access content servers on the Internet cloud for video services. It is difficult for traffic management between the mobile terminal and the content server on the Internet cloud to cope with changes in status of the access network. Therefore, to improve the quality of experience (QoE) for users, a novel approach to the traffic management is required. This paper proposes an improved traffic management scheme using the edge cloud in the access network.Download : Download high-res image (129KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Network system for mobile video services.
Mobile edge computing (MEC) is known as the edge cloud. The MEC moves computing resources from the Internet cloud to the access network. The MEC server organizes the edge cloud for the access network. Thus, mobile terminals can use the edge cloud for computing. The edge cloud provides the mobile terminals with low latency and improved bandwidth utilization [7], [8], [9], [10]. As the edge cloud measures the status of the access network, a traffic management scheme employing the edge cloud can efficiently manage video traffic for mobile video services using the measured information. The MEC server estimates the access network status and applies policies for traffic management. It receives video traffic from the content server in advance and manages the traffic such that seamless service of the mobile terminal is maintained. In addition, the MEC server monitors the bandwidth required for the video service of the mobile terminal and instructs the mobile terminal to combine the cellular and WiFi networks to compensate for insufficient bandwidth. Therefore, the proposed traffic management scheme can lead to QoE improvement for mobile video services.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related work on the MEC in the mobile edge cloud and traffic management. Section 3 presents the proposed traffic management and network architecture for the scheme. In Section 4, the performance is evaluated through computer simulation. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
