Driven by public and private sector investment into people and projects (Stephan, 2012, Stokes, 1997), the rate of scientific production has exhibited persistent growth over the last century (Althouse, West, Bergstrom, & Bergstrom, 2009; Lariviere, Archambault, & Gingras, 2008). However, the extant empirical and theoretical literature provides little guidance for understanding the impact of these long-term growth trends on the structural properties of the science citation network. Only recently have studies shown that accounting for the growth of science can drastically change measured trends, e.g. in the decay rate of the citation life cycle of individual publications (Parolo et al., 2015). Insights such as this call for a better understanding of how the scientific attention economy (Franck, 1999, Klamer and van Dalen, 2002) is impacted by growth of the scientific system. Moreover, the recent proliferation of a new ecosystem of rapid-publication online-only “mega-journals” (Bjork, 2015, Petersen, 2018, Solomon, 2014, Solomon and Bjork, 2012, Wakeling et al., 2016) has further tipped the balance towards production over consumption of new research, making it a relevant and pressing issue.
To grasp the impact of this new publishing paradigm, consider the sole contribution by the online-only journal PLOS ONE, which grew over its first 6 years at an annual growth rate of 78.6%, corresponding to a doubling rate of only 1.2 years. To place this growth in real terms, after just 5 years since its inception, publications by PLOS ONE in 2012 (more than 23,000 articles) accounted for 1.4% of the entire volume of 2012 items indexed by the Web of Science (WOS) Science Citation Index Expanded; and calculated over the entire period 1900–2012, PLOS ONE publications represented 0.12% of all articles in this WOS index. Compared with other journals and fields in Fig. 1, which show typical growth around 3–4% annually, and even breakthrough fields such as Stem Cell research, which has grown at a thriving annual rate of 18.5%, the emergence of mega-journals appear ready to sustain long-term trends in the growth of scientific production well into the 21st century.Download : Download high-res image (301KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Empirical growth of scientific output: journals, fields (A, B) Growth in two specific journals. Physical Review Letters (physics), and PLOS ONE (multidisciplinary open access). The remarkable growth rate for PLOS ONE – representative of the shift in scientific publication towards large online-only journals – dwarfs the others by an entire order of magnitude, with the exponential growth rate gn = 0.58 corresponding to an annual growth rate 100(Exp[0.58]−1) = 77.6% and a publication doubling rate of ln2/0.58 = 1.2 years. (C, D) Growth in two specific research domains, Stem Cell research and Economics.
Applying methods from network science, complex systems, and data analytics, the ‘science of science’ (Fortunato et al., 2018) uses the millions of new research outputs produced each year by scientists around the world to illuminate knowledge production and innovation processes, thereby aiming to provide valuable insights for science policy guidance (Fealing, 2011). One particular link to the past that is preserved within each publication is the bibliographic list of references, which provide a means to measure how much today's research builds upon yesteryear's. As such, the citation network – where nodes are publications and links are the references within a publication to prior literature – has been used to conceptualize and measure the processes underlying the evolution of the scientific enterprise for more than half a century (de Solla Price, 1965, Garfield, 1955), and continues to be useful for making important insights into the long-term evolution of the scientific enterprise (Fortunato et al., 2018; Sinatra, Deville, Szell, Wang, & Barabasi, 2015).
Against this background we analyze the interplay between publication output growth and the attention to prior literature captured by the citation network. More specifically, we simultaneously identify and model three key features of this complex adaptive system:
1.The steady growth of the total number of references produced each year, arising from increasing publication output and reference-list lengths, and its relation to citation inflation.2.The subsequent shifts in the concentration of citations received by publications at the lower and upper extremes of the citation distribution, providing perspective on citation inequality.3.The distribution of references backwards in time which captures the historical breadth of scientific attention.
These considerations are important in the measurement, interpretation, and modeling of science for three fundamental reasons. First, citation inflation, which arises from the exponential growth in the production of references, affects the relative value of citations, thereby impacting the comparative evaluation of careers, institutions, and country output across different periods. For this reason, the bibliometrics community has put much effort into developing normalization strategies for comparing citation measures between varying time periods and disciplines (Waltman, 2016, Waltman and van Eck, 2018).
Second, this increasing supply of references has dramatically diminished the fraction of publications that go uncited. While this shift may at first appear to be an incremental change in the lower tail of the citation distribution, it has an enormous impact on the overall connectivity of the citation network, thereby affecting the scalability of “random walk” algorithms developed for the purpose of search, browsing, and recommendation in large yet sparse networks.
Third, there is the question of whether, and to what extent, a diminishing breadth of attention is related to the system's growth, and whether a decreasing attention to older literature may negatively impact the efficiency of knowledge production. Here we also uncover a decreasing attention to very recent literature – published within the most recent 6 years – that further indicates that scientists are not able to keep up with the deluge of new research, which may also reduce innovative capacity and efficiency. How innovation in information and communications technology (ICT) will address this information overflow by improving researchers’ ability to browse, search, retrieve, store, analyze, and recall knowledge, thereby augmenting human memory capacity (Sparrow, Liu, & Wegner, 2011), is a question of particular relevance and importance.
By considering the three features simultaneously – each of which has been addressed separately in the literature, however with some notable disagreement – we aim to show how they are all related to the growth of science. We begin by outlining the fragmentation of the existing literature pertaining to these three features, and proceed to develop a framework and theoretical model for analyzing them together.
