Traditional product data exchanging and sharing has always focused on the exchange of geometric data. With the development of the model-based definition (MBD),the product information exchange between heterogeneous systems gradually shifts to non-geometric information, including product manufacturing information(PMI) and design intent etc. Currently the mainstream CAD system mainly describes the design intent through four aspects: design history, parameters, constraints and features [1]. Features are the core of design intent, and different features in the product reflect a large amount of design intent information. However, the existing CAD software mostly stores the product information in the form of geometry and topology. The information only has less information such as points, lines, edges and surfaces, so the data is hard to be shared. In this paper, the semantic features of design intent is an abstract geometric shape that contains certain design semantic information. It refers to the design intent expression of the feature information and parameters with engineering semantics.
Feature recognition has been a hot topic in related fields. It is mainly divided into two categories: (1) An ontology-based recognition approach  [[2], [3]]; (2) Feature-based attribute adjacency graph recognition method [[4], [5]]. The former is applicable to the parts with certain shape requirements, and has some difficulties in recognizing the miscellaneous parts. The latter is the most widely used method, but the computation is large and cannot effectively identify the intersecting features and complex features. The method based on graph and neural network [[6], [7], [8]] can solve the identification of intersection feature to a certain extent. But the problem is that: BP neural network can easily make the search process fall into the local optimum and cannot search the global optimal solution, resulting in a large error of feature identification and a large convergence error.
ISO10303 STEP AP242 provides all the functionalities already covered by AP203 and AP214. Moreover, it includes enhanced PMI capabilities and design intent etc [9]. Intersecting features and complex features tend to reflect the design intent [10] more, while traditional feature recognition methods cannot do it. In this paper, STEP feature extraction method based on graph and factor clustering is proposed. Neural network has excellent learning performance, using it for feature recognition can greatly improve the accuracy and efficiency of feature recognition. Because its learning convergence is slow and it is easy to fall into the local optimum, an improved novel bat algorithm (NBA) to optimize BP neural network is designed. Compared with PSO, GA, the improved NBA algorithm can control the conversion between the local search and the global search and avoid falling into the local optimal defect. After the training feature recognition, it can improve the accuracy of feature recognition with some validity and practicality.
