Networks are ubiquitous in the world from natural networks to artificially generated networks [1], [2]. Biological, communication, transportation networks, and WWW are few examples of such existing real-world complex networks [3], [4]. The networks provide a platform to the dynamical processes, such as information diffusion, epidemic spreading, diffusion of resources, to run [5], [6]. Underlying network structure affects the diffusion processes and helps in controlling them. The power-grid network is a human-made complex network which is an example of the weighted network and the capacity of the electricity transportation through a link can be thought as the weight of that link. The distribution of the links and their weights defines the performance of the network in the electricity transportation. A diffusion process is governed by the rules of the diffusion and structural properties of the underlying network. Identification of the networked non-linear systems is fundamental to control them. In many cases, exact information regarding the network structure and its nodal dynamics are unknown. To develop a better understanding regarding how to control the networked systems, nodes’ interconnection pattern and their properties are required. Diffusion dynamics, for example, information diffusion and epidemic spreading provide time series data which contains the status of the nodes at different time steps. If a node is infected or informed, its status will be 1 otherwise 0. It is a binary data and called as status-time-series (STS) data. Reconstruction of the structure of a network using the available status-time-series data of a diffusion process that is seen in the network is an interesting inverse problem and studied in many contexts [7], [8], [9].
The practical importance of the network reconstruction in many disciplines motivated us to propose a more generalized method for network reconstruction. As a contribution, in this paper, we propose a simple yet efficient method of network reconstruction using just STS (binary) data. The proposed method does not require any additional information such as the selection of the threshold values in compressed sensing theory (CST) based method of network reconstruction. The proposed network reconstruction method is tested on the networks of different structural properties, for example, modular network, random networks, and real-world networks and a high accuracy is achieved in most of the cases. Further, the proposed method is compared with a CST based method of network reconstruction [10] using the same STS data and observed superior performance.
Rest of the paper is arranged as follows: A brief introduction to the similar literature in the same context is considered in Section 2. The proposed method of network reconstruction from available status-time-series (STS) data is explained in Section 3. Section 4 provides the performance analysis. Discussion and salient features of the proposed network reconstruction method are discussed in Section 5. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 6.
