1.1. BackgroundThe use of devices with screens (screen time) is steadily increasing worldwide (De Decker et al., 2012; Holloway, Green, & Livingstone, 2013; Rideout, 2013; Sweetser, Johnson, Ozdowska, & Wyeth, 2012). Of greatest concern to researchers is the alarming rate at which young children are overexposed to television, smart phones, tablets and myriad screen devices and the potential negative associations of such use (Hill et al., 2016; Lieberman, Fisk, & Biely, 2009; Vandewater et al., 2007; Zimmerman, Christakis, & Meltzoff, 2007). Years of research suggests excessive screen time is strongly associated with cognitive and social decline in young children (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001; Brown, 2011; Hill et al., 2016; Rideout, 2013; Tomopoulos et al., 2010; Wethington, Pan, & Sherry, 2013), but children's exposure is only part of the problem. Emerging research suggests the screen time of parents greatly influences the screen time of their children, and any comprehensive effort to reduce screen time in children should consider the role of the parent (Gentile & Walsh, 2002; Hill et al., 2016; Jago et al., 2011; Jago et al., 2012; Lee & Chae, 2007; Linebarger, Barr, Lapierre, & Piotrowski, 2014).Consequently, child advocates are sounding the alarm to parents to restrict screen time completely for children under two years, limit older children to one or two hours, and reduce children's overall screen time (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001; Hill et al., 2016).Young children and adolescents in eastern countries, such as China, experience high screen times through television, computers, and mobile devices also (Cao et al., 2011; Jiang, Hardy, Ding, Baur, & Shi, 2014). Researchers, studying Chinese populations, found that excessive screen times is associated with psychological, emotional, and social problems in Chinese children (Cao et al., 2011; Li et al., 2013; Zhang & Harwood, 2002; Wu, Tao, Zhang, Zhang, and Tao (2015). Despite these results, data on Asian countries, and particularly in Chinese settings, that explores the relationship between screen time of parents and children and cognitive and social development of the latter is surprisingly sparse (Cao et al., 2011; Jiang et al., 2014; Ruangdaraganon et al., 2009). Most research on screen time in China is limited to college students engaging in heavy Internet use (Kim et al., 2010), lack of physical activities, mental health concerns (Cao et al., 2011) and sleep disorders associated with screen media use (Feng, Zhang, Du, Ye, & He, 2014; Li et al., 2007). China is the largest country in the world by population, has the largest economy, and is experiencing a technology boom (Central Intelligence Agency, 2018; International Monetary Fund, 2018). It has more internet users and mobile phones than any other country and >96% literacy (Central Intelligence Agency, 2018). With such widespread availability of screens, it is important to researchers, parents, guardians, child advocates, educators, governments and even makers of screen-based technologies to explore the potential ramifications of excessive screen time on the well-being of Chinese children. Therefore, in this study, we explore such a relationship using a large representative sample of Chinese families in Guangdong, China.
1.2. Relationship between parental screen time and childrenParents occupy a critical role in the screen habits of their children (Lauricella, Wartella, & Rideout, 2015). In a national representative study in the United States, researchers found that parenting styles had a mediating effect on the association between executive functions and children exposed to excessive screen time (Linebarger et al., 2014). Matarma, Koski, Löyttyniemi, and Lagström (2016) found that mothers' advanced education (rather than fathers') was associated with reduced screen time for children, but fathers' sedentary habits was associated with children's increased screen use.Mendelsohn et al. (2008) suggested that the interactions between parents and children may reduce the negative associations of screen time and is linked to additional benefits, especially when mothers co-view television with their children and encourage verbal exchanges in the process. Another observed that parents often serve as a moderating influence on their children's screen time and this influence is understudied and deserves further scrutiny (Tandon et al., 2012).We explore the relationship between parents' screen time and their children's screen time in four areas: (1) parents' attitude toward screen media, (2) family socio-economic status, (3) parenting style, and (4) screen content. Each will be discussed in turn. First, the attitude of parents toward screen media varies widely, but more importantly, it shapes the screen time of their children in positive and negative ways (Cingel & Krcmar, 2013; Jiang et al., 2014). Some parents embrace screen media and have a positive view of its perceived benefits for their children (Holloway et al., 2013; Ruangdaraganon et al., 2009; Wartella, Richert, & Robb, 2010). They believe screen technology contributes to their children's cognitive development (Lauricella et al., 2015) and enrich their educational experiences (Cingel & Krcmar, 2013; De Decker et al., 2012; Fenstermacher et al., 2010; Sanders, Parent, Forehand, Sullivan, & Jones, 2016; Wartella et al., 2010). Consequently, they provide their children with screen media to keep them busy, reward them for accomplishments, serve as bedtime companions, give children what they desire, and provide parents with personal time to complete chores or relax (Cingel & Krcmar, 2013; Kabali et al., 2015; Rideout, Vandewater, & Wartella, 2003). Parents may even engage productively with their children during screen-based activities (De Decker et al., 2012). Children in these settings take their cue from parents and are likely to exceed recommended screen time limits (Hill et al., 2016).In contrast, skeptical parents have a nuanced attitude toward screen time and are likely to limit their children's exposure. They are wary of screen time's association with a sedentary lifestyle, aggressive mood changes in children, reduced communication with parents, decreased physical and psychological development, increased screen time addiction, diminished peer-bonding skills, and myriad negative effects (De Decker et al., 2012; Lemola, Perkinson-Gloor, Brand, Dewald-Kaufmann, & Grob, 2015; Schmidt et al., 2012; Wethington et al., 2013). In short, parents with positive attitudes toward screen media afforded more screen time to their children, while parents with negative attitudes had a nuanced approach (which did not necessarily result in decreased screen time for children) (Cingel & Krcmar, 2013).Second, the socio-economic status of parents influences their children's screen time. Parents in a high socio-economic status provide less screen time to their children compared to parents in low socio-economic status households (Carson, Spence, Cutumisu, & Cargill, 2010). Researchers speculate that parents in high socio-economic status may live in nicer, safer neighborhoods that allow children more freedom for outdoor play, while parents in low socio-economic settings may encourage children to stay indoors for extended periods, which may lead to increased screen time (Burdette, 2005; Tandon et al., 2012). Socio-economic status may also be related to parents' educational level and screen time choices. Parents with higher education provided less screen time (67.1 vs. 114.4 min) to their children compared to parents with lower education, but this result only applied to parents who spent time with children (Certain & Kahn, 2002; Gentile & Walsh, 2002; Lin, Cherng, Chen, Chen, & Yang, 2015). Parents who did not complete high school, especially mothers, were likely to expose their children to increasing amounts of screen time (Thompson, Adair, & Bentley, 2013).Third, parenting style is another factor to consider when exploring screen time and children. Households with parents as primary caregivers allowed less screen time for their children compared to households that outsourced children's care to grandparents or other caregivers (Benjamin et al., 2009; Guryan, Hurst, & Kearney, 2008). Working parents, unable to make significant play-time with children, often outsourced caregiving to grandparents or third parties or used screen media to aid with babysitting duties or create time for their own chores. This practice was especially true for young children with difficult temperaments or active lifestyles (Lin et al., 2015; Lin, Leung, Hui, Lam, & Schooling, 2011; Rideout, 2013; Thompson et al., 2013).Parenting style also determined the level of restriction placed on children's screen time. Permissive parents afforded more screen time to their children, while restrictive parents placed strong limits on screen media (Jago et al., 2011) including limits on television use in children's room as recommended by the AAP (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001). Having a TV in the child's room increased screen time by more than five hours each week and is associated with obesity and sleep disorders (Gentile & Walsh, 2002; Wethington et al., 2013). Restrictive parents are also likely to limit the duration and circumstance of children's screen time and keep their children within recommended AAP guidelines (Jago et al., 2011).Parenting style also had a gender difference. Highly-educated mothers (compared to fathers) provided less screen time to their children and were more interactive and hands-on. Fathers were likely to be more sedentary and provided children more screen time (Lin et al., 2015). However, if both parents led sedentary lifestyles and did not restrict screen time, children were likely to exceed recommended screen time limits (Jago et al., 2011). Additionally, mothers (as opposed to fathers) played a more critical role in shaping the screen time practices of children (Burdette, 2005; Jago et al., 2012).Finally, screen content affects parents' screen time behavior around children. The literature provides strong evidence that children benefited from well-made screen content created especially for them but did not fare as well with content meant for older children or adults. Educational programs such as Sesame Street, Blues Clues, and Dora the Explorer were associated with improved school readiness for children older than two years; however, these findings did not hold true for children viewing content meant for others (Anderson, Huston, Schmitt, Linebarger, & Wright, 2001; Wright et al., 2001).Schmidt, Pempek, Kirkorian, Lund, and Anderson (2008) observed a reduction in the quality and quantity of parent-child interactions when content meant for adults was viewed within earshot of both children and parents. In these settings, children were less likely to maintain sustained attention to parents because of frequent distractions from television content, and parents provided passive rather than active responses to their children (Anderson, 2005; Kirkorian, Pempek, Murphy, Schmidt, & Anderson, 2009). The very presence of a passively playing TV in the background was associated with reductions in the quality and frequency of communication and interaction between parent and child (Kirkorian et al., 2009; Lavigne, Hanson, & Anderson, 2015; Schmidt et al., 2008). Parents were also likely to restrict screen time when they observed their children viewing violent content (Lally, 2007).To summarize, educated parents of high socio-economic status, served as primary care-givers, interacted with their children regularly, placed consistent limits on screen time, and provided age-appropriate screen content to children saw benefits from their children's screen time. This result was especially true for mothers as opposed to fathers.
1.3. Relationship between screen time and children's cognitive and social developmentNumerous studies provide strong associations between increased screen time and reduced cognitive and social development in children. Findings include reduction in children's cognitive, language and motor development, with impairments increasing as screen time increased (Lin et al., 2015). Others report reduced reading and comprehension scores (Zimmerman & Christakis, 2005), difficulties staying attentive to tasks, decreased academic performance, motor delays, reduced sleep time and deleterious effects on children's memory (Gentile & Walsh, 2002; Kopasz et al., 2010; Pagani, Fitzpatrick, Barnett, & Dubow, 2010; Radesky, Silverstein, Zuckerman, & Christakis, 2014; Zimmerman & Christakis, 2005). Cognitive declines were associated with children younger than six-months-old exposed to content meant for adults (Tomopoulos et al., 2010). Similar patterns were found in children under three years (Hill et al., 2016).In like manner, social development concerns were littered throughout the literature. Children with excessive screen time were associated with disturbing emotional behaviors, violent tendencies, aggression, poor language development, reduced social engagement, hyperactivity, peer concerns, conduct disorders, poor sleep habits and obesity (Allen & Vella, 2015; Cespedes et al., 2014; Duch et al., 2013; Hale & Guan, 2015; Lin et al., 2015; Pagani et al., 2010; Paik & Comstock, 1994; Radesky et al., 2014; Ruangdaraganon et al., 2009; Zimmerman et al., 2007).These concerns and others led the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) to recommend a complete ban on screen use for children under 18 months (except for synchronous video conversations with others) and a limit of one hour per day for children between the ages of two and five years, and even then, the content should be of high-quality, parents should be present with their children for screen time (co-viewing), and actively provide context to keep children grounded (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001; Hill et al., 2016). Additionally, the AAP encouraged parents to put consistent limits on screen time, monitor the types of content viewed, remove TVs from children's rooms and install safeguards to ensure that screen time did not displace physical activities, outdoor play and regular sleep (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001; Chassiakos et al., 2016; Hill et al., 2016).Unfortunately, parents do not always follow these recommendations. In practice, co-viewing was rarely done with younger children (Dorr, Kovaric, & Doubleday, 1989); parents communicated less and reduced play with their children when the TV was active (Courage, Murphy, Goulding, & Setliff, 2010), and children who thought their mothers offered a permissive parenting style were likely to exceed recommended limits on screen time (Jago et al., 2011).Despite the myriad links between high screen times in children and negative outcomes, some researchers observed positive outcomes such as increased school readiness, improved social development, enhanced math and improved language skills, but these outcomes only applied when screen content was age-appropriate, well-designed, limited in duration, and children paid careful attention (Anderson et al., 2001; Barr, Lauricella, Zack, & Calvert, 2010; Krcmar, Grela, & Lin, 2007). Researchers also noted an association between screen time in older children and increased awareness, exposure to new ideas, improved social interactions, change in racial attitudes, community engagement and increased imagination (Hill et al., 2016; Thakkar, Garrison, & Christakis, 2006). Parents also reported increases in their children's vocabulary, language acquisition and creativity associated with screen time (De Decker et al., 2012), and well-designed games and interactive experiences may promote physical activities, exercise and cognitive development (Biddiss & Irwin, 2010; Lieberman et al., 2009; Sweetser et al., 2012).In summary, excessive screen time for young children is associated with adverse social and cognitive outcomes, but some screen time is associated with improved outcomes when used appropriately for older children. Additionally, parents' screen practices greatly influence the screen time of their children and such a mediating force deserve additional scrutiny.
1.4. Current studyIn this study, we explore the association between the screen time of parents and their children, and specifically, the role of parents in mediating the associated negative effects of screen media on children's cognitive and social development. The available literature suggests such a relationship exists (Cingel & Krcmar, 2013; Lauricella et al., 2015; Tandon et al., 2012), but the exact nature of this relationship is not widely studied in Chinese settings. Therefore, this study aims to add to the literature by exploring the following research questions:RQ1. Is there an association between the screen time of Chinese parents and the screen time of their children?RQ2. Are parental restrictions on Chinese children's screen time and content associated with measurable improvements in children's cognitive and social development?
