The importance of forensic identification is beyond doubt [1]. It does not only resolve serious legal and social predicaments, but it also brings closure to grieving families. The primary and most reliable means of identification are fingerprints, comparative dental analysis, and DNA analysis. Unique serial numbers from medical implants may also be reliable identifiers in terms of proving identity. During the last two decades, these techniques have been employed in many forensic identification scenarios. However, the application of these methods fails when there is not enough ante-mortem (AM) or post-mortem (PM) information either due to unavailability of appropriate reference samples or to the degraded condition of the remains.
Skeleton-based forensic identification (SFI) techniques have an important contribution to the identification endeavor because the skeleton usually survives both natural and non-natural decomposition processes (fire, salt, water, etc.) while the soft tissue progressively degrades and is lost. Unfortunately, this is a very common situation in disaster victim identification scenarios. Another reason for the importance of SFI techniques is their lower price and time required in comparison to DNA, which is a crucial factor in mass disasters identification scenarios. SFI techniques are used for identification or just for short listing depending on the SFI technique and bone considered [2]. Within SFI, some of the most important techniques are craniofacial superimposition [3], facial reconstruction [4], and comparative radiography (CR) [1], [5]. They all are always applied after a previous estimation of the biological profile (sex, stature, etc) and jointly with as many available identification techniques as possible.
CR [1] is the only SFI technique considered primary by Interpol (together with the comparison of surgical implants) [6]. In the literature, several bones and cavities have been reported as useful for positive identification in CR based on their individuality and uniqueness [5]. The most common are located in the skull, chest, and abdominal areas. In the skull, the most frequently used are teeth [7], frontal sinuses [8], and the cranial vault [9]. In the chest and abdomen, clavicles [10], and vertebral features [11] are those most considered. There are also a few bones outside these areas that are commonly used, such as the bones of the hand [12], and the patella [13] among others.
Motivated by the analysis of forensic literature, we can distinguish three consecutive stages in the automatic identification process for CR (see Fig. 1):
1.Process the PM material (cleaning, stabilizing the skeletal remains, and scanning the “clean” bone with a laser range scanner or performing computed tomography (CT) scan) and ask the corresponding authorities for AM data of all the candidates. Image enhancement and/or segmentation.2.Produce a PM radiograph that simulates the scope and projection of each of the AM radiographs.3.Based on the superimpositions achieved, the identification decision is made by comparing the consistencies and inconsistencies in the bone or cavity morphology, together with other elements such as the quality of the AM radiograph, the visibility of bone or cavity, etc. Notice that, the use of computers in this stage aims to support the final identification decision that will always be made by the forensic anthropologist.Download : Download high-res image (230KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The three proposed stages for the automatization of the CR technique.
The application of CR requires producing PM radiographs simulating the AM in scope and projection that relies completely on the skills and experience of the expert, and lastly a visual comparison of AM-PM data. The method utility is reduced because of the time required and the errors related to analyst’s fatigue and subjectivity. As a consequence, an unapproachable number of citizens continue unidentified for long periods due to insufficient human and technological means to properly analyze and compare them.
There is thus a need of (semi) automatic forensic identification methods. Meanwhile the automation of the craniofacial identification technique has been the subject of research throughout many works [14], [15], [16], there are just a few computerized approaches for CR. In particular, geometric morphometric techniques (such as elliptical Fourier analysis [17]) have been employed to compare radiographs of frontal sinus [18], cranial vault [9], teeth [19], [20], clavicles [21], and patellae [13]. The former four follow the traditional CR error-prone and subjective approach still requiring PM radiography acquisition in the same conditions of the AM one and then comparing them using the elliptical Fourier analysis. The latter two are based on the acquisition of 3D surface models with a 3D laser range scanner of the clavicles/patellae but the final decision still involves a comparison of a silhouette (again elliptical Fourier analysis descriptor) in a set of predefined 2D projected images obtained through the 3D model rotation. However, as far as we know, there is not any approach that completely automatizes search for the best possible 2D projection of the PM 3D surface model of the bone (either obtained using a 3D scanner or segmented from a PM CT), i.e. the superimposition process. Furthermore, others computerized approaches, such as [22] with teeth, follow a paradigm based on the comparison of AM and PM 3D data obtaining great results. However, the availability of 3D AM data (such as CT) is scarce compared to the number of AM radiographs available (especially when people who disappeared a long time ago are involved) reducing significantly their applicability.
The superimposition process for CR is complex. It is due to several reasons such as the unknown set-up of the AM radiograph or the fact that image intensities are not reliable or even not captured (see Section 2 for further details). These reasons make classic 2D-3D image registration (IR) techniques not suitable for CR. Thus, more sophisticated techniques should be considered in order to solve it satisfactorily, such as advanced numerical search methods [23] and evolutionary algorithms [24].
The objective of this work is twofold. First, to propose and validate a novel computer-aided paradigm for the superimposition of a PM 3D model of any bone or cavity and an AM radiograph based on a 3D-2D IR feature-based approach using their silhouette (second stage). This is validated with synthetic images of two bones (clavicles and patellae) and one cavity (frontal sinuses). Second, to study how optimization performance and both variability and differences in the segmentation performed by human operators affect the identification using synthetic and real images of frontal sinuses (a first and partial approach to tackle the third stage).
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the current state of the art in IR. Section 3 describes our proposal to tackle the 3D bone scan-2D radiograph superimposition problem. Section 4 presents the experiments and their results. The conclusions are detailed in Section 5.
