Norman [43] argues that the issue with technology is that “The same technology that simplifies life by providing more functions in each device also complicates life by making the device harder to learn, harder to use. This is the paradox of technology” (p.31). Technology changes at a fast and exponential rate and its snowball effect can be observed in many technologies. In 1980 for example, the total number of computers sold by 24 companies was 724,000; however, after only three years, one company (Apple) sold more than a million computers [7]. But humans' cognitive skills, on the other hand, develop slowly over time and cannot adapt to or learn all these technologies in a timely manner. This process creates a gap between individuals' skills and knowledge and the technology that is introduced to the workplace or personal environment; this gap may slow individuals' adoption of the new technology which might be attributed to technophobia.
In order to stay competitive in the market, companies largely invest in new technologies. In 2012, the U.S. spending on technology by business areas such as Architecture & Research, IT, Legal, Marketing, Engineering, Sales, Accounting, Finance, and Billing, Customer Service, Human Resources, Industry Specific Operations, Security and Risk and Supply Chain Management was $236.6 billion and in 2017 it is expected to grow to $330.7 billion [25]. However, technologies cannot improve organizations if employees choose not to use them or avoid them all together: “If the desired improvement conflicts with what people are motivated to do, a system alone will not solve the problem” ([36]. p.24). It is estimated that technophobia might be responsible for no less than $4.2 billion; in wages, in the United States alone [19]. And that employees tend to avoid new technologies when it is presented to them in the workplace [70]. This created a stigma about technologies that continue to exist. Furthermore, user's reaction toward new technologies that are introduced in the workplace is largely ignored in the literature. It is believe that it might be because scientists are mainly focused on developing new technologies rather than studying peoples' attitude toward them [37].
In technophobia research, the majority of studies investigate the fear of computers and do not account for many current technologies [13]. A clear distinction between computer anxiety, computer phobia, and technophobia is lacking from literature [14,31,32]. Also, there are very few tools for measuring technophobia that is independent of a specific technology [13,60].
If computer-related studies were removed from technophobia research, the remaining research would do little to explain technophobia [13]. In the literature review done for this paper, only a couple of studies examined technophobia in a more general sense; [63] and [37]. With the increasing number of emerging technologies, technophobia is believed to be on the rise. Yet, studies on measuring and defining technophobia are scarce. The current study aims to develop a scale to measure technophobia in a manner that is independent of one specific technology. Also, the current study will examine whether there might be hidden factors within technophobia or whether technophobia is a single construct as argued by some researchers (e.g. Ref. [37]). Finally, the study will provide a conceptual definition of technophobia that is based on critical review of the literature and the current study findings rather than a definition that is constructed on anecdotal evidence.
