Association rule mining (ARM) allows discovering frequent associations among items present in tuples in databases. Usually, tuples or rows are referred to as transactions, and a set of items composes each tuple or transaction. ARM algorithms can be classified into two categories: candidate set generation approaches, including Apriori [1], [2] and not candidate set generation approaches, including Frequent Pattern Growth (FP-Growth) [3], [4]. The applications of ARM span a large area, and more recently the use of the ARM in life sciences is a growing research area [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. The literature contains many examples of ARM algorithms, and some of them are tailored to cope with particular datasets that present peculiar characteristics. For instance, genomic datasets are an exciting application field, but they present some features that motivate the introduction of ad-hoc customised algorithms. For example, by analyzing genomics datasets, it is essential to link each item to the genomic region of belonging, so elements with the same identifier may be different as they are detected in different genes, making the computation of the occurrences of each item more complex. Here, we first survey main approaches of the ARM in life sciences datasets; thenyes we focus on microarray datasets produced by the Affymetrix DMET (Drug Metabolism Enzymes and Transporters) platform. Such microarray is used to detect the allelic variants of humans in the ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion) genes [13], [14] and it is particularly important in pharmacogenomics research. As we highlighted in some previous works, the classic ARM algorithms are not the best choice for learning Association Rules (ARs) from DMET datasets since they present large execution times and produce low-quality results [15]. To overcome these problems we proposed DMET-Miner [15], an algorithm able to mine association rules from DMET datasets. DMET-Miner implements an optimized version of the FP-Growth algorithm. Nevertheless, when applied to large population datasets, DMET-Miner requires a significant execution time as well as a substantial amount of memory. Therefore we extended the mining methodology of DMET-Miner in a parallel version called PARES (Parallel Association Rules Extractor from SNPs) [16]. Although parallel computing improves execution time, DMET datasets yield to unbalanced workload that may prevent good scalability and speedup. Thus, to overcome this problem, in this paper we propose a novel version of PARES called BalancedPARES (BPARES) that adopts a customised load balancing strategy. The proposed load balancing methodology makes it possible to dynamically balance the workload on the available cores improving the usage of the physical cores and improving performance. The main contributions of this paper are: (i) a survey and comparison of main ARM algorithms that includes both sequential and parallel algorithms; (ii) a novel parallel ARM algorithm well suited to SNP datasets. In particular, considering that SNP datasets yield to large search space and thus long execution times and large memory occupancy, to face those challenges the proposed BPARES algorithm uses efficient data structures that reduce memory occupancy and employs a novel load balancing procedure that improves response time. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 introduces main parallel computer architectures. Section 3 presents the state of the art of sequential, parallel and distributed ARM algorithms. Section 4 presents the BPARES algorithm and its novel workload balancing methodology. Section 5 presents the performance evaluation of BPARES. Finally, conclusions are given in Section 6.
