Innovation is an important driver for the development of a country, a region as well as a company (Hekkert et al., 2007; Lamperti et al., 2017). Particularly, those new knowledge-based industries have transformed from traditional factor- or investment-driven to innovation-drive (Lu, 2016; Lu, 2017; Wang, 2017). The mode of an innovation-driven economy is endogenous development (Acs and Varga, 2002), characterized as taking advantage of new knowledge and technology to reform and integrate factors of production (García-Morales et al., 2014; Rasool et al., 2017). Innovation activities can be portrayed as a result of knowledge and resources exchange between players who are mobilized through legitimization activities (Cajaiba-Santana, 2014; Lima, 2016). There is little doubt that innovation is a main source for technology companies to improve their efficiency and to establish long-term competitive advantage (Achi et al., 2016; Huang, 2011). Innovative technology enterprises tend to break the traditional constraint of production factors, and instead, to develop a joint industrial advantage so that they can achieve efficient, intensive, and sustainable development (García-Morales et al., 2014; Grinstein and Goldman, 2006).
Succeeding with a new business is not an easy task for any entrepreneurs. There are huge risks and responsibilities. Entrepreneurs always face challenges such as a lack of adequate resources (Yoon et al., 2015), capacity variance (Demirbas et al., 2011), situational differences (Choi and Majumdar, 2014), and risk taking (MacKo and Tyszka, 2009). To succeed with a new enterprise, entrepreneurs must have all elements, including leadership and organization, people and skills, culture and values, and processes and tools to work in a coordinated manner. Among all choices, science parks provide such a mechanism.
Science parks have been widely recognized for their importance to development of high-tech enterprises and industrial clusters (Lamperti et al., 2017). Gordon and Mccann (2000) suggest that it is a unique regional innovation system that brings together innovation organizations such as enterprises, research institutions, and public services. It is a mechanism that integrates innovative resources including manpower, knowledge, and many other factors (Rutten and Boekema, 2007) to establish one “virtual” location for physical locations and innovation clusters. This is particularly important to emerging economies where a technology catch-up (imitation) strategy is frequently adopted (Fan, 2017). With such a strategy, it is vital to have sufficient interactions among industries, universities and governments (Zhang and Zhou, 2016). In established economies, science parks also play an important role. The difference is that industries are the driving force, universities mainly provide skilled human capital, and the government focuses on social and economic polices (Huang et al., 2012; An and Ahn, 2016). For example, Samsung has a highly centralized innovation network, which includes many academic institutions in the U.S. and Japan, and strong collaboration between Foxconn and Tsinghua University in China (Ozcan and Islam, 2014). In another example, Technologically Able Social Entrepreneur (TASE) from the U.S. national laboratories brought the birth of Laminar Flow Clean Room, and National Institute for Nanotechnology Engineering (Chavez et al., 2017).
Among science parks all around the world, Silicon Valley is the most well-recognized benchmark for building a high-tech industrial park (Dorfman, 1983; Klepper, 2010; Wonglimpiyarat, 2016). Its development model provides practical guidance to many science parks in established economies including Cambridge Science Park (Minguillo et al., 2015; Siegel et al., 2003), science parks in Greece (Bakouros et al., 2002; Ratinho and Henriques, 2010), and science parks in Italy (Bigliardi et al., 2006; Colombo and Delmastro, 2002). It also is heavily referenced by science parks in emerging economies including software parks and biotech parks in India (Nagendra and Gopal, 2011; Vaidyanathan, 2008), biotechnology science parks in Brazil (Cabral and Dahab, 1998; Etzkowitz et al., 2005), Xinzhu Science Park in Taiwan, China (Chen et al., 2006; Lai and Shyu, 2005), and science parks in Singapore (Koh et al., 2005).
Emerging economies such as China and Malaysia are actively supporting new start-ups that pioneer in technologies required by new market needs (Li, 2017; Wong and Goh, 2015). Yoon et al. (2015) elaborated policy implications of the construction of East Asia regional innovation system that aims to promote regional entrepreneurship. New technology revolution is also one of the four driving factors of China's economy development in the past three decades (Baark, 2001; Cui et al., 2016; Yang and Li, 2008). Successful entrepreneurship is crucial to the vitality of economy (Bruton and Chen, 2016). The literature has well documented how technological entrepreneurship, including city and town-based enterprises, private start-ups, and transformed state-owned enterprises, triggered socio-economic changes in China, from a relatively closed and slow growth to a sustained industrialization process (Contractor and Kundu, 2004; Yang and Li, 2008).
The development path and characteristics of science parks in China are significantly different than that of Western countries. High-tech zones are common in China and they provide a good living environment for the study of government-university-enterprise linkage for technological entrepreneurship. As of October 2015, the number of national high-tech zones in China has increased to 145. These high-tech zones have rapidly become an important carrier of independent innovations in China. They have successfully supported industrial upgrading and technological progress in China (Cooke and Leydesdorff, 2006). Specifically, science parks offer a unique context for the sharing of knowledge, skills and best practice within a geographic area (Venkataraman, 2004; Yoon et al., 2015), and lead to superior performance by simultaneously integrating resources and collaborating with partners (Cui et al., 2016; Pillania, 2012). Most science parks, such as Zhongguancun science park and Ningbo science park are guided by municipal governments in China. The industrial policies fundamentally adjust the allocation of social capital and mitigate constraints on entrepreneurship (Urbano and Aparicio, 2016; Wu et al., 2010). In contrast, spontaneous creation and research institutions promote the formation of most western science parks (Yoon et al., 2015). Entrepreneurs are more technology-driven, whether the innovation is of a world-changing nature or merely efficiency improvement. The original innovation determines the fundamental differences in technological entrepreneurship (Su and Hung, 2009). In addition, factors such as average R&D investment, labor productivity, number of employees, number of companies, and capital have significant performance implications on technological entrepreneurship derived from science parks (Chan and Lau, 2005; Gupta et al., 2014; Lee and Yang, 2000).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we propose a theoretical paradigm for technological entrepreneurship and socio-economic changes about science parks. We then analyze basic functions of science parks to build an effect model for technological entrepreneurship, considering the differences between emerging and established economies. In Section 3, we conduct a case study on Wuhan Donghu High-Tech Zone, illustrating the five effects identified in the theoretical model. In Section 4, we perform a simulation study on the effect of technological entrepreneurship. The simulation model explores the interaction effect among technological innovation, institutional innovation, technological entrepreneurship, innovation and entrepreneurial culture. We conclude the paper with a summary of findings and policy recommendations on the development of science parks in emerging economies.
