Forensic identification is the science of match. When two objects have identical features, their match statistic increases with the rarity of those features. Feature uncertainty or dissimilarity reduces the match statistic. This balance between numerator similarity and denominator surprise is the likelihood ratio (LR), first used forensically for glass evidence [1]. Match strength puts the LR on a logarithmic scale, enabling the addition of independent evidence factors [2].
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) testing of biological evidence generates laboratory data from multiple genetic loci. Simple locus data from an unambiguous DNA reference can give a definite genotype having one value. But DNA evidence usually produces complex data. Such data leads to an uncertain locus genotype that assigns probability to a hundred possible values. Statistical comparison of an inferred evidence genotype with a definite reference genotype calculates LR match strength. This LR numerically divides evidence genotype probability by population probability, both evaluated at the reference genotype. Adding together independent locus log(LR) values yields the total match strength.
An evidence genotype's match strength is mathematically determined at every reference point before any comparison is made. The distribution of match strength values gives insight into genotype uncertainty. A definite genotype concentrates all its probability at maximal strength for the one matching reference. An entirely uninformative genotype collapses to zero match strength. Most genotypes fall in between these two extremes, often showing a bell-shaped distribution of match strength along the real line. For references unlikely to have contributed to the evidence, the uncertain genotype's match strength distribution is centered left of zero (Fig. 1). For references likely to have contributed to evidence, the contributor distribution is mainly positive (Fig. 2).Download : Download high-res image (206KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Non-contributor distribution. (Cumulative) An uncertain genotype's cdf FX for non-contributor random variable X shows cumulative probability (y-axis) relative to logarithmic match strength (x-axis). (Probability) At bin resolution ε=10−3 ban, the corresponding pmf fXε gives the probability in each bin.Download : Download high-res image (204KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Contributor distribution. (Cumulative) An uncertain genotype's cdf FY for contributor random variable Y shows cumulative probability (y-axis) relative to logarithmic match strength (x-axis). (Probability) At bin resolution ε=10−3 ban, the corresponding pmf fYε gives the probability in each bin.
Match strength distributions have broad application in forensic science. Non-contributor distributions have been graphed as Tippett plots [3] to assess data quality and compare interpretation methods [4]. Distribution curves predict DNA database search specificity [5] and kinship identification power [6]. The distributions provide LR error bounds and tail probabilities [7]. In validation studies, match strength distributions summarize the sensitivity and specificity of statistical methods for interpreting DNA mixtures [8, 9].
There are exponentially many multi-locus genotypes. Listing all combinations, with one value from each locus, forms the multi-locus possibilities. A dozen loci generate a trillion trillion possible genotype outcomes. Brute force LR comparison of an uncertain genotype with all these reference possibilities is not feasible. Instead, Monte Carlo simulation samples representative match strengths [4, 10]. Branch-and-bound [11] and importance sampling [5] algorithms can improve simulation performance in some applications. But the genotype space grows exponentially with additional locus tests, and sampling is inexact.
There is an analogous combinatorial explosion in probability theory. When tossing a coin n times, there are 2n possible outcomes of head (H) and tail (T) sequences. One additional toss doubles the number of H-T sequences. But the interesting information concerns the number of heads, not where in the sequence these heads occur. With n tosses, there are just n+1 counting results: 0, 1, 2, …, or n heads. A random variable (RV) [12] summarizes the exponential 2n number of experiment outcomes as a linear n+1 number of informative results. The binomial probability Binom(k; n, ½) of getting k heads in n tosses of a fair coin is n!k!(n−k)!2−n.
The binomial distribution is constructed as a sum of independent coin tosses [13]. Convolving the distribution of n tosses with another toss forms the expanded binomial distribution Binom(k; n+1, ½) for n+1 tosses [14]. Convolution shifts and adds lists of numbers, producing (for example) the binomial coefficients n!k!(n−k)! of Pascal's triangle [15]. In this paper, the concepts of RV and convolution are used to efficiently construct match strength distributions for multi-locus evidence genotypes.
The Methods introduce evidence genotypes and their uncertainty. The match strength RV arises from genotype probability functions, and is efficiently constructed by convolution. The function convergence of binned distributions helps demonstrate their accuracy. Mixing genotype distributions to form composites accelerates validation studies.
The Results lend empirical support using an uncertain genotype derived from a 10% DNA mixture component (Materials). The genotype's match strength distribution is constructed for one locus, and then convolved across many loci. Distribution accuracy is assessed by function convergence at increasingly fine bin resolutions. Efficiency is measured by timing different stages of distribution construction. Genotype sample space size is compared with the number of bin intervals. Bin event occupancy explains why the convolution construction works efficiently. Composite distributions can speed up validation. Match strength error rates are instantly calculated from (single or composite) genotype distributions.
The Conclusions discuss the general applicability of these match strength convolution methods for handling genotype uncertainty.
