The rise of information and communication technologies (ICTs) provide opportunities for the advancement and improvement of education and achievement related outcomes. Classroom technology use has been shown to enhance teaching and learning (Wong et al., 2006) by introducing unprecedented communication practices between students and teachers (Dawes, 2001). Acquainting students with ICTs in early childhood can also equip them with the technological skill sets necessary to succeed in an increasingly ‘smart’ world (Daggett, 2010). Helping students grow familiar with technologies may even increase their affinity for STEM-related fields, which offer higher-than-average incomes and job stability (Langdon, McKittrick, Beede, Khan, & Doms, 2011). Therefore, the strive for classroom computing integration encompasses a mission concerned with maximizing opportunity and job stability for generations to come.
Given these projected benefits, extensive efforts are geared toward the sustained adoption of ICTs in learning settings. However, educators continue to face struggles while attempting to implement ICTs into their teaching practices (Balanskat, Blamire, & Kefala, 2006). The difficulties tend to be more pronounced in low-income populations, where teachers are twice as likely to cite lack of access to digital technologies as a “major challenge” in their schools (Purcell, Heaps, Buchanan, & Friedrich, 2013). In order to maximize and propagate the potential learning outcomes that may accompany ICT integration, we must first develop an understanding of the potential barriers to optimal integration under a variety of different circumstances (Al-Alwani, 2005). While scholars classify these barriers differently, the literature generally points to two broad categories of barriers that obstruct the optimal adoption of ICTs in educational settings: first- and second-order barriers (Ertmer, 1999), also commonly referred to as extrinsic and intrinsic barriers (Chen, Tan, & Lim, 2012), or school-level and teacher-level barriers (Becta, 2004), respectively. Recently, researchers have referred to a third-order barrier, encompassing factors related to teachers' design thinking, that may serve to impede teachers’ use of technology in the classroom (Tsai & Chai, 2012).
In some populations, overcoming barriers to classroom computing integration poses more crucial implications and may require a greater level of urgency (Robinson, 2011). Digitally disadvantaged individuals may experience social inequalities (Hargittai & Hinnant, 2008), suffer emotional costs (Huang, Robinson, & Cotten, 2015), and show less information-seeking patterns than those with access to ICTs (DiMaggio, Hargittai, Celeste, & Shafer, 2004). Our interest in exploring computing integration barriers in digitally disadvantaged populations is twofold: (1) schools in digitally disadvantaged communities represent educational settings where access to well-functioning computers, software, and technical support is lacking (i.e., first-order barriers are high), and (2) the potential benefits that may ensue from appropriate technology integration are vast and hold strong implications for disadvantaged youth specifically (Robinson et al., 2015).
Previous research suggests that teachers’ motivation to incorporate ICTs in their interactions with students may address first-order barriers – teachers who are eager to integrate ICTs in their classrooms are more likely to pursue tech integration goals even in the absence of the appropriate equipment and technical support (Ward & Parr, 2010). Although recent studies examine the interplay of first- and second-order barriers and the potential connections between them (e.g., Koh, Chai, & Tsai, 2013), little research examines the relative importance of second- and third-order barriers in populations where first-order barriers are consistently high. The present study presents a retrospective analysis of a computing integration intervention. The goal is to examine fundamental barriers to ICT adoption in elementary school classrooms where students and teachers face ongoing deficits of computing resources and assistance.
