The global transition process towards more sustainable and low-carbon energy systems requires the development of alternative future trajectories for thorough scientific discussion. Using these, decision processes on different levels e.g. in transnational policy making or local energy planning can be supported. However, future energy systems imply a rising complexity in technical, economic and socioeconomic dimensions due to increasingly cross-sectoral and decentralized structures [1]. Insights into such complex systems can be gained by applying computer-based modelling approaches which create a quantitative basis for the above mentioned discussion and decision processes.
Depending on the specific investigation and research question, a variety of model types can be applied. Such model types include power flow models for electricity transmission network operation and planning, economic dispatch models for general capacity planning and unit commitment models for power plant utilization [[2], [3], [4], [5]]. Applications range from large-scale transnational investigations using purely economic top-down equilibrium models to detailed technical local infrastructure planning using bottom-up models based on technology-specific data. Moreover, many models can be adapted to integrate different sectors such as electricity, heat and mobility to investigate cross-sectoral interdependencies.
Energy system models and derived results have often been heavily discussed among different stakeholders and been criticized for not opening their internal logic and underlying assumptions [[6], [7], [8]]. As a result, in the last decade more scientists have opened their models and data [9,10]. This process goes along with a general trend to open science in many other research fields. The rationale for open science includes improved efficiency, scrutiny and reproducibility of results, re-usability of scientific work and increased transparency of all scientific processes [11]. As the European Commission has recently started to push open science in its research programs [12], the subject of openness has finally moved into the public spotlight.
This paper presents the Open Energy Modelling Framework (oemof) as a novel approach to foster open science in the field of energy modelling and analysis. First, the idea of a single energy modelling framework is differentiated from other approaches to delineate the scientific contribution in Section 2. The underlying concept with its mathematical representation as well as the framework architecture and its implementation are outlined in Section 3. Building on this, the general process of application development is described in Section 4 along with a selection of existing applications. Finally, the general approach and its scientific contribution are summarized in Section 5.
