Nuclear experiment is an essential part in nuclear engineering education providing hands-on experience to students. Each experiment set may contain measuring device such as gamma-ray spectrometer, data acquisition software, computers, and sources. During the class, multiple students must use multiple computers to control multiple detectors to perform data acquisition. At Texas A&M University-Kingsville (TAMUK), the undergraduate nuclear experiments are conducted with four sets of Canberra LABKIT-Basic (Cocks et al., 2017). Each LABKIT-Basic mainly contains an Osprey multi-channel analyzer (MCA), a NaI detector, and a Cs-137 source. The ProSpect gamma spectroscopy software (Canberra Inc., 2012) of each equipment set is license locked to a user provided Windows PC. This restriction would be an obstacle preventing the expansion of the number of equipment to accommodate the growing enrollment in the nuclear program, because it is difficult to purchase, maintain, and store a dozen of computers for this purpose, especially in a regional university. In addition, restricting the ProSpect software on a certain computer may cause the entire LABKIT unusable, if the computer or software fails to start. That would take weeks to coordinate between the manufacturer and the university IT department to transfer the software license to another computer. This situation motivates us to develop a centralized server solution to host the ProSpect software and enable remote data acquisition by using the existing campus network infrastructure. This work will eliminate the client computers from the inventory of the equipment, which means the nuclear lab does not need to invest, maintain, or keep them. When operating all experiment equipment is needed, the users may use any computer to connect to the server to manipulate the detector. They can either bring their own laptops or log on the general purpose computers available in the lab. The client computers do not need the data acquisition software installed. The developed solution will support client devices with various operating systems (OS) including mobile devices. This solution presents an easy and low-cost method to manage the nuclear lab and greatly reduce the workload of the lab administrator, as there is only one server that needs cares. It also allows the ProSpect to run on other OS that are not natively supported by the Windows-based software. The central idea presented by this manuscript can be applied to other similar scenarios to bring revolutionary network solution to nuclear education. To the best knowledge of the authors, the literature survey shows no relevant existing work, and this research is extended from the authors previous efforts (Garcia et al., 2016).
