Nowadays, the Internet have evolved from a static and one-way information carrier to a dynamic and interactive media, where human beings can post comments on news or products, send instant message, etc. The massive interactive information exposes people’s emotion, which is users’ psychological footprint.
Those posted texts are subjective information reflecting opinion and attitude of people on social events or commodities, and of great value. They help enterpriser to set a good brand image or investigate users’ experience. They help consumers to make purchase decision. They help government to know the public opinion on policy or hot social issues. Even they are helpful for medical institutions to evaluate people’s healthy status and take counter measures.
Sentiment analysis is widely applied in internet public opinion analysis, product or service review mining, etc. Text sentiment analysis is a classic research topic in the field of natural language processing (NLP). It plays an important role in intelligent network or society.
Machine learning [[31], [9]] and pattern recognition [[24], [32]] are two important technologies in computer field, which can be used in many areas, such as wireless sensor networks [32] and wireless communication networks [24]. Traditional methods of sentiment analysis mainly include the emotional dictionary based classification method  [6] and the traditional machine learning based method. Although these methods perform well in classification accuracy, they confront many difficulties. The former relies on a large number of manual operations, such as manual tagging of emotional parts of speech, manual development of search rules, etc. Moreover, such kind of methods is incapable of dealing with new words and unknown words. The latter cannot distinguish the semantics of sentences because it ignores the order of words in a sentence. This leads to the problem of sentiment misclassification. Take Bag of Words (BOW) for example, which is a feature model frequently used in machine learning based methods. BOW model represents a text (such as a sentence or document) as a collection of words, but the collection ignores the syntax of the statement and the order in which the words appear. As a result, it cannot catch the context-sensitive information between the words and underneath the sequence. The polarity change sometimes happens in real world cases [23]. The above-mentioned pitfall leads to the potential misclassification.
Words connection has an important impact on classification performance. Due to neglecting it, traditional machine learning exists serious misclassification. For example, given two Chinese sentences, “ (the phone is very expensive but good-looking)” and “ (the phone is good-looking but very expensive)”. The BOW model thinks those sentences identical without noticing the subtle difference, leading to the wrong judgment that those two sentences have the same sentiment. In fact, those two sentences emphasize different parts, and the emotion gets different from each other. The former emphasizes that the phone looks good, and its emotion is positive; while the latter emphasizes that the phone is expensive, and its emotion is negative. BOW model ignores the word order of statement, and thus cannot understand the emotional implication.
The example illustrates the word connection in sentence. There is another problem, the word connection in phrase, which is exclusive in Chinese. For example, given two phrases in Chinese “ (sorry)” and “ (great)”, which have opposite sentiment. In English, there is a single word for each phrase. But in Chinese, three characters are contained in each phrase. Furthermore, the character “ (no)” is negative and challenges the judgment. Therefore, phrase segmentation is a special feature in Chinese, which impedes the transplantation of some methods for English sentiment analysis.
Recently deep learning methods have started to be exploited to deal with NLP tasks, such as word-based ConvNet, long-short term memory (LSTM) [12], recurrent neural network (RNN) model, and convolutional neural network (CNN) model. Section 2 gives a comprehensive analysis and comparison of those methods. This paper focused on CNN for Chinese sentiment analysis task, because of its advantages on training speed and efficiency, parallel implementation.
As to the word connection in phrase and sentence, we propose a Convolution Control Block (CCB) construct and CCB based model. Instead of the bag of words, an unsupervised pre-training algorithm is used to generate word vectors, making the word relation measurable. In a sentence, several words form a semantic unit, which has a unified contribution to sentiment. The number of words in a semantic unit reflects a semantic distance. The larger the distance is, the more words are thought to be interdependent. According to the feature of Chinese, 3 and 5 are believed to be the short and long semantic distances. Based on that, two parallel convolutional operations of different sizes are simultaneously executed. And then gate convolution is used to merge and filter the high-level abstract features. The structure is called Convolution Control Block (CCB) construct, which attempts to deal with the phrase segmentation problem.
A large network of CCBs is organized by tiering and pooling, expecting the word connection to be extended to the sentence level. So a CCB based model is designed using CCB as a basic construct. This model has a good understanding of the dependency and semantics of the Chinese context. The model considers larger context dependency and extracts more abstract hierarchical features by CCB networking.
In contrast to dictionary based and traditional machine learning based methods, our model does not need to manually develop emotional dictionaries and classification rules; partially immune to the new words and the unknown words through training; capable of semantic retrieving damaged in BOW model. To evaluate the performance of our model, two recent deep learning methods, LR_all [3] and DCN [28], are compared. As far as F1-score is concerned, our model outperforms them by about 2%. Model depth and sentence length are positively proportional to accuracy. Gate convolution is testified to work in improving accuracy.
The following summarizes our contributions:



•
Based on CNN, we propose a Chinese sentiment classification model on the concept of convolution control block. It is realized by the deep learning library Keras. Its main component is 5 layered CCBs.
•
The performance of the model above is assessed on the real millions of Chinese hotel review dataset. The experimental results show that its accuracy is higher than that of LR_all and DCN.
•
The depth of convolutional layer, the length of training statement, and the existence of gate convolution are studied, so as to obtain some better Hyper-parameters.
