With the rapid reform and development of the biomedical system, digital medical images have become increasingly important in recent years [1]. Medical images can be transmitted conveniently through the networks for the purposes of research, education, and consultations. Since medical images contain the patients’ personal information, information security and privacy protection have become greatly significant during transmitting medical images over the Internet [2], [3], [4]. Therefore, steganography is introduced to provide protection and confidentiality for medical images, and it could make the patients’ information undetectable [5], [6].
Bremnavas et al. [7] presented a new steganographic method to hide the patient’s information into medical images. The information is embedded by the least significant bit (LSB) method, and then the medical image is encrypted using chaos algorithms. Pandey et al. [8] combined image cryptography and steganography techniques for the secure transmission of medical images. The medical image is first encrypted and then embedded with the patients’ information. There are some steganographic schemes for the encrypted medical images. Qin et al. [9] proposed an inpainting-assisted reversible steganographic scheme using histogram shifting mechanism. They designed an effective reversible steganographic scheme for the privacy protection of medical image content [10]. Liao et al. investigated reversible data hiding in encrypted medical images based on the absolute mean difference of multiple neighboring pixels [11].
Recently, the JPEG format has been increasingly adopted for medical image storage and transmission, since it can achieve not only higher compression rate but also good visual quality. Hence, JPEG image steganography can be utilized to embed the patients’ personal information into medical JEPG images. Researchers have made much helpful progress on JPEG image steganography. A classic method called F5 was proposed by A. Westfeld [12]. It only embeds messages into the non-zero alternating current (AC) DCT coefficients, but introduced the shrinkage effect if a coefficient becomes zero after embedding. Non-shrinkage F5 [13], an improved version of F5, assigned infinite costs to some DCT coefficients, and thus alleviated the negative effect. Guo et al. [14] spread the embedding modification to each DCT coefficient evenly and designed a cost function for homogeneous embedding according to the principles of the spread spectrum communication. Huang et al. [15] presented a new channel selection rule for JPEG image steganography, aiming to find the DCT coefficients that may introduce minimal detectable distortion. Wang et al. [16] proposed an efficient JPEG steganography scheme based on the block entropy of DCT coefficients and syndrome trellis coding (STC) [17]. In 2013, Huang et al. [18] divided DCT coefficients into two portions and assigned different weights for them, and designed the cost function based on the quantization step, quantified coefficients and quantitative disturbance error. Filler et al. [19] constructed the cost function and JPEG image steganographic scheme by designing and optimizing a multi-parameter model with specific statistical features. Lately, they proposed JPEG universal wavelet relative distortion (J-UNIWARD) [20] which evaluates the embedding costs of DCT coefficients in the spatial domain by using inverse DCT, and implements the embedding operations in JPEG domain. Wang et. al [21] exploited block fluctuation and quantization steps to design a hybrid distortion function for JPEG image steganography.
In a JPEG image, DCT coefficients exhibit two kinds of complex dependencies, intra-block dependencies, and inter-block dependencies. Intra-block dependencies refer to the relationship among coefficients with similar frequency in the same block, while inter-block dependencies describe the relationship among coefficients at the corresponding positions in different DCT blocks. However, the existing JPEG image steganographic schemes might destroy the inter-block dependencies. As a modern JEPG image steganalysis approach, the union of JPEG and spatial rich model (JSRM) [22] could detect the data hiding traces according to the dependencies of DCT coefficients. Thus, the security performance of JPEG image steganographic schemes could be improved by preserving the inter-block dependencies.
In 2015, clustering modification directions (CMD) strategy [23] was presented, which mainly focused on preserving the correlation between neighboring pixels in the spatial domain. Consequently, it can synchronize the modification directions, and enhance the performance evaluated by the powerful spatial image steganalysis. In this paper, inspired by CMD, we propose an adaptive JPEG image steganographic scheme, and it preserves the correlation among inter-block adjacent coefficients by adjusting cost values in the embedding process. The initial cost values of all coefficients are firstly computed by one of the existing distortion functions. The original JPEG image is divided into several non-overlapping sub-images, ensuring that the neighboring DCT coefficient blocks belong to different sub-images. For a given DCT coefficient, it has four corresponding points at the same locations in the four adjacent DCT blocks (we name them inter-block neighbors). The cost value of each coefficient would be dynamically adjusted in accordance with the modifications of its neighbors. Experimental results show that the proposed scheme performs better than J-UNIWARD in resisting the modern JPEG image steganalysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A strategy for preserving inter-block dependencies is introduced in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe the proposed JPEG image steganographic scheme in details. The comparative experiments are presented in Section 4. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section 5.
