Closing the yield gap between actual and potential yields is a key strategy for increasing crop production on existing cropland (van Ittersum et al., 2013). To conduct farm-level yield gap analysis, detailed information about soil, management activities, farm(er) characteristics and socio-economic factors for a large number of farmers is needed (Beza et al., 2017a, Beza et al., 2017b). However, costs and time limit feasibility of collecting this information. Citizen science, the involvement of citizens such as farmers, in the research process (Dehnen-Schmutz et al., 2016), supported by the proliferation of mobile communication technologies such as smartphones allows for collecting a large amount of data (Herrick et al., 2013). Although the use of citizen science in agriculture is in its early stage, recent studies showed the potential of citizen science in agriculture (Minet et al., 2017, Rahman et al., 2015, Rossiter et al., 2015, van Etten, 2011). Recent reports on the next generation of agricultural system data, models and knowledge products also emphasized potentials of innovative data collection approaches (Antle et al., 2016, Janssen et al., 2016).
According to Nov et al. (2011), volunteer’s participation in digital citizen science is grounded on two facilitating pillars. The first is motivational: how to attract and retain people who would be willing to contribute to citizen science initiatives. Recruiting and sustaining community members to participate in citizen science requires an understanding of the motivations of the community to participate. Beza et al., 2017a, Beza et al., 2017b showed that while fun has appeared to be an important factor to participate in other citizen science projects, this was not the case for smallholder farmers in Ethiopia, India and Honduras. Two groups could be distinguished, one motivated by sharing information, helping and contributing to science, and one motivated by expectation, expert and community interaction. The second pillar - which the current study investigates - is the technological pillar: developing systems to collect, manage, and aggregate large amount of data. The rapid spread of mobile phones, especially in developing countries, creates the opportunity to use mobile phones to support rural development (Qiang et al., 2011).
According to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), seven billion people (95% of the global population) live in an area that is covered by a mobile-cellular network (ITU 2016). Considering its broad coverage, the utilization of mobile Short Message Service (SMS) for agricultural data collection offers a platform for agricultural citizen science projects. While more advanced technologies are available, including tablets, smartphones and remote sensing, to reach smallholder farmers simple technologies such as mobile SMS technology are needed. However, development of mobile networks alone does not guarantee use of mobile phones in yield gap information collection by farmers. It is thus necessary to explore the intention of farmers to adopt mobile SMS for agricultural data collection. Newman et al. (2012) discussed the importance of assessing technology adoption in future citizen science projects and openness to new technologies as they emerge. Although some studies exist on the adoption of mobile services (e.g. mobile government) in rural regions (Liu et al., 2014), to our best knowledge currently no studies exist on the adoption of mobile SMS for agricultural citizen science. The current study seeks to fill this gap.
The objectives of the current study are twofold. First, to explore the acceptance of mobile SMS technology by smallholder farmers for farm-related information provision, by identifying the factors that predict willingness to use mobile SMS technology for agricultural data provision. Second, to assess the role of farmer’s characteristics (i.e., age and experience) in predicting farmer’s intention to adopt mobile SMS.
