Astronomy, as with many other scientific disciplines, is now in the petabyte-data era Brunner et al. (2001), Borne (2008), Juric and Tyson (2012). This growth in the total volume of data is due, in part, to the improvements in resolution that modern instruments and detectors are able to access and record. Alongside this is the increased computational power available for numerical simulations.
Visualisation is a crucial component of knowledge discovery. As both the size and complexity of astronomical datasetscontinue to grow, the existing paradigm of the astronomer visualising and analysing data at the desktop is being pushed to the limit. The high computational and graphics-intensive requirements for many research workflows now exceed the processing, storage, and memory capabilities available with standard desktop-based solutions Berriman and Groom (2011), Hassan and Fluke (2011).
A compelling option is to move all of the processing requirements away from the desktop to a dedicated remote data centre or into the cloud. Here, on-demand computational resources can be co-located with the data such that computation and analysis can be performed at an appropriate scale.
Choosing the right mix of dedicated compute resources that suit the needs of all users is complex. The availability of cloud services allows for flexibility and experimentation with configurations that is not always possible with a fixed-purpose data centre. Cloud computing abstracts the hardware aspects of computing away from the user. This takes away the burden of managing hardware, and allows the user to consume the service like a utility such as electricity or network connectivity. However, there is much that is still unknown, and untested, regarding the suitability, choice of hardware, cost effectiveness, and user experiences afforded by commercial and research clouds for supporting astronomical workflows.
To this end, the Square Kilometer Array (SKA) Telescope organisation1 and Amazon Web Services (AWS)2 jointly announced the formation of the “Astrocompute in the Cloud” ( Astrocompute, 2015) program in April 2015. This program was proposed as a way to explore potential roles for AWS infrastructure to be used for current astronomy projects, and in the future for SKA-related research and operations. This included opportunities to improve research outcomes through the application of additional on-demand compute power, storage and other capabilities.
1.1. The need for a virtual desktopAllocation and scheduling of computing resources through a prioritised batch queue is the preferred approach for most high-performance tasks. For workflows that are computationally limited, any reduction in the overall processing time is beneficial. The overhead in waiting for a workflow to be executed is amortised by the reduction in wall-time once the job starts. However, many astronomy applications – especially data visualisation tasks – require an interactive, on-demand desktop window interface to operate. Such an option is not always compatible with queued access to remote compute resources.The paradigm of “moving the computation to the data” applies to both traditional computational tasks for analysis and knowledge discovery, and in the use of Virtual Hosted Desktops (VHDs; see Miller and Pegah (2007)). Here, the astronomer’s virtual workspace resides entirely in the cloud, and is unlocked from the reliance on the processing capabilities of a physical desktop. A low powered local computer is only required as a gateway between user inputs (e.g. keyboard and mouse interaction) and streaming of images back to the display. Input requires minimal bandwidth; response speed is limited by the remote processing time and the overhead in returning image data to the display device, which scales linearly with the number of pixels.VHDs can be provisioned on standard workstation or server computers, with the desktop environment presented as a Graphical User Interface (GUI) application management suite. Alternatively the service can be installed on a virtual machine hosted by a cloud provider.VHD capability has existed for some time, e.g. via X11 window forwarding, where graphics are remotely rendered and streamed via a connection protocol such as SSH, or through Virtual Network Computing (VNC; Duato et al., 1997). These approaches are usually reserved for circumstances where the performance of the environment itself is not critical. In this way, VHDs have often been used as a last resort due to their bandwidth and latency issues. With the rapid improvements in modern networking, it is now possible to employ a VHD in a manner that is almost indistinguishable to the local desktop.For graphics-intensive work, the result of using a VHD has not always been satisfactory. This, too, has changed with the advent of graphics processing unit (GPU) acceleration of remote desktops. Indeed, GPU manufacturers such as NVIDIA are creating graphics cards specifically for operation in cloud infrastructures (e.g. NVIDIA Grid K1 and M10).3 It is timely, therefore, to explore whether a virtual hosted desktop is a functional replacement for a local computer in astronomy.
1.2. OverviewIn this work, we investigate the suitability of VHDs for performing visualisation tasks from the domain of astronomy. Combining benchmarks with user experience testing (Lam et al., 2012) through the involvement of a cohort of astronomers, we compare software performance and user experiences between local computers (two generations of Apple Mac laptops) and two VHDs, provisioned by AWS and the Australian National eResearch Collaboration Tools and Resources (NeCTAR)4 Research Cloud (NRC). These options cover three potential choices for upgrading a computing environment for use in graphics-intense workflows: buy a new local computer; purchase time through a commercial cloud; or, if the option is available, utilise a national research cloud infrastructure.One of our motivations is to provide astronomers with the knowledge to make more informed decisions when it comes to investing in either a new physical desktop or a VHD. Choosing an alternative infrastructure requires a consideration of operational factors, suitability, user experience, and financial matters. While subject to change without notice, we compare pricing models (at the time of writing) for both physical hardware and cloud services.This remainder of this paper is laid out as follows. A review of the previous work done in this research area and an introduction to VHDs is presented in Section 2. In Section 3, we benchmark two laptops and two VHDs, and describe the user experiences in these environments for 2D and 3D astronomy tasks. In Section 4 we discuss the results of the user experience testing, and compare the costs associated with VHDs and laptops. Concluding remarks are made in Section 5.
