Communication plays a central role in human relationships, learning and several other activities of life in society. A key aspect of communication refers to the shared understanding of intention. Illocutions, acts of speaking or writing which constitute intended actions,1 may result in different pragmatic effects depending on the interpretation of the speaker's intentions. For example, the phrase “please, leave the room” can be interpreted as an order, a gentle request or even a permission, depending on the situation, intonation and corporal expressions. Although some words can characterize intention, such as, “suggest”, “ask”, “expect” and “apologize”, in many situations the speaker's intentions are formulated without the explicit use of words that indicate the speaker's intentions. Moreover, these indicators might have different pragmatic meanings, e.g. in the case of “I suggest you leave now”.
In face-to-face communication, humans rely on various resources including gestures and facial expressions for better expressing themselves. Communication through computational systems remains predominantly based on text, and in some cases, the involved parts are unable to perform a successful communication due to inadequate design solutions, resulting in misunderstandings and disagreements (Bonacin, Hornung, Dos Reis, Pereira, & Baranauskas, 2013; Jensen, Dos Reis, & Bonacin, 2015; Thompson & Filik, 2016).
The lack of intention communication may result in difficulties for users to manage, retrieve and interpret information, as well as interact effectively and satisfactorily with others in technology-mediated collaboration tasks. Even though recent research has addressed pragmatic aspects in interaction design (e.g., Hornung & Baranauskas, 2011), there is still a lack of interactive solutions and techniques to allow users to explicitly communicate their intentions when using computer systems.
The automatic capturing of intentions by using natural language processing techniques (e.g., Hamroun, Gouider, & Said, 2016) is a complex endeavour, since the interpretation is highly dependent on social and cultural patterns. Moreover, accurate methods for the detection of intentions from user interaction activities monitoring is a difficult task. In this investigation, we argue that adequate design solutions might enable users to communicate their intentions more clearly and explicitly.
Whereas the use of icons (called emoticons from ‘emotional icons’ as well as ‘emojis’ from the Japanese words for picture and character) in interactive interfaces has been explored to support the expression and transmission of emotions (Huang, Yen, & Zhang, 2008), we argue that emoticons can also bring benefits to the communication by supporting users in expressing their intentions.
Our previous work investigated a participatory method to select, adapt and design representative emoticons to express different classes of intentions. We named “Intenticons” the expressive emoticons elicited or selected with the purpose of representing and emphasizing users' intentions (Dos Reis, Jensen, Bonacin, Hornung, & Baranauskas, 2016). One open question is to which extent Intenticons represent classes of intentions for users. Our hypothesis is that Intenticons created with participatory user involvement are more likely to express different types of intentions than a general set of emoticons created or selected by designers.
This article presents an experimental study to analyze the expressiveness of Intenticons created from participatory practices. We carried out a study involving 164 participants, including graduate and undergraduate students in Computer Science. They were invited to assign the representativeness of Intenticons according to an illocution classification framework based on Semiotics (Peirce, 1958) and Speech Act Theory (SAT; Searle, 1969). This framework organizes and classifies various intention classes based on different dimensions of the illocutions (Liu, 2000). For each intention class, the Intenticons were mixed with a set of emoticons selected from the Web and the mixed set was presented to the participants to investigate their representativeness. We used a form to gather the participants' assignments for each icon in the mixed set (intenticons and emoticons) based on a Likert scale.
We carried out statistical analyses of the participants' answers to compare the two sets of intention representations. In addition, a qualitative analysis supports us in explaining key findings. Our main contributions are two-fold:
1.Evaluate the contribution of a participatory approach to designing and selecting emoticons to represent intentions;2.Define and evaluate a set of emoticons, named Intenticons, which can be used to represent intentions in Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) systems.
The results indicate that Intenticons, designed with user participation, are more representative than emoticons selected by designers. Our findings show the power of the Intenticons in the experimental setting.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 contextualizes the study by presenting related work on emoticons in CMC; Section 3 presents the adopted theoretical background; Section 4 describes the study design with the research method, participants, implemented procedures and materials; whereas Section 5 reports on the obtained results, Section 6 discusses the findings; finally, Section 7 draws conclusions and points out further research.
