When new technologies—such as radio, TV, and computers—have been introduced into school classrooms, discussions often have followed about how such new technologies would drastically change the way we see, understand, and organize education and learning (McLuhan, 1964; Tapscott, 1998). This discussion also has been the case for computer games (Gee, 2007; Prensky, 2001). However, computer games can be utilized for educational purposes not only through play but also by letting young people design their own computer games (Kafai and Burke, 2015, Kafai and Burke, 2016).
The present article unpacks the activity of game design in an elementary school classroom to investigate how students work on a task in which they must use information and communication technology (ICT) but within a subject—in this case, social studies—in which traditional learning resources remain prominent. We set out to explore how students participate in the learning activity of designing computer games, in a formal learning setting where constructing and displaying knowledge about history is central. We seek to understand how students use different artifacts in the process of designing computer games, what epistemic status these artifacts are given, and how the use of artifacts contributes to the students' construction of knowledge. This is explored through the following research question: What artifacts do students use, and how do students use these artifacts while designing history-themed computer games in the classroom?
1.1. From using to designing gamesComputer games increasingly are being used for learning topics, such as social studies and history. Games can be used to model complex situations in the real world (Gee, 2007), such as the Middle East conflict in PeaceMaker (ImpactGames, 2007), climate change in Fate of the World (Red Redemption, 2011), and the reasons for poverty in Ayiti: The Cost of Life (Global Kids & GameLab, 2006) and 3rd World Farmer (3rd World Farmer Team, 2005). The game This War of Mine (11 bit studios, 2014), in which the players assume the roles of civilians in a war, has elicited critical and public acclaim and is sold on multiple platforms (Darvasi, 2016).Games also can be used as representations of the past, giving players opportunities to interact with historical settings (Schrier, 2014). Such games have been used successfully to teach history, for example, bringing the civilization-building history game Civilization III into a high school classroom, in which students “developed familiarity with game concepts and deeper understandings of relationships among history, geography, economics, and politics” (Squire & Barab, 2004, p. 505). Games about historical topics allow players to immerse themselves in the past and speculate about what could have happened under different circumstances (Simons, 2007; Uricchio, 2005). Unlike books, games also have the advantage of being interactive. Instead of merely reading about a historical topic or time period, you can experience it through the game, and possibly alter the outcomes of historical events. However, historical content in games should be balanced with fun and engaging gameplay (Schrier, 2014), which might be a challenge for game designers.Software advancements have made it more accessible for game players to create games using technologies such as Scratch (MIT Media Lab, 2017), Kodu (Microsoft Research, 2017), and RPG Maker (Enterbrain, 2011), thus creating the possibility for young people to learn not only from playing games made by others about history but also by creating games while engaging with curricular content, constructing knowledge, and integrating it into the games (Kafai, 2006). Although introducing game design as a learning activity in classrooms often has focused on learning programming (Hayes & Games, 2008; Kafai & Burke, 2015), utilizing software that allows for easy creation of game worlds, characters, and narrative content shifts the focus to other aspects of game design. It has been argued that game design involves “a rich array of knowledge and skills,” including problem solving, art, writing, and storytelling (Salen, 2007, p. 305), and that game designers must think actively about the content they are implementing in games (Kafai & Burke, 2016). These aspects have been discussed as relevant to primary and secondary education in Western countries (Gee, 2007; Kafai and Burke, 2015, Kafai and Burke, 2016; Peppler & Kafai, 2007; Selander, 2008).Creating games has been seen as a method for students to learn “21st century skills” (Bermingham et al., 2013; Kafai & Burke, 2015; Salen, 2007), or as a way for young people to become critical players of games and active producers and participants in today's media culture (Kafai and Burke, 2015, Kafai and Burke, 2016; Peppler & Kafai, 2007). Many studies have been conducted outside classroom contexts, such as studies on learning programming or computer skills in after-school programs, youth clubs, or summer camps (Denner, Werner, & Ortiz, 2012; Maloney, Peppler, Kafai, Resnick, & Rusk, 2008; Peppler & Kafai, 2007). However, in studies in which game design has been used to teach subjects such as math and English in formal learning environments, the design aspects of the activity have taken precedence over learning academic content (Ke, 2014; Oldaker, 2010). This highlights that introducing game design into classrooms includes expectations for what students should gain from the experience. With the demand for more research on game design as a learning activity (Ke, 2014; Oldaker, 2010; Robertson & Good, 2005), the present study aims to address this demand by exploring how students' learning activities unfold when designing games in the classroom, focusing on the students' use of artifacts in the game design process.
1.2. Learning from designingA core aspect of this article is to explore how students might learn from participating in a design process: how knowledge is constructed in collaboration when designing computer games and the role of artifacts in this process. Thus, this study relates to the body of work that include theories on learning by design (Kolodner, 2002; Selander, 2008; Selander & Kress, 2010).In research on learning from game design, inspiration is often drawn from work by Seymour Papert (Papert, 1980; Papert & Harel, 1991), who was an early advocate for how designing for computers could be a powerful way for young people to learn (Papert, 1980). He proposed that knowledge is actively constructed by the learner, and that an effective way to do this is for learners to be involved in a project that they themselves find meaningful, centered on constructing external artifacts (Papert & Harel, 1991) — such as computer games. Research drawing on this perspective emphasized this connection between designing and learning, asserting that “activities involving making, building, programming – in short, designing – provide a rich context for learning” (Kafai & Resnick, 1996, p. 4).These ideas regarding learning from design have become a main point of departure and theoretical inspiration for much research on learning from designing games. However, Kafai and Resnick's (1996) compilation on learning from design noted that creating computer games was considered an unusual approach to learning, and decades later, learning from designing games is still seen as a less common aspect of game-based learning (Kafai & Burke, 2015).There are also different approaches to learning from designing games. While a computational thinking approach (Kafai and Burke, 2013, Kafai and Burke, 2015; Wing, 2006) emphasizes drawing on computer science to teach effective problem solving, abstract thinking, and systems design, designing games to build knowledge about a topic emphasizes aspects such as collaborating to use artifacts to find information, make sense of it, and build it into computer games (Selander, 2008b). This article aims to further explore the idea that designing an artifact—here, a computer game—might be powerful for learning, by focusing on how this process unfolds, concentrating on students' participation and use of artifacts in a social and cultural context.
