Visual fiducial tags, or fiducials, are artificial landmarks that are easy to detect and to identify from images taken by digital cameras. They are high reflectance bidimensional patterns with known structure that encode a unique ID [1].
Fiducial tags have an special importance in the Computer Vision and Augmented Reality [2], [3], [4], [5], [6] fields because they are an easy approach for helping a computer system to identify objects and their location in an scene seen through a camera. Some applications of them are object identification, tracking, camera calibration, and robot localization [3], [6], [7], [8], and very recently for robot localization and mapping [9].
In recent decades, the use of visual fiducial tags has become very popular for Augmented Reality and robotics applications since they allow to perform automatic identification, and also because they are useful to estimate the relative position and orientation between the camera and the tag. They are considered the cheapest technology since can be generated with conventional printers and can be detected with low cost cameras as those embedded in personal computers or mobile cell phones [10].
Unlike bidimensional barcodes like QR [11] or Datamatrix codes [10] that have the capability to encode big amounts of information (text or numbers), fiducials are provided with an smaller set of previously known numbers, or identificators (IDs), called a dictionary. The reason for this difference comes from the fact that bidimensional barcodes are assumed to be read one per image and also to occupy the totality of the image field, by contrast, fiducial tags are intended to be read from larger distances, in conditions of 3D rotation and multiple instances of them can be read from a single image [12].
For most of the existing visual fiducials tags in literature, three essential steps are performed for their decodification from an image: Tag identification, Data area correction, and Data area decodification.

1)Tag identification consists in finding those segments of the image that seem to contain a tag. This identification is done by finding the constant parts of the tag like quad borders or squares at the corners, e.g., three of the later for QR codes.2)Since the pattern in the image can be distorted by a projection or it can be occluded, the data area correction step consists in getting a corrected version of the image. This step is commonly solved by computing a homography between the tag in the image and the known structure of the tag to correct the image [12], [13], [14]. The homography is a 3 × 3 matrix (i.e. a projective transformation) with 8 DOF that is used to estimate the position in the image of specific elements in the structure. This step is crucial in most of the existing approaches and the correct tag decodification depends on the correctness of this step.3)Once data area is corrected, information is decoded. For those approaches based in bits, this step consists in computing the encoded ID by reading all bits from the image, applying their verification, and correction.
Since most of the existing visual fiducial tags perform the homography estimation for the identification step, in this paper we propose new visual fiducial tags, based in the combinatorial invariant Order Type, that are invariant to rotation, translation and perspective transformations.
This article is organized as follows: in Section 2 we present a review of the state of the art visual fiducial tags, in Section 3 we describe Order Type, its definition and all the related concepts used in this paper. In Section 4 we describe the design for the proposed markers. In Section 5 we present all experiments performed to validate our proposal. In Section 6 a brief discussion about this work is given, and finally, in Section 7, conclusions and future work are drawn.
