Advances in modern technology and the increase in internet usage have enabled greater number of people to access the internet. It was found that 85% of the adult population of the USA was internet users in 2013. According to data released by the Turkish Statistical Institute, 66.8% of Turkey's population is internet users (“Turkish Statistical Institute Household Usage of Information Technologies Survey”, 2017). Internet usage is the highest in the group comprising people between ages of 16 and 24 (91.5% in males and 82.9% in females). According to educational levels, 89.8% of the internet users in Turkey are high school and vocational high school graduates while 97% are graduates of university undergraduate, master's and doctorate programs. The highest percentage of internet usage was observed in professional occupational groups with 99.3% (“Turkish Statistical Institute Household Usage of Information Technologies Survey”, 2016). As the widespread and intensive use of the internet have provided people easy and free access to information, the internet has become a popular source of accessing online health information (McElroy and Shevlin, 2014; Yılmaz, 2013). International studies have shown that a great number of people manage their own health based on health-related information they get online. In Turkey, the percentage of seeking personal health related information online was 65.9% during the first three months of 2016. Despite the fact that an online environment provides extensive and easy access to information through a myriad of sources, it often creates problems concerning access to up-to-date, reliable, efficient and accurate information (Lewis, 2006; Singh et al., 2004; “Türkiye İstatistik Kurumu 2016 yılı Hanehalkı Bilişim Teknolojileri Kullanım Araştırması (Turkish Statistical Institute Household Usage of Information Technologies Survey for the year 2016”, 2016) because seeking health information is an important coping strategy, people continue to search for information; however, sources they use and how they do this demonstrate variations.
Online sources meet the information needs of the patients and their relatives prior to consulting a physician with respect to up-to-date medical information, newly diagnosed diseases and treatment methods, advanced medical devices. Information often obtained using general search engines may be effective in decision making by healthy or sick individuals related to maintaining their health, engaging a physician's assistance concerning diagnosis and treatment, treating an acute illness and coping with chronic problems. Information obtained from official and other reliable sources provides various benefits such as understanding symptoms, deciding on the urgency and necessity of consulting a physician, turning to the correct area of specialty for the health problem and obtaining accurate information. Unofficial and unreliable sources, on the other hand, lead to incomplete and incorrect information; thus aggravating health anxiety depending on the problem being experienced (Doherty-Torstrick et al., 2016; White and Horvitz, 2009; Yılmaz, 2013).
It is known that individuals with frequent online medical information seeking demonstrate elevated health anxiety concerns (Norr et al., 2014). These people often investigate rare, uncommon and dreadful medical conditions (Uzun, 2016). When online sources are perceived as reliable, likelihood of developing health concerns increases (Singh and Brown, 2014). Milder form of health concern may direct individuals to get medical assistance but may lead to excessive grief and development of negative social and occupational functions (Pugh et al., 2013). In a review by B. Zülfikar investigating the online health-related attitudes and behaviour, it was determined that more than half of the individuals who scanned online health information had benefited from this procedure which strengthened the process of decision- making concerning certain diseases and helped them in their contacts with their doctors. However, problems related to compulsion and reliability of the information obtained were also observed in the management of some diseases (Zülfikar, 2014).
Health anxiety is a psychological state in which somatic and mental concerns are stimulated by health-related threat perceptions. It describes negative interpretation of normal and abnormal somatic sensations and fear. In other words, the individual thinks that s/he has a serious health problem and that this problem will cause negative consequences. Health anxiety is common not only among individuals with somatoform and psychological disorder but also among normal people. Mild health anxiety experienced by many people is a tolerable situation that will go away on its own. Severe health anxiety, on the other hand, indicates basic psychiatric disorders such as hypochondriasis or health phobia. It is thought that health-related unconcern, anxiety and hypochondriasis display successive consistency (Aydemir et al., 2013; Hadjistavropoulos et al., 2012; Ünalan, 2014; Welch et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2014).
Young people starting higher education try to adapt to university environment while coping with problems of adolescence. Especially factors such as living away from the family, adaptation to university life and conditions, new and different friends and financial problems inevitably have an impact on physical and mental health in a period when individual responsibilities and personalities are shaped (Ünalan, 2014). An online environment has become a more frequently-used alternative for sexual and mental problems young people cannot discuss face to face or prefer to keep secret. When health anxiety is high, online environments are used more frequently and concerns increase following the internet search (Singh and Brown, 2014).
Furthermore, medical students are under constant stress associated with intense study sessions, heavy work load, a competitive environment and new clinical experiences. This stress intensifies somatic sensations with autonomic activations and causes them to be perceived as symptoms. It is thought that medical students conceptualize some symptoms with new information they learn and interpret them as medical evidence. Thus, clinical teachers report that they are often faced with fear and symptoms of illness in medical students. Such reactions termed as medical student's disease, nosophobia, or medical student's hypochondria are often conceptualized as a mild form of health anxiety or transient hypochondriasis. Medical students who believe they have contracted a certain disease identify cases more easily and selectively as they readily arouse interest and stay in their mind. It can be considered that this condition may also be true not only for medical students but also for all the students studying in health sciences including nursing, pharmacy and dentistry.
Online health information seeking behaviour may become steady with the fear that one has or will develop a serious disease. Studies conducted have shown that this increases health anxiety and may lead to cyberchondria which is described as a severe form of anxiety associated with the escalation of distress and anxiety (Doherty-Torstrick et al., 2016; Muse et al., 2012). Cyberchondria is a form of anxiety characterized by excessive online health research (McElroy and Shevlin, 2014; White and Horvitz, 2009). Following its widespread use in the media, the term cyberchondria emerged in the medical literature in the 2000's (Uzun, 2016). Although the number of related studies is limited, cyberchondria is thought to be quite common in our country as well (Uzun et al., 2017).
The aim of the present study is to determine the factors affecting cyberchondria and health anxiety levels in health sciences students.
