In recent decades, pesticides are used to control and combat insects and pests in the agricultural sector, households, among others (Nascimento and Melnyk, 2016). Frequent and disorderly use of these pesticides has led to serious problems, including high levels of toxic waste in food, biological imbalance, environmental contamination, intoxication of humans and other animals, resurgence of old pest and resistant insect strains, etc. (Ali et al., 2019; Jayaraj et al., 2016; Pereira de Sousa et al., 2014).
The use of natural products in pest and insect control is increasing worldwide. Natural products has the following advantages: they are obtained from renewable resources and have biodegradable molecules; the development of insect resistance to these substances is a slow process; they have good accessibility, especially for farmers; no residues remain in food; they are less toxic to mammals and have low production costs (Pinto et al., 2015).
The species studied in this work are Musca domestica and Mythimna separata, insects that are causing damage both in the agricultural sector and in humans. Musca domestica (Diptera: Muscidae) is a species with a synanthropic character, abundant in the urban region, it develops in several types of substrates: decomposing organic matter, such as feces, garbage, corpses, and carrion. It is important for the health and is closely related to animals and the human environment, acting as an important vector of pathogens such as bacteria, protozoa, helminths, fungi, and viruses (Pinto et al., 2015). They have great flying capacity (hundreds of meters to several kilometers) from their breeding grounds and are attracted by odors of food or organic residues in fermentation or putrefaction (Gomes and Santos, 2015).
Mythimna separata is a typical long-distance migratory insect, being considered one of the main polyphagous pests of grain crops in China and other Asian countries, causing huge losses in agricultural production and economic losses throughout the country annually. Between the years 1950–2013, the average annual area of agricultural land in China infested by M. separata were 5.28 million hectares (ha). With the recent adjustment in the structure of agricultural planting, maize has become the most widely cultivated food crop in China, increasing from 29 million ha in 2007 to 35 million ha in 2011. As a result, maize has become the most important host plant of in China and infestations in the north and northeast in 2012 represented a loss of 2.9% in total maize production (Jiang et al., 2016).
The evaluation and selection of compounds that have desired properties, anti-insecticidal in our case, are performed through Virtual Screening (VS), which is the process of screening chemical compound libraries through computational models. It is considered as fast and low-cost option for screening and selection of hits, thus reducing the number of molecules chosen to be used experimentally (Alves et al., 2018). Therefore, the aim of our study is to perform computer-assisted design of compounds with insecticidal activity against Musca domestica and Mythimna separata.
