
Lane marking detection and localization in traffic scene images is crucial for Intelligent Transportation Systems, which can be used in Automatic Vehicle Driving and Advanced Driver Assistant System (ADAS). Numerous collision accidents are caused by at least one of the vehicles driving out of lane. If lane departure events are early discovered and corrected, some collisions could be avoided. This research improves upon a method to automatically recognize the lane markings on the road with a machine learning algorithm, and a driving out of lane equation is derived as well. The result produced by the equation determines if the driver should be warned about out of lane situation.
Since lane markings are line like features, a wide variety of traditional image processing algorithms could be applied for the task, such as edge detection [1], template matching [2] and Hough Transform [3], in which color, texture, edge and other low-level features are used to detect the area or the edge of the lanes in images. However, those traditional methods are not suitable for detecting lane markings due to (1) variations of the lane marking appearances, for example, dotted lines, solid lines, circular reflectors, white or yellow; (2) variations of the type of road, such as tunnels, bridges, highways and city streets; (3) variations of the time of day, for instance, vehicles in the day time and vehicles at night appear to be totally different; (4) variations of the occlusions, such as pedestrians, bicycles, motorcycles and vehicles that occluding the lane markings; and (5) the presence of shadows of trees and buildings that affects the appearance of lane markings.
Data-driven methods allow for variations of the appearance of the lane markings, and use these variations to increase the heterogeneity of the samples. The more variations contained in the training samples, the better learned of the lane marking model. Lane markings have obvious texture characteristics, so different handcrafted texture features, such as haar-like [4] and local binary pattern [5] could be employed in lane markings detection. Machine Learning algorithms, such as adaboost [6], SVM [7], deep convolutional neural networks [8] were evaluated in literature on lane detection.
At present, the most accurate method is too slow to use (sliding window + CNN [8]), and the fastest method [9] is not accurate enough to use. In this paper, we present a lane marking detection approach that is practical to implement, which is distinguished from the previous ones in the following ways: (1) it is an end-to-end approach to detect small size object, combining multi-layer feature maps effectively and efficiently: down-sampling and up-sampling are replaced by convolution layers; (2) adaptive context information is obtained to increase accuracy; (3) it is extended from anchor generation algorithm in Faster RCNN [10], combining sub-pixel sliding window for small objects detection; (4) a new and bigger road image database is built, so the lane markings detection algorithm proposed here could be evaluated better. Our Tian Traffic dataset and the model described in this paper can be downloaded from the author's website.1
