Smartphones have become the main mean through which users can access cloud services to go shopping, send messages, reserve tickets for events or seats at a restaurant, post comments into a blog, etc. These devices are also assuming the role of edge systems in mobile IoT scenarios, by collecting and pre-processing the data generated by multiple sensors, such as the ones used in healthcare monitoring or tracking/surveillance services and conveying them towards the cloud for further and deeper analyses. However, it is known that most of these services can be abused and are subject to automated attacks generated by computer programs called bots, or exploited by automated applications often mimicking the human behavior for fraud or criminal purposes. As an example of abuse, we may cite the recent trend in posting inflammatory comments on social media to apply pressure on citizens during election campaigns (Ferrara et al., 2016). Furthermore, malicious programs may also engage in damaging or manipulative behaviors such as register thousands of free accounts at a time, vote automatically in online polls, click on ads to generate revenue or to reduce the likelihood of being displayed to a real user, iterate through the entire space of passwords to find the missing credential part, impersonate humans in their activities, by tricking remote workers’ monitoring or activity tracking systems as well as creating the illusion of a physical presence in some place for creating a false alibi.
In a Content Delivery Network (CDN) scenario where edge devices are adopted to dynamically cache contents on the basis of users’ requests, automated access to unpopular contents might degrade the system performance and, if mitigating mechanisms are not implemented, the degradation might scale to complete saturation of bandwidth and storage space. Furthermore, as it is nowadays easier for a smartphone to be always on than it is for a traditional PC, mobile botnets (Eslahi, Salleh, Anuar, 2012, Xiang, Binxing, Lihua, Xiaoyi, Tianning, 2011) are an emerging threat and are starting to appear in the wild. In such a scenario, the capability to throttle access to critical mobile cloud services controlling that the request has been activated by an actual human user would mitigate the level of threat and reduce the potential of mobile cloud services abuse. While the machine-to-machine IoT has a different set of security priorities (Chasaki and Mansour, 2015), in the smartphone-empowered IoT it becomes necessary to reliably demonstrate the human nature of a smartphone user before connecting to some online service or when transmitting to a cloud application some sensory data such as a GPS position or a real-time video as well as an ECG track. The easiest and most popular way used over years by the web developers to tackle this issue is to allow access to these services only to users able to solve a CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart). The main purpose of CAPTCHAs is, as explained by the name itself, to distinguish between humans and computer programs; this goal is pursued by generating a test that is intended to be easy to solve for humans, yet hard to solve for computers. The most widely used CAPTCHA is reCAPTCHA (von Ahn et al., 2008) by Google which has been adopted by many popular websites.
Over the years, reCAPTCHA has leveraged text-, image- or audio-based challenges to verify the presence of a human before allowing access to online services. The original reCAPTCHA challenge asked users to recognize a distorted text in an image form which is known to be difficult for computer vision systems but easy for humans’ eyes. However, the increasing sophistication of computers and artificial vision systems forced reCAPTCHA’s challenges to become more complicated by adding noise and distortion aimed at making it harder to break. Nevertheless, it has been solved by automated systems with high level of accuracy, e.g., Cruz-Perez et al. (2012), Goodfellow et al. (2013), Starostenko et al. (2015). In addition, the introduction of heavy noise and distortion makes the challenge, especially on small screens such as the ones of smartphones, hard for humans to decipher as well. In 2014, Google began to replace the reCAPTCHA system with a user-friendly alternative called No CAPTCHA ReCAPTCHA (Google Inc., 2018c). This version requires simply the user to click in “I’m not a robot” widget and through an advanced risk analysis software that relies on behavioral cues, such as where users click, how long they linger over a checkbox, their typing cadence and other variables that Google is keeping secret, tries to determine which behaviors are human-like and which are too robotic. If the system classifies the user as human, then it gives him access. However, when the risk analysis engine cannot confidently predict whether a user is a human or not, it falls back to prompting the user to solve a reCAPTCHA challenge. Similar to No CAPTCHA ReCAPTCHA, the latest version, the Invisible reCAPTCHA (Google Inc., 2018b) employs an advanced risk analysis software to determine if a visitor is a human or not but without any direct involvement of the users themselves. In this version, the users are not required to click in “I’m not a robot” widget unlike the previous one.
To overcome the limitations of CAPTCHAs, in a past work we have introduced the concept of Completely Automated Public Physical test to tell Computer and Humans Apart (CAPPCHA) (Guerar, Merlo, Migliardi, 2017, Guerar, Migliardi, Merlo, Benmohammed, Messabih, 2015), which, in order to spot the presence of automations, leverages the physical nature of human subjects instead of requiring them to tackle a complex cognitive task. In doing this, CAPPCHA asks the user to tilt the smartphone to a specific degree to be recognized as a human. CAPPCHA is designed in such a way that users cannot make mistakes and there is no additional cognitive burden places onto them; yet, just like traditional CAPTCHAS, it introduces a specific additional step in the chain of tasks that lead to the user’s goal.
Thus, to further reduce the perceivable impact on end-user, while guaranteeing the same level of reliability in identifying the presence of a human performing an operation, we introduce a new version of CAPPCHA, Invisible CAPPCHA, whose goal is to be fully transparent to the user without requiring any additional task or challenge to prove that he/she is human.
In conceiving such idea, we noticed that almost all the online services that require protection against automation abuses require user’s input (e.g., fill a form, write a comment, tap on a button, perform login/ sign up, etc.). While on computers the user’s input is limited to the keyboard and mouse, the user’s input on smartphones leverages the touch paradigm and makes heavy use of tapping gestures; as a consequence, the user’s tap on smartphone is a physical interaction that is naturally used to fill forms, write comments, download an application, acknowledge a message etc. This interaction generates a micro-movement of the device that can be easily detected and measured by sensors such as the accelerometer that are universally available on modern smartphones.
Thus, instead of asking the user to perform an additional motion task (e.g., tilting the smartphone) to authorize access to the requesting application, Invisible CAPPCHA leverages the micro-movements of the device which are generated naturally by the user’s interaction with the touch-screen, more in details the taps. These micro-movements need to be measured by a trusted sensor to prevent sensor data manipulation by any malware component. As all the cloud-based services that need confirmation that they are dealing with human requires user’s input, Invisible CAPPCHA can be used as an effective and secure way to prevent automated programs from abusing cloud services from mobile devices; furthermore, this result can be achieved without posing any additional burden on the user, mainly in services that require periodic transmission of sensory data, and thus having an extreme level of usability. Such proposal, allowing smartphones to assume the role of reliable edge gateways in human-centric IoT/cyber-physical applications, has been carefully assessed from the functional point of view in order to provide a proof of concept for all the involved ideas and mechanisms. The results demonstrated the effectiveness of the whole approach and architecture, and its real applicability in both present and future devices.
