With the widespread adoption of the smartphone and other hand-held devices in everyday life as well as the availability of multitudes of social media platforms, online photo sharing has become a common social activity that facilitates people’s exchange of experiences and opinions. Particularly in hospitality and tourism, photography plays an integral role in the travel experience, and photo sharing is an important activity in documenting, reliving, and sharing that experience (Chalfen, 1979; Garrod, 2008; MacKay and Fesenmaier, 1997; Markwell, 1997). While photo sharing may serve many purposes, user-provided photos on the Internet are becoming increasingly important in the context of product evaluation (Konijn et al., 2016; Vu et al., 2015). For example, many online review sites such as TripAdvisor and Yelp allow users to post photos along with product reviews, which in tandem may generate higher impact on consumers’ perception of the travel products during the decision making process (e.g., Lo et al., 2011). As such, understanding the effects of user-provided photos can be of great interest to both research and practice in hospitality and tourism.
Recent literature studying online consumer reviews in hospitality and tourism has focused on understanding a range of research questions including product attributes, guest satisfaction, product defects as well as the impact of consumer reviews on business performance (e.g., Schuckert et al., 2015; Xiang et al., 2015). Also, there is a growing interest in applying the so-called analytics approach to collect, analyze, summarize and interpret online review data in order to extract useful patterns and insights pertaining to managerial problems (Xiang et al., 2017). However, likely due to technical challenges in collecting and analyzing visual data in large quantities, the impacts of user-provided photos embedded in online reviews have not yet been examined and well understood. Therefore, the primary goal of this study is to introduce deep learning techniques for image processing recently developed in computer science to assess the information value of user-provided photos embedded in online hotel reviews. As the old saying goes, “is a picture worth a thousand words?” Specifically, we designed an analytics exercise by applying deep learning techniques to examine the extent to which user-provided photos influence the perceived helpfulness of online hotel reviews. As such, this study evaluates the utilities of deep learning techniques within a social media setting and discusses its implications for research and practice in hospitality and tourism.
