The continuous development of new technologies creates challenges at the level of higher education in technologies, where one of the key areas of expertise is mathematical science. This forces a continuous adjustment of academic courses and the need for effective assessment of skills and knowledge. All these factors are significant in the process of education of university students with disabilities who encounter additional difficulties in accessing visually presented information and communication with others. Garderen et al. report very little explicit instructional information about representations in the classical math text book [1].
Nowadays, methods of distance education are also used in teaching mathematics. E-learning is one of the high growing trends. One of the well-known examples is the educational software ALEKS. Through adaptive questioning, ALEKS accurately assesses a student's knowledge state and then delivers targeted instruction on the exact topics the student is most ready to learn [2]. Another example is multi language e-learning platform ActiveMath [3].
People with visual disabilities use computers like everybody else does, however such computers are equipped with additional assistive technologies such as screen readers and screen magnifiers. To encourage and at the same time to help people with disabilities to take advantage of distance education, it is necessary to integrate assistive technologies with e-learning platforms and designing educational content according to the accessibility standards. One of the existing solutions for visually impaired children that support math learning is MiniMatecaVox [4]. Another solution is MathPlayer, which can read aloud mathematical formulae written in MathML notation. It supports Internet Explorer and Mozilla Firefox and requires screen readers [5]. Google Chrome web browser is supported by another plugin called ChromeVox [6].
Blind people use the voice or braille presentation. The mathematics extension of Digital Accessible Information System (DAISY) standard (ANSI/NISO Z39.86-2005 R2012 Specifications for the Digital Talking Book) defines structure of accessible math books, but it is only a partial solution. The mathematical formulae are written in MathML notation with additional XML tags, that contain links to the alternative voice description in the audio files. The standard does not define the principles of an audio alternative description for math formulae and does not allow navigation inside the description. Daisy Math Reader that is used at the Silesian University of Technology allows students to read math formulae aloud in Daisy Books [7], [8], [9], [10].
Past experience shows that a method based on reading the text aloud is effective in teaching nontechnical subjects, where the dominant form of information is text. In the case of mathematics, the teaching situation is more complex as educational materials for mathematics include a large percentage of structural information, such as mathematical formulae, charts, graphs, etc. The improvement of this situation requires developing ways for remote presentation of structural information to be made more accessible for disabled people. During the research the accessibility of commonly used e-learning platforms was tested by the authors together with blind students. Evaluation results show that using previously mentioned platforms by impaired people is highly unavailable and difficult to use (e.g. the problem with reading numbers by screen readers like JAWS or NVDA). These problems are reported by impaired users of Khan Academy [11]. The level of the accessibility of another educational software ALEKS is still improving [2].
The goal of this study is to present the methodologies for developing accessible teaching and assessment of mathematics skills. Moreover, the study describes the experience in deploying an interactive e-learning platform focused on supporting the education of the blind.
