Injuries to Thoracic 11th (T11), Thoracic 12th (T12) and Lumbar 1st (L1) vertebrae can be called as thoracolumbar spine injuries [1]. Thoracolumbar injuries usually occur after a fall from height, high velocity road traffic accidents or penetrating trauma. Injury to the spine is common in thoracolumbar junction, where a relatively fixed thoracic spine meets the flexible lumbar spine. Standard anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs provide information about spinal alignment, loss of vertebral height, widened interpedicular distance and increased interspinous distance [2]. In United States, it is estimated that, approximately 12,500 spinal injuries occur every year [3].
Computed tomography (CT) provides excellent bony structure details for evaluating canal encroachment in axial section [1]. It also helps in the assessment of spinal stability by means of reconstructed sagittal and 3D images. Different classification systems are available in the literature to describe the patterns of spinal injuries. An ideal classification should be simple and comprehensive. Usually vertebrae are counted from Cervical 1st (C1) vertebra if complete spine CT images are available. In some situations, it is counted from Sacral 1st (S1) vertebra. However, taking sacrum as a landmark may result in errors as there may be sacralized Lumbar 5th (L5) vertebra or lumbarised Sacral 1st (S1) vertebra [2]. Three-column injury, neurological deficits, kyphotic deformity and canal compromise are the usual indications for surgery [1]. In the management of such unstable fractures, the vertebrae need to be fixed with a pedicular screw construct. It is essential that the injured vertebra is identified properly before surgical stabilization [4]. The details of different regions of spinal column are shown in Fig. 1.
Download : Download high-res image (174KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Structure and different regions of spinal vertebra.
1.1. Computer aided diagnosis (CAD) for thoracolumbar fracturesComputer aided diagnosis (CAD) plays a vital role in the early detection of thoracolumbar spine injuries. It assists doctors in taking appropriate decision during their regular screening and avoid inter and intra observer variability where intra observer variability error is minimum than the inter observer variability [5]. Application of CAD for thoracolumbar fractures will help orthopedists in detecting injuries at T11, T12 and L1. The following subsequent section describes the previous related works pertaining to thoracolumbar fractures.
1.2. Related worksThe existing works can be broadly classified into detecting two categories: (i) vertebral compression fracture (VCF) and (ii) thoracolumbar fractures. Majority of them have concentrated on detecting the VCF and few on thoracolumbar fractures. The existing works on thoracolumbar spine injury identification aims at segmenting vertebra and then making the decision based on it. Yao et al. [6] have proposed a segmentation method by extracting the vertebra cortical circumference and 2D mapping. Their method achieved 95.3% sensitivity using 18 CT dataset. Ghosh et al. [7] have used 2D sagittal reconstruction to detect VCF. They attained 97.33% accuracy for 250 lumbar vertebra. Kelm et al. [8] proposed a segmentation technique using probabilistic model of full vertebral column. They reported 98.6% sensitivity for 42 magnetic resonance (MR) images. A novel spinal column segmentation is proposed in [9] using watershed and direct graph search technique. Their method performed well with 69 images are correctly classified among 71 images. In [10], a new vertebra classification technique is proposed using measured longitudinal features. They tested their algorithm on 51 subjects and achieved 82% accuracy using combined features. Burns et al. [11] have developed an automated detection, localization and classification system for thoracic and lumbar spine using initial segmentation technique. They reported maximum sensitivity of 92% for fracture localization. It can be noted from the above studies that, majority of the works use segmentation of vertebra for the detection of spine vertebra injury. Segmenting vertebra is iterative and difficult task when more subjects are to be included in the study [12]. It can also be observed from the literature that, most of the existing works have used few subjects in their studies. Also, there is a need for an efficient model which can accurately classify large set of normal and fractured subjects.
1.3. Our approachFrom the literature, it is evident that deep learning features are more efficient as compared to hand-crafted features. It does not require segmentation and feature extraction steps during the traditional pipeline structure of automated system [[13], [14], [15]]. It is successfully applied to many applications due to its invariant property such as scale, shift etc. In this paper, we have used deep learning technique to build a robust identification module for classifying CT sagittal view images into normal and thoracolumbar fracture subjects. The details of the proposed model is explained in the following sections. Fig. 2 illustrates the overview of the proposed CNN model.Download : Download high-res image (359KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Overview of the proposed CNN model.
