Plants play an irreplaceable role in our world and they have direct effect in many domains such as agriculture, climate, ecological system, and so on. Besides, they are the main source of food for human survival and development. Many problems such as habitat degradation, global warming, ecosystems destruction, environment worsen, species extinction, and so on have something to do with plant protection. Plant species identification is the prerequisite for protection. There have been many research related to the issue. Method based on image classification is now considered to help improve the plant taxonomy. It is one of the most promising solutions among those related research work, as discussed in (Goëau et al., 2016). And it has been a long term hot research issue.
Considering flowers and fruits of plants are seasonal, some researchers believe that leaves are more suitable for identification. In the early time, leaves are frequently used for computer-aided plant species classification. Most image-based identification methods and evaluation data proposed were based on leaf images (Kumar et al., 2012; Backes et al., 2009; Cerutti et al., 2011). However, most leaf images are specimen or scanned at that time. The way to acquire samples is also strict. Afterwards, flowers begin to be employed (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008; Angelova et al., n.d.; Nilsback & Zisserman, 2006).
Obviously, approaches only with leaves or flowers are insufficient considering realistic plant identification and protection. More diverse parts of plants have to be considered for accurate identification, especially because it is not possible for plants to see their leaves all over the year. Compared with the photos token by realistic ways, the background in those datasets where the camera are closely to targets when people take pictures is simple. We believe that those are not real-world identification task. In this paper, we focus on plant species identification especially realistic recognition. For a real-world plant identification task, plant image samples should include many parts such as fruits, branches, entire, apart from leaves and flowers. At the same time, the way to create and acquire plant images should not be strict. They can be snapshotted by different users and at different time and users can be at their own will. Image samples can be with complicated background. Besides, the scene includes not only indoor but also field. We believe that these indeed belong to real-world plant identification. The task of the identification is more challenging compared with tradition species identification while it is more valuable at the same time. And only real-world species recognition can realize better, convenient, and comprehensive plant protection.
In the last few years, a number of projects and organizations such as iNaturalist, Botanica can generate large amounts of biodiversity data. Big biodiversity data can be available easier compared with the past (Agarwal et al., 2006). As it is convenient for a vast majority of people to snapshot plant images with mobile phones. The way to create and acquire plant images becomes easier and close to the condition of a real-world scenario. Besides, people like to share them and chat with each other on their personal social networks.
In this paper, we first review the related work about plant species recognition issue. We discuss commonly used approaches using leaf and flowers for tradition species identification. We then propose a novel framework and an effective data augmentation method to address the task of realistic recognition. As deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide us a useful tool for large-scale image classification, we conduct our work basing on deep learning. As stated in (Yarbus, n.d.; Neisser, 1967), the salient objects which are to be recognized in an image are focused on in terms of our human visual attention. We crop the image in terms of our visual attention and name the operation attention cropping (AC). AC is accomplished with the generated saliency map using saliency detection approach. As we all known, data augmentation is an important operation in deep learning. Here, we apply AC as a data augmentation method for deep learning. The schematic diagram of our framework is shown in Fig. 1. We validate our proposed approach through a series of comparisons and results show that superior results are achieved.Download : Download high-res image (179KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Illustration of image classification in general way and our proposed method.
