Cancer is the development and progressive growth of abnormal cells in the human body. Breast cancer is mostly considered the central cause of death among females around the globe. Major casualties due to the breast tumor are seen in female over the age of 50 years. ACS (American Cancer Society) announced that approximately 40,610 patients died in the USA during year 2017 due to breast cancer [1]. It is clear from the report that breast cancer is the most astounding reason of expiry among ladies. Two sorts of abnormalities are observed in the breast: masses and micro-calcifications. The little dabs of calcium in the breast are referred as micro-calcifications. Masses allude to any bump, sore, or bulge display in the breast area. Typically, masses are enclosed by various structures for example, fibrous tissues, blood parenchyma and vessels. Such types of factors turn into a troublesome form that makes it difficult to diagnose and detect masses in the breast [2].
Currently several research efforts have focused on medical imaging to help radiologists. Early finding of tumors plays a vigorous role in the diagnostic process and treatment planning of breast cancer [3]. Different diagnostic procedures are advised to detect breast cancer that are, mammogram (x-ray of breast), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), ultrasound and Positron Emission Tomography (PET). Mammographic screening is a low-dose x-ray (minimum and optimum radiation) procedure that is the most predictable and exceptionally delicate methodology being utilized as a part of early determination of the abnormality and treatment procedure [4]. Recently the mortality rate of breast cancer patients has decreased due to early detection of benign masses through advancement in the field of mammographic imaging. During the period from 1974 to 1984, the proportion of breast cancer detection depending upon mammography system was mere 2%, and it was later expanded up to 36% during the period 1995 to 1999 [5]. However, it is observed that a significant ratio of abnormalities is still being missed by expert radiologists in early stage of cancer. The problems that are being faced during identification of suspicious region and position of lesions are due to huge number of mammograms images given to each radiologist. This repetition of work badly affects the accurate interpretation of mammograms. The burden on radiologist can be significantly reduced by assisting them through an effective automated system. Thus, the identification of malignancy at early time should be accomplished to lessen the death ratio. A Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) system for identification of breast malignancy to help radiologists has not yet gained maturity. But current improvement in the field of mammography system has become a long suit for such frameworks [6]. Different reviews affirmed that CAD system can expand the successful diagnosis accuracy up to 90% that is hard to achieve through the detection done alone by the professional radiologists. Indeed, even decision accuracy ratio of talented radiologist may range from 65% to 75%. The review affirms that 66% to 85% biopsies of the patients are judged as benign [7]. Thus, it is imperative to associate expert's view with CAD system to improve the diagnosis results and to avoid superfluous biopsies. The mammographic images consist of various types of artifacts, noise and pectoral muscles. Such undesirable parts are required to be disposed of during pre-processing stage because it can prompt extraction of distorted features that may lead to misclassification [8]. Different studies have discussed cropping procedure that removes undesired portions of the image to get the region of interest (ROI). A standard rectangular window defines the ROI that is marked by an expert or it may be selected by the anticipated shape of the irregular region [2]. Segmentation is the utmost imperative stage of a CAD framework. Effective segmentation maintains the important features of lumps that cause positive impact on the consequent stages. Segmentation strategy divides an image into regions in such a way that each region becomes alike containing at least one feature or property (for example, surface, color, shading, reflectivity, and so on) [9,10]. In the previous work, commonly unsupervised methods of segmentation have been employed for tumor finding. Three types of unsupervised segmentation are being used i.e. Region-based, Contour-based and Clustering-based methods [11]. In region-based approach the particular image is separated into similar and spatially associated areas [12]. Three well known techniques are used for region-based segmentation methods: watershed technique [13], split and merge technique [14] and region growing technique [2,15]. Contour-based segmentation is created on boundaries of region [16]. While in clustering approach similar data items are placed in a single category [17].
Features extraction stage is assumed as a crucial part for CAD environments. Assortments of systems are produced for this purpose to differentiate malignant tumors from benign ones. Gray-Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) is the most common method used for texture-based feature extraction [18]. Different researchers proposed GLCM method for mammography images. For example, Rangayyan et al. [19], Vasantha et al. [20], Naveed et al. [21], Pereira et al. [22] employed GLCM to define texture-based features. LBP is another well-known texture-based description mechanism employed by several researchers. Bruno et al. [23], de Rocha et al. [24], Liu et al. [25] applied LBP to identify benign masses with respect to their malignancy. Singh et al. used center symmetric-LBP [26] and Nanni et al. [27] employed LTP (Local Ternary Pattern) and LPQ (Local Phase Quantization) as texture-based features. R. Nithya et al. [28] employed different texture features such as LBP, GLCM, Gray Level Difference Matrix (GLDM), Gray Level Run Length Matrix (GLRLM), Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT), Wavelet Packet Transform (WPT), Gabor transform and trace transform. Jamil Ahmad et al. [29] proposed spatial pooling approach in clustered convolutional feature space for texture features extraction used for endoscopic images classification. Jamil Ahmad et al. [30] employed novel methods of feature extraction called edge orientation histogram (EOH) and shape matrix histogram (SMH) for real time classification.
Several research works consolidate shape-based and texture-based features to find out malignant and benign masses. Rouhi et al. [2] proposed shape-based, GLCM features and created ANN to distinguish between benign and malignant tumors. Using this strategy over 10-fold cross-validation on DDSM and MIAS database an accuracy of 82.06% and 78.43% is achieved correspondingly. In [31], the authors measured texture-based and shape-based features and thus proposed GA for discerning features selection to guarantee that MLP gives better classification accuracy on MIAS over 10-fold cross-validation.
The main contributions made in this research are:
aIn the proposed approach, segmentation of masses is performed using cascading of Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) and region-growing (RG) technique called FCMRG algorithm. The results obtained show that the segmentation performed by FCMRG is better for mammographic images than the previous approaches.bThe proposed framework employed two types of feature extraction. First type uses hybrid features termed as LBP-GLCM that are obtained in two stages. First, the coded images are generated using LBP and then GLCM is applied on coded images to obtain the required features. The second one, an advancement of LBP called LPQ is used for feature representation, resulting` in adequate performance.cThe mRMR algorithm has been applied to select discerning feature sets from LBP-GLCM, LPQ and hybrid methods, hence creating it more appropriate for classification.dThe performance of classification using selected features is evaluated based on accuracy, precision, sensitivity, specificity, MCC and F-Score on MIAS and DDSM databases that shows the increased accuracy of current methods.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2, describes the detail of the proposed segmentation and texture feature extraction mechanisms. Section 3 explains the experimental setup. The discussion on result is presented in Section 4 and Section 5 concludes the finding also with a look into the future research directions.
