Citizen Science (CS) and Community Operational Research (COR) differ markedly in terms of access to and attention from important stakeholders (e.g. policy makers), with consequent impacts on the availability of research funding and support. Given CS's preferential position, it seems logical to suggest that an alignment with it might bring benefits to COR. But what would be the basis for such an alignment, and what benefits would it bring for CS? If judged merely on a summary review of the literature, COR and CS may not appear to have much in common, with the two developing alongside each other but hardly, if ever, communicating. Superficial appearance, however, may be deceptive and belie deeper level commonalities, so it is one of the aims of this paper to identify these. We need to begin, though, by establishing some context and reviewing the origins of COR and CS.
Let us start with COR which, according to Jackson, 1987a, Jackson, 2004), has its origins in a ‘long tradition’ of international practice. This tradition includes Ackoff's (1970) paper on the Wharton School's work with inhabitants of the local Mantua ghetto in Philadelphia; Cook's projects with inner-city community organizations (Cook, 1973; Luck, 1984); Beer's engagement with the Allende Government in Chile (Beer, 1981); and various projects undertaken from Bath University (Jones and Eden, 1981; Sims and Smithin, 1982). Early practice was complemented with critical reflection, as demonstrated by Churchman's (1970) concern for the OR profession's lack of engagement with matters that cause ‘social anxiety’. In addition, Cook (1984) lamented the shift from the aspirations of OR's early theorists and practitioners of ‘science helping society’ to that of ‘science helping the establishment’ (Jackson, 1987a, p. 48). A similar tone of lament can also be found in Rosenhead's inaugural address as President of the UK's Operational Research Society, which gave real impetus and recognition to COR (Rosenhead, 1986). While Midgley and Ochoa Arias (2004a) reflect on the longevity of COR as an established stream of practice within the OR profession, it has a relatively short and ordered history if compared with that of CS.
‘Contemporary science has its roots in the achievements of amateur scientists of centuries past’ (Mims, 1999), and it was only with the growth of universities and other such institutions that research questions moved away from the everyday experience of the amateur. In recent times, though, the expression of critical narratives on scientific knowledge which question its reliability and status in society (see for example Ziman, 1978) have inspired efforts to reclaim science by, or on behalf of, amateur or citizen scientists. Such efforts found expression in the UK in Irwin's (1995) book, Citizen Science – the title being purposely chosen because it ‘evokes a science which assists the needs and concerns of citizens’ (p. xi), while implying ‘a form of science developed and enacted by citizens themselves’ (p. xi). Around the same time, in the USA, Bonney (1996) used the identical term to refer to the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology's growing number of public research projects. It is worth noting that this crowd-sourced form of CS goes under a variety of other names such as ‘community science’ (Carr, 2004). Indeed, the tradition of research with and by indigenous peoples, which seeks the liberation of science from dominant Western perspectives (Smith, 1999), is also a close ally. While citizen participation is a focus of both, Lawrence's (2006) scheme of dimensions of power and knowledge suggests a different classification of each. The Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology's work is classed as consultative/functional (Conrad and Hilchey, 2011, Ely, 2008), based on citizens providing information to experts and implementing their decisions. In contrast, Irwin's (1995) version of CS is transformative, being focussed on the empowerment of citizens, with expert engagement only when necessary. Consequently, Irwin's version of CS provides the focus for this analysis, although Bonney's work is not irrelevant as it represents a very influential, perhaps even the dominant, view of the movement. Indeed, in some ways, the crowd-sourced view of science is more timely as it has only relatively recently become possible because of technology putting engagement within the reach of the masses (Gouviea et al., 2004, Silvertown, 2009).
Having provided a summary review of the origins of COR and CS, in Section 3 we elaborate on this in a systematic comparison of the two. The findings of this comparison provide the basis for the achievement of the second aim of this paper, in Section 4, which is to establish how an alignment of COR and CS might be realised at micro, meso and macro levels of practice. Our first task though, in the next section, is to make explicit the framework of analysis on which our comparison of COR and CS is based.
