Bruising is the most common injury resulting from physical abuse to children1 and the pattern of bruises may indicate the causative mechanism.2 For forensic purposes, it is important to measure and accurately record the bruise to facilitate analysis. Any research that aims to describe the evolution of bruises over time, or how their appearance relates to a proposed cause, would benefit from a reliable method of measurement.
As part of the clinical assessment of a child where physical abuse is suspected, it is standard practice to measure, and record, the maximum diameter of any bruise using a paper tape measure. Bruises are also recorded using digital photographic imaging.3 Every image should include a calibrated measure in the same plane as the bruise to enable an estimation of its size. Freely available software such as Image J has been widely used for almost 30 years4 to facilitate a more precise analysis of medical images5 of cutaneous lesions.6
Conventional photography is the standard method for imaging bruises, however, these images can be impaired by spurious light reflectance from the skin. Cross polarized photography aims to reduce this light reflectance, enhance visual detail and improve the definition of bruise margins.7 This method was selected as the preferred imaging modality by clinicians assessing boundary, shape, size, colour and absence of light reflectance among bruises.8
It has been shown that there is considerable variation in the reliability and consistency of bruise measurement. A previous study by this group, assessed inter and intra observer variation among 45 people measuring images of bruises with a paper tape, or using Image J software. Manual measurements tended to be smaller than electronic. There was a marked difference between observers using Image J electronic measurements, but less intra observer variation using this method. However an intrinsic bias to ‘round up’ or ‘round down’ the observed size of the bruise to the nearest centimetre or half centimetre was identified.9 By contrast, Cosman et al., 2015 measured bruises resulting from invasive cardiac procedures, and showed that both linear measurements and planimetry were reliable for bruise assessment, by both professionals and patients, with high correlation coefficients.10 A pilot study by Bennett et al., 2013 proposed a technique of using circle templates to measure a bruise, and showed a large between observer variation in measurement for complex bruises, which was thought to be a result of imprecision when determining bruise margins.11 This was particularly true for complex bruises, which, to the naked eye, appeared to be composed of multiple parts. In this type of bruise the level of variation between observers using the ‘circle method’ in comparison to a paper tape measurement showed a standard deviation of over 1 cm using either technique.11
Thus bruise measurements are influenced by the imaging technique used, and the measurement strategy, complicated by the fact that bruises may have unusual shapes and indistinct borders, where it can be difficult to identify the margin of the lesion. Given the potential forensic significance of bruises found, and the matching of such bruises to implements potentially used to inflict them, it is imperative that we discern what is the best combination of image capture and measurement for measuring bruise size.
This study aims to identify the optimal method to measure images of bruises, taking into account imaging method (conventional vs cross polarized photography) and different computerised techniques (Image J vs Photoshop vs circle measurement) to determine which combination produces the most consistent results, both within and between individuals.
