A cluster is a type of parallel or distributed processing system which consists of a collection of interconnected stand-alone computers working together as a single, integrated computing resource [8]. Although the idea of using clusters to improve system reliability dates back to the 1960s [25], its usage to improve system performance is more recent [7].
The excellent price–performance ratio of clusters has led to their widespread usage. They fit the needs of multiple environments, from small servers to Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) and large Internet servers. Popular Internet services are provided by large scale clusters, usually located in different places to provide resilience against natural disasters. On the other hand, the largest supercomputers are also based on computer clusters [32].
Computer engineering curricula may include some subjects on clusters [10]. Among the topics to be taught, we can mention system architecture, networking, operating systems, parallel programming and applications. Clusters come in several major flavours depending on their purpose [18]: High Performance Computing (HPC), High Throughput Computing (HTC), High Availability (HA) and High Performance Service (HPS). Most cluster computing courses are oriented towards HPC and HTC, usually ignoring HA and HPS. However, most cluster installations, especially Internet data centres, fit into these latter categories. In [22], we described the contents of a master-level cluster computing course that already addresses HPS/HA issues. In this paper, being aware of the growing importance of these kind of servers, we propose an updated version of the course with additional material on HPS/HA at the expense of sacrificing parallel programming topics, that can be taught in other subjects on programming. We describe in detail those topics related to HA and HPS clusters that should be included in the syllabus. A distinguishing feature of the proposed course is that it includes several hands-on sessions to easily assimilate the learned concepts. In particular, we propose building a computer cluster in the lab, installing the operating system, services and required packages. The cluster may be configured taking into account one or more of the aforementioned flavours. In this paper, we propose configuring and deploying a small cluster-based Internet server that provides web service.
As stated in [22], the use of virtualization environments allows students to build their own cluster on the computers of the lab or even on their own laptops. The computing power and memory available on current off-the-shelf computers are high enough to deploy a cluster composed of several virtual machines. Machine management (boot, reset, power-off or replication) is easy to achieve, without interfering with the work of other students. Root privileges are easily fulfilled.
The main contributions of this paper are (i) the proposal of selected topics on High Availability and High Performance Service to be included in a cluster configuration and administration course; (ii) considering a practical and hands-on approach where students build, configure, test and evaluate a cluster-based web server; (iii) using packages and tools used in real installations; and (iv) that it tries to fill the gap observed in many cluster computing courses.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the syllabus of the subject. Section 3 includes well-known and established concepts related to high performance service and high availability that should be taught in the subject. Some of these concepts are applied in Section 4, describing the steps followed to build, configure, test and evaluate a small cluster proving web service. Section 5 discusses some issues on teaching the subject and Section 6 gives pointers to some related work. Some conclusions finish the paper.
