1.1. Rationale and objective“You can play computer games after you finish your homework.” Parents have been saying things like this to their children for decades, but computer game visionaries foresee a future in which playing computer games is the homework (Gee, 2003, Prensky, 2006, McGonical, 2011). For example, Prensky (2006, p. 4) asserts: “Kids learn more positive, useful things for their future from their computer games than they learn in school.” Computer game proponents and visionaries claim that playing computer games can improve your mind. However, such claims are rarely backed up with compelling research evidence, particularly when operationalized as the claim that playing computer games can improve cognitive skills such as spatial skills (Honey and Hilton, 2011, Mayer, 2014, O’Neil and Perez, 2008, Tobias and Fletcher, 2011).The goal of the present study is to test the claim that playing the classic spatial puzzle game Tetris, which has been called “the greatest computer game of all time” (McGonical, 2011, p. 23), can improve cognitive skills. We accomplish this goal in two ways-- by addressing what Mayer (2014) calls the value added question and the cognitive consequences question. In value added research, we compare the learning outcome of a group that is assigned to play a base version of a game versus a group that plays the same game with one feature added. In the present study, we compare a group that plays Tetris for 4 sessions (Tetris group) with a group that plays Tetris for 4 sessions along with directed training on effective spatial strategies for Tetris in each session (enhanced Tetris group). If the enhanced Tetris groups shows greater gains in cognitive skills than the Tetris group, we can conclude that adding strategy instruction increased the effectiveness of playing Tetris. The design of Study 1 allows for a direct test of the value added research question by determining whether adding a feature to playing Tetris results in improvements in transfer test performance.In cognitive consequences research, we compare the learning outcome of a group that is assigned to play a game with a group that engages in an alternative activity. In the present study, we compare a group that plays Tetris (Tetris group or enhanced Tetris group) with a group that does not play Tetris (inactive control group). If groups that play Tetris show greater gains on cognitive skill tests than groups that do not, we can conclude that playing Tetris causes an improvement in cognitive skills. The design of Study 2 allows for a direct test of the cognitive consequences research question by determining whether the enhanced Tetris group (or even the Tetris group) shows greater improvements in cognitive skills than a control group that does not play the game.A major hurdle in research on game effectiveness is to determine whether cognitive skills exercised within the game context can transfer to improvements in cognitive skills performed outside the game context, and ultimately in practical contexts such as in school, work, and everyday life. In order to incorporate this thorny issue of transfer in the present study, we administer pretests and posttests on six cognitive skills related to Tetris but presented in a context outside of game play: Tetris and non-Tetris mental rotation, visualization, perceptual speed, useful field of view, and visuospatial working memory. In this way, we seek to determine whether we can develop an enhanced training program with Tetris that leads to improvements in transferable cognitive skills.In short, this study examines the extent to which playing an enhanced version of the classic spatial puzzle game, Tetris will transfer to improvements in spatial and perceptual skills in non-game environments. By transfer, we mean the effects of prior learning (in this case, 4 h of Tetris playing) on subsequent performance (in this case, performance on classic paper-based and computer-based tests of spatial and perceptual skills). By spatial and perceptual skills, we mean the ability to mentally represent and/or manipulate visual stimuli as measured by the card rotation test, form board test, perceptual speed test, 2-D Tetris rotation test, useful field of view test, and Corsi block-tapping test, as described in the method section of study 1. By non-game environment, we mean that the spatial and perceptual skills are performed on tasks that do not involve playing Tetris.The major empirical contribution of the current set of studies is to determine whether it is possible to take an off-the-shelf game that was designed for entertainment, and add enhancements that will allow it to serve as a vehicle for improving educationally relevant cognitive skills. The major theoretical contribution of the current set of studies is to explore the nature of transfer of cognitive skills, particularly the thorny issue of how to increases the changes that cognitive skills learned in one domain will result in improvements in another domain.
1.2. Literature reviewCan playing Tetris help students improve their cognitive skills? Tetris involves rotating and aligning shapes, so on its face it appears to be a good candidate for developing spatial skills like mental rotation, visualization, and perceptual attention. In a recent review of the literature (Mayer, 2014), students who were assigned to play Tetris did not show substantially better gains than students who did not play Tetris on an array of tests of spatial cognition (median d = .04 based on 15 experimental comparisons), perceptual attention (median d = 0.15 based on 5 experimental comparisons), or 3-D mental rotation (median d = 0.22 based on 3 experimental comparisons). Similarly, Tetris playing did not have a strong positive effect on memory tasks (d = −0.44, Boot, Kramer, Simons, Fabiani, & Gratton, 2008), reasoning tasks (d = 0.08 and d = −0.43; Boot et al., 2008), or task switching (d = 0.18, Goldstein et al., 1997; d = 0.35, Boot et al., 2008). However, as 2D mental rotation appears to be the most obvious component of Tetris, it is interesting to note that playing Tetris had a strong positive effect on mental rotation of 2D Tetris-like shapes (median d = 0.82 based on 6 comparisons) and a small-to-medium effect on mental rotation of 2D non-Tetris shapes (median d = 0.38 based on 5 experimental comparisons). Thus, the only strong and consistent effect reflected in literature is highly specific: playing Tetris helps improve mental rotation of shapes like those in the game. These results suggest that the cognitive skills exercised in playing Tetris do not appear to transfer to contexts outside of the game.Given the generally poor showing of off-the-shelf games such as Tetris for improving cognitive skills, it is worthwhile to determine whether they can be repackaged based on cognitive theory to be effective. In short, before declaring Tetris as ineffective in promoting the development of spatial and perceptual skills relevant for education, the current set of studies adds to the literature by determining whether we can add instructional enhancements to Tetris playing than foster transfer of cognitive skills to non-game environments.
1.3. The elusive search for transfer in computer gamesWhen students progress through a computer game, such as Tetris, they develop in-game knowledge and skills that help them perform well in the game. Is the knowledge that students gain specific to the game context, or can elements of that knowledge be useful in new situations? Although procedural fluency--performing action sequences smoothly without conscious attention--is highly prized in computer game playing, it is not a characteristic typically associated with training transferable skills. Fluency leads to gains during the training of procedural knowledge but does not lead to the transfer of procedural knowledge, such as when training in one skill increases performance in another skill or situation (Schmidt & Bjork, 1992). Game environments therefore offer both opportunities and challenges as educational tools. One such challenge is the focus of this study—what can be added to games to promote cognitive processing that leads to transferable skills?Diverse attempts to facilitate transfer of cognitive skills trained in computer games to non-game contexts generally have not been made. However, some success has been demonstrated by taking a contextual interference approach (Battig, 1972, Shea and Morgan, 1979). For example, research has shown that combining spatial skills training with Tetris training improves spatial skill performance better than combining spatial skill training with a non-spatial game (Terlecki, Newcombe, & Little, 2008). This suggests that transferable spatial skills can be developed when in-game practice with a skill is combined with practice of the same skill in a non-game context. The strongest and most well established effect of using computer games to train cognitive skills is the positive effect of playing first-person shooting games on perceptual attention skills (see Mayer, 2014 for a review). These results may be explained by the contextually dynamic nature of first-person shooters: first-person shooters require the player to practice their visual attention skills in an ever-changing context (Green and Bavelier, 2003, Green and Bavelier, 2006).
1.4. Declarative knowledge as a basis for transfer in skill learningDeclarative knowledge, such as memory for facts, concepts, or events, involves conscious awareness, whereas procedural knowledge (also called skill knowledge), does not require conscious remembering (Schacter and Tulving, 1994, Squire and Zola, 1996). In general, learned skills are assumed to be highly specific and bound to the context of training (Schacter and Tulving, 1994, Squire and Zola, 1996). Training designed to foster expert skilled performance, such as deliberate practice, leads to outcomes that are specific and automatic (Anderson, 1982, Ericsson and Kintsch, 1995). However, under certain training conditions, transfer can be demonstrated with both simple and complex skills (Singley & Anderson, 1989). Therefore, training must be adapted when the goal is to foster outcomes that are more flexible. Although researchers have been interested in how to train transferable skills for over a century, work is still emerging aimed at principles for training transferable skills (Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012).Skill learning is characterized by declarative guidance at early stages of learning, and increased automaticity at later stages of learning (Anderson, 1982, Fitts and Posner, 1967, Pellegrino and Hilton, 2012). One proposal for the facilitation of transfer in skill learning is to increase the amount of task-relevant declarative processing the learner performs during learning (Sun et al., 2001, Sun et al., 2005, van Merriënboer et al., 1992), in order to keep the learner in the declarative stage of skill acquisition longer (Hesketh, 1997). This approach to training sets the learner off in the right direction before implicit learning takes over (Sun, Merril, & Peterson, 2001) by taking advantage of the flexibility in interpreting rules afforded by early stages of skill acquisition (Ahlum-Heath & Di Vesta, 1986). This gives learners an opportunity to build a declarative knowledge base including rules and schemas that can be used as a basis for later transfer, allowing them to develop reflective expertise (van Merrienboer, Jelsma, & Paas, 1992). Declarative processing also allows the learner to develop metacognitive skills for self-assessment and dealing with errors (Hesketh, 1997). Metacognitive skills represent a form of conditional knowledge, in which learners know when and how to use their declarative and procedural knowledge. In summary of this position, Hesketh (1997) argued that “maximising the chance of developing transferable expertise… requires a lengthening of the time during skill acquisition when analytic processing is involved” (p. 321). This is the approach we take for the enhanced Tetris group training in the present study.Evidence suggesting that spending more time in the declarative stage of skill acquisition can facilitate transfer began with a seminal study by Charles Judd. Judd (1908) found that subjects who were given a lesson on light refraction improved more quickly on a task throwing darts at underwater targets than those who did not get the lesson. Modern experiments find similar results. For example, in a reaction time task, participants who developed explicit knowledge about the sequence of stimuli demonstrated better transfer than those who did not develop explicit knowledge (Willingham, Nissen, & Bullemer, 1989). A study using the Tower of Hanoi task and Katona card problem found that participants do not spontaneously focus on the process of finding a solution, but when they are forced to do so with explicit prompting to describe their problem-solving process, transfer effects are positive (Berardi-Coletta, Buyer, Dominowski, & Rellinger, 1995). Similarly, participants who verbalized while completing the 3-disk Tower of Hanoi task showed better transfer to the 6-disk Tower of Hanoi task, although the effect was eliminated if participants were first given practice without verbalization (Ahlum-Heath & Di Vesta, 1986). Participants completing a minefield navigation task in a dual task condition that suppressed verbalization showed worse transfer performance than participants in a single task condition (Sun, Merrill, & Peterson, 2001). Concurrent and post-task verbalization on concrete version of Wason selection task improved transfer to abstract version of task compared to no verbalization (Berry, 1983). Novice players demonstrated better transfer of a chess endgame when they gave self-explanations of errors during a learning phase (de Bruin, Rikers, Schmidt, 2007).
1.5. Training spatial skillsDo principles for training higher-level cognitive skills also apply to training lower-level cognitive skills, such as spatial skills? The idea that spatial skills can be trained in a transferable way is only recently established. While most work shows a high degree of specificity and limited room for transfer in spatial skill learning (National Research Council, 2006, Sims and Mayer, 2002), a recent meta-analysis concludes that spatial skills may be exceptionally malleable. Uttal et al. (2013) reviewed the effect of spatial training on transfer and found an overall effect size of g = 0.48. That effect size is remarkably substantial considering how elusive transfer effects typically are. While their review did not analyze which experimental factors moderated the transfer effect, the authors speculated that the effect size was large because studies that intend to measure transfer tend to use more heavy-handed manipulations (such as prolonged training regimens) in order to maximize the chances of an effect. Thus, while evidence suggests that spatial skills can be trained in a transferable way, specific theoretical guidelines for doing so have not been established.
1.6. Which cognitive skills are involved in playing TetrisTetris was selected for the current experiments because it is the most studied computer game (Mayer, 2014). While no formal cognitive task analysis of Tetris playing has been completed, connections between Tetris operations and cognitive operations can be proposed. Some cognitive skills that may be utilized during Tetris play are mental rotation (such as when a player needs to know how a piece will be configured when turned to a different orientation), spatial visualization (such as when a player needs to imagine how a piece will fit in with the existing board, what pieces are necessary to clear lines on a board, or what the board could look like several moves ahead), perceptual speed (such as when a player must rapidly scan the shape of each new falling piece and the shape of the ever-changing board configuration), useful field of view (such as noticing when a new shape has appeared, noticing the configuration of the board, and noticing the next shape in the line-up), and visuospatial working memory (such as imagining how an object will rotate while maintaining a mental representation of the configuration of the board).The game mechanics of Tetris allow a player to offload some mental effort through onscreen actions. For example, a player can offload the cognitive effort required by mental rotation by pressing a key on the keyboard to rotate the shape on the screen. Kirsh and Maglio (1994) use the term epistemic action to refer to onscreen rotations intended to reduce the need for mental operations. For example, a player may use rotations beyond what is necessary to get a piece into position. These moves can appear superfluous, but they serve a purpose by obviating effortful mental rotation processes. In contrast to epistemic actions are pragmatic actions, which are onscreen rotations meant to get players closer to their in-game goals. Tetris players can use a combination of mental rotation, epistemic onscreen rotations, and pragmatic onscreen rotations strategically during play. Players with greater skill in Tetris are more likely than lower-skilled players to use epistemic actions (Maglio & Kirsh, 1996). Advanced Tetris players may also use game mechanics to assist with some of the perceptual requirements of Tetris, such as rotating pieces as soon as they appear in order to help identify their shape (Kirsh and Maglio, 1994, Maglio and Kirsh, 1996). Thus, players may develop techniques while playing Tetris that minimize the need to engage in spatial skills such as mental rotation.
