Students who are blind compensate for visual loss using perceptual information obtained through the haptic, auditory, and olfactory senses (Bishop, 2004). Despite the “developmental lag” that people who are blind experience (Warren, 1994), they process most cognitive information much as do people with sight. Differences between students who are blind or sighted occur in the modes of information collection, but in the cognitive structures and operations processes, the dissimilarities fade (Hollins, 2000). For the past 80 years, K–12 students who are blind have been integrated in general education schools with their sighted peers and are required to complete the same curriculum and examinations. One of the main objectives of integrating students who are blind is to provide them the same opportunities and educational experiences as those provided for sighted children (Mani, 1998). The science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) curricula rely heavily on visual imagery in tables, plots, graphs, diagrams, charts, and models and in exploration in science laboratories (Beck-Winchatz & Riccobono, 2008). Without vision, students who are blind are left to gather information through a compensatory channel such as the auditory or tactile sense, placing them at an immediate disadvantage. Equal access to STEM learning materials can enable the majority of students who are blind to accomplish STEM-related tasks on par with their peers with sight (Klingenberg, Fosse, & Augestad, 2012). To date, few guides have been written on how to teach science to students who are blind (Kumar, Ramasamy, & Stefanich, 2001), and, unfortunately, research into the application of these techniques and their impact on learning is sparse. To integrate students who are blind in science classrooms and laboratories, researchers have suggested reforms such as providing accessible learning materials in braille, audio, large print; tactile diagrams and graphs; specific instructions; and using real objects for hands-on learning experiences (American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), 1991; De Oliveira, Nascimento, & Bianconi, 2017; Dick & Kubiak, 1997; Toenders, de Putter-Smits, Sanders, & den Brok, 2017a). Moreover, teachers devote a considerable amount of time developing accessible learning materials and teaching one-on-one during regular classroom activity (Toenders, de Putter-Smits, Sanders, & den Brok, 2017b).
1.1. Assistive technology for people who are blindAssistive technology in education for students who are blind plays a valuable role in enabling them to be independent and in enhancing their literacy, learning, and social skills (Taylor, 2016). Furthermore, assistive technologies provide an equal opportunity to participate in learning environments with peers with sight (Douglas, 2001). These technologies are based on tactile resources, large print, or audio. Auditory tools compensating for lack of visual information include screen readers and sonification, the presentation of information using nonspeech sound (Kramer, 1994). Although screen readers provide quality access to text materials, students who are blind face greater obstacles in using the technology. STEM materials are especially challenging because of their unique symbols, characters, and nonlinear writing style (Nees & Berry, 2013; Power & Jürgensen, 2010). Assistive devices and software have also been developed to support STEM education for students who are blind, for example, Talking Tactile Tablets (Landau, Russell, Erin, & Gourgey, 2003), based on audio and 2D tactile images for learning mathematics and science diagrams. In their overview research, Scalise et al. (2018), in addition to implementing the universal design learning (UDL) methodology (CAST, 2011), accommodated future development of digital interactive STEM simulations to ensure accessibility for STEM assessments. Jones et al. (2014) developed a haptic simulation that allows elementary and secondary students who are blind to learn about particle motion, temperature, and pressure; students can feel particle movement as it varies with different temperature and pressure settings. Line Graphs technology is based on auditory and haptic feedback and is geared to learning mathematics (Ramloll, Brewster, & Burton, 2000); the force-feedback mouse for physics study is another tool (Farrell, Baldyga, & Erlandson, 2001, chap. 21, pp. 308–309). One of the first sonification system developments for people who are blind was the vOICe project (Meijer, 1992). Many researchers have followed up on Meijer's work. Amedi, Raz, Pianka, Malach, and Zohary (2003) studied various perception topics, including memory. Binev et al. (2018) developed the NavMol, which auditorily describes the molecular structures and enables students who are blind to use a molecular editor for metabolic reactions. Leuders (2016), in her research on mathematics learning by children who are blind, concluded that auditory perception is the most suitable sensory channel for the processing of temporal information.
1.2. Understanding complex systemsComplex systems are made up of many elements that interact among themselves, self-organizing in coherent global patterns (Bar-Yam, 1997). In the past three decades, the field of complex systems has developed enormously, contributing to our understanding of a wide range of systemic phenomena (Barabasi & Bonabeau, 2003). It has provided a framework for representing and comprehending the structure and dynamics of systems, focusing on generating global patterns from local behaviors and interactions. The framework's wide applicability presents a powerful paradigm for interpreting systems. Goldstone and Wilensky (2008) argue that learning about complex systems cases is pedagogically valuable because it helps students in (a) organizing science phenomena according to complex systems principles, bestowing on students the benefits of new, rich perspectives; (b) bridging explanations on two levels (explaining large-scale, macrolevel phenomena in terms of local, microlevel events); (c) grounding for formalisms; and (d) cross-fertilizing between sciences as a result of the use of common principles across cases. Complex systems challenge our understanding, as several biases sway people's reasoning: confusion among levels (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999), a focus on the system's structure at the expense of function and mechanism (Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004), and a tendency to view causal relations as a consecutive chain of causes and effects rather than as parallel concurrent interactions (Chi, 2005). These difficulties point to the importance of educational support in making sense of systems. Several innovative learning environments have been designed to help people overcome these biases and understand complex systems; these include constructing and exploring computer models (Levy & Wilensky, 2009a, 2009b; Wilensky & Resnick, 1999) and participating in role-playing simulations (Klopfer, Yoon, & Perry, 2005). Agent-based modeling is a computational modeling paradigm that simulates complex dynamic systems by simulating each of their many autonomous and interacting elements. NetLogo (Wilensky, 1997) enables construction of models of complex systems by programming and running the rules of numerous entities. The NetLogo modeling platform was used to create a computer model (Levy & Wilensky, 2004) based on previous research on learning about complex systems using models with students with sight (Levy & Wilensky, 2009a, 2009b).In chemistry education, one of the central frameworks presented by Johnstone (1993) is that a well-developed understanding of a chemical system needs to relate three forms of description that map nicely onto a complexity perspective: the submicroscopic level, the macroscopic level, and representations. Learning about the particulate nature of matter is one of the main learning topics in chemistry in the seventh grade. In the last two decades, studies have demonstrated students' difficulties in consistently understanding and internalizing the particulate nature of matter model; a large percentage continue to harbor misconceptions in this topic (Chiu, 2007; Linn & Eylon, 2011; Novick & Nussbaum, 1978). Previous research describes several common difficulties in understanding chemical systems, particularly with respect to the topic of gases (Ben-Zvi, Eylon, & Silberstein, 1986); most high school students do not base their explanations upon a particulate view of matter and assign macrobehaviors to gas particles such as expansion and heating (Nussbaum, 1985); many view gas particles as being pushed down by atmospheric pressure and keeping away from heat (Lin & Cheng, 2000); some view gas as weightless (Mas & Perez, 1987); students also have difficulties incorporating the idea of random particle motion in a gas or liquid (Novick & Nussbaum, 1978). Of the 300 students Westbrook and Marek (1991) examined for understanding of the diffusion concept, none across three grade levels exhibited complete mastery. Samon and Levy (2011) studied junior high school students' learning of chemical systems with an agent-based versus a textbook approach. Their results showed that students scored higher after learning with agent-based models, particularly when micro- and macrolevel behaviors were distinct.
1.3. The current studyAs noted, most STEM curriculum materials are not accessible for students who are blind. In this research, we aim: (a) to improve our understanding of perception of sound streams and their transformation into conceptual thought through interactions with Listening-to-Complexity (L2C) systems, (b) to examine the learning processes based on the L2C activities, and (c) to explore the STEM learning of learners who are blind and to compare the learning between those who learned through a curriculum-based textbook to that of those who learned through an identical curriculum with added interactions based on the NetLogo L2C activities. In the current research, we followed the AAAS (1991) and others (Kumar et al., 2001) who suggested reforms in developing curricula for students who are blind. The curriculum we used for this research is Chapter 1 of the Connected Chemistry curriculum (CC1) for learning Kinetic Molecular Theory (KMT) of gas in chemistry (Levy, Novak, & Wilensky, 2006), which was developed for sighted students. To make CC1 accessible to students who are blind, it has been altered using UDL methodology (CAST, 2011). For example, we described images and tables; included specific instructions; created tactile diagrams, graphs, and images; and produced the material in braille and audio file. In accordance with the recommendation of Supalo, Humphrey, Mallouk, Wohlers, and Carlsen (2016) to use technology to increase students' hands-on learning experiences, we included the L2C computer model inquiry activities that allow participants to explore computer models of complex systems and to study systems reasoning through a complexity perspective. These activities are based on the NetLogo system; the L2C models are based on the transmittal of visual information of dynamic and complex systems, providing perceptual compensation by harnessing auditory feedback. Use of sonification output reaps the benefits of auditory properties: (a) it transmits information that changes both in space and time, like the visual modality; (b) the auditory modality easily interfaces with large bandwidths at fine frequency-discrimination and intensity-discrimination thresholds (Capelle, Trullemans, Arno, & Veraart, 1998); (c) the auditory modality is able to deal with rapidly changing sound patterns (Hirsh, 1988). This is the first study in which participants have been able to access dynamic rather than static information in exploratory science learning that is happening in real time; each time they run the model with the same variables a new scenario is represented. The study examines four research questions:1.What level of scientific knowledge had the participants in each experimental group achieved as shown in the pretest?2.How did both experimental groups perform in their learning tasks with and without L2C activities?3.What level of scientific knowledge did the participants in each experimental group achieve as demonstrated in the comparison between the pretest and posttest results?4.How does the learner model compare in both experimental groups in terms of accuracy of responses in the pretest, posttest, and learning activities?
