Over the last decade, technology and interactive social media have proliferated and become pervasive aspects of daily life (Valkenburg & Peter, 2013). Presently individuals are exposed to an unprecedented amount of media content, and this media content can be accessed across a variety of platforms including televisions, computers, cell phones, video games and newer types of interactive social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Children and teenagers are particularly heavy media users (Rideout, Foehr, & Roberts, 2010). A report by the Kaiser Foundation based on data collected in 2009, for example, indicates that using media is the leading waking activity among children and teenagers; adolescents spend about 8 hours a day using media, and when accounting for media multitasking, they are exposed to an average of 11 hours of media content each day (Rideout et al., 2010, Strasburger et al., 2010). Consequently, there has been growing concern regarding the effects of technology and interactive social media use on children's development, namely their school outcomes. This concern is largely based on the displacement hypothesis, which posits that youth's high levels of media use may displace time spent in more productive educational activities such as doing homework and engaging in cognitively stimulating learning activities (Anderson et al., 2001, Sharif and Sargent, 2006, Wiecha et al., 2001). To date, most of the research in this area focuses on how only one or two technology and interactive social media types relate to young adolescents' academic outcomes giving an incomplete picture of how the current technological landscape relates to student outcomes. In addition, studies that have examined a wider range of technology and interactive social media rarely examine young adolescents' use in conjunction with a comprehensive set of individual and contextual factors. Given that individuals are embedded within multiple contexts and an individual's outcomes are due to a confluence of individual characteristics and factors within their environmental milieu (Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 1998), it is important to examine these associations with a comprehensive set of individual and contextual factors to help clarify the associations between technology and interactive social media use and academic outcomes.
1.1. Traditional media and academic outcomes1.1.1. TelevisionTo date, most of the research on media use and academic outcomes focuses on traditional types of media platforms such as, television, computers, and video games. Study findings indicate that children and adolescents who watch high amounts of television, in the short term, generally spend less time engaged in cognitively stimulating activities such as reading and doing homework, and in the long term, tend to have lower grades and lower levels of educational attainment in early adulthood (Anderson et al., 2001, Hancox et al., 2005, Sharif et al., 2010, Wiecha et al., 2001). For example, young adolescents who watch three or more hours per day of television are twice as likely not to have a college degree in comparison to their counterparts who watch less than an hour of television per day (Johnson, Cohen, Kasen, & Brook, 2007).Few studies on television viewing, however, distinguish between time spent watching television on the weekend versus weekdays, which may have differential associations with students' school-related outcomes. Based on displacement theory, weekday (i.e., school-night) television watching could displace time spent doing homework and relate negatively to grades in school, although weekend (i.e., non-school night) television watching would be less likely to do so. Indeed, a longitudinal study of 10th graders found that watching television on the weekday predicted lower math achievement for students in 12th grade (Dumais, 2008), and a cross-sectional study of middle school (5th-8th) students found that weekday—but not weekend—television watching was related to lower school performance (Sharif & Sargent, 2006). Both of these studies highlight the importance of differentiating when television was watched to get a better understanding of how it relates to students’ academic performance.1.1.2. ComputersIn contrast to television, the research on computers and adolescents' academic outcomes suggests overall positive associations. In a nationally-representative sample of 12–16 year olds, for example, Fairlie, Beltran, and Das (2010) found that having a computer at home was positively related to students' achievement over time even after controlling for individual- and family-level characteristics. This pattern was echoed by a cross-sectional study of 13-year-olds in the U.S. and in Japan indicating a positive association between computer use at home and at school and science achievement (House, 2010). These findings are not surprising given that computers are often used to facilitate completing school work (Jackson et al., 2006, Subrahmanyam et al., 2001). Moreover, unlike watching television, using computers generally requires input from the user and thus provides more opportunities for improving academic skills. Indeed, there is some evidence from cross-sectional studies on young children and longitudinal studies on adolescents to suggest that tasks performed on the computer may have spillover effects and can improve students’ reading and problem solving skills (Jackson et al., 2006, Judge, 2005, Li and Atkins, 2004). These findings, however, are based on data from about a decade ago and it is unclear whether the association between computer use and school outcomes has remained consistent given the rapid changes in technology.A longitudinal study of two cohorts by Dumais (2008), for example, found that computer use was related to higher math achievement for 10th graders in the 1990s but was unrelated to the achievement for 10th graders in the 2000s, even after controlling for sociodemographic factors (e.g., child gender, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status). Thus, these findings indicate the importance of investigating the associations of computer use with school outcomes using contemporary data.1.1.3. Video gamesThe evidence regarding the effects of video games on students' academic outcomes are mixed as well. Overall, studies suggest that playing video games can enhance cognitive skills, including visual spatial ability and problem solving skills, of students across a wide range of ages (for a review, see Subrahmanyam et al., 2001). However, more recent studies focused primarily on high school students suggest that playing video games is negatively associated with grades and test scores (Dumais, 2008, Jaruratanasirikul et al., 2009). The increases in media use during early and mid-adolescence (11–14 year olds) from childhood are due largely to increased time spent watching television and playing video games (Rideout et al., 2010), so it is particularly important to document the extent to which these activities relate to adolescents’ school-related outcomes.1.1.4. Interactive social mediaMost of the research that examines the association between interactive social media and academic outcomes are based on college students, and study results demonstrate inconsistent associations with academic-related outcomes. Studies that have investigated cell phone use, texting, and instant messaging among college students indicate that talking on the phone and messaging are negatively correlated with homework completion and GPA (Fox et al., 2009, Harman and Sato, 2011, Jacobsen and Forste, 2011, Junco and Cotten, 2011). Similarly, more frequent use of social media, such as Facebook, by college students is associated with less studying and lower GPAs (Al-Menayes, 2015, Kirschner and Karpinski, 2010). In other work, use of interactive social media is unrelated to GPA or cognitive engagement in school work for college students (Pasek et al., 2009, Turner and Croucher, 2014).A review of extant literature concludes that few studies have examined the association between use of interactive social media (e.g., social networking sites) and young adolescents' outcomes (Best, Manktelow, & Taylor, 2014), with even fewer focused on academic outcomes. An ethnographic study of high school and college students suggests a positive association between use of social networking websites and adolescents’ school-related outcomes; that is, social networking websites may support student learning because they provide a way for students to collaborate and work on projects together (Boyd, 2008). Understanding the extent to which the use of interactive social media relates to the academic outcomes of adolescents not yet in college is important to examine given the limited empirical research on this age group using contemporary data.
1.2. Age differencesTo date, most of the research on television and video games has focused on young children, while the majority of studies on interactive social media focus on college students. The limited research on the effects of technology and interactive social media for adolescents is of concern given that the early teen years (ages 11–14) marks a considerable increase in their media use (Rideout et al., 2010). Moreover, the associations between media use and school outcomes in the transition from middle school to high school may be particularly important to understand because this marks the time when social media platforms allow youth (at age 13) to create their own accounts, and when academic performance has implications for their future academic trajectory (Pike & Saupe, 2002). Thus, it is likely that younger adolescents will spend more time with television and videogames and less time with interactive social media than older adolescents because of the age restrictions regarding use on social media platforms. In addition, many of the studies investigating the link between technology and media use and academic outcomes are based on either unrepresentative convenience samples of college students or young children, and generally only examine one or two types of technology or media platforms. Studies that have examined the relationship between multiple types of technology and interactive social media and youth outcomes, on the other hand, often aggregate associations across a wide range of ages and/or do not include a comprehensive set of covariates that may confound study results (Schmidt & Vandewater, 2008). The literature is not clear on whether the association between use of various types of technology and interactive social media and academic outcomes varies by age among adolescents.
1.3. Gender and race/ethnicity differencesPrior literature also suggests differential use of technology and interactive social media by gender and race/ethnicity. Although there are typically no gender differences in the amount of time that adolescents spend watching television in nationally-representative studies (Hofferth, 2010, Rideout et al., 2010), there is evidence demonstrating that females spend more time than males talking and texting on the cell phone and interacting on social networks (Lenhart, 2015, Rideout et al., 2010). Males, on the other hand, generally spend more time than females playing video games. Additionally, there is evidence indicating that adolescent males spend more time on the computer for recreational purposes, while adolescent females spend more time on the computer for school (Hunley et al., 2005, Rideout et al., 2010). Whether these patterns remain consistent in contemporary national data is not clear.The patterns of technology and interactive social media use across race/ethnicities are more consistent. Black and Hispanic youth spend more time than White youth watching television, using computers recreationally, talking and texting on the phone, and using social media (Rideout et al., 2010). Important to note is that although Black and Hispanic youth generally spend more time with technology and interactive social media, a smaller proportion of Black and Hispanic youth have access to computers compared to White youth (Rideout et al., 2010). Finally, prior studies have focused on the technology and interactive social media use of White, Black, and Hispanic youth. Little is known about Asian American youth's use of technology and interactive social media at a national level and how their use compares to other race/ethnic groups in the United States.Although several studies have examined gender and racial/ethnic group differences in use of technology and interactive social media, fewer studies have examined whether the relationship between media use and academic outcomes is moderated by these factors. One study that examined gender as a moderator found that messaging and socializing online in 8th grade predicted lower test scores one year later for adolescent females, but not for males. In contrast, online gaming predicted lower test scores one year later for adolescent males but not for adolescent females (Chen & Fu, 2009). A study by Hofferth (2010) using longitudinal national data found that both gender and race/ethnicity moderated the relationship between computer use and achievement for children aged 6–12. Specifically, increases in the amount of time using the computer for school work predicted higher reading achievement for Black males and higher math achievement for White females, but was unrelated to the achievement of White males and Black females. Additionally, increases in time spent playing video games predicted lower reading achievement among White females and math achievement among Black females, but did not significantly predict achievement for Black or White males. These nuances are important to examine, but to date, there is limited work using contemporary national data to examine whether age, gender, and race/ethnicity moderates the relationship between various types of technology and interactive social media and academic outcomes among adolescents.
1.4. Other related factorsAdditional factors that may influence adolescents' academic outcomes include family socioeconomic background, school engagement, and substance use. For example, there is a strong body of literature demonstrating differences in student achievement by parent education (e.g., Davis-Kean, 2005, Magnuson, 2007, Tang et al., 2016). School engagement (e.g., enjoyment of school, participation in extracurricular activities) is associated with higher grades and motivation to do well in school (Eccles et al., 2003, Samdal et al., 1999). In contrast, substance use is negatively associated with adolescents' academic outcomes (Bachman et al., 2008). Although these factors are not of primary interest in the present study, they are important to include in the model to control for potential bias and confounding in the association of interest between technology and interactive social media use and adolescents’ school-related outcomes.
