The world famous inventor Nikola Tesla, besides his mainstream inventions in the field of electro techniques, also created Fountain in original design solution and materials [1]. The project “Computer Simulation and 3-D Modelling of the Original Patents of Nikola Tesla” in cooperation with “Nikola Tesla Museum” of Belgrade, which represents an institution of national importance, has started in 2009 [2]. Basically, the main purpose of the project is to digitalize, visualize and reconstruct (in real models) the original legacy of the Museum. The part of this paper is based on research within the project entitled “Computer Simulation and Modelling of the Original Patents of Nikola Tesla” and approved by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia.The first Tesla's patent that was under our attention was Tesla’s Fountain patented as Tesla’s Fountain, no. 1,113,716, US patent office, granted Oct,13,1914 (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (415KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Original Tesla’s Fountain patent.
We were working intensively to produce 300.000 particle 3D model of Tesla’s Fountain (Fig. 3.) [1]. The application that were used are 3ds Max, Adobe Photoshop, RealFlow, V-Ray, Microsoft Visual Studio C++. Then, we used different tools to generate digital model of Tesla's fountain in various configurations and environments. To comply this complex plan, there has been cooperation among the authors and professional experts from Museum. We used original construction schema from Museum (Fig. 2.) to generate first 3D model of Tesla’s Fountain.Download : Download high-res image (218KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Tesla-Tiffani original Fountain construction (Museum of Nikola Tesla Heritage).Download : Download high-res image (214KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Color filters at tho top of Tesla’s fountain (detail).
The original construction predicts the solid materials for basic structure (metal). The main idea in patent is to use just one induction motor to generate water flow (from down to up) and to run the complex light control mechanism using the mechanical redactors (Fig. 2).
The Tesla Fountain in ceramics has many benefits for research of the inner structure as well as artistic and visual ones. After the initial structure modelling we concentrate on a problem of light control. In his original patent (Fig. 1) Tesla used multi color filters to generate interesting color effects in Fountain water flow. We implemented this original idea in our model (Fig. 3):
To run this color filter system on the top on the Fountain, Tesla predicted complex mechanical system with differentials, similar to clock mechanism. This unit reduces the high rotational speed of main induction motor which also runs the water pump on the same axis (Fig. 1). Our model follows this part of the original construction also (Fig. 4.).Download : Download high-res image (90KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. The complete model of Tesla fountain in solid material.
As to the authors known the first Tesla’s experiments have been done in materials like metal, bronze-metal and also in some phases. This is the first time, that the authors applied ceramic materials technologies in combination of casting and sintering. The basic knowledge and results in this technology are very well known but also here is presented quite new application.
When the Tesla as an inventor, used basic metal materials science for his patent, the ceramic materials properties had still been developing. If ceramics solution was implemented, It would be easier to consolidate the samples, and they would be much lighter, very firm and stable in construction, with possible controlled porosity, than in the case of the metal technology implementation. Regarding atmospheric corrosion, and other environmental conditions, ceramics have advantages in comparison with metal applications. Also, ceramics have much better thermal characteristics than metal considering the outdoor physical- chemical impacts on the fountain. Also the ceramics materials described in the patent feature one very important characteristic such as the surface layer, which allows the material to be resistant to environmental effects. It is very flexible for modeling, especially using contemporary software technologies. Eventually, the ceramics technology is much cheaper than the metal technology. The ceramic designing is more flexible and more likely to result in a more attractive final shape.
