Computer models are widely used to help study the behaviour of energy systems and to make decisions about these systems (e.g. see [1] and [2]). Computer models generally combine a set of uncertain input assumptions with an approximation of some part of an energy system to give some output of interest. Decision-makers need confidence that decisions made on the basis of this model output will be robust in the real-world, rather than within the computer model. This distinction makes it critical to study the uncertainty in how the output of the computer model relates to the real energy system. Without assessing uncertainty in model output it is not possible to draw conclusions based on model output that relate to the real-world. Uncertainties that should be considered to make this link include: parametric uncertainty, which stems from lack of knowledge about which input parameters to use, and structural discrepancy, which relates to the imperfect approximation of the system. This paper presents methodology for quantifying uncertainty so that real-world decisions that are reliant on computer model output can be based on a more complete picture of the uncertainties associated with this output.
The computer model studied in this paper is a long-term model of the future Great Britain (GB) electricity supply. This model takes inputs such as projected future demand, future fossil fuel prices and the costs of future technology and uses these assumptions to model investment in generation and electricity supply in GB. Outputs from the model are wide ranging and include future wholesale electricity prices, future generation mix and emissions. In this paper one particular aspect of the modelling is studied, namely obtaining projections of wholesale electricity prices out to 2030. Uncertainty in these projections is of interest to policy-makers because of the impact that electricity prices have on other aspects of an energy system, such as on demand for electricity and on future investment (e.g. see [3]). In GB, wholesale electricity prices are particularly of interest because of political concerns about the effect of high electricity prices on domestic and industrial consumers [4].
The computer model estimates wholesale electricity prices by comparing daily load curves on sample days (net of wind generation, interconnection, storage and reserve requirements) to the generation merit order, accounting for increased prices above the marginal cost at times of short supply. This merit order is estimated using assumptions about the short term costs for each plant in the system. The future projections depend on a large number of uncertain model inputs. Four of these are focused on: gas prices, demand, European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) price and offshore wind deployment. These inputs were selected after discussion with model developers as being inputs which may have a large impact on wholesale electricity prices, as well as being associated with a high level of uncertainty. Confidentiality issues prevent further details about the model being discussed here but this does not affect the validity of this study, which focuses on the assessment of uncertainty in model outputs, and not on technical modelling details.
When assessing uncertainty for wholesale electricity price projections, one consideration is the extent to which uncertainty in the four selected input assumptions affects the wholesale price projections. An assessment of the overall uncertainty in wholesale price projections due to input uncertainty as well as the effect that individual inputs have on the wholesale price projections will be made. However, even if the true values of the four input assumptions were known and the model was run at these values, there would still likely be some error, or structural discrepancy, in the price projections. A further aspect of this study therefore considers the quantification of this structural discrepancy. In particular, two possible sources of structural discrepancy are considered. The first is the use of a smoothed time-series of future gas prices as an input to the model, when in reality gas prices are volatile. The second is the effect that uncertainty associated with future coal prices (which are held as a fixed time series in this study) has on the wholesale price projections.
A major practical difficulty associated with the study of uncertainty in computer models is that these models can take a long time to run. The model studied in this paper takes around one hour to perform one model evaluation. Traditional Monte Carlo (MC) simulation involves drawing many inputs from a probability distribution (used to represent uncertainty in these inputs) and running the computer model at every input drawn. When models are slow to evaluate, this process is infeasible because it is not possible to run the model at enough inputs to get a complete picture of uncertainty over the input space. To resolve this difficulty, a statistical model (known as an emulator) is fitted to a small number of model evaluations. A computer model can be thought of as a function f(⋅), taking some vector of inputs x and returning some vector of outputs f(x). An emulator specifies the uncertainty in f(x) for any input x. Thus, even for inputs that have not been run, an approximation of the model output at that input (given by the mean of the emulator) and the error in this approximation (given by the standard deviation of the emulator) can be obtained. Emulation makes it possible to assess uncertainty when the number of model evaluations is limited, whilst also quantifying the additional uncertainty arising from this sparse coverage of the input space.
This paper uses emulation and a model for structural discrepancy to assess uncertainty in projections of the wholesale electricity price obtained using a computer model. The steps taken are applicable to a wide range of applied problems in energy systems modelling. Any modelling study which uses a slow-to-run computer model to obtain results and has uncertain inputs and/or structural discrepancy could benefit from the methodology described here. This paper focuses on a model that is used to obtain long-term projections. Examples of similar computer modelling studies that could benefit from the methodology include those associated with the TIMES/MARKAL family, PRIMES and ESME (see [2] for a summary of the major UK energy models).
Emulation has previously been used to assess uncertainty in the output of energy system models in [5] and [6]. This paper extends [5] and [6] with three key contributions. The first is that Bayes linear methods are used to fit the emulator. As with a conventional Bayesian analysis, Bayes linear methods have the advantage that expert judgement can be incorporated when fitting the emulator, but Bayes linear fitting uses only linear algebra rather than time-consuming Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). The second contribution is that computer model experimentation is used to assess structural discrepancy. Using experimentation as demonstrated in this paper is particularly useful in the absence of historical data, or where historical data are not thought to be representative of the future behaviour of a system. More details on these two points are given in Section 2. The third contribution is that emulation is demonstrated on a real-world policy problem, that of assessing uncertainty in projections of wholesale electricity prices.
The structure of the rest of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 existing methods for assessing uncertainty in energy models are reviewed. In Section 3, the process for the selection of model evaluations to run is described. In Section 4, an emulator is fitted to these model evaluations. In Section 5, results from the study on structural discrepancy are given. Finally, in Section 6, the emulator in combination with uncertainty specifications for structural discrepancy and parametric uncertainty is used to study uncertainty in wholesale electricity price projections.
