English has been widely used as the medium of instruction in academic courses at tertiary levels—in face-to-face, distance learning, and online contexts—in both English speaking and non-English speaking countries. Second language (L2) learners in these courses have to comprehend not only reading materials such as textbooks and research articles but also lectures, seminars, labs, and tutorials (Biber, 2006). Because vocabulary knowledge and comprehension are closely related (Laufer and Ravenhorst-Kalovski, 2010, Schmitt et al., 2011, van Zeeland and Schmitt, 2013), it is essential for learners to master the words that they are likely to encounter often in a wide range of academic written and spoken texts. A large number of wordlists have been developed to assist L2 learners' comprehension of academic writing (e.g., Coxhead, 2000, Coxhead and Hirsh, 2007, Gardner and Davies, 2014, Liu and Han, 2015, Martínez et al., 2009, Watson-Todd, 2017, Wang et al., 2008). Yet little has been done to help these learners comprehend academic speech. In fact, understanding academic spoken English is a great challenge for L2 learners in different contexts (Flowerdew and Miller, 1992, Mulligan and Kirkpatrick, 2000). Given this fact, it is crucial to create wordlists that capture the most frequent and wide-ranging words in academic speech. Together with written wordlists, these spoken wordlists are valuable resources for English for Academic Purposes (EAP) programs to support L2 learners' comprehension of academic English.
Depending on the target subject areas of their learners, EAP programs can be divided into two types: English for Specific Academic Purposes (ESAP) and English for General Academic Purposes (EGAP).1 Learners in ESAP programs are fairly homogeneous in terms of target subject areas. That is, they all plan to study hard-science subjects (e.g., Mathematics, Physics, Engineering or Medicine) or soft-science subjects (e.g., Linguistics, Law, Business, or Education). The hard/soft division refers to the existence of a paradigm, or ‘a body of theory which is subscribed to by all members of the field’ (Biglan, 1973b, p. 201). Earlier research on students' learning strategies and scholars' behavior and opinions about various aspects of academic disciplines (e.g., teaching, learning, research styles) (e.g., Becher, 1989, Biglan, 1973a, Biglan, 1973b, Neumann et al., 2002) has indicated that the hard/soft division is the strongest dimension2 that distinguishes academic subjects in higher education. Hard-sciences (e.g., Mathematics, Engineering) are likely to have a single paradigm that allows scholars working in these areas to reach a wide consensus on research methods and key concepts. In contrast, soft-sciences (e.g., Law, Philosophy) are likely to lack a single paradigm, and scholars working in these areas seem to argue over methods and key concepts. While the hard/soft division cannot fully reflect the complexity and variation in inquiry processes and knowledge structures in various disciplines (Becher and Trowler, 2001, Nesi, 2002, pp. 351–358), this division is a useful shorthand when attempting to explain the complexity and diversity of academic discourse.
Learners in EGAP programs, however, are more heterogeneous in terms of their target disciplines. In other words, there is a mixture of hard-science and soft-science students in these programs. EGAP programs can also be the programs where (a) learners have not yet identified their target subject areas, (b) learners plan to study interdisciplinary subject areas, (c) or teachers lack background knowledge of learners' specific subject areas.
According to Hyland (2016), general and specific EAP approaches should be considered as a continuum rather than a dichotomy. Depending on the teaching and learning context of a particular EAP program, either a general academic wordlist or a discipline-specific wordlist is more suitable than the other (Dang, Coxhead, & Webb, 2017). A general academic wordlist is more relevant to EGAP programs. The diversity in learners' academic subject areas may make it challenging for teachers in these programs to satisfy the specific needs of every learner. Meanwhile, a discipline-specific wordlist is more suitable for ESAP programs. As specialized vocabulary tends to occur more often in specialized texts (Chung & Nation, 2004), discipline-specific wordlists focus learners' attention on items that occur very often in their specific areas and provide a shortcut to reduce the amount of learning (Nation, 2013). Learners are more motivated to learn items from discipline-specific wordlists because they can see clearly the link between what they learn in their ESAP course and their subject courses (Coxhead and Hirsh, 2007, Hyland, 2016). Additionally, the similarities between learners' academic disciplines may make it easier for teachers to focus on specialized vocabulary in a particular discipline.
Several general academic spoken wordlists have been developed for EGAP programs such as Nesi's (2002) Spoken Academic Word List, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis's (2010) Academic Formulas List, and Dang et al.'s (2017) Academic Spoken Word List. As a result, we have a fairly good understanding about the shared spoken vocabulary across hard- and soft-sciences. In contrast, only one spoken discipline-specific wordlist has been developed for ESAP programs, and it focuses on spoken vocabulary in hard-sciences: Dang's (2018) Hard Science Spoken Word List (HSWL). No attempts have been made to identify the most frequent and wide-ranging words in soft-science speech. The lack of such a list makes it challenging to compare the vocabulary in academic speech of the hard- and soft-sciences.
The present study was conducted with two aims. The first aim was to develop a Soft Science Spoken Word List (SSWL) for ESAP programs which consist of solely soft-science students. The second aim was to compare this list with Dang's (2018) HSWL to see the similarities and differences between the most frequent and wide-ranging words in hard disciplines and soft disciplines. The research thus provides soft-science students in ESAP programs with a useful instrument to achieve better comprehension of academic speech, and sheds light on the nature of vocabulary in hard- and soft-science speech.
1.1. BackgroundStudies that investigated the nature of vocabulary in spoken texts of hard- and soft-sciences either examined the vocabulary load of the two disciplines or focused on the shared vocabulary between these disciplines. Vocabulary load studies (Coxhead et al., 2017, Dang and Webb, 2014) determined the number of words required to understand academic speech. They looked at the lexical coverage of different 1,000-word frequency levels of general vocabulary in academic speech and estimated the number of words needed to reach 95% and 98% coverage of these texts. Lexical coverage is the percentage of words covered by items from a particular wordlist in a text (Nation & Waring, 1997). The 95% and 98% figures have been widely used as the coverage cut-off points to indicate high and stable degrees of comprehension (van Zeeland & Schmitt, 2013).Dang and Webb (2014) examined the vocabulary load of lectures and seminars of the hard- and soft-sciences represented in the British Academic Spoken English Corpus (BASE). They found that a vocabulary size of 3,000–4,000 word families is needed to reach 95% coverage of soft-science speech while a vocabulary size of 5,000–7,000 word families is necessary to achieve 98% coverage. These coverage figures are lower than those needed to reach 95% coverage (4,000–5,000 word families) and 98% coverage (10,000–13,000 word families) of hard-science speech. A similar pattern was reported by Coxhead et al. (2017) when investigating the vocabulary load of university tutorials (a distinctive speech event of soft-sciences) and labs (a distinctive speech events of hard-sciences). A vocabulary size of 2,000 word families and 4,000 word families was necessary to reach nearly 95% and 98% coverage of tutorials, respectively. These vocabulary sizes are much smaller than those needed to reach 95% coverage (3,000 word families) and 98% coverage (7,000 word families) of labs. Together, Dang and Webb's (2014) and Coxhead et al.'s (2017) findings indicate that comprehending soft-science speech is less demanding than comprehending hard-science speech in terms of lexical coverage. However, the corpora used in these studies were fairly small (137,000 to 400,000 words) and only presented a limited number of speech events: lectures and seminars (Dang & Webb, 2014) or labs and tutorials (Coxhead et al., 2017). Importantly, they examined the occurrences of words at different frequency levels of general vocabulary in specialized texts. EAP/ESP research examining various kinds of academic and general discourse from different perspectives such as phraseology, terminology, and grammatical structures (e.g, Biber, 2006, Biber et al., 2004, Cabré, 1999, Csomay, 2006, Hyland, 2000, Resche, 2012) has indicated that the linguistic features vary according to discourse types. Therefore, a comparison of the most frequent and wide-ranging words in spoken texts of hard- and soft-sciences may provide a better insight into the nature of vocabulary in hard and soft disciplines.In recognition of this need, several studies have been conducted to identify the most frequent and wide-ranging lexical items in spoken texts of hard- and soft-sciences. Three studies have investigated multi-word units in academic speech. Biber et al. (2004) analyzed a 1.2-million word corpus of university classroom teaching from both hard- and soft-sciences. They then developed a list of 84 most frequent lexical bundles in the corpus (e.g., I mean you know, you need to know). Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) developed a spoken Academic Formulas List (AFL). The top 200 spoken AFL formulas (e.g., you know what I mean, how do you know) were selected from a 2.1-million word spoken corpus which represented academic speech from both hard- and soft-sciences. Coxhead et al. (2017) focused on labs and tutorials specifically and came up with lists of the most frequent sequences in each kind of speech event as well as those in tutorials and labs combined (e.g., do you know what, you don't know why). Lists of multi-word units have great value because knowledge of multi-word units is essential for fluency development (Nation and Webb, 2011, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010). Yet knowledge of single words is also important for learners to comprehend academic speech because it provides valuable support for the acquisition of multi-word items in the discourse. Specific phrasing of multi-word items may vary across different lists, but these items share a reasonable number of core single words (Coxhead et al., 2017, Shin and Nation, 2008). This pattern can be seen clearly from the above examples of Biber et al., 2004, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010 and Coxhead et al.'s (2017) lists. Hence, developing lists of single words is equally as important as developing lists of multi-word units. Given this fact, Nesi (2002, pp. 351–358) and Dang et al. (2017) developed lists of single words.Nesi's (2002) Spoken Academic Word List (SAWL) was created based on the common approach taken to develop academic written wordlists (e.g., Coxhead, 2000, Xue and Nation, 1984). According to this approach, general vocabulary is seen as a series of layers, each of which represents a 1,000-item frequency level. Words at the first 1,000-word level are the most frequent and wide ranging whereas items at the second 1,000-word level are less frequent and narrower ranging. Words at the first and second 1,000-word levels, or even the third 1,000-word level are general high-frequency words (Nation, 2013, Schmitt and Schmitt, 2014). Academic words are then defined as items that fall outside general high-frequency word levels, but have high frequency and wide range in academic texts. In other words, this approach assumes that learners have already mastered general high-frequency words, and, therefore, academic wordlists do not include general high-frequency words but only lower frequency words that have wide range and high frequency in academic texts. In the case of Nesi's (2002) list, the selected SAWL words were outside Nation's most frequent 2,000 word-families, occurred more than three times in each sub-corpus of the BASE, and had high frequency in the corpus. Unfortunately, no precise information is written about the development and validation of the SAWL, and this list is not available to access.Dang et al. (2017) Academic Spoken Word List consists of 1,741 word-families which were selected from an academic spoken corpus with four equally-sized sub-corpora: hard-pure (e.g., Mathematics, Physics), hard-applied (e.g., Medicine, Engineering), soft-pure (e.g., History, Philosophy), and soft-applied (e.g., Law, Business). Each sub-corpus represents six subject areas of around 500,000 running words. In other words, the whole corpus was derived from academic speech of 24 subject areas which made up a total of about 13 million running words. Unlike Nesi (2002, pp. 351–358) and Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010, Dang et al., 2017 made the best use of the two approaches towards developing general academic wordlists.Following Gardner and Davies, 2014, Dang et al., 2017 considered academic vocabulary as a separate kind of vocabulary that cuts across different 1,000-word levels of general vocabulary and created the ASWL from scratch. That is, they selected all word-families that met the following criteria: (1) appearing in all sub-corpora of the corpus and in at least 50% of the subject areas, (2) occurring at least 350 times in the whole corpus of 13 million words (i.e., 26.9 times per million words) and (3) having a Juilland and Chang-Rodrigues's (1964) dispersion (D) of at least 0.6. Creating the ASWL as an entirely new list avoids the limitations related to existing lists of general high-frequency vocabulary such as West's (1953) General Service List and directs learners' attention to the most frequent and wide-ranging words in academic spoken English. However, while Gardner and Davies only included items that have wider range and higher frequency in academic texts than non-academic texts in their Academic Vocabulary List, Dang et al.'s (2017) ASWL consists of items that have wide range and high frequency in academic texts regardless of the ratio between their frequency in academic texts and in non-academic texts. This approach then allows the inclusion of items that are common in both general and academic speech (e.g., investigate, think, issue).Following other earlier studies (e.g., Coxhead, 2000, Xue and Nation, 1984), Dang et al. (2017) considered academic vocabulary in relation to general vocabulary. Nevertheless, instead of setting a fixed benchmark for the number of general words that every learner should know before learning items from the ASWL, the list was divided into four levels based on Nation's (2012) BNC/COCA lists. Levels 1 to 3 represent ASWL words appearing at the first, second, and third 1,000 BNC/COCA-word levels, respectively. ASWL words at Level 4 are those outside the most frequent 3,000 BNC/COCA words. Depending on their current levels of general vocabulary, learners can skip certain levels of the ASWL. Dividing the list into levels makes it adaptable to learners' proficiency levels.The ASWL covered 90.13% of the whole corpus and around the same amount of coverage in each sub-corpus. When tested against a second academic spoken corpus of similar size and structure, the ASWL provided around 90% coverage. Moreover, its coverage in the academic spoken corpora was higher than the coverage in the academic written corpus and non-academic spoken corpus of a similar size. If proper nouns and marginal words are known, knowledge of the ASWL may enable learners to reach 92%–96% coverage of academic spoken English depending on their proficiency levels.It is important to note that Nesi, 2002, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010, and Dang et al.'s (2017) lists are general academic wordlists. By developing these lists, these researchers confirm the existence of a core vocabulary across hard- and soft-science speech. Yet, these general academic wordlists only represent the lexical items that have high frequency and wide range in both hard- and soft-sciences. Items that have high frequency and wide range in one discipline but do not have high frequency and wide range in the other are not included in these lists. Moreover, from the pedagogical perspective, while general academic wordlists are valuable resources for EGAP programs, wordlists developed specifically for hard-science students and for soft-science students are more useful for ESAP programs.To address this gap, Dang (2018) developed a HSWL from a 6.5 million word corpus which was solely made up of spoken texts from hard-sciences. This corpus had two equally-sized sub-corpora: hard-pure and hard-applied. Each sub-corpus consisted of six subject areas. Each subject area contained 500,000 words. Following Dang et al.'s (2017) approach, Dang (2018) created the HSWL from scratch by including in the list items that satisfied the range, frequency, and dispersion criteria. The range and frequency criteria were adopted from those used to select Dang et al.'s (2017) ASWL words. However, unlike Dang et al., 2017, Dang, 2018 used Gries's (2008) dispersion (DP) rather than Juilland and Chang-Rodríguez's (1964) dispersion (D) to measure dispersion, because DP is likely to be better at distinguishing well-dispersed and not well-dispersed items in a corpus with a large number of sub-sections (Biber, Reppen, Schnur, & Ghanem, 2016). In particular, to be included, an HSWL word-family had to have a DP of 0.6 or lower. There are 1,595 word-families satisfying these criteria. They accounted for 90.94% coverage of the hard-science spoken corpus and around the same amount of coverage in an independent hard-science spoken corpus of similar size and structure. These coverage figures are higher than those in the soft-science spoken corpus, hard-science written corpus, and non-academic spoken corpus of similar sizes. The HSWL has fewer items than Nation's (2012) most frequent 2,000 BNC/COCA word-families and Dang et al.'s (2017) ASWL, but provides higher coverage than these lists in the hard-science spoken corpora. Additionally, the HSWL consists of a larger proportion of words outside general high-frequency words (i.e., the most frequent 2,000 words, Nation, 2013) (28.15%) than the ASWL (26.13%). The range of frequency levels of these items is wider in the case of the HSWL (3rd–16th 1,000 word levels) than in the case of the ASWL (3rd–10th 1,000 word levels). These findings suggest that the HSWL better captures the most frequent and wide-ranging words in hard-science speech than a general academic wordlist like the ASWL. Given the lack of a wordlist that represents the most frequent and wide-ranging words in soft-science speech, it is important for further research to develop a soft-science spoken wordlist taking the same approach as the HSWL. Such research would provide soft-science students in ESAP programs with a useful resource to enhance their comprehension of academic speech as well as shed light on the similarities and differences between vocabulary in the speech of hard- and soft-sciences.
1.2. Research questions1.Which lexical items occur frequently and are evenly distributed in a wide range of academic speech in soft-sciences?2.With knowledge of these words, how much coverage of academic speech in soft-sciences may be reached by learners with different vocabulary levels?3.How do these items compare with those from Dang's (2018) Hard Science Spoken Word List (HSWL)?
