Most materials in real-world exhibit both specular reflection and diffuse reflection. The separation of reflection components is an important issue in computer graphics, computer vision, and image processing.
On one hand, the presence of specular highlights is a nuisance in many tasks, such as tracking, segmentation, visual recognition, photometric stereo, relighting, etc. Many algorithms in such applications assume perfect Lambertian reflection and consider specular highlights as outliers or noise. However, there are few materials in real-world exhibit ideal diffuse reflectance. In the presence of highlights, the appearance of a surface can vary significantly. Specular highlights may cover texture details, produce undesirable discontinuities on the surface from view to view. As a result, the robustness of such algorithms will be considerably reduced when specular reflection cannot be ignored.
On the other hand, specular reflectance can play a role in human perception and provide important cues for some algorithms. Drbohlav and Sára (2002) demonstrated that specularities reduce the ambiguity of uncalibrated photometric stereo. Osadchy et al. (2003) have shown how to use the highlights information to recognize challenging shiny transparent objects. Several works (Chen, Goesele, Seidel, 2006, Francken, Cuypers, Mertens, Gielis, Bekaert, 2008, Wang, Dana, 2006) found that fine-scale surface geometry can be reconstructed from specularities. Yu et al. (2008) discovered that the specularity distribution is a robust cue to identify recaptured images.
The specular highlight removal problem aims to separate an image into two intrinsic images (Barrow, Tenenbaum, 1978, Shafer, 1985): a diffuse image and a specular image. Such separation, however, is a highly ill-posed problem (Weiss, 2001) since the number of unknowns to recover is much larger than the given measurements. Over the years, researchers have tried in many different ways to tackle this problem. They developed many methods under various imaging conditions (e.g. linear radiometric response (Tan and Ikeuchi, 2005)), or using elaborate hardware (e.g. polarized filters (Umeyama and Godin, 2004), multi-flash system (Feris et al., 2004b)), which makes it difficult for these techniques to be used in many different cases.
In this paper, we demonstrate that the difficulty of highlight removal can be reduced when the surface geometry is known. Such idea was first appeared in Dellepiane et al. (2010) for high-quality imaging via flash-based photography. Nevertheless, the method assumes that the flash is the dominant light source and its position should be well calibrated. Thus, highlight separation in uncontrolled environment with the assistance of surface geometry is still an open problem. Such 3D geometry can be accessed by high-precision or consumer depth sensors, such as the Rexcan scanner, Microsoft Kinect, Intel RealSense 3D camera, Google Project Tango phone, etc. The increasing development and popularity of depth sensors make the data acquisition easier and cheaper.
Our motivation is based on a common physical phenomenon that specular highlights move along with the change of view point or light source (Swaminathan et al., 2002). In fact, the positions of highlight pixels are determined by the relationship of the light source position, the view direction, and the surface geometry. This is demonstrated in Figs. 1 and 2. We show that the separation of specular highlight can be handled elegantly with the assistance of surface geometry. In contrast to Dellepiane et al. (2010), where the position of light source is calibrated manually, we design a novel objective function to simultaneously detect highlight pixels and estimate the position of light source.Download : Download high-res image (489KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. This paper study the problem of specular highlight reduction in the case that surface geometry is known. Our motivation is based on a common physical phenomenon that the positions of highlight pixels are determined by the relationship of the light source position, the view direction, and the surface geometry. We show that with the assistance of surface geometry, the problem can be solved effectively in complex surfaces and environment.Download : Download high-res image (67KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Specular highlight reflection model in which v is the viewpoint vector, n is the surface normal, r denotes the reflection of v, and l is the incident light direction. The strongness of specular highlight received by eye is determined by the angle between r and l. Specifically, the eye receive the strongest highlight when r=l. In our problem, v,n and r are known while l has to be estimated. Frankly speaking, we try to find the highlight pixels where the incident light l should agree with r as much as possible. v, n, r, l ∈ R3 and are normalized with unit length.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows. First, we discuss related work in Section 2, and then present our method in Section 3. We explain our data acquirement procedure in Section 4 and show experimental results in Section 5. Finally, We conclude this paper in Section 6.
