Education, training, skills development, and learning are processes that are continuously performed since we are born. These characteristics and the ability to learn and teach, allow us to grow up as a person. Besides, learning is inevitably linked to the History of Humanity, to its construction as a social being capable of adapting to new situations. Learning can be defined as the act of acquiring knowledge, behaviors, abilities, standards or preferences and the study of learning has been closely linked to the development of psychology as a science [1].
In a traditional learning environment the student and the teacher are the key elements in the classroom. In environments in which technologies exist, the teacher plays an essential role in providing an engaging learning and teaching environment. Together, teacher and students take a set of physical, social, emotional, mental characteristics, and needs to the classroom. These features influence the way that one relates with the other and consequently affect the way the learning process will progress. Teacher is able to learn about necessities and educational philosophy as well the nature of his/her students; this will improve the teacher's position to facilitate student's learning.
For these reasons, the school must create systems that are capable of involving students and capture their attention. Advances in computers and wireless technologies have also had an impact on the educational setting, thus generating a new approach for Ambient Intelligent Systems (AmI systems). The rapid development of these technologies combined with the access to content in a wide variety of settings, allows learners to experience new learning situations beyond the school's walls.
In the last years, the school has introduced computer-based training or networked based learning in order to improve the field of AmI systems [2]. These systems must have the following features: context awareness and context adaptively. The definition of context awareness denotes that the pedagogical progress and the context that are provided to the learning environment should be aware of the situations in which the learner actually is. The context of adaptively refers to the idea that different learning context should be adaptable to the particular setting in which the learner is situated [3]. Using artificial neural network (ANN) it's possible to perform actions for a student and access to information, based on requirements or student profile. In addition, the ANN can be a recommendation system that interacts and represents the student in the system in order to choose relevant items according to their needs and preferences.
Scientific studies have shown the influence of different states of attention on student learning [4], [5], [6]. These indicators are useful to predict the behavior of a student and identify potential learning problems in the class. By using behavioral biometrics, especially keystroke and mouse dynamics, it is possible to analyze: the type of the task performed by each user; the time spent performing it; as well the level of attentiveness on the task. With this information it is also possible for classifiers to distinguish situations in which each student shows signs of attentiveness and where higher or lower levels of attentiveness are measured [7].
This technique is based only on the observation of the usage of the mouse and the keyboard, which allows an assessment of the student's performance. Consequently, we considered both non-invasive and non-intrusive approaches. In this way we can applicate this technique to develop attention level and management initiatives in the context of learning activities, allowing teachers to perceive student's state of mind and adjust teaching process to the student's needs and behavior.
The target of this paper is to propose architecture of an AmI system aimed at capturing and measuring the level of students’ attentiveness in real scenarios and dynamically provide recommendations to the teacher. The students can learn in a relatively anonymous environment without the embarrassment of failure and/or socio-cultural prejudice from personal contact. All the students get the same standardized set of learning materials from the learning activities using technologies in an environment. The student usage of the learning materials can be monitored and in an early stage it's possible to discover if the student dropout and counteractive support can be offered. These environments can be used to give instant feedback from student's level of attention.
