The technology in the present days has covered all the sectors in the society including health all over the world.1 E-health is a term that used to describe the use of internet and other electronic technologies to enhance health. In other words, e-health refers to the use of information and communications technology (ICT) to enhance health care services.2
Since ancient times, diseased people have made great effort to obtain remote information or contact expertise not available at the patient’s bedside. This approach to telemedicine is still used today in some remote areas.3
E-health means a wide range of health aspects that use the internet and associated technologies to provide health information and health services. Usually, patients depend upon the healthcare workers to provide health-related information for diagnosis and therapy. Patient health education in the past has included a group of independent health information that mainly distributed in written and video materials. E-health has begun to grow or increase rapidly in which health professionals and health stakeholders develop and search information.4
The internet is a powerful worldwide communication medium that provides its users with immediate information irrespective of their location, cultural, language, and time. Recently, a great number of research articles that studied health professionals and consumers’ perception and attitude towards e-health has been available.5
A study was conducted on samples from the general population in different European countries, in 2007, to investigate the pattern of using internet in the field of health, its consequences, and people expectations about physicians’ provision of e-health services. The authors reported differences between the users of internet health services and the general population due to health status and social-demographic variables.6
Another article that was conducted in Australia described the effect of using the internet on patient knowledge, education, and its subsidiary impact upon the medical decision taken by the patient and clinician. The author found that higher approachability to the internet has provided patients with a new method of access to health-related information and has a great role in decision-making. The extent to which the technology of e-health to be effective depends upon patients' ability to approach, understand, and discuss this knowledge with their physicians.4
This study aims to determine the proportion of patients who used to seek health-related information through the internet as well as factors that could affect using the internet for seeking health information.
