A decade ago, the Institute of Medicine (2006) mandated the gap between research and practice be addressed through both scientific findings and patient preferences. Yet the longstanding chasm between research findings and practice of evidence-based psychosocial treatments (EBPTs) continues to exist (Barlow, 2004, Butler et al., 2006, Glasner-Edwards and Rawson, 2010; Lancaster et al., 2016; Weisz et al., 2006). “Direct-to-consumer” is an approach to address this gap and engages patients and caregivers to increase consumer awareness and demand for quality EBPTs when available (Becker, 2015). In that model, understanding individuals’ treatment preferences is crucial and can complement EBPTs roll-outs by increasing the probability that individuals access available care. This is particularly important within the Veterans Affairs Healthcare System (VA), where EBPTs are nationally implemented to address the mental health care needs of over nine million United States (U.S.) veterans every year (Cook et al., 2015, Eftekhari et al., 2013, Karlin et al., 2012, Karlin et al., 2015, Karlin et al., 2013, Karlin and Cross, 2014, Watts et al., 2014).
Despite national EBPT roll-outs within the VA, only about half of U.S. veterans in need seek care (Bagalman, 2013; Schell and Marshall, 2008; Department of Veterans Affairs, 2013), in part due to well-documented barriers including multiple comorbidities, perceived stigma, availability of services, and gender differences in pursuit of treatment (Department of Veterans Affiars, 2006; DeViva et al., 2016; Kehle et al., 2011; Kulesza et al., 2015; Pietrzak et al., 2009; Seal et al., 2010). Women are more likely to use outpatient mental health services and report higher levels of distress, yet once men recognize their symptoms, men and women are equally likely to use services (World Health Organization, 2002, Wang et al., 2007). However, there remains a gap in knowledge about gender differences in treatment preference, especially with respect to modality of services. Taken together, these barriers are particularly important to address in a system such as the VA where EBPTs should be widely available given the government initiatives to offer such care to all veterans who need it.
With respect to comorbidities and stigma, insomnia is a primary complaint of the military population (Alexander et al., 2016, Hoge et al., 2008) and one of the most common reasons for a mental health referral in active-duty military (Cozza et al., 2004) and veterans (Jenkins et al., 2015). However, the comorbidity of insomnia with PTSD and with depression complicates EBPT access by reducing clarity of symptom prioritization. Since PTSD and depression often have symptoms noticeable by a treating provider, a referring provider, or one's family (e.g., depressed mood, irritability, hyperarousal), providers may prioritize treatments for PTSD or depression over insomnia in initial assessments and treatment plans. Yet this fails to factor in the patient's preference for which symptoms they want to target directly in treatment; or more specifically, which symptoms they are more willing to target. Preferences among veterans for symptom focus within treatment remain uncertain and are important to determine due to potential differences in stigma barriers around seeking insomnia care over depression or PTSD care. For example, in a population where physical and mental strength are encouraged and rewarded, it may be difficult for many veterans to request help for mental health symptoms (McDermott et al., 2017, Nash et al., 2009, Westphal and Convoy, 2015). Symptoms perceived as physical (e.g., problems with sleep) may be more digestible, and, as such, they may be more willing to pursue care for sleep problems over PTSD and depression care, which may be perceived to be more stigmatized.
In addition to knowing veterans’ symptom-focus preferences, knowing their preferences for treatment modality may also increase the likelihood of veterans accessing care. Indeed, the VA offers multiple telehealth care options for veterans with insomnia, PTSD, and/or depression (e.g., Gehrman et al., 2016; Luxton et al., 2016; Porcari et al., 2009), as well as mobile application (“app”) and Internet-based approaches (e.g., Kuhn et al., 2014, Kuhn et al., 2016). Although some qualitative work has explored treatment preferences with veterans seeking VA care (e.g., preference for behavioral or pharamcological therapy; Epstein et al., 2012), preferences for treatment modality (e.g., in-person care versus self-delivered via mobile app or Internet) among veterans with insomnia, PTSD, and/or depression have been largely unexplored.
The present study was designed with three aims to better understand veterans’ treatment preferences for insomnia, PTSD, and depression care. First, we examined veterans’ preferences for symptom focus related to the three mental health concerns. Based on the rationale that veterans may view sleep problems as less stigmatizing than PTSD and/or depression symptoms, we hypothesized they would report higher willingness to seek care to address sleep concerns over the others. Second, we examined treatment modality preferences (i.e., in person counseling, mobile application/online treatment, neither, or both) among those screening positive for each of the three targeted concerns, hypothesizing veterans would report a high degree of preference for mobile/internet-based care given perceived stigma among this population and other barriers to seeking in-person care. Lastly, we explored gender differences in preference for symptom focus and treatment modality. Although women are traditionally more likely than men to seek mental health services (World Health Organization, 2002, Wang et al., 2007), women veterans face significant barriers to seeking VA care, such as limited resources available to women veterans within VA clinics, concerns about safety and comfort, and few outreach efforts encouraging pursuit of VA care (Department of Veterans Affairs, 2015). Findings from this study can help researchers and clinicians better develop interventions and treatments aligning with veteran preferences, as well as provide researchers and clinicians with important information about how to couch recruitment and outreach efforts to veterans in need.
