“The most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it”. With this statement in 1991, Weiser idealized ubiquitous computing as the main technology for the 21st century (Weiser, 1991). More than twenty years later, ubiquitous applications have increasingly been used to support everyday activities. It is common to see tour guides helping users to locate themselves in big malls or museums and to learn about what is around them. Moreover, software assistants are available to support drivers by proposing routes or suggesting where to park. Smartphones now also have practical applications designed to mute the device in particular situations (e.g., while attending classes, meetings or in a movie theater, see Fig. 1). This kind of application creates new challenges for the evaluation of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI).Download : Download high-res image (94KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Scenarios that a ubiquitous application can help. Adapted from Carvalho et al. (2016). Icons from http://www.flaticon.com and https://www.iconfinder.com
These challenges are even more relevant if we consider that ubiquitous applications should be able to work anywhere and at any time, which could result in an increased risk of annoying or overwhelming the user. It is not acceptable to have a system that continuously interrupts the user with irrelevant information anywhere or at any time (Evers et al., 2014). Then, we argue that ubiquitous applications should be delivered to the user by prioritizing the quality of HCI.
In general, to determine the quality of software systems and, in our case, the quality of interaction with ubiquitous applications, measurements can be applied. The purpose of these measurements is to obtain data about characteristics that the client requires from the software system (ISO/IEC 25000, 2014). For example, the standard for software quality, (ISO/IEC 25000, 2014), proposes measures to different quality characteristics (e.g., maintainability, efficiency, portability and so on). Regarding HCI, the standard (ISO/IEC 25000, 2014) specifies the usability quality characteristic and software measures to evaluate it. Moreover, the standard (ISO/IEC 9241, 2015) provides recommendations for human-centered design principles and activities throughout the life cycle of interactive systems.
However, ubiquitous applications bring new aspects that completely change the interaction with their users. For example, they have new sensing possibilities, they are capable of initiating an interaction with users, they are present in different devices and they focus more on everyday life (Poppe et al., 2007). Therefore, specific characteristics should be taken into account and, consequently, new measures should be applied for a complete HCI quality assessment in these applications.
In a previous study, we performed a systematic mapping (SM) to identify quality characteristics and software measures for evaluating HCI in ubiquitous applications (Carvalho et al., 2016). In the first results of this study, we identified 26 quality characteristics that impact user's interaction quality with ubiquitous applications. However, most of measures were only simple propositions with no defined measurement function for a possible use in practice. It is therefore urgent to obtain well-defined software measures for evaluating these quality characteristics in ubiquitous systems.
This paper proposes a suite of software measures to evaluate the quality of interaction in ubiquitous applications called AQUArIUM. To establish this suite, we use the quality characteristics from the systematic literature mapping (Carvalho et al., 2016) as a starting point. From these characteristics, we have identified a very particular subset for ubiquitous computing (Context-Awareness, Mobility, Transparency, Attention and Calmness). Then, a set of software measures to address these five quality characteristics were defined specifically for ubiquitous applications in mobile devices.
Mobile applications are an important group in ubiquitous computing domain. According to Abowd (2012), the ubiquity of mobile phones is perfect for large-scale deployment studies in a variety of fields. Mobile applications have also been widely developed at the laboratory where this research was carried out2. Professionals from the lab have worked in research and development of mobile applications since 2002 for large companies (e.g., LG, Sony). Taking advantage of this experience, we applied the defined measures in three case studies with existing ubiquitous applications developed for mobile devices to evaluate the effectiveness and usefulness of the proposed suite. Also, we validated the suite through the main theoretical elements from Kitchenham et al. (1995), Fenton and Pfleeger (1997), (ISO/IEC, 2007), (ISO/IEC 25021, 2012).
It is important to mention that the software quality measures proposed are not intended to be an exhaustive set. It is not our goal to establish a full suite of all possible measures for evaluating the interaction in ubiquitous computing, but rather to define a primary set of measures for ubiquitous applications in mobile devices. This suite can and should be extended to other characteristics and measures.
The remainder of this paper is organized into more six sections. Section 2 discusses HCI in ubiquitous computing, presents the main concepts used in this work about software measurements and, finally, briefly presents our previous study, which is the systematic mapping performed to identify quality characteristics and existing measures for ubiquitous computing from literature. Section 3, which is the core of this paper, presents the definition of the AQUArIUM suite, from the process used to define the measures until the validations of it. Section 4 discusses the threats to the validity of this work. Section 5 covers the related work and, finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions and perspectives for future research.
