Brain computer interfaces (BCIs) have emerged as a new and promising communication mode between human and computers with the development of neuroscience and engineering over the last 20 years [1]. They capture brain signals associated with mental activities and transform them into commands to communicate with or control external machines. BCIs not only benefit people with severe motor impairments caused by various neuromuscular disorders through restoring their communication and movement ability [2], [3], but also find a lot of applications for healthy individuals, such as virtual reality systems [4], [5] and games [6], [7]. The brain signals employed in BCIs can be measured by several techniques, mainly including electroencephalogram (EEG), magnetoencephalogram (MEG), functional magnetic response imaging (fMRI) and functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). Among them, EEG, which measures voltage fluctuations from scalps during brain activities, is most widely used in practical applications due to its simplicity and efficiency [8]. As motor imagery (MI) based EEG–BCIs offer promise for motor function recovery and are widely used in rehabilitative applications, in the paper, we focus on motor imagery (MI) based EEG–BCIs.
Fig. 1(a) illustrates a typical pipeline of a MI based EEG–BCI system. When a user is imagining an action (e.g., left hand movement), the EEG acquisition device first obtains the EEG signals. Then the preprocessing is performed to remove the artifacts from the signals. Based on the filtered signals, the system extracts discriminative patterns/features and then based on them trains a classifier and identifies the motion that the user has imagined. While such a MI-based system has been widely used in many applications, most of them mainly focus on two-class motor imagination patterns [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. In practice, MI-based BCI systems supporting multiple tasks are highly demanded [14]. However, implementing a multi-task MI-based BCI system is still a challenging problem, as the involvement of more brain activities may make it quite difficult to precisely identify multiple tasks from single trial EEG signals [15], [16].Download : Download high-res image (315KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The schematic illustrations of (a) a general EEG based BCI system, (b) classification workflow based on vector-form features, and (c) classification workflow with the proposed MSMM model supporting multiclass classification of matrix-form EEG data.
One of the main limitations for current BCI systems to support multiple motor tasks is that most of them employed classifiers that only accept input EEG signals in the form of vector, such as Bayes classifiers [17], [18], support vector machine (SVM) [19], [20] and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [10], [21]. In practical applications, each single trial EEG signal records voltage fluctuations at several electrodes during a time period. In this regard, it is more natural to be represented as a two-dimensional matrix with strong correlation between rows and columns with respect to certain channels and frequency bands in motor imagery tasks, rather than as a vector. For example, EEG signals from C3, C4, Fz and Cz channels between 7 and 30 Hz are correlated to reflect some motor imagery tasks [22]. To this end, matrix-form features can better preserve the structural information of EEG signals between the temporal and spatial domain whereas vectorization would collapse the topology and loss the structural information.
A straightforward solution for this problem is to concatenate a matrix into a vector to fit into these classifiers, as shown in Fig. 1(b). However, such a solution will suffer from the curse of dimensionality [23], especially for EEG signals. For example, the popular dataset IIa of BCI Competition IV [24] contains 288 training samples and each sample unit is a 750 × 22 temporal-spatial matrix. The dimension of feature vectors is extremely large as d=750×22=16,500, whereas the samples size is only 288, which may lead to severe over-fitting problem. Some efforts have been devoted to suppressing the matrix-form features into vectors [18], [25] after preprocessing with common spatial patterns (CSP) like filters [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]. These methods, however, still ignore the topological structure latently embedded within single trial EEG data. In this regard, it is of great interest to study classification algorithms that can take full advantage of structural information of EEG signals in matrix form, such as the correlation information over frequencies and channels, to improve the performance of multiclass classification of EEG signals and hence facilitate the implementation of multi-task MI based BCI systems.
Several classifiers have been proposed for classification of data in matrix form. Wolf et al. [31] proposed a rank-k SVM to capture the global structure of data matrices by regularizing the regression matrix as the sum of k rank-one orthogonal matrices; Dyrholm et al. [32] and Pirsiavash et al. [33] decomposed the regression parameter into the product of two rank-k matrices; Kobayashi et al. [34] proposed a similar bilinear SVM framework by regularizing the nuclear norm of the model parameter; and recently Luo et al. [35] proposed a spectral elastic net regularization to constrain the combination of Frobenius norm and nuclear norm of the regression parameter simultaneously. However, all these matrix classifiers are originally built for binary classification problems. Though it is natural to break a multiclass classification task into a series of binary ones by one-versus-rest (OvR) or one-versus-one (OvO) strategies [36], [37], this scheme would suffer from several drawbacks. First, it would introduce bias when the scales of confidence values are different between the binary classifiers in the prediction stage [38]. Second, it may result in unbalanced distribution of input samples because the number of negative samples is much larger than that of positive ones with OvR scheme [39]. Finally, it is quite time-consuming to train multiple binary classifiers, especially when the number of motor imagery tasks involved in the BCI system is large.
In this paper, we propose a novel classifier to address the multiclass classification of single trial EEG signals in matrix form, aiming at improving the performance of BCIs supporting multiple motion tasks, as shown in Fig. 1(c). We call our classifier multiclass support matrix machine (MSMM). The MSMM is constructed based on regularized risk minimization framework. We first propose a novel objective function, which consists of two components: a multiclass hinge loss term and a combined regularization term taking structural information of matrix-form data into consideration. We formulate the multiclass hinge loss by extending the margin rescaling loss [40] to support matrix-form data. The regularization term is a combination of the squared Frobenius norm of tensor-form model parameter and nuclear norm of matrix-form hyperplanes extracted from the model parameter. While the Frobenius norm is applied to prevent the over-fitting problem when training the model, the nuclear norm is leveraged to capture the global structure within the matrix data. We further propose a solver for this convex objective function based on the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) framework [41], [42]. The solver converges quickly and reaches to the global optimal solution. We extensively evaluate the proposed MSMM on two benchmark single trial EEG datasets: dataset IIIa of BCI competition III [43] and dataset IIa of BCI competition IV [24]. Experimental results show that the proposed MSMM achieves much better classification accuracy on multiclass single trial EEG data than state-of-the-art classifiers, by taking full advantage of the structural information of EEG data.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.

•We propose a novel classifier for multiclass classification of EEG data in matrix form, namely MSMM. Compared with existing EEG signal classifiers, which are either based on vector-form data or only capable of coping with two-class classification of matrix data, the proposed MSMM can leverage the inherent structural information of EEG data for more accurate multiclass classification, and hence improve the performance of BCI systems with multiple tasks. To our best knowledge, the proposed MSMM is the first classifier that can support multiclass classification for EEG data in matrix form.•We propose a novel objective function based on regularized risk minimization framework by regularizing the combination of the squared Frobenius norm of the tensor-form model parameter and nuclear norm of matrix-form hyperplanes extracted from the model parameter, and develop an efficient solver based on ADMM framework to solve it.•We extensively evaluate the proposed MSMM on real multiclass EEG datasets, and achieve the state-of-the-art performance. Although the proposed method is applied to MI-based BCI systems, it is general enough to be used in other BCI systems involving multiclass matrix-form signals.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we review the relevant studies on classification algorithms used in MI based EEG classification. We briefly introduce some preliminaries in Section 3. Then we illustrate the MSMM model and its efficient solver for multiclass matrix classification in Section 4. We conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of our model in Section 5. We conclude this paper in Section 6.
