Papaya is a berry fruit with high nutritional and commercial value due to its non-seasonality and reduced time to harvest. In 2013, the world production of papaya reached 1.25×107 mt (Faostat, 2016). Papaya grading (as carried out in packing houses) is performed manually by human operators which may lead to misclassifications, resulting in fruit boxes with different maturity stages (Savakar and Anami, 2015). Visual inspection has been serving the fruit industry for many years, but it may lead to inconsistencies and variations despite the professional training of the graders. The variability associated with human assessment pertinent to automated inspection tasks accentuates the need for objective measurement systems providing reliable information throughout production (Damez and Clerjon, 2008). However, this must not sacrifice the essential benefits of human grading, e.g. intuition (Valous et al., 2016).
The identification of ripening stage is important, as it is related to internal properties of the fruit such as sweetness and firmness (Magwaza and Opara, 2015). In addition, it helps to determine storage time prior to consumption. The determination of these properties is carried out by analytical techniques commonly used for agricultural products. These techniques are time-consuming and destructive, plus they usually require chemical reagents and lengthy sample preparation procedures. In addition, they are applied to a limited number of samples which are not representative of the typical physico-chemical variability found in such batches. Thus, rapid, intelligent, and non-destructive techniques are required in this application domain (Wu and Sun, 2013).
Computer vision systems have been used for agri-food quality evaluation and control (Jackman et al., 2012). Quality assessment can be performed by such systems and is based on consumer digital cameras which are widely available. This approach has several advantages: rapid time of analyses, low cost, high accuracy and precision. For example, in a study researchers extracted color features to predict the ripening of stone fruits with low misclassification rates (Eyarkai Nambi et al., 2016). In addition, researchers applied laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy to classify papaya into four quality grades (Obledo-Vazquez and Cervantes-Martínez, 2017a). It is reported that this technique is able to distinguish between ripe and unripe fruits from fluorescence measured at 690 and 740 nm. However, the study has a small amount of samples and a full classification model is not reported. In addition, the region between 690 and 740 nm is in the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Practically, digital imaging systems may be the simpler approach for predicting maturity stages in papaya.
Machine learning techniques are being used in a variety of domains (Ropodi et al., 2016). The application of these techniques in agri-food characterization and evaluation has been also investigated (Wang et al., 2012, Liu et al., 2013, Papadopoulou et al., 2013, Prevolnik et al., 2014). Random decision forests, support vector machines, as well as miscellaneous types of artificial neural networks are implemented in many studies related to agri-food quality evaluation (Granitto et al., 2007, Chen et al., 2010, Valous et al., 2010, Wang et al., 2012, Papadopoulou et al., 2013, Liu et al., 2013, Savakar and Anami, 2015, Muñoz et al., 2015, Rojas-Moraleda et al., 2016, da Costa Barbon et al., 2017). In general, the literature has been reporting comparisons between conventional machine learning methods in various research domains, since there seems to be no clear consensus on absolute winners. On the other hand, an extensive benchmarking report demonstrated that random decision forests (RF) as an ensemble learning method (Breiman, 2001) may provide equal or better performance when compared to other classification algorithms (support vector machines, C4.5, AdaBoost, k-nearest neighbours, logistic regression, stochastic gradient boosting trees, extreme learning machines, sparse representation-based classification, and deep learning) on publicly available datasets (Zhang et al., 2017). For example, researchers compared random forests with neural networks and support vector machines for electronic tongue data classification, with RF achieving 99.07% accuracy (Liu et al., 2013). In another study, RF provided a measure of variable importance in clustering when investigating the similarity of six vegetable oils (Ai et al., 2014). Yet in another example, RF models gave an estimation of the relative importance of each sensory attribute for the discriminant function (Granitto et al., 2007). Finally, in Barbon et al. (2016) RF demonstrated superior prediction results in identifying pork storage time compared to artificial neural networks, fuzzy-based classifiers, support vector machines, k-nearest neighbours, and decision trees.
Hence, the aim of this work is to predict the ripening of the papaya fruit using digital imaging and random forests. A series of physical/chemical analyses are carried out and true maturity stage is derived from pulp firmness measurements. Imaging and image analysis provides hand-crafted color features computed from the peel and random decision forests are implemented to predict ripening stage.
