Textbooks are a common feature in every classroom and have an integral role in instructional settings and teaching (Väljataga & Fiedler, 2014). Traditionally textbooks have been used as a guideline for the teacher to help structure the learning and provide extra resources for the student in the classroom and at home. With the increased availability of educational resources online, more teachers are moving away from the traditional textbook. They are still available but are no longer used as a one-stop-shop for all information to be delivered and retrieved from. However, e-textbooks with multimedia and interactivity embedded into them, have the chance to create a more personalized learning approach for the students (Gu, Wu, & Xu, 2015). A study conducted using ‘CourseSmart’ as the e-textbook platform deduced that the more students were able to engage with their digital textbook, the better their final grade (Junco & Clem, 2015).
E-textbooks are still faced with many difficulties in both the higher education and K-12 education settings. Publishers started with a direct scanned copy of the printed version of a textbook, with no interactivity. It was clunky to use, and there was no effort in using technology to enhance learning (Dennis, McNamara, Morrone, & Plaskoff, 2015). In recent years, there have been new developments to actively engage the students’ using the e-textbook by creating active learning opportunities, personalizing the experience, and offering immediate feedback (Martin, 2012). Examples of these include interactive simulations, social interactions, quizzes with immediate feedback, and other widget activities (Fouh et al., 2014). For the sake of clarity, we use the term e-textbook to refer to digital textbook, electronic textbook or online textbook, formerly defined by Jung and Lim (2009) as a student-centered textbook that is designed to promote various types of interactions by providing multimedia learning environment such as videos, animations text, virtual reality among others, and allows students to work at their pace. An e-textbook has the advantage of being able to be used in personal desktop computers, laptop, or tablet device making it portable for the students.
Cognitive theory of multimedia learning proposed by Clark and Mayer (2008) suggests that meaningful learning can occur when a learner is presented with words and pictures as they can start to build a mental representation. This way the learner gets engaged in active learning through multimedia such as pictures, maps, charts, figures, graphs, or dynamic media such as videos and simulations. This has significant impact when designing instructional e-textbooks for students. Huang, Chen, and Ho (2014) suggests that learners when using e-textbooks will benefit from reduced cognitive load, and may improve their learning. Evans and Gibbons (2007) suggest that interactivity has the ability to promote effective learning since learners actively participate in the learning activity. However, there is need to establish the effects of interactivity in e-textbooks on learners' high cognitive load focusing on the learning domains: cognitive, affective, and psychomotor as identified by Bloom (Anderson and Krathwohl, 2001, Bloom, 1956). Using these three dimensions to evaluate students' learning, we envision that we are able to establish a more accurate measure of long term learning since a cognitive only approach focuses on a test result that examines students’ memory recall of a subject only and not their understanding.
Different from most studies (Shepperd et al., 2008, Woody et al., 2010) that use either subjective or objective results in analysing student learning and perceptions on e-textbook, this study leverages advantages of both subjective and objective results. This way, we are able to supress biases, for instance, of using objective measures such as final unit test grades that measure only a particular skill or cognitive ability and capture a small range of skills or knowledge (Bowman, 2010). Moreover, Rovai, Wighting, Baker, and Grooms (2009) argues that a student's grade may be contributed not only by what the student learned but also by other factors such as participation in class among others. Grades could also vary depending on teachers hence grades may not be a reliable measure of learning (Rovai et al., 2009). Thus, there has been an interest in examining self-reporting measures as a more beneficial and accurate measure for student learning (Rockinson-Szapkiw, Courduff, Carter, & Bennett, 2013), and Bloom's cognitive, affective, and psychomotor learning domains have been widely applied in evaluating students' learning (Huang et al., 2014). This study employs a similar approach by including both types of measures in view that this would portray a comprehensive picture.
Not much research has focussed on effectiveness of e-textbooks for junior high school students whose preferences may be different from those of adults that have been extensively studied (Porter, 2010, Woody et al., 2010). Therefore, the purpose of this study is to create an interactive e-textbook for junior high school science class and to examine the effectiveness of the interactivity of the e-textbook. The specific objective is to investigate how multimedia interactivity in an e-textbook affects students’ perceived learning, grades, and cognitive load in comparison to a static PDF e-textbook. An interactive e-textbook will include videos, hyperlinks, simulations, quizzes, bookmarking, and social collaboration tools. A static PDF e-textbook will include written content, images, and bookmarking ability.
Post-test interviews and a survey on students’ perceptions and usefulness of the e-textbook were done by the teachers and students respectively to generate supportive data for the quantitative results. The interviews were conducted face-to-face with the two professional science teachers to ascertain their feedback on using the e-textbooks in the classrooms and how the students responded to using the e-textbook in class. The interviews were conducted in a semi-structured format, with flexibility allowed to follow up on any answers provided by the professional science teachers.
