Antinuclear Antibody (ANA) test is a common protocol for serological diagnosis of autoimmune diseases such as Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Sjorgrens syndrome and Rheumatoid Arthritis. Human epithelial type 2 (HEp-2) cells with indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) is the gold standard for ANA test [1], [2]. Usually, two or three specialists need to analyze these patients’ specimen images via fluorescence microscopes and vote to decide the staining patterns. This approach is super time-consuming when the dataset is large, in the meantime, the results are subjective due to the variation of the specialists’ experience and the laboratory conditions.
Computer-aided systems aim to automatically analyze HEp-2 images and assist doctors diagnose as much as possible. Most of the approaches in the literature consist of three stages. The first stage usually consists of image preprocessing, intensity normalization and noise removal. The second stage mainly extracts features like Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT), Local Binary Pattern (LBP) and Histogram of Gradient (HOG) etc. While local descriptors and their extensions are the common choices, some methods also use Bag of Words (BoW) or Fisher Vector framework to encode these descriptors. In the third stage, classifiers such as K Nearest Neighbor (k-NN), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and naive Bayes are trained using the features from stage two and their corresponding ground-truth labels. In order to improve the performance of cell classification systems, four related competitions were held in conjunction with the International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) and the International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) [1], [3], [4], [5] to evaluate state-of-the-art systems. While the first publicly available ICPR 2012 dataset consists of 721 training and 734 testing cells segmented from 28 specimen images [3], the Indirect Immunofluorescence Image (I3A) dataset with 68,429 cell images, provided by Sullivan Nicolaides Pathology Laboratory, Australia, is a much bigger dataset. The I3A dataset was then used as the test bed for the following the ICIP 2013 [4], ICPR 2014 [1] and ICPR 2016 contests [6]. When cell level classification (task 1, cells were already cropped out from specimen images) was the main focus of the ICPR 2012 and ICIP 2013 contests, specimen image level classification (task 2) was introduced into the ICPR 2014 contest and segmentation task was introduced into the ICPR 2016 contest. We focus on cell level staining pattern classification in this paper.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A number of related works and the two datasets are introduced in Sections 2 and 3 respectively. Section 4 describes our system flowchart, the proposed DCR module, data preparation and network training details. We visualize the learned features of the proposed DCRNets and analyze their discrimination capacities in Section 5. Detailed experiments and results on both the ICPR 2012 dataset and the I3A dataset are presented in Section 6. At last, this paper concludes with a brief summary in Section 7.
