Multimedia learning materials, including both visual and verbal modes of instructional messages, are commonly utilized in diverse learning settings. In face-to-face classroom environments, instructors can supplement verbal instruction with static or dynamic images owing to the advances in visualization technologies (Mayer, 2014a). In addition, with the proliferation of mobile technologies and online courses, learners can easily access multimedia materials without being limited by time and place. Despite their prevalent use, the way in which cognitive activities occur in multimedia learning has recently drawn attention (Desjarlais, 2017). Interviews, behavioral assessments, and self-reporting measurements have been mostly used to make inferences about information processing in multimedia learning (Rodrigues & Rosa, 2017). However, self-reporting measurements are not capable of capturing the temporal fluctuations in cognitive processes. There is a need for measurements that directly indicate cognitive processing during multimedia learning (Mayer, 2017).
To overcome the limitations of self-reporting measurements, eye tracking technology can be used to explore cognitive activities in multimedia learning. Using eye movement measurements obtained through this technology provides the opportunity to test assumptions about where people look during the integration of text and pictures (Tabbers, Paas, Lankford, Martens, & Van Merriënboer, 2008). Moreover, educators who gather eye tracking data can enhance the design of their multimedia materials on the basis of learners' information-processing capabilities. However, the body of knowledge that interprets eye tracking measurements in terms of learners' cognitive activities is not enough (Lai et al., 2013). To fill this gap, Lai et al. (2013), in their literature review, explained the use of eye tracking technology in learning studies. The authors classified studies with respect to various areas of cognitive development examined by eye tracking technology and the connections established between eye movement measures and several learning issues. This work revealed that conceptual development, perception, and language were the most-often studied areas of cognitive development; patterns of information processing and the effects of instructional strategies were also prevalent learning themes indicated by eye movements. Although Lai et al. (2013) provided general learning topics studied by eye tracking technology, their research is inadequate in offering specific explanations of cognitive activities in the domain of multimedia learning. Thus, research that investigates information processing and the variables affecting knowledge acquisition or construction in multimedia learning is necessary (Desjarlais, 2017). In addition, analyzing studies published in different databases after 2012 is crucial to collect and synthesize the latest findings on this topic. The current study systematically reviews up-to-date literature on the use of eye tracking technology in multimedia learning in diverse databases. In particular, it aims to explain the cognitive processes that eye tracking measurements are associated with, the potential factors that can affect eye tracking measurements, and the relation between eye tracking measurements and learning performance in multimedia learning research.
