In the early years of FedEx, Frederick Smith saved the company from bankruptcy by taking $5000 to Las Vegas and winning $27,000 in the game of blackjack (Frock, 2009). Though some interpret this story as one of grit or demonstrating dedication to the firm at all costs, it sets an example that shareholders would be reluctant for their executives to follow. Encouraging such behavior puts bondholders at risk and creates a poor incentive to gamble everything when a firm nears financial ruin. Risks such as these are pervasive in the finance industry where one can earn large returns through risky investments. To mitigate this risk, firms might wish to design contracts that do not reward atypically high profit as that may indicate excessive risk. Such a contract exhibits non-monotonicity as agents earn more in the case of moderate earnings than high earnings. Given the potential of such contracts to improve welfare, their lack of use in the field seems perplexing.
This paper contributes to literature on labor markets and contracting as it is the first to explore whether principals construct non-monotonic contracts on their own accord which are theoretically optimal when given the opportunity. The experiment proposed in this paper improves on the existing experimental literature on non-monotonic contracts by providing several key additions. The design uses a simple setting with only one period, two choices for the agent (high or low effort), simple intuitive probabilities (one quarter and three quarters), and three possible outcomes: LOW, MEDIUM, and HIGH profit for the principal. In addition, we allow the principals to select any division of earnings for each outcome (with the restriction of no negative payout to the agent or the principal).1 HIGH profit occurs in our experiment independent of agent effort; therefore, the theoretically optimal contract offers the agent more in the case of MEDIUM profit than HIGH profit, causing the optimal contract to exhibit non-monotonicity. Moreover, the design controls for factors such as risk preferences. Furthermore, our experiment controls for concerns about the rationality of the agent and other-regarding preferences by including two treatments: one with a human in the role of the agent and another with a computer in the role of the agent using a simple decision rule. Ultimately, we want to learn what type of contracts principals construct in this environment and whether the principal decides differently with a computer agent than a human one. We also want to see how agents respond to different contract structures, and the overall effect on efficiency, as this should inform us whether non-monotonic contracts, though theoretically optimal, are desirable in practice.
Several papers (Grossman, Hart, 1983, Innes, 1990, Hvide, 2002) have described various scenarios where non-monotonic contracts are optimal instead of more traditional monotonic or piece-rate contracts. In the simplest case, Grossman and Hart (1983) demonstrate non-monotonic contracts may be optimal when the highest outcome states are invariant to agent effort.2 In this case, the highest outcomes provide no information about the effort of the agent, and the principal should not create contracts that reward these states. For instance, if an exogenous demand shock occurs in an industry, a firm may make record profits regardless of the efforts of its employees. Likewise, if misfortune or mismanagement lead one or more competitors to drop out of the market, a firm may make large profits that are not primarily the result of the work of its own employees. Our experiment models the case where the highest outcomes are invariant to agent effort, and the theoretically best contract for the principal exhibits non-monotonicity. Though studied for decades, these contracts rarely occur in practice, and we hope this paper provides insight on why that may be the case.
If principals fail to offer non-monotonic contracts to computers agents, whose decision rule mimics that of a risk neutral profit maximizer, where they are clearly optimal, this indicates such contracts seldom exist in practice due to the inability of principals to conceive of them. However, even if principals construct non-monotonic contracts in the computer treatment, such contracts may also not occur in practice if agents react to them negatively. For example, agents might respond more favorably to theoretically suboptimal contracts, due to fairness or other-regarding preferences, and less favorably to non-monotonic contracts, which agents may perceive as unfair. In this case, principals might earn a higher payoff offering more standard contracts anyway. On the other hand, if principals offer the optimal contract often and agents respond in the predicted manner, this provides support for firms to offer such contracts when they are optimal, which could improve the profit for the firm, decrease the amount of risk in industries such as investment banking, and increase overall economic efficiency.
Our design allows the principal to control for factors such as risk and fairness. Because the principal may worry about agent risk preferences, there exists a non-monotonic contract that encourages the agent to choose high effort regardless of the agent’s risk preferences which also theoretically provides the principal with more profit than any monotonic contract. To mitigate the effects of fairness from deterring agents away from non-monotonic contracts in our experiment, the contract that gives the principal and agent the highest amount of equally split surplus ex-ante (the difference in expected value) and that encourages the agent to choose high effort is also a non-monotonic contract. If fairness ex-post (the difference in the realized payment) matters to the agents, the optimal contract must be monotonic; however, agents earn more choosing low effort with such contracts. Because of these features of the experimental values, neither concerns about risk preferences of the agent nor concerns about fairness should alter the structure of the optimal contract (non-monotonic), unless agents care more about ex-post fairness than their total earnings.
In short, our experimental design allows us to test several key questions related to non-monotonic contracts. First, we can address the most basic question: if principals can write their own contracts, will they write non-monotonic contracts when they are theoretically optimal? Second, how do agents respond to different contracts in this environment? Finally, we test whether removing the concerns about agent rationality or other-regarding preferences by using computer agents alters the contract structure chosen by the principal. Our results show that a portion in both treatments offer non-monotonic contracts; however, principals offer non-monotonic contracts about twice as frequently in the treatment with computer agents. In the human treatment, principals offered theoretically non-incentivizing contracts which could be perceived as fair. Agents often responded favorably to these “fair” theoretically suboptimal contracts that compensate them for the cost of effort. Because human agents made decisions in this manner, principals earned more in the treatment with human agents even though they offered more theoretically optimal contracts in the treatment with computer agents. The theoretically suboptimal behavior of the human agents also caused efficiency to be roughly the same between treatments. Given the response of agents in our experiment and that a majority of contracts, even in the computer treatment, failed to have a non-monotonic structure, these results seem consistent with a lack of non-monotonic contracts in the field.
