One of the major public health challenges in which IoT and smart medical systems can assist is Alzheimer’s disease which affects a predominantly ageing population. Treatments for this disease require novel interactive and unobtrusive ways of both tracking disease progression and monitoring, emotional health and safety while accounting for the changing care needs of sufferers. Alzheimer’s Disease International estimates that the number of people living with dementia worldwide is estimated at 46.8 million and this number will reach 131.5 million in 2050 [1]. The global cost of dementia is estimated at US $ 818 billion, and this is set to rise to $ 1 trillion by 2018 in part as a result of an ageing population brought about as a result of improvements in healthcare enabling more people to live longer [1].
Despite the lack of a cure for Alzheimer’s disease, non-pharmacological therapies are often used (cognitive stimulation being one of the most advised therapies [[2], [3]]) with the goal of maintaining cognitive function or helping the brain compensate for impairments in addition to improving quality of life or reducing behavioural symptoms [4]. In this sense, Computer-Assisted Cognitive Therapy (CACT) systems have been found to be valuable tools for the delivery of often low cost and effective interventions with a number of associated benefits such as: inducing cognitive enhancement in older adults (60 to 85 years old) [5] and Alzheimer sufferers [6]; achieving more robust effects in reducing measures of cognitive distortion besides requiring reduced contact with therapists when compared to Standard Cognitive Therapy [7]; monitoring older adults and detecting early signs of frailty [8]; detecting sustained changes in cognitive performance [9].
In this paper, we present an adaptive system for cognitive stimulation therapy that analyses the performance of dementia sufferers during their interactions with computer-based activities to generate personalized stimulation therapies according to the sufferers changing levels of cognitive impairment. The aim of the system is to reduce the cognitive burden on care workers and therapists of supervision, monitoring, assessment and adaptation of therapy plans by delegating these functions to an intelligent system and enabling therapies to be performed at home via a mobile health computing infrastructure. These developments were integrated into an existing CACT software called Mente Activa for the treatment of older adults with cognitive impairment. The developed system makes use of Fuzzy Logic Systems (hereinafter, FLSs) for handling qualitative concepts (e.g., representation of abstract terms such as “easy”, “difficult”, “good performance”, etc.), which can be used to describe the performance categories and characteristics of participants based on their interactions with the stimulation activities.
We present unique experiments based on Alzheimer sufferers’ interactions with Mente Activa while attending a day care centre. The experiments are used to evaluate the plan recommendations determined by the fuzzy system against therapists’ own assessments of recommended therapy for individual sufferers. Simulations of the system with data of different patients and cognitive areas are also carried out to demonstrate its ability to automatically propose an initial plan according to their mental health condition and adjust the subsequent generated therapy plans over time in response to user performance. As a means for assessing the emotional state of the sufferers, we report on the piloting of an IoT enabled patient dialogue system (using IBM’s TJBot) with preliminary results on affect recognition analysis in the context of a targeted therapy session. We show how the proposed adaptive cognitive stimulation system can be integrated with the patient dialogue system and affect recognition system to enhance the system. This enhancement is achieved by processing context relevant quantitative and qualitative data streams including behaviour and affect data in the cloud using IBM Watson services.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses current Computer-Assisted Cognitive Therapy approaches; Section 3 describes the software Mente Activa and techniques used in developing the proposed support system; Section 4 describes the developed intelligent performance assessment and plan recommendation system. Section 5 describes the integration of the IoT enabled patient dialogue system with initial experiments on detecting affective states of participants interacting with the Mente Activa software during a simulated therapy session. Evaluations of the developed system on participating individuals with dementia and simulated sessions are presented in Section 6. Finally concluding remarks and future work are discussed in Section 7.
