Object contour is of prime importance as it contains essential visual information such as shape and identity that finds numerous applications. Contour detection is a fundamental problem in computer vision which is closely related to other tasks, e.g., segmentation, shape discrimination, and object recognition [1], [2], [3], [4].
In this work, we propose a learning algorithm for contour detection based on stacking random forest learning by using multi-level visual cues. We extract pixel-level features that integrate both local and global visual information. In addition, segment-level features are extracted to exploit structural information of contours. All the features are mapped to a space for selecting discriminative ones via a novel algorithm based on posterior divergence of Gaussian mixture models and sufficient statistics feature mapping based on deep Boltzmann machine. A stacking random forest learning classifier is trained based on these features for contour detection.
We evaluate the proposed algorithm with state-of-art methods on several databases including the Berkeley segmentation [5] and Weizmann horse database (WHD) [6] and the Weizmann segmentation database (WSD) [7]. Experimental results bear out feature selection from multi-scale visual cues via posterior divergence with a random forest classifier facilitates effective contour detection in natural images.
In a nutshell, the main contributions of this paper are:1
•This paper presents the so-called sufficient image features including multi-scale pixel level and segment level for contour detection.•This paper describes posterior divergence feature mapping using Gaussian mixture model and sufficient statistics feature mapping based on deep Boltzmann machine.•This paper introduces stacking random forest learning framework for contour detection. Moreover we perform comprehensive empirical studies on the performance of different feature extractors, feature mapping methods and classifiers and the stacking of their different combinations.
The paper is organized as follows. Related work is introduced in Section 2. Section 3 presents the image features extraction method used in our model. Section 4 describes the proposed feature mapping methods. Section 5 introduces the stacking random forest learning for contour detection. Fig. 1 shows the framework of the stacking random forest learning for contour detection. Experiments on natural images are depicted in Section 6 and Section 7 concludes this paper.Download : Download high-res image (503KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Framework of the stacking random forest learning (SRFL) for contour detection.
