Computer networks changed the paradigm in which people perform some of their daily duties and operations. For example, bank accounts can be managed through the Internet, electronic mails are used instead of paper letters, voice communication is done with Voice over IP (VoIP) rather than telephone, quick access to news through web pages, video streaming, and others. Besides these basic services, modern network concepts such as Internet of Things (IoT) and Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET) also use computer networks to accomplish their purposes. Some of these applications have personal and critical information pertaining to individuals and organizations and must have restricted access.
Therefore, it is necessary to monitor computer networks to retain their integrity, availability and resilience. For such an intent, standard monitoring protocols were designed and developed. There are two standardized network monitoring techniques: Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) and Internet Protocol Flow Information Export (IPFIX). Both techniques were standardized by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and operate on the network level. IPFIX is based on network flows, which groups packets sharing a set of properties, such as transport protocol, source and destination IP, and source and destination ports. Flow analysis provides more information than SNMP, affording more extensive traffic analysis. In this work, a network flows based protocol is utilized to extract information, which is used in the proposed Network Anomaly Detection System (NADS).
There are two main approaches to detect anomalies in the literature (Patcha & Park, 2007). Traditionally, in signature-based detection, a database of known signatures is used to check whether the current network behavior matches a known pattern, indicating an anomaly (Yu, 2012). In contrast, the alternative approach uses a profile-based detection (Gong, Zulkernine, & Abolmaesumi, 2005). By using the network historical traffic, a profile of normal behavior is predicted and, if the current behavior differs significantly from the profile, an alarm is issued. The main difference between these approaches is that signature-based approaches need to know the signature of problems while profile-based detection one does not. However, as a drawback, the latter is unable to identify which is the current problem, while the former can identify the observed problem. There is also the hybrid approach, that combines both aforementioned methods, with the capability of detecting unknown problems and identifying those with known signatures.
Due to its importance, NADS is a widely researched topic (Amaral, de Souza Mendes, Zarpelão, & Junior, 2017). Methods to assist in network management through NADSs varies in categories such as Statistical, Clustering, Soft Computing and others. The NADS presented in this work uses the concept of Digital Signature of Network Segment using Flow Analysis known as DSNSF. In this approach, the network’s behavior is estimated based on information collected over network flows and compared to the real network traffic, and if there is a compelling discrepancy, an alarm is issued.
The presented approach aims to create an accurate network profile using recent data in an environment with imprecisions and uncertainties. Therefore, Soft Computing approaches, i.e., Genetic Algorithms and Fuzzy Logic, were used to implement our system. Additionally, Soft Computing techniques usually have a low computational cost when compared to other methods capable of addressing the network anomaly detection issue (Ibrahim, 2016).
Primarily, the Genetic Algorithm is applied to deal with uncertainties and Fuzzy Logic with imprecisions (Zadeh, 1994). Genetic Algorithm is a meta-heuristic approach based on natural selection and is applied to learn the behavior of the network. It evolves a set rather than individual solutions, evaluating the search space in an efficient manner by offering a suitable balance between exploration and exploitation (Črepinšek, Liu, & Mernik, 2013). Moreover, it covers a wide range of solutions through its genetic operations, in the worst case it provides near-optimal results.
Fuzzy Logic is used to identify if an anomaly is present in a time interval. The threshold calculation is performed using the Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA), which assigns a higher weight to more recent observations. By combining these three techniques, a NADS to detect anomalies in a network segment is presented. The goal of this work is to provide an expert system with the capability of monitoring the traffic through IP flows and create an expected behavior for time intervals, issuing alarms to the network’s administrator when anomalous events are occurring.
The main contributions of this work are listed as follows:

•Provides a system that can detect anomalies in a computer network autonomously, alerting the network’s administrator when a possible problem is occurring.•Combines Genetic Algorithm and Fuzzy Logic approaches to produce an expert system with the capability of predicting and detecting network anomalies based on six attributes extracted from IP flows data. The Genetic Algorithm is applied to predict the network’s behavior; based on this analysis, the Fuzzy Logic approach is used to evaluate if a time interval in the IP flows data has an anomaly.•NADS research is a topic of wide interest and has many works concerning its applications and results. This paper proposes an unsupervised training method, which is tested using flows data provided by a campus network.
This work is divided as follows: Section 2 presents the related works and the state of the art of Instrusion Detection Systems. Section 3 provides a solid background concerning the methods applied in this work. Section 4 introduces the expert system implemented for the network anomaly detection purpose. Section 5 discusses the representative results obtained. Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusions drawn from this work.
