Brain disease is one of the leading causes of death in people with different age groups across the globe. Many types of brain diseases exist such as neoplastic diseases (brain tumor), cerebrovascular diseases (stroke), degenerative diseases, and infectious diseases. Some of these diseases cause minor problems in the human brain and some prompt to death. Therefore, development of the automated pathological brain detection system (PBDS) which is a type of computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system specifically designed for the diagnosis of the human brain is of great importance. PBDS plays an important role in arriving at correct and quick clinical decisions. An advanced medical imaging modality known as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been commonly used as the input to the PBDSs because of its advantage of providing huge information about the soft tissues of the human brain [1], [2], [3]. In addition, MRI is a non-invasive and radiation-free imaging modality as compared to other modalities like X-ray and CT scan. However, due to the enormous data storage, it is hard to interpret MR images manually. In particular, manual interpretation is a costly, troublesome and time-consuming task [4], [5]. To overcome such issues, automated PBDSs need to be developed by using dedicated computer systems which can assist radiologists in taking accurate and faster decisions. PBDS utilizes various image processing and pattern recognition algorithms in its different stages.
Many attempts have been made toward the development of various PBDSs in the past decade [6]. However, the development of ideal PBDS is still in its infancy because of the difficulty in selecting proper algorithms for feature extraction, feature selection and classification that will combinedly work in all cases regardless of the type of image modalities and the dataset size. Hence, PBDS remains an open challenging problem in front of researchers. Our objective in this study is to enhance the performance of the PBDS for abnormality detection in the human brain.
It has been observed that discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is the most used feature extractor in PBDSs as it analyzes images at several scales and handles one-dimensional (1D) singularities effectively. However, it has limited capability of representing two-dimensional 2D singularities (edges of an image). That is, DWT is not able to capture curve like features effectively from the images. Therefore, to handle such issue, application of advanced transforms are in great demand. Further, classifiers like feed-forward neural network (FNN) and support vector machine (SVM) are often used in earlier PBDSs because of their capability in separating nonlinear input patterns and predicting continuous functions. To train FNN, conventional gradient-based learning algorithms such as back-propagation (BP) and Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) are used which have many limitations such as trapping at local minima, slower learning speed, and learning epochs. Traditional SVM classifier encounters higher computational complexity and it performs poorly on large datasets. Furthermore, the number of features required in some PBDSs is also higher which makes the classifier’s task more difficult and costly.
This paper aims at developing an efficient PBDS which can overcome the issues faced by existing PBDSs. The proposed system markedly improves the recent results with the help of ripplet-II transform and a new variant of extreme learning machine (ELM). In more detail, the major contributions are

(a)Use of discrete ripplet-II transform (DR2T) for feature extraction as it is effective in capturing 2D singularities along with a group of curves from MR images.(b)Use of a recently proposed learning algorithm known as ELM in oder to overcome the problems of traditional learning algorithms. In particular, ELM provides faster learning speed and better generalization performance than other conventional learning algorithms.(c)Combining modified particle swarm optimization (MPSO) and ELM (MPSO-ELM) to avoid the difficulties faced by basic ELM such as local minima issue, slow response speed on testing data, high requirement of hidden neurons and ill-conditioned problem.(d)Comparison with other competent methods in terms of classification accuracy and number of features on three well-known datasets.
The remaining part of the article is organized as follows. Related works are summarized in Section 2. Section 3 offers the materials used in the experiments. The proposed methodology is discussed in Section 4. The statistical setting and pseudocode of the proposed scheme are presented in Section 5. In Section 6, the experimental results are analyzed. Conclusions based on this study and the future research directions are highlighted in Section 7.
