Reporting by the mass media can profoundly impact public perception of environmental issues (e.g., Ogden, 2015) and has been, for instance, a powerful actor in the public understanding of climate science (Stamm et al., 2000; Carvalho and Burgess, 2005; Cooper, 2011; Brulle et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2013), extinctions (Ladle et al., 2004), and genetically modified organisms (Mintz, 2016). However, while the mass media have the potential to effectively communicate environmental issues, various factors such as competition for shrinking news space (Friedman, 2004), the prioritization of event-driven coverage (Hansen, 2010), and the relative invisibility and long timeframes of many environmental phenomena present major challenges for journalists. Furthermore, factors such as the journalistic norms of objectivity, balance, dramatization, personification, and novelty can be problematic in science and environmental coverage (Boykoff and Boykoff, 2007). For example, a 2004 review of U.S. news articles demonstrated how the journalistic norm of balance - or the proclivity to tell 'both sides' of the story - leads to coverage that questions the causes of climate change and problematic disagreement between scientists and science reporting (Boykoff and Boykoff, 2004). These factors, among others, have led to the mass media's potential to misinterpret, misconstrue, or otherwise misinform the public (Henderson-Sellers, 1998; Boykoff, 2008). Therefore, it is important to examine media coverage and the representation of complex environmental issues.
As an example, scientists have debated the potential benefits and consequences of the mass media's extinction-risk coverage. Some scientists have argued that overly simplistic representations of research and a failure to clarify scientific uncertainty around the time frames of various land animal and plant species extinctions may lead to accusations of frivolously 'crying wolf' (Ladle et al., 2004). Other scientists have contended that mass media coverage of the extinction risks posed by climate change, despite the potential negative effects of errors in reporting, is ultimately beneficial as it has raised public awareness considerably (Hannah and Phillips, 2004).
In recent years scientists have expressed similar concerns over the representation of the state of the oceans in science journalism. Duarte et al. (2015, p. 131) wrote that "recent media reports on problems in the ocean do not leave much room for optimism." Referring to press coverage of an article about marine biodiversity by Worm et al. (2006), Hilborn (2010, p. 5) wrote, "if you have paid any attention to the conservation literature or science journalism over the last five years, you likely have gotten the impression that our oceans are so poorly managed that they soon will be empty of fish…". In a similar vein, the website http://oceanoptimism.org noted, "We recognise and respect the many challenges facing our oceans, yet too often ‘doom and gloom’ stories are the only kind of ocean news we hear."
The representation of the state of the oceans is important, since the failure to accurately report ocean health issues, or a tendency to bias ocean coverage with hyperbolic doom and gloom rhetoric, is likely to send very different messages to the broader community. For example, Duarte et al. (2015, p. 131) expressed that the current framing of ocean health issues runs the risk of conveying "an overly negative message that may lead society into pessimism or the belief that the ocean is beyond restoration." Hilborn (2010, p. 5) expressed concern that popular media depictions of ocean issues distort reality and ignore a more balanced diagnosis of the world's fisheries, favoring instead a counterproductive, "apocalyptic rhetoric that obscures the true issues that fisheries face" and fails to recognize "the long, hard work of fishery managers, scientists and stakeholders in the many places where management is working" (p. 8, emphasis in original).
However, the evidence for claims of constant doom and gloom in media depictions of the ocean is lacking (Jacquet et al., 2015). Empirical support is superficial and no research has systematically examined the U.S. media's portrayal of the state of the oceans. In an effort to provide the groundwork of empirical evidence needed to further explore the debate over whether or not news media tend to emphasize doom and gloom and fear-inducing rhetoric over more balanced and/or optimistic appraisals, the goal of this work was to examine the ways that ocean-related issues have been represented in major U.S. news media outlets from 2001 to 2015, including how ocean-related issues rank on the news media agenda, as evidenced by their frequency of coverage. In addition, this research explored how ocean-related issues have been framed in U.S. news media, including how these narratives attribute causality, address uncertainty, provide evidence, and indicate solutions. Finally, adapting methods used in prior analyses of climate discourse, we examined the frequencies with which doom and gloom or alarmist rhetoric as well as ocean optimism were used in recent discussions of the state of the oceans.
