The human face is our most defining characteristic, and our primary means for identifying people we know. The uniqueness of the face makes it a desirable biometric for the field of human identification. The psychology of facial recognition has been studied for years by researchers and it has shown that accurate recognition is more likely to occur when the target individual is familiar to the witness, even from low-quality images [1], [2]. However, there is a high error rate when the average person is trying to recognize unfamiliar faces [3]. According to Bruce et al. [4], the exactness of facial matching also decreases with changes in viewpoint, although not as much as with changes in facial expression.
Facial examination is the most challenging type of facial comparison scenario involving a time consuming process performed between (sets of) images. There are four main methods currently in use for facial comparison [5]: holistic comparison, morphological analysis, superimposition, and photo-anthropometry.
Holistic comparison exploits an innate human ability, where all facial features are assessed simultaneously and compared to another face or image of a face. However, studies show that holistic comparison has low and variable accuracy rates [3], [4], [6], [7]. In fact, the Facial Identification Scientific Working Group (FISWG) recommends that holistic comparison should be limited to cases where operational conditions preclude the use of other methods, and only for review scenarios, not for facial examination. Morphological analysis is a systematic method of facial comparison in which the features of the face are described and compared. Conclusions regarding similarity or difference are based on subjective assessment and interpretation of observations. The main drawbacks are the inter-observer differences in classification of facial features [8], [9], lack of standards, high sensitiveness to image quality and facial pose within the images under comparison. Superimposition is the process of creating an overlay of two aligned images and comparing them visually. According to FISWG, it should be used in conjunction with morphological analysis as an aid to visual comparison, but only when two images are taken from the same viewpoint. This is because superimposition requires very specific conditions to achieve reliable results which are rarely encountered in forensic case work.
Finally, photo-anthropometry uses soft tissue landmarks marked on the facial image to measure distances between two landmarks (dimensions) and proportionality indices (from now on, we will jointly refer to them as DPIs) in order to quantify characteristics and proportions. The measurements taken from one image are then compared to the measurements taken from a separate facial image. Conclusions are based on subjective thresholds for acceptable differences between measurements. The main drawback is the need for images acquired under very restrictive and controlled conditions. In particular, according to the FISWG, the following imaging conditions must be met to get reliable results using photo-anthropometry: sufficient resolution and focus to resolve features and landmarks of interest, minimal compression artifacts, minimal distortion, same viewpoint, same lighting, minimal occlusion, known focal length, known lens distortion, known subject distance, known angle of head tilt, same aspect ratio, same pose, short time interval between photographs, similar expression. Thus, such a list of limiting pre-conditions is rarely encountered in forensic case work and led several authors [10], [11] and the FISWG to conclude that this technique should neither be used as an independent comparison method nor in conjunction with another method for positive identification or exclusion.
Nonetheless, photo-anthropometry has interesting features: it has a large potential for automation, plus it is objective and repeatable, thus allowing its use in massive data bases and within legal procedures. This does not mean that facial examination by photo-anthropometry would serve as a tool for solid positive identification. However, if it demonstrates that it could be used for filtering/excluding a large percentage of candidates within a database, it would become a useful asset for legal prosecutors, forensic labs and experts in order to narrow down the list of possible candidates.
The majority of the imaging conditions limiting the applicability of photo-anthropometry are related with the use of facial (2D) photographs. The absence of photogrammetric control (scale) in the images dictates the use of ratios/proportions rather than absolute measurements. However, the use of ratios will not overcome problems arising from subject distance to camera [12], subject pose or focal length of lens [13]. This is because the photograph is the result of the 2D projection of a real (3D) scene that was acquired by a particular (unknown) camera [14], [15]. Intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters are responsible of changing proportions and measurements in a 2D plane with respect to the real (3D) world. The former are the parameters describing the physical model of the camera (focal length, image sensor format, coordinates of the optical center, etc.), while the latter specify the pose (position and orientation) of the camera. There has been limited empirical research into quantifying the influence of such parameters. Moreton and Morley [11] studied the reliability of photo-anthropometric measurements between different images of the same individual taken with different angulations of the camera. The study examined the facial measurements of 25 individuals from high resolution photographs, taken at different horizontal and vertical camera angles in a controlled environment. Results show that the degree of variability in facial measurements of the same individual due to variations in camera angle can be as great as the variability of facial measurements between different individuals.
Precise measurements, i.e. real 3D world measurements, could be obtained from any photograph if intrinsic and extrinsic parameters were known, a well-known problem in the computer science community called camera calibration [16]. However, such an idealistic scenario is not common in a large variety of regular forensic case work and the inability to provide precise (3D) measurements of facial DPIs of the images under comparison remains as a major limitation of photo-anthropometry.
According to the last statement, the solution for many of the problems related with anthropometry for facial examination would be the use of 3D images instead of (2D) photographs. The accuracy and precision of anthropometric measures derived from 3D images is now well established [17]. Within the anthropology field, Ogawa et al. [18] have recently performed an anthropometric analysis on 1126 3D facial images for personal identification. However, this study just showed the distribution of the measurement of 40 DPIs in the population under study without studying their discriminating power. Related with the forensic anthropology community, there is a wide subfield of research applying computer vision and machine learning techniques for 3D face recognition purposes. In general, these algorithms are not limited to landmarks and/or DPIs but consider the whole geometry of the face. The accuracy of 3D face recognition methods is high, achieving up to 99% of rank-1 score1 over databases containing thousands of 3D face models with different poses and facial expressions [20], and similar results over 2D images in unconstrained environments [21]. Although there are no research works using only DPIs for 3D face recognition, there is one proposal [22] employing DPIs (127) among 25 anthropometric landmarks, but calculating Geodesic distances (only possible in 3D) together with Euclidean's. In this work the authors achieved a 98.8% (neutral expression) and 95.6% (different facial expressions) rank-1 accuracy over a database containing 1149 3D facial models.
Unfortunately, there is a important issue with 3D facial images: it is very unlikely to have them in forensic cases, thus, the application of the latter technology is limited. Another possibility, limiting to the use of 2D photographs as the most common available forensic material but attached to the advantages and discriminant power of 3D measurements, is the one presented in this manuscript. For the first time, we propose a methodology to estimate 3D DPIs from 2D ones. This methodology uses computer graphic techniques to simulate thousands of facial photographs under known camera conditions, and regression to derive the mathematical relationship between 2D and 3D DPIs automatically. Using this methodology we aim to demonstrate the utility of photo-anthropometry as a tool for facial examination, allowing us to anthropometrically describe a given unknown face. Additionally, we also present a method that makes use of the estimated 3D DPIs for reducing the number of potential matches of a given unknown facial photograph within a set of known candidates. However, the final goal of the research line initiated with this article is more challenging: the application of photo-anthropometry to quantitatively describe the available facial photographs (AM material) and skulls (PM material) and the automatic comparison of these quantitative measurements for candidate filtering purposes in craniofacial identification scenarios.
