The need for individuals who possess skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) has never been greater in our country. Yet as recent reports from both business and government sectors indicate, millions of these STEM jobs remain unfilled in large measure because of a skills shortage in America’s labor market (U.S. Congress Joint Economic Committee Report, 2012, U.S. Department of Commerce, 2011). In a 2015 report to Congress, the Committee on Equal Opportunities in Science and Engineering (2015) identified poor elementary and high school education as one of the major reasons that STEM careers are ignored, dismissed or abandoned. This dynamic is especially prominent among minority students in our inner cities.
Since the early 1990s the achievement gap between white students on the one hand, and black and Hispanic students on the other, has remained disturbingly large (National Center for Education Statistics, 2013). Much of the available research indicates that this gap widens over time, is accelerated over the summer break, and is not limited to cognitive skills, but affects non-cognitive skills as well (Heckman, 2013, Fryer and Levitt, 2004). A consensus has also emerged that interventions to improve academic performance are best targeted at younger (elementary) school students; these interventions do not face the equity-efficiency tradeoff characterized by programs for adolescents (Heckman, 2013, Heckman and Masterov, 2008).
In this paper we report results from an evaluation of the Nurture thru Nature (NtN) program in seven elementary schools serving disadvantaged black and Hispanic students in Central New Jersey, USA. NtN is a natural/environmental science initiative that attempts to improve the basic science, mathematics and language arts performance of disadvantaged elementary and middle school students and use this improvement as a platform for stimulating interest in STEM disciplines and careers. The program is inspired by the “Head, Heart and Hands” environmental educational model articulated by Singleton (2015) which has its roots in the active learning philosophy of John Dewey (1976,1990. The NtN program is designed as a classical experiment with random assignment to treatment and control groups and operates as an after-school as well as a summer enrichment program. NtN makes active use of the aesthetics readily found in nature to excite student imagination and engender a deeper scientific understanding of the interconnections among persons, community and the environment.
