In the vast literature on scientific models and simulations, increasing attention has been paid to the sensitivity of modelling to scales. Models and simulations are tied to particular scales, with far-reaching consequences for the ontological inferences that can be drawn about the target system. For example, fluid dynamics typically offers scale-based models for the behavior of fluids. It is possible to model a fluid at the macro-scale (e.g. its viscosity) without having to model what happens at the micro-scale (and the Navier-Stokes equations typically take care of this modelling task at the macro-scale). On the other hand, if the goal is to model and understand the statistical behavior of molecules composing the fluid, then modelling at the macro-scale does not help with the task. Batterman (2013) has called this well-known feature of modelling practices the “tyranny of scales”; and has addressed the problem by looking at the role of the renormalization group in modelling what he calls the “in between scales” point of view. Batterman has explored methodological ways of modelling “in between” scales as a way of counteracting the tyranny of scales and the apparent choice it forces upon us between pure top-down or pure bottom-up modelling techniques.1 Batterman’s message is that “mesoscopic structures cannot be ignored and, in fact, provide the bridges that allow us to model across scales” because they are the scale at which top-down modelling strategies and bottom-up modelling strategies typically meet:
bottom-up modelling of systems that exist across a large range of scales is not sufficient to yield observed properties of those systems at higher scale. Neither is complete top-down modelling. After all, we know that the parameters appearing in continuum models must depend upon details at lower scale levels. The interplay between the two strategies—a kind of mutual adjustment in which lower scale physics informs upper scale models and upper scale physics corrects lower scale models—is complex, fascinating and unavoidable (Batterman (2013), p. 283).
The overarching goal of the present paper is to contribute to this literature of modelling across scales by looking not at hydrodynamics, or condensed matter physics, but instead at contemporary cosmology. This paper explores the distinctive ways in which the “tyranny of scales” affects modelling dark matter at the meso-scale as I am going to call the scale of individual galaxies in contemporary cosmology. Three scale-related problems about modelling dark matter are presented and discussed. These problems are interesting because they lie at the very heart of cutting-edge research in cosmology; and, they touch upon pressing methodological aspects on which the debate in cosmology between the standard model (ΛCDM) vs. Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND) has been revolving. I am going to call them the “downscaling problem”; the “upscaling problem”; and the “in between” scales problem. Before presenting each of them, it is necessary to flesh out both the philosophical and scientific context behind the problem of multiscale modelling in contemporary cosmology.
What Batterman calls the “tyranny of scales” affects modelling in cosmology in interesting and novel ways, I am going to argue. For it affects the very nature of the debate between the ΛCDM model and MOND as well as some novel hybrid proposals that have emerged to go beyond the ΛCDM – MOND dichotomy. The ΛCDM – MOND debate has been ongoing since the 1980s when the work of Milgrom (1983) challenged the standard ΛCDM model, which postulates the existence of cold dark matter, and suggested instead the need for amending the laws of Newtonian dynamics at large scale. While the majority of the cosmology community has gathered consensus around the ΛCDM model —because of its remarkable success at explaining structure formation at large scale, among many other phenomena (as explained in Section 2)— as of today, no dark matter particles have been detected yet.
There is more. In the past two decades increasingly more accurate astrophysical data and measurements concerning galaxies have been made. These data have highlighted some phenomena—for example, the so-called Baryonic Tully-Fisher relation, (BTF hereafter) among others—that naturally fit MOND but are more problematic to explain within the ΛCDM model. Most within the cosmology community would not be swayed by BTF evidence at galactic scale, while MOND supporters have increasingly pointed at this evidence to keep the debate open. It is fair to say that many in the cosmology community feel that this debate will be settled if and when either dark matter is detected in the laboratory; or when MOND can be generalized from the status of a successful phenomenology at the galaxy scale onto a general theory at large scale.
From a philosophical point of view, however, this debate goes deeper than the dichotomy between finding the smoking gun of dark matter particles; or elaborating a suitable relativistic MOND for large-scale structure. What is philosophically at stake in this debate is yet another manifestation of the “tyranny of scales”; or better, how challenging multi-scale modelling proves when the scales in question are of the order of cosmological scales. My overarching philosophical goal is to lay out the nature, problems, and prospects of multi-scale modelling in contemporary cosmology by advancing and substantiating five main claims:
(i)ΛCDM and MOND, respectively, work best at a specific scale (large scale for ΛCDM, meso or galactic scale for MOND);(ii)Each model faces challenges when modelling across more than one scale. The ΛCDM faces problems going down from large scale structure formation to the meso scale of individual galaxies—I call this the “downscaling problem”. MOND faces problems going up from the meso scale of individual galaxies to the large scale of clusters and structure formation—I call this the “upscaling problem”.(iii)Philosophically, these problems are different in nature and different physical solutions to them have been given. The downscaling problem for ΛCDM is a problem about the explanatory power of ΛCDM for some recalcitrant phenomena at the meso scale of individual galaxies. The upscaling problem for MOND, by contrast, is a problem of consistency: how to consistently extend MOND at large scale where general relativity (GR) applies (and most of the large scale phenomena and even experimental techniques, such as gravitational lensing, rely on and presuppose the validity of GR).(iv)Hybrid models have recently been explored (e.g. dark matter superfluidity discussed in Section 5). These models aim to bypass the ΛCDM – MOND dichotomy by delivering the best of both worlds at the large scale and the meso scale. They too, I contend, face challenges: I call it the “in between” scales problem. And it is not a problem about explanatory power, or consistency, but about the predictive novelty of the hybrid model and the extent to which its success is genuinely independent of the success of either ΛCDM or MOND.(v)Ultimately, I suggest, a successful multi-scale cosmology ought to address these problems of scales that different models respectively face. Even if dark matter particles were detected tomorrow, the ΛCDM would still need to come up with an explanation of the BTF relation for galaxies. Even if MOND were able to retrieve clusters’ behavior, the problem of consistency with large scale phenomena (CMB angular power spectrum, the matter spectrum, gravitational lensing) would still have to be addressed.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the standard ΛCDM cosmological model, and very briefly reviews the evidence for it at large scale and ongoing searches for dark matter particles. The emphasis in this Section is on the meso-scale of individual galaxies (rather than the micro scale of dark matter particle candidates, or the large scale of structure formation in the universe). This is the scale at which most of the contemporary debates and controversy takes place. Three problems about multiscale modelling are presented. Section 3 illustrates what I refer to as the “downscaling problem”, faced by the current cosmological model, with a focus on some very recent developments on the front of computer simulations and their ability to tackle this problem. Section 4 discusses the “upscaling problem” faced by modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND), as a rival of the current cosmological model. I review in particular two recent attempts at expanding upon MOND (the so-called EMOND and Verlinde’s emergent gravity). Section 5 briefly illustrates a recent proposal that has been put forward with an eye to overcoming the stand-off between the downscaling and the upscaling problem. This hybrid proposal (by Berezhiani and Khoury) while exciting and promising, faces its own problem, namely what I call the “in between” scale problem, in the creative attempt at devising modelling solutions for dark matter across different scales. In the final Section 6, I draw some qualified and tentative conclusions on the philosophical and physical challenges still open for multiscale modelling in contemporary cosmology.
