In a recent study, it was shown that real life system operation follows a two level configuration denoted as “Time driven – event driven – parameters change” paradigm as elucidated in Fig. 1 [1], [2], [3]. The basic level indicates the time-based physical system with its accompanied physical dynamic (state-space) equations, while satisfying the controllability and stability requirements. On the other hand, the upper level represents the event-based platforms affecting the system from all inside and outside sources.Download : Download high-res image (301KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. A schematic diagram depicting the forward stacking of “time driven-event driven-parameters change” paradigm [1], [2], [3].
The study revealed that “everything in life is subject to change” and the sequential progresses of real life systems during their changes follow the representation shown in Fig. 2. Such changes can be viewed as some type of forming one or more of six types of stack-based layers (S1, S2, …, S6) as summarized in Table 1(see footnote1). Each stack is categorized as growing S(+), shrinking S(-), growing/shrinking S(±), or blank/empty S(0). Stacks of blank type (zones of versatile categories or its categories cannot clearly be specified) are denoted just by the symbol S. Moreover, each stack layer could contain sub-layers, segments and sub-segments.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 2. Schematic of sequential progress of different physical stacked-based layering pathway changes at the system basic level.Table 1. Different classification of stack-based physical layering systems.Stack classDescription of stack classS1Above, top or upwardS2Beneath, bottom or downwardS3Single, double or all sided-externalS4Outward, outer or coating of certain original system core or nucleusS5Inward, inner or lining of certain hollow or empty space inside the basic original systemS6Within, in-between or scattered-internal. This class may also include within its sub-layer(s) nested stacks allowing sub-stacks within existing stacks, or clustered sub-stacks scattered or in-between the existing stacks.
It can also be observed everywhere that the stacking behavior of system change is followed by all systems in various disciplines and sciences with different types and categories. Numerous examples of real life systems have been reported in geosciences, life sciences, environmental science, ecology, biology, medicine, material sciences and engineering following the above different stack-based layering behavior as given in [1], [2].
The programming of various types of the above stacks has successfully been developed in modular form using the notion of growing and shrinking matrices as given in [4] (see footnote2). The implementation of the stack-based layering modeling methodology to real life systems includes three aspects, namely layering identification, layering extraction and layering processing (using either 2-D or 3-D stack layering representations) as depicted in Fig. 3 [2].Download : Download high-res image (294KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 3. The stack-based layering modeling methodology.
The main approach was based on introducing a new instrument or measure denoted as μ that describes a form of register to all events and influences on the system “on and above” their normal practices. External or internal excessive influences and happenings on the system can be visualized as accidents, collisions, impacts, breaks, shocks, collapses, eruptions, destructions, etc. Also extreme, severe, extraordinary, unusual, rare events, etc. are all included within such affecting categories [5].
Based on this concept, it was investigated that such influences will lead to corresponding change of the parameters of the system (regardless of their time of occurrences). As each system is different than the other, it is logical to assume that such change will differ from one system to another and is particular to each system depending on its susceptibility and withstanding to change. For such purpose the “Consolidity Index” [6], [7], [8], [9] is introduced as a normalized metric for scaling such change.
Consolidity is an intrinsic system metric that changes from one system to another and can be calculated based on the system physical equation(s). It is a normalized index measuring the ratio of total output changes over total combined inputs and systems effects through fuzzy sets, random sets, rough sets, Z-numbers, or any other similar sort of analysis. The system is considered to be consolidated if index < 1, neutrally consolidated if index ≈ 1, and unconsolidated if index > 1. The typical ranges of the consolidity indices based on previous real life applications are as follows: very low (<0.5), low (0.5 to 1.5), moderate (1.5 to 5), high (5 to 15), and very high (>15) [1], [2], [3].
In the following section, the new paradigm of “Fractals-General Science” is elaborated and compared with other fractals approaches reported in the literature.
