1.1. Breast cancerBreast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer (National-Health-Service, American-Cancer-Society) and accounts for 25.2% of the total cancer related deaths among women followed by colorectal (9.2%), lung (8.7%), cervix (7.9%), and stomach cancers (4.8%) according to the International Agency for Research on Cancer, WHO1 (Stewart and Kleihues, 2014). The assessment process for breast screening follows a triple assessment model: appropriate imaging (i.e. mammography as a primary imaging modality for lesion visualisation and finding early changes in breast tissue) plus clinical assessment and, where indicated, needle biopsy (i.e. H&E 2 stained histology) (Breast-Cancer-Biopsy, 2016). Typical examples of mammographic and H&E histological images of breast tissue, as the two commonly used imaging modalities, are shown in Fig. 1 and are the focus of this paper.Download : Download high-res image (602KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Two breast imaging modalities: (a) mammography images from the INBreast dataset (Moreira et al., 2012), Craniocaudal (CC) and Mediolateral Oblique (MLO) views (left - right sides) shown in the first and the second row respectively; (b) breast histology images from the MITOS-ATYPIA-14 (2016) dataset, showing from top to bottom: 10 HPF, 20 HPF and 40 HPF (HPF stands for high power field which indicates magnified areas).Among the women who undergo mammographic screening, about 10% are recalled for additional evaluation. Among these, 8 to 10% will have suspicious abnormal findings which warrant undergoing breast biopsy (Neal et al., 2010). In the United States, approximately 15-30% referred for biopsy are found to have malignant abnormalities and in European trials, this ranges from 30% to 75% (Kopans, 1992). Although effective, this process is a trade-off between sensitivity (84%) and specificity (91%) which leads to a number of unnecessary biopsies (Elmore et al., 2009). The impact of unnecessary biopsy and the downstream diagnostic burden includes increased anxiety, morbidity and stress for the women concerned and increased health care costs. Nevertheless, biopsy is currently considered the only way to confirm the presence of cancer (Elmore et al., 2009). Therefore, there is a clear need to develop a specific discrimination model or criteria, like the “Stavros Criteria” in ultrasound, which determines whether ultrasound could help accurately distinguish benign solid breast nodules from indeterminate or malignant nodules and whether this distinction could be specific enough to reduce the need for biopsy (Stavros et al., 1995). In mammography, an equivalent model or criteria could indicate benign abnormalities and reduce the need for further biopsies.
1.2. Conventional CAD systemsIn order to assist radiologists’ interpretation, Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) systems and quantitative image analysis (QIA) techniques have been developed as an alternative to double reading, improving clinicians’ accuracy and patient outcome. These systems are aimed at improved identification of subtle suspicious masses, calcifications, micro-calcifications and other abnormalities in mammograms (Oliver, Freixenet, Marti, Pérez, Pont, Denton, Zwiggelaar, 2010, He, Juette, Denton, Oliver, Martí, Zwiggelaar, 2015). Meanwhile, histological CAD systems, provide another perspective on developing breast cancer models such as the identification of tumour regions, mitotic activity, nuclear atypia score, the epithelium-stroma and the tubule formation score along with identifying subtypes of breast cancer like IDC3 or ILC4  (Veta, Pluim, van Diest, Viergever, 2014, Gurcan, Boucheron, Can, Madabhushi, Rajpoot, Yener, 2009). An overview of machine learning based image analysis aspects used in histopathology and mammography CAD systems is provided in Fig. 2. Using conventional machine learning methods, various hand-designed descriptors (i.e. morphological, topological and textural features) based on prior knowledge and expert guidance have been developed for these CAD systems. Previous publications have described and compared such approaches for automatic detection and segmentation of abnormalities in mammographic images (Oliver, Freixenet, Marti, Pérez, Pont, Denton, Zwiggelaar, 2010, Oliver, Freixenet, Martí, Zwiggelaar, 2006, Giger, Karssemeijer, Schnabel, 2013, Boyer, Balleyguier, Granat, Pharaboz, 2009). When dealing with breast histology; inherent complexities are modelled via different algorithms to achieve specific tasks (Kowal, Filipczuk, Obuchowicz, Korbicz, Monczak, 2013, Irshad, Veillard, Roux, Racoceanu, 2014, Dundar, Badve, Bilgin, Raykar, Jain, Sertel, Gurcan, 2011, Kothari, Phan, Stokes, Wang, 2013, Veillard, Kulikova, Racoceanu, 2013). These models and approaches have been evaluated on different breast databases including digital/digitised mammography and histology images.Download : Download high-res image (420KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Image analysis procedures for mammography and histopathology image data.The most significant weakness of conventional machine learning methods is the hand-engineered feature extraction step, which employs a combination of heuristic and mathematical descriptors. Subsequently, the extracted features are introduced into different classifiers to be categorised into the desired classes as expressed in Fig. 2. This feature extraction step makes the learning algorithm more cumbersome since it mostly depends on the features extracted from the data and requires effort and sufficient interpreting knowledge due to the various geometrical and morphological structures. Reproducing results is not always easily achieved and the generic discrimination ability of the features used needs investigation.
1.3. Towards, deep learning based CAD systemsThe benefits of conventional mammographic and histologic CAD systems in clinical practice have not been fully determined. There has been significant discussion on whether CAD is an effective tool at the current level of performance (Fenton, Abraham, Taplin, Geller, Carney, D’Orsi, Elmore, Barlow, Consortium, 2011, Giger, 2014). Still, more creative and predictive models need to be designed to improve the performance metrics, including accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, precision and recall rate to improve upon the current state-of-the art. A crucial step towards a new generation of machine learning approaches is enabling computers to learn the features as data representatives. These are expressed as low-level features such as margin and edge; middle-level features such as edge junctions and high level object parts (Zeiler et al., 2011). Deep learning approaches - termed one of the significant breakthrough technologies of recent years by the MIT Technology Review (MIT-Technology-Review, 2017)- has made headlines in producing semantic information due to its nature of adaptive learning from input data. Various deep learning structures have been developed for both supervised approaches (algorithms that infer a function from input data with labelled responses) and unsupervised approaches (algorithms that draw inferences from input data without labelled responses). SAE5 (Ng, 2011), DBN6 and RBM7 (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009) are among popular architectures developed for unsupervised approaches. CNN8 (LeCun, Kavukcuoglu, Farabet, 2010, LeCun, Bottou, Bengio, Haffner, 1998) and RNN9 (Medsker and Jain, 1999) have become the technique of choice for supervised approaches. In recent years, a noticeable shift from conventional machine learning methods to deep learning based methods is seen in a wide variety of real world, especially medical, applications and several review papers have been published (Schmidhuber, 2015, LeCun, Bengio, Hinton, 2015, Litjens, Kooi, Bejnordi, Setio, Ciompi, Ghafoorian, van der Laak, van Ginneken, Sánchez, 2017). Several open crowd-sourced algorithmic analysis competitions have been announced to motivate the development of better techniques for cancer prognosis, detection, risk stratification, disease outcome prediction and survival. Recently held breast cancer mammography related competitions have been the Digital-Mammography-DREAM-Challenge (2017) and UK-Breast-Cancer (2016). Some recent breast histopathology competitions include: ICPR2012 (2017)10, AMIDA13 (2017)11, MITOS-ATYPIA-14 (2016), CAMELYON16 (2016), CAMELYON17 (2017)12 and TUPAC16 (2016)13. These competitions have influenced the evaluation of different methods to become more transparent and easier to compare. In most of these challenges, deep learning based approaches have shown the most promising performance.In AI14 technology, deep learning methods have multiple levels of representation learning which use raw data and discover the essential representations for detection or classification (LeCun et al., 2015). These inherent representations and patterns are obtained through a hierarchical framework which is able to put features extracted from a low level (starting with raw data) and high level abstracts together using a non-linear approach. Such networks are able to improve themselves according to the input content variation and optimise the relationship between inputs and outputs via an iterative training process (Bengio, 2009). At the same time as the deep learning concepts were developed, a step-change in processing power through high performance GPUs15 and open source frameworks/libraries developed on CUDA16 (CUDA, 2017) or OpenCL17 (OpenCL, 2017) platforms have made significant progress for the implementation of deep learning based methods. These open source frameworks and libraries provide the chance for optimised implementation of convolutions and other related functions. In addition, they facilitate the ability to perform a high number of computations at a relatively low costs through their massive parallel architectures.
1.4. Structure of the paperThis paper presents an overview of different deep learning based approaches used for mammography and breast histology and proposes a bridge between these two fields employing deep learning concepts. We have focused on mammography, since this is the most common modality used in breast screening, and H&E stained histology, since it is considered as the gold standard for final decision making.The main aims of this paper are:
1.In Section 2, deep learning based models are introduced and their fundamental structures summarised.2.Recent deep learning based approaches for mammographic and histopathologic image analysis are reviewed (covered in Sections 3 and 4, respectively). Details of the models (e.g. datasets, architecture, etc.) are provided in separate tables.3.Exploring the link between mammography and histology phenotypes from a biological point of view is reviewed in Section 5.4.The future of deep learning in constructing a model linking mammographic and histologic features and phenotypes called “Mammography–Histology–Phenotype–Linking–Model” (MLM<−>H) is covered in Section 6.5.Potential challenges to be considered in the development of MLM<−>H are also discussed in Section 6.1.4.1. Paper selection processWhen selecting the papers, popular review papers (Veta, Pluim, van Diest, Viergever, 2014, Gurcan, Boucheron, Can, Madabhushi, Rajpoot, Yener, 2009, Oliver, Freixenet, Marti, Pérez, Pont, Denton, Zwiggelaar, 2010, Rangayyan, Ayres, Desautels, 2007, Doi, 2007, He, Juette, Denton, Oliver, Martí, Zwiggelaar, 2015, Litjens, Kooi, Bejnordi, Setio, Ciompi, Ghafoorian, van der Laak, van Ginneken, Sánchez, 2017) were considered. Other papers citing them and publishing work on mammography or breast histology were also reviewed. Papers published by participants in breast cancer challenges were selected too. Google Scholar was searched using keywords: “breast cancer, mammography, histopathology, CAD systems, deep learning, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), linking map, phenotype” and those related to breast cancer and deep learning were included in this review.
