Agricultural engineering is one of the most promising fields for applying the latest advances in expert systems [1]. The purpose of these techniques is to reduce production costs, increase crop quality and productivity, and ensure the sustainability of the methods used. This is an essential aspect, since agriculture is one of the human activities that have the greatest impact on climate change. For example, the use of phytosanitary products, such as herbicides, insecticides and fertilizers, can have a significant global effect on the environment. Therefore, reducing the use of such products is a key objective in current agricultural expert systems.
In particular, weed control is a very active area of study in expert systems recently [[2], [3]]. Weeds are considered to be harmful plants in agronomy, because of the competition against crops for getting water, minerals and other nutrients in the soil of the field. The techniques for weed control depend on the type of crop, the type of weeds and the planting method. Generally, the optimum time to control weeds begins with the planting of seedlings and continues until the crop growth concludes [4]. Nowadays, the most common way for removing weeds is spraying the herbicide uniformly all over the farmland, which means that areas without weeds are also sprayed. Therefore, new expert systems have been suggested in Precision Agriculture for weed control. These systems only spray in the exact spots where there are weeds and, so, reduce the risk of contamination of crops, humans, animals and water resources.
According to Wong et al. [5], spot spraying is the most effective way to reduce the use of different types of herbicides, and it will help to improve human health and prevent environmental pollution. They suggested a computer vision expert system based on spot spraying, considering different types of weed, which can be usually found in corn-growing lands. 80 images were taken from each type of weed; 60 samples were used for training a support vector machine classifier, while the remaining 20 images were used for testing. After capture, several shape, moment invariant and color features were extracted from each sample. Some of the best features were selected by using a genetic algorithm, and then a classifier was applied using them. The experiments showed that the proposed classifier achieved an accuracy of 100% for all the classes. However, the results of this research could not be applicable for online spraying, for two reasons: (1) there was only one type of weed in the used images, but in general it is possible that several types of weeds and crops appear in an image; and (2) the images were taken in static mode, however in videos sequences, the camera is moving along the field and many frames may not be correctly focused, depending on depth of field and exposure.
Several researchers, such as [[2], [6], [18], [7], [8]], have studied the detection and classification of weeds and different types of crops based on color analysis. Aakif and Khan [9] believed that automatic classification of plants is the most important step to predict diseases, and to estimate their growth and health state. They studied 14 types of leaves of different species. 187 images were used in order to train the classifier. Features in the fields of morphology, shape and Fourier descriptors were extracted from each leaf. Then they applied artificial neural networks to classify these input vectors. Their results showed that the system was able to classify the 14 types of leaves with an accuracy of 68.3% by using morphology features, 77.8% using Fourier descriptors, 83.6% with shape features, and 96.5% applying a combination of all the features. In total, the accuracy of proposed system was acceptable for that database; however, it has to be considered that light intensity can change in outdoor lighting conditions, so the thresholds should change accordingly.
According to some authors [[10], [11]], intelligent robots in agriculture should be able to recognize the information of their environment and their movement directions. But these two actions may be disrupted because of changing of light, temperature and humidity. Thus, they suggested that the robots focus on images taken from crop under different conditions, using different visual features. In this regard, Miao et al. [11] obtained 380 images with three types of light conditions corresponding to morning, noon and evening. Then, 8 features were extracted: the 3 components of color space HSL, the 2nd and 3rd components of HSV, and the 3 components of HSI. The feature vectors were classified using radial basis function neural networks. The results showed that this system was able to classify the image in sunny and cloudy days with an accuracy of 84.58% and 68.11%, respectively. This accuracy is not sufficient for a completely autonomous system, and would lead to many errors. Moreover, light intensity changes greatly during a day, so the use of just three light intensities does not seem to be enough for designing a general system under realistic conditions.
On the other hand, mechanical control and elimination of weeds in the traditional way present well-known problems such as destruction of crops. Thus, many researchers such as Meng et al. [12] have focused on integrating mechanical methods and expert systems. They suggested a computer vision system based on fuzzy logic for removing inter-row weeds. Their proposed system included a color video camera, an industrial laptop, a transverse displacement controller, a GPS receiver, a hydraulic system and blades to destroy weeds. The HSI color space was used for image processing, where the H component was thresholded to segment weeds. In this system, fuzzy logic was used for moving blades in longitudinal transverse directions. The proposed system was tested in 3 different speeds, 0.6, 1 and 1.4 m/s; the experiments showed that the highest transverse errors were 4.5, 5.5 and 6.8 cm, respectively. These errors can be considered acceptable, but if the image processing system is not trained for all lighting conditions, the errors would become greater.
Some authors have proposed the application of genetic algorithms in problems of weed detection. For example, Nguyen et al. [13] used genetic programming to distinguish rice and non-rice on 20 × 20 pixels windows. They observed that this approach greatly improved a simpler method based on color thresholding, achieving 90% accuracy. Watchareeruetai and Ohnishi [14] also made use of genetic algorithms to configure the parameters of a fuzzy logic classifier using color and texture. This system was designed for lawn weeds detection in winter, showing the benefits of this hybrid approach. In this regards, our idea is to apply metaheuristic methods, other than genetic algorithms, in the optimal configuration of a neural network.
More recently, other authors have proposed different solutions to weed detection by means of image processing. Li et al. [15] proposed a system to locate weed with multispectral images, using 4 characteristic wavelengths, and obtaining a recognition accuracy of 90.7%. Zheng et al. [16] tackled the problem of weed detection in maize crops, by using color indices. Principal components analysis (PCA) was applied to obtain the best color features, while reducing the effect of illumination. Their accuracy results range from 90% to 93.8%. Bakhshipour et al. [17] also used PCA, in this case applied to texture descriptors obtained with wavelet filters. They achieved a precise detection of weeds in crops of sugar beet, even in the presence of partial occlusion of the plants.
The aim of the present research is to describe a new computer vision expert system, using color and texture features for identifying weeds in order to perform site-specific spraying of herbicides. Three different types of weeds have been considered: Secale cereale L., Polygonum aviculare L. and Xanthium strumarium L., in a crop of potatoes (Solanum tuberosum subsp. tuberosum, var. Marfona). The main contribution of the proposed approach is the combination of artificial neural networks with two metaheuristic algorithms, one for the selection of the input features and another one for the configuration of the neural network parameters. In the first case, the cultural algorithm is applied, since it is more adequate for selecting a subset of elements from a set of candidates. In the second case, harmony search algorithm is the most adequate when some parameters have to be configured, each one with a set of possible values. As a result, the proposed expert system is able to work under natural lighting conditions, achieving a great accuracy and computational efficiency in the classification of plants and weeds.
