In recent days, automated diagnosis involves in medical image segmentation to extract the abnormal lesions from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain. The types of tumors vary due to several characteristics such as nature, volume, its shape, volume, number and its locations of lesions. MRI offers an advanced concreteness of flexible tissue composition to appropriate segmentation. The correct segmentation methods have a high correlation with image modality and the significance of tissues. Thus recognition of abnormalities is critical in diagnosis and treatment due to the multiplicity of intracranial diseases including brain tumor, edema, cerebral aneurysm, characteristics, vascular malformation, trauma, heterogeneity or changes in radio and(or) chemotherapy. Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) method has added a new dimension to physicians for achieving a faster and more perfect identification.
The CAD is field explicit because they are precise for a particular category of diseases, focuses on a specific piece of the body and diverse on diagnosis techniques. The diverse kind of input includes stated indication, pathological tests, health checkup, and brain images corresponding to their domain-specific areas. Development of such CAD system is demanding because they unite the basics of segmentation, artificial intelligence, machine learning, statistics, deep learning and MR images analysis. This effort proposes a CAD structure to assist the radiologists in the recognition of tumors lesions in MRI scan from the human brain to predict their natures. A number of the older mechanisms [1] dealt with the problems of segmenting area of solid tumors. The earlier effort was used by spatially biased k-means histogram-based clustering method, while, in the later effort, the authors apply a multi-resolution computer-generated annealing technique. A more modern work a thresholding method based on Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) cluster [2] was used to eliminate the entire non-brain area. The outcome of that clustering was fragmented into slices by median filtering to reduce noise, and then the highest entropy threshold was calculated for every slice to determine the possible abnormal area as a tumor. The small defected lesion identification within the high background intensity values makes an unsatisfactory result. It has experimented that extraction of shady irregularity was not helpful as segmentation in light glow abnormal lesions. Generalized fuzzy c-means algorithm was [3] used together features selection with the local spatial knowledge that was biased in connection with the nearest component based on their Euclidian distance between different features. The poor disparity, noisy, and heterogeneous intensity dissimilarity can change the outcome of automated method. Results of the unsupervised learning segmentation appear to a comparative analysis with typical unsupervised k-means techniques. K-means was less important in the scientific background as a sign of the detection of multivariate brain MRI can matters. The color transformed tumor segmentation with K-means cluster technology [4] was properly separate tumor to assists pathologist to discriminate the lesion volume and its quantification correctly. Fast recognition technique based asymmetric vicinity with respect to the estimated brain regularity plane was proposed [5]. It applied to many datasets with diverse abnormality extent, intensities and locality to identify and segment very dissimilar types of brain abnormality with similar types. Asymmetry based [5] outcome comprise the detection method on a group of a spatial deformable model, and leading to a specific recognition of the tumor. In the final phase of their work, the tumors areas were determined to find out their locality and grayscale statistics property. The result obtained was really cheering; the authors were acknowledged that it was a premature effort. An improved method was applied to improve the superiority of detection with precise morphology to enhance the contrast in brain MRI. The wavelets transform was used to segmentation techniques by breaking the image into small sub-images [6]. The practical utility is that it can assist in detecting tumors during huge sets of MR images of brain scans within a very small time period.
The implication of heterogeneity of tumor lesion was observed in cellular level, however dissimilarity in genetic appearance and nutrient necessities can supply to a varied and active micro background, that was previously been occupied as a main feature in chemotherapy confrontation. Authors had developed [7] a distinct cell biomarker implementation for a series of precise recognition of genetic appearance in existing cells with no changing feasibility or intrinsic biology. A key part of the heterogeneity detection was a suitable metric that (i) enables comparisons of tumor shapes, (ii) provides tools for computing descriptive statistics and implementing principal component analysis on the space of tumor shapes, and (iii) allows for a rich class of continuous deformations of a tumor shape. The utility of the heterogeneity analysis was illustrated through specific statistical tasks on a dataset of radiologic images of patients diagnosed with glioblastoma multiform, a malignant brain tumor with poor prognosis. In particular, that analysis discovers two patient clusters with very different survival, subtype and genomic characteristics [8]. Furthermore, it was improved by adding tumor shape information into survival models containing clinical and genomic variables in predictive power.
A brain tumor segmentation [9] and categorization technique for multi-modality MRI scans was proposed for heterogeneous tumor segmentation. From the pre-processing steps, the information was extracted as intensity, the difference between intensity, locality and wavelet texture. The incorporated features consequently offers to the decision tree based categorization to guess five different classes: background, enhancing tumor, necrosis, and tumor surrounded edema. Then non-full-grow tumor and class labels were used to generate a tree data structure to quantify full tumor, dynamic tumor and enhancing tumor. Single cell sequencing (SCS) [10] was turned into a new loom to learn biological tumor heterogeneity. The improvement in exercising for particular cell separation, enlargement of transcriptase and sequencing facilitates SCS to expose the inherent assets of a unique cell from a large amount of the genome at very high resolution. In recent times, SCS is broadly useful in diverse medical and investigation areas, such as oncology, and prenatal analysis but SCS suffers from under segmentation. In SCS analysis, authors discussed the growth of SCS techniques and focus on the most recent clinical research uses of SCS.
To resolve the dispute of under-segmentation, a mutual histogram based correction of the isotropic (I) and anisotropic (Q) mechanism of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was proposed [11]. They investigate the heterogeneous character of glioblastoma tumor with the mutual histogram and estimate their analytical values [11]. Pixels were mine from DTI-I and -Q model was used to build mutual histograms, in contrast, attractive and non-enhancing areas respectively. Their predictive values were studied and evaluated with experimental factors using some mathematical metrics [12]. Robust results were established for the majority patients, through careful pixels collection that was compulsory to keep away from sub-optimal segmentation. A complete technique for detection of the irregular tissue connected with tumor center and edema from MR image was proposed [13]. The technique was based on super-pixel method and categorization of every super pixel. A number of new image information's including intensity-based, Gabor textons, fractal study, and curvatures were computed from every super pixel inside the whole brain in MRI to guarantee a strong categorization. Randomized trees (RT) categorization was evaluated with support vector machine to categorize every super pixel into tumor and non-tumor. This offers a close competition to the specialist description for all evaluation of glioma direct to a quicker and more reproducible technique of brain tumor recognition and description to aid patient organization. A new technique for glioblastoma removal based on Gaussian mixture model using MRI was proposed for brain tumor heterogeneity detection [14]. They concentrate on the mission of new features to recognize glioblastoma using T1, T2 and FLAIR weighted MRI. A pathologic region was distinguished using multi-thresholding segmentation method with a morphological process on MR images. Multi-classifier methods were measured to assess the electiveness of the feature-oriented method in conditions of its ability to distinguish glioblastoma and normal tissue but suffer from spurious lesions generation. These experimental outcomes were capable to improve the distinctiveness of heterogeneity and timely treatment of a premature tumor.
A new approach [15] to the detection of saliency in a three-dimensional multi-channel MR image sequence for the glioblastoma multiform (a form of malignant brain tumor) was proposed. First enhance the three channels, FLAIR (Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery), T2 and T1C (contrast enhanced with gadolinium) to generate a pseudo-colored RGB (Red-Green-Blue) image. The method operates along the three major axes to maximize the computation efficiency while minimizing loss of valuable 3D information. Thus the 3D multichannel MR image saliency detection algorithm was useful in generating a uniform and logistically correct 3D saliency map with pragmatic applicability in CAD. The results were compared with 2D saliency detection algorithm and applied on brain data. For all comparisons, the area under the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve was found to be more than 90% over various tumor types, structures, and locations. But this method does not work well for the boundaries that are not well defined. An ensemble method [16] was proposed by combining the results generated by Potential Field Segmentation (PFS) and other methods to achieve a fused segmentation. Potential field clustering was based on an analogy with the concept of potential field in physics. The intensity of a pixel was viewed in an MRI as a “mass” that was created a potential field. Specifically, for each pixel in the MRI, the potential field was computed and, if smaller than an adaptive potential threshold, the pixel was associated with the tumor region. The performance of PFS was quite competitive as a stand-alone segmentation method but requires to tuning of fewer parameters.
Berkeley wavelets transformation (BWT) [17] based brain tumor segmentation was proposed with the combination of support vector machine (SVM) to improve the accuracy and quality rate. The experimental results of BWT technique were evaluated, validated for performance and quality analysis on magnetic resonance brain images, based on accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and dice similarity index coefficient. The proposed method was suitable for integrating clinical decision support systems for primary screening and diagnosis by the radiologists or clinical experts. But more improvement is required in terms of accuracy by investigating the selective scheme of the classifier with the combination of more than one classifier and feature selection techniques. Automated number [18] of clustering selection was used by using histogram and entropy. This number was used for K-mean clustering algorithm. But authors did not find much accuracy for an automated number of cluster detection.
Previous methods discussed in this literature suffer from over-segmentation, under-segmentation, multiple lesion identification, small lesion identification and unable segment heterogeneous lesions identification. Proposed method solves the existing problem and effectively tested on different types of MR image causing different types tumor. There is no human interference to assists the physicians to enhance diagnose human brain abnormalities, for further treatment. The quantitative and practical study of proposed detection method is described along with the results of segmentation for individual abnormalities.
The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows: Proposed methodology is describes in Section II and result and its discussion is describes in Section III. A comparative study with competitive gold standard method is described in Section IV. Finally, we conclude our work in Section V.
