With the fast development of computing, communication, and control technologies, the fields of IoT and Cyber–Physical Systems (CPS) have attracted much attention in the last few years  [1], [2], [3]. These technologies realize the interconnection among ubiquitous things by the corresponding applications and services in both physical-space and cyber-space  [4], [5], [6], [7]. In physical-space, various physical objects (e.g., persons, sensors, computers, mobile devices, and commodity) have been accessed Internet as building blocks of IoT and enable novel applications  [8]. Meanwhile, a large number of cyber objects are generated in cyber-space  [9], [10]. They need to rely on the identification and resolution technology to directly or indirectly communicate and cooperate with each other to reach the goals of information sensing and automatic control  [11]. As an important field of IoT, identification and resolution technology has been applied various IoT scenarios. For example, entrance guard, logistics, food safety, supply chain management, Internet Finance (ITFIN), mobile payments, etc. Identification and resolution of physical object has become an important research direction for achieving object’s identity authentication, data access control, and trust establishment between object and service.
In the process of identification, various physical objects are respectively identified and associated by the corresponding identifiers. So that network and applications can control and manage these objects with identifier to implement information acquisition, processing, access control, transmission and exchange throughout both physical-space and cyber-space. In addition to physical object identification, there are communication identification and application identification. The former is used to identify the network nodes which has the communication ability, for example, IP address, E.164 number. The latter is used to identify the various application services in the application layer, for example, domain name, Uniform Resource Locator (URL). The identity resolution of physical object is a process that maps a physical object identifier to a communication identifier or application identifier or its associated information. For example, by resolving an identifier of product, we can obtain the application identifier which stores its related information or service  [12]. The identification and resolution of physical object realize the mutual mapping between the individual in physical-space and the identity information or application service in cyber-space.
For identification and resolution technology, current research mainly concentrates in physical objects with identification (ID) code. Electronic product code (EPC) and ubiquitous ID (uID) are typical ID code  [13], [14]. They have been widely used in various application areas, including logistics, food safety, supply chain management, commodity retail, and so on. They are accurate identifier which is comprised of numbers or alphabets with certain rules. The Object Name Service (ONS) is a typical resolution model of ID code  [15]. It links EPC with its associated Physical Markup Language (PML) data file  [16]. The host address on which corresponding PML file is located will be obtained by ONS. However, in some IoT scenarios, there are many objects without any available ID code. We can identify them with their properties, for example, biometric, space–time information, and other characteristics  [17], [18], [19]. Compared with ID code, these identifiers are not accurate. But they can meet the demands of identification in some IoT applications. Furthermore, they have some of the particular advantages which ID code is not available.
In the future, IoT and Internet of people (IoP) will be interconnected to each other enabled by cloud  [20]. More and more people are accessed to the Internet, and corresponding cyber-individuals will be generated  [21]. The research on human identification and resolution has become more and more valuable for realizing identity authentication, personal information management and data access control about human.
Face is a discriminative biometric which is used to uniquely distinguish different humans. It is an inherently reliable and distinctive identification method  [22], [23]. Face identification is a process that analyzes facial images, extracts special useful information such as pixel and position of feature points, size and position of eyes, nose and mouth  [24], [25]. Finally, face identifier is generated by using the extracted facial feature value. The goal of face resolution is to find the application identifier stored individual’s identity information or application service by identity authentication based on face identifier.
Compared with ID code, the process of face identification and resolution is more complex, which result from the characteristics of face identifier. Some algorithms need to be performed, for example, face detection, facial image preprocessing, facial feature extraction and identifier generation, identifier matching. So the computational complexity is greater than that of ID code. Moreover, it needs more storage capacity because the size of face identifier data is relatively larger and data structure is more complex. With the increasing of IoT applications based on face identification, face image database is also growing at the same time. It causes that the time complexity and space complexity of face resolution are further increased. Especially in current big data environment, the demands for computation power and storage capacity will be greater  [26], [27].
Currently, most of the identification and resolution applications are implemented in the specific and independent IoT scenarios. Simple identification and resolution service model is usually adopted. It is difficult to achieve interoperability between different industries and different platforms. Users need to frequently verify and resolve identity in different applications, which result in inconvenient operation, waste of resource, and increasing risk of privacy disclosure  [28]. Furthermore, the future of IoT is moving toward the direction of ubiquity, that is ubiquitous Internet of Things (ubiquitous IoT)  [29], [30]. It is the integration of multiple independent IoT applications and realizes the interconnections and cooperation among ubiquitous things, as well as pervasive management and access control of IoT resources  [31]. This situation facilitates the requirement which design a unified and efficient face identification and resolution scheme to share face services for cross-industry and cross-platform IoT applications.
The advantages of cloud computing technology in providing powerful computational and storage capacity and unified cloud service access can appropriately solve the above mentioned problems  [32]. It has many advantages in practical application, which mainly include resource pooling, virtualization, broad network access, high reliability, high scalability, elasticity (dynamic provisioning), service oriented architecture (SOA)  [33], [34]. These characteristics motivate the utilization of cloud computing technology to store and process face identifier data. Therefore, we design a face identification and resolution scheme based on cloud computing in this paper. This scheme concentrates computation power and storage capacity in cloud platform. It can solve the problems of computation and storage caused by the increasing of applications and users in IoT. Furthermore, we design a parallel resolution mechanism to give full play to the processing capacity of cloud computing and improve the efficiency of face resolution. In this scheme, the face identifier generation model, matching algorithm and service interface are unified. So various cross-industry and cross-platform applications can conveniently access the face identification and resolution service.
In this paper, we focus on identification and resolution based on face, as well as cloud computing-based resolution framework. The main contributions are as follows: 
(1)Face identification and resolution system model is presented to implement the face identifier generation and identifier matching. It can effectively identify an individual and realize the identity resolution with face identifier in IoT application.(2)Cloud computing-based face resolution scheme is proposed to resolve face image, control personal data access and obtain identity information service. It makes full use of the advantages of cloud computing to effectively meet the demands of computation power and storage capacity. Furthermore, it provides a unified face identification and resolution service platform for cross-industry and cross-platform IoT applications.(3)The parallel resolution mechanism is proposed to improve the efficiency of face resolution.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section  2 reviews the related work on face identification and resolution. Section  3 presents the face identification and resolution system model. Section  4 proposes the cloud computing-based face resolution scheme. Section  5 presents the experiment and performance evaluation for proposed scheme. Section  6 draws a conclusion.
