Researchers and practitioners often point to the use of technology-enabled instructional activities that employ constructivist pedagogical strategies as a key to engaging and motivating students in school (Blumenfeld, Kempler, & Krajcik, 2006). However, this assumption should not be taken as a given for a number of reasons, including factors such as how the activities are implemented by teachers (e.g., Wu & Huang, 2007) and whether the design and use of the technology-enabled activities might interfere with their willingness to engage with the content (Blumenfeld, et al., 2006). The specific type of technology that teachers use in classrooms will not necessarily determine the level of motivation and engagement that students experience—teachers can use a low-tech, low-cost, movie just as successfully as they can use high-tech, high-cost, games and simulations (Star et al., 2014). Thus, it becomes important to consider more nuanced questions about the specific affective experiences of students as they participate in activities rather than the medium (e.g., computer games versus movies). In fact, in our previous analyses of the same dataset using a variable-centered approach (Star et al., 2014) and only investigating changes from pre-intervention to post-intervention, we found that there was little to no effect of the technology activity that students participated in on outcomes such as self-efficacy and implicit theory of ability. There were very modest pre- to post-intervention changes on mathematics learning and value beliefs. These findings led us to consider the possibility that perhaps it is not the technology activity that makes a difference. Rather, it may be how students experience the technology that matters.
Unfortunately, evidence related to these issues is limited and contradictory (Moos & Marroquin, 2010). Like any pedagogical tool, technology can be designed and used in ways that facilitate or thwart students’ engagement and motivation. Also, motivation and engagement are broad multi-dimensional constructs, such that technology-enabled activities may be successful in affecting some aspects of motivation and engagement but not others. These issues drive the present research, where we explore the variety of ways that technology-rich activities can engage and motivate students, and how students’ experiences with the activity relate to their subject matter learning and motivation.
For the sake of clarity, we broadly define technology-enabled activities as those that involve some use of digital media. For our study in particular, we wanted to include digital media that spanned the spectrum from low interactivity and relatively low barriers for implementing (e.g., movies) to very high interactivity and relatively high barriers for implementing (e.g., immersive computer games). Also, because the terms engagement and motivation are often used interchangeably, we clarify how these constructs are defined and operationalized in the present study. Consistent with prior work on engagement (e.g., Furrer and Skinner, 2003, Skinner et al., 2008), we broadly define engagement with technology as the degree to which students feel immersed in an activity and find the activity to be interesting/enjoyable. Drawing from the motivational literature (e.g., Eccles, 2009, Wigfield and Eccles, 2000), we define motivation as beliefs about competence, which answer questions like, “can I succeed?” and beliefs about value, which answer questions like, “why would I want to do this activity?”
The present research makes three unique contributions to the literature on engagement, motivation, and technology. First, as mentioned, scholars have noted the poor quality of empirical evidence investigating the affordances of technology-rich scholastic activities (Moos and Marroquin, 2010, Wouters et al., 2013). By using constructs drawn from rigorous theories of motivation and engagement, we investigated what affordances (if any) are provided by three different technology-rich activities that were tightly integrated into teacher-led, inquiry-based, mathematics instruction. Therefore, any differences in students’ observed outcomes could be attributable to how students experienced the technology activity because everything else that students experienced was constant. Second, we drew from diverse literature bases to conceptualize salient aspects of motivation and engagement within technology-enabled environments. Although scholars have conceptualized the construct of engagement fairly broadly to encompass the dynamics that take place within a typical classroom (for a review see Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004), we sought to explore engagement in a manner that was consistent with the nature of technology-enabled activities. Third, our interest here is in individual differences regarding students’ motivation and engagement with technology-enabled activities. Rather than documenting whether computer games versus movies are associated with larger or smaller gains in motivation and engagement on average (e.g., Star et al., 2014, Annetta et al., 2009, Bai et al., 2012, Kebritchi et al., 2010), we instead examined the patterns of motivation and engagement evinced by students, which represented their individual affective experiences with the technology activity, regardless of which one they participated in.
We asked three main questions. First, what patterns (i.e., profiles) of motivation and engagement emerge regarding students’ experiences with technology? In particular, we focused on profiles regarding how immersive, interesting, and useful the technology activity was. We also focused on how relatable the characters were to students. Second, because the technology activities we used were integrated within a classroom-based mathematics lesson, we wondered what motivational and achievement outcomes in mathematics do students’ technology engagement profiles predict, even as all students (regardless of technology activity) received the same teacher-guided, inquiry-oriented, mathematics instruction? Exploring this question would allow us to provide evidence for predictive validity regarding the profiles of technology motivation and engagement. Finally, because technology is not a one-size-fits-all solution for all students, we wondered which factors predict students’ motivation and engagement with technology-enabled activities?
