Celiac disease (CD), or celiac disease, is a complex autoimmune disorder that affects the small intestine in genetically predisposed individuals of all age groups after the introduction of food containing gluten. Characteristic for the disease is an inflammatory reaction in the mucosa of the small bowel. During the course of CD the mucosa looses its absorptive villi and hyperplasia of the enteric crypts occurs, leading to a diminished ability to absorb nutrients. Recent studies showed that the prevalence of CD in Northern America and Europe ranges between 1:80 and 1:300 [1, 2, 3, 4].
The current gold standard for diagnosis of CD is endoscopy biopsies. Histopathological analysis is performed according to the modified Marsh classification [5] which distinguishes between the classes Marsh-0 to Marsh-3, with subclasses Marsh-3a, Marsh-3b, and Marsh-3c, resulting in a total number of six classes. According to this classification scheme, Marsh-0 denotes healthy mucosa (without visible changes of the villous structure) and Marsh-3c designates a complete absence of villi (villous atrophy).
The whole diagnostic work-up of CD, including endoscopy with biopsies, is time-consuming, cost-intensive, and rather invasive. Consequently, to save costs, time and manpower and to increase the safety of the procedure, a less invasive approach avoiding or reducing biopsies would be highly desirable. Studies by Cammarota et al. [6, 7] showed that upper endoscopy using an immersion technique can reliably detect abnormalities of duodenal villi. Automated diagnosis systems could help the physician during endoscopy by applying a continuous automated mucosa analysis that raises alarm in the case areas affected by CD are identified. Alternatively, the endoscopist could make use of the option to manually trigger the classification process for a specific mucosal region of interest.
Due to the possibly patchy distribution of CD [8, 9], areas affected by CD can be in the midst of normal mucosa. So, given the case that the biopsies are taken from areas of healthy mucosa, CD will be missed due to a sampling error. Automated systems could be used to indicate areas that are affected by CD and thus improve the targeting accuracy of biopsy taking.
Previous research also showed that the histological staging of biopsies is subject to a significant degree of intra- and inter-observer variability [10, 11, 12]. It is foreseeable that this variability might worsen especially in pediatric CD. In 2012, the European Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition issued new diagnostic criteria that for the first time allowed a non-invasive diagnosis under certain circumstances: in children and youths presenting with a history compatible with celiac disease and having tissue transglutaminase-IgA-autoantibody levels more than ten times the upper limit of normal and positive endomysium antibodies endoscopy with biopsies is not needed for the confirmation of the diagnosis [13]. A multicenter prospective European study conducted after 2012 provided sound evidence for the validity of this biopsy-skipping approach and showed that more than half the children with celiac disease do not need endoscopy with biopsies any longer for an accurate diagnosis of celiac disease [14]. However, the remaining children with celiac disease, who do not fulfil these criteria, still require endoscopy with biopsies, the analysis of which will be even more difficult because this group of children predictably will comprise more equivocal cases with more subtle alterations of the intestinal mucosa further aggravating the intra- and interobserver variability. Automated diagnosis systems are observer independent and could provide a “second opinion” either for a specific region in the bowel or for the overall diagnosis on a patient and thus improve the accuracy of the histopathological classification. For this purpose, the digital image material, which is routinely captured during esophagogastroduodenoscopies, can be exploited.
Research on automated diagnosis systems for the classification of CD was performed for two highly different endoscopic modalities:
•”Manual” esophagogastroduodenoscopies (EGDs): During this manual endoscopy, the physician has control of the camera and focuses on informative regions of the small intestine where images as well as biopsies are taken. Research in this field only made use of image patches that were manually extracted from actively captured image data [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23].•Wireless capsule endoscopy: Although the image data shows the same content, the arising challenges are different, as there is no way to control the camera in case of capsule endoscopy. Previous works using wireless capsule endoscopy were performed by Ciaccio at al. [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30]. For a survey on quantitative analysis of capsule endoscopy we refer to [31].
In this work we only consider manual EGD. Recent literature [32, 33, 34, 35, 36] in this field generally aims at a two-classes classification scheme. Specifically, mucosa showing no visible changes (Marsh-0) should be distinguished from mucosa showing visible markers of villous atrophy (Marsh-3A, Marsh-3B and Marsh-3C). For classification, mostly patches with a size of 128 × 128 pixels were manually extracted [32, 33, 34, 35, 36]. Pipelines generally consisted of a feature extraction and a separate classification stage. For image representation, either general purpose features such as local binary patterns [16, 37, 38, 39, 32] or Fisher vectors [40, 41] or domain specific approaches [21, 42] were employed. For classification, mainly support vector machines or k-nearest neighbor classifiers were applied. To measure classification performance, either cross-validation was applied or a fixed separation into training and test set was employed.
1.1. ContributionIn this work, we provide a review of recent trends on computer aided CD diagnosis based on endoscopic images obtained during EGDs. We focus on the last three years, i.e. we summarize published work since the survey of Hegenbart et al. [43], showing a significant change in methods as well as in the considered application scenarios. Hand-crafted features were completely replaced by state-of-the-art deep neural network architectures (Sect. 2). Apart from that, focus was laid on making the approaches completely automated by getting rid of the restriction that the patches need to be manually extracted (Sect. 3). Furthermore, diagnosis systems were not only applied to single patches (as done previously) but also to the combined data of patients enabling a more accurate decission on patient level. Finally, effort was undertaken to exploit the endoscopist’s expert knowledge to increase the system’s accuracy (Sect. 4). We put the recent work in a larger context and discuss about progress, remaining challenges and about limitations that are currently prohibiting a deployment in clinical practice and about future efforts to tackle them.
