Background subtraction and object tracking are important pre-processing and basic steps for various multimedia applications such as live video, traffic monitoring communication system, interactive learning space, etc.
Background subtraction plays an important role in video surveillance system because it provides a focus of attention for moving object detection. Even though numerous background subtraction algorithms have been proposed in the literature, the issue of distinguishing moving objects in challenging scenarios such as dynamic backgrounds and illumination variation is still far from being totally solved. The proposed background subtraction approaches create an accurate and adaptive background model with the help of key frame selection strategy and symmetry-based subspace construction process. So, it can handle the challenges prevailing in background subtraction [9].
Object tracking is also one of the challenging tasks in the field of computer vision. Tracking can be defined as the problem of estimating the trajectory of an object in the image plane as it moves around the scene. The main problem prevailing even now in object tracking is occlusion handling. The proposed trackers utilize symmetrical patterns from each diagonal directional derivative to extract unique features of each object. Thus, it is capable of handling occlusion and partial occlusion successfully.
Considering all these, the contributions can be listed as follows:

•Development of both background subtraction and object tracking methods based on a novel feature descriptor referred to as ES-DHP.•Symmetrical patterns are used to reduce the length of the feature vector. This reduced feature vector is significant to track the objects.
Some of the related works on moving object detection, object tracking algorithms and the patterns for background subtraction are given in Section 2. Section 3 presents the concepts of ES-DHP. Section 4 presents the proposed background subtraction approach using ES-DHP. Section 5 explains how object tracking is achieved using ES-DHP. The experimental results are presented in Section 6. Conclusion and future works are given in Section 7.
