Because we are living in big data century, therefore the efficient analytical tools which can analyze the huge volume of multidimensional data are still focus of intense research. One of the example of such a data is hyperspectral imaging, which is widely used in agriculture, mineralogy etc. One can say that if a picture is worth 1000 words, a hyperspectral image is worth almost 1000 pictures.1 Hyperspectral cameras are able to capture hundreds of monochrome images correlated with a particular spectrum, nevertheless they still need to be analyzed manually, what is highly time consuming and requires very expensive manual labeling. Therefore methods which can use partially labelled data are desirable tools for hyperspectral image classification [6]. One of the very promising direction is active learning paradigm [27], [35], which employs an iterative data labeling and classifier training strategy with as small as possible set of training examples. A complementary approach proposes an efficient data representation of hyperspectral images which could be used by a classification system. As we deal with multi-class and high-dimensional problem, we require a highly effective pattern classification system to be able to analyze such data.
Classifier ensembles are nowadays recognized as the on of the most promising direction in pattern classification [42]. This approach exploit the conclusions from so-called Wolpert’s no free lunch theorem, that there is not a single classifier, which is the best one for all decision tasks, but each model has its own, specific domain of competence [41] where it may outperform other competing algorithms. Let’s formulate the main presumptions of using such a classification model [13]

•Classifier ensembles behave well both in the case when a learning set is very small and when we have a huge amount of learning examples at our disposal. In the first case, classifier ensemble can exploit methods based on bootstrapping [30], while for the second case it allows to train individuals on partitions of dataset.•Classifier ensemble may outperform the best individual classifier [10] and under some conditions (e.g., majority voting by a group of individual classifiers committed error independently) this improvement has been proven analytically [26].•Many classifier training methods, as decision tree [34], are heuristic search algorithms which usually suffer from local optima. Therefore, the ensemble learning approach approach is equivalent to a multi-start local random search which increases the probability of finding an optimal model.•Classifier ensemble may be easy implemented in efficient computing environments such as parallel and multithreaded computer architectures [40].
In this work, we propose a novel ensemble dedicated to analysis of hyperspectral data. Its base classifiers are being built on the basis of decomposed color channels. This assures their initial diversity, as every color channel carries different information. We further augment this idea by using a trained fuser, based on perceptron learning. This allows us to assign higher weights to more competent classifiers. As not all of the channels carry equally useful features, we boost the influence of the most relevant ones on the final decision of the ensemble.
As the basis of our ensemble we propose to use Extreme Learning Machines (ELMs), a popular branch of randomized neural networks. Due to their efficacy and low training complexity they have been reported to display high usefulness for the hyperspectral data analysis task [28], [31]. However, methods for constructing efficient ELMs ensembles still require development [4].
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:

1.A novel proposition of the statistical-based feature extraction from hyperspectral images.2.An efficient ELMs ensemble architecture based on trained combiner.3.Application of the proposed features and ensemble structure together with Random Subspaces method to the problem of hyperspectral image classification.4.Experimental evaluation of the proposed approach.
In Section 2, we shortly introduce into hyperspectral image analysis, then in Section 3 presents the proposition how to extract the valuable features from hyperspectral data. Section 4 describes the classification methods based on ensemble approach. The experimental evaluation is presented in Section 5. At the end, in Section 6 shows conclusions and possible usages of the proposed approach.
