Video-sharing websites are a fast-growing platform that allows internet users to distribute their video clips. There are often a large number of face videos in these websites. How to index, retrieve, and classify these face videos has become an active research topic in the area of video-based face recognition (VFR) [1]. Current VFR methods often perform recognition based on hundreds or thousands of floating point features [2], and store almost every face sample from a video clip. Since there can be (many) thousands of face samples in a video clip, high-dimensional dense features and large-scale registered samples result in tremendously large time and space complexity, which becomes a computational bottleneck when applying VFR methods to video-sharing websites.
Recently, binary code representations have drawn much attention in biometric recognition [3], [4], [5] and large scale image retrieval [6], [7], [8]. Among these binary coding methods, codes constructed from ordinal measures (OM) are one representative method. Ordinal measures [9] are common in human perceptual judgments. It is easy and natural for humans to rank or order the heights of two persons, although it is hard to estimate their precise differences  [10]. Ordinal measures were originally used in social science [9] and then introduced to computer vision.
In biometrics, an OM is defined as the relative ordering of some property - for example, the average brightness of two adjacent regions (with 1 coding A≻B and 0 coding A≺B) or the relative ordering of two color channels within the same region. Ordinal filters with a number of tunable parameters, are methods to analyze the ordinal measures of image features. The Haar wavelet and quadratic spline wavelet can be regarded as typical ordinal filters. Ordinal features are the binary codes of image features obtained by thresholding ordinal filters. Fig. 1 plots a simple illustration of OM.Download : Download high-res image (316KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. An illustration of structured ordinal measures. Ordinal measure of visual relationship between two regions [10], [11]. Previous OM methods apply feature selection methods to select over-complete ordinal features (binary codes) that are generated by handcrafted ordinal filters. SOM simultaneously seeks ordinal filters and optimal ordinal features in a data-driven way, makes the learned features low-rank and enforces an optimal ordinal matrix for classification. In SOM, one binary code of a sample can be corrected according to the codes of similar samples.
In prior work, the set of handcrafted ordinal filters is chosen to correspond to some family of coherent patterns - like Gabor filters. The space of ordinal filters can therefore be quite large as the tunable parameters - scale, frequency, orientation - are varied, each giving rise to a potential ordinal feature. Different feature selection methods [10], [11], [12] have been used for OM to select a stable subset from the over-complete ordinal features. The term ’stable’ indicates that the floating point features generated by an ordinal filter from the same class are expected to have large margins so that the corresponding ordinal features (binary codes) are robust to intra-class variations during binarization.
Motivated by the success of OM in iris [11], palmprint [10] and face recognition [3], we present what we refer to as a structured ordinal measure (SOM) method for video-to-video face recognition. Different from previous handcrafted OM methods, SOM simultaneously learns ordinal filters (SVM’s) and structured ordinal features (binary codes) from video data as shown in Fig. 1. Considering that face appearances in video clips contain several facial variations and are similar in adjacent frames, we design the ordinal features of SOM to be stable and self-correcting binary codes. Stability indicates that the learned ordinal features are required to have large margins and to be clustered. The self-correcting character indicates that binary code of one frame depends not only on its corresponding ordinal filter (or coding function) but also on the binary values of similar (typically nearby in time) face samples. Because face images in a video clip often lie in a union of multiple linear subspaces [13], [14], the features (binary code) assigned to the subset of faces from a single linear subspace should be similar. These binary codes can be potentially corrected by each other through a low-rank constraint on the matrix of constructed codes. One of the main advantages of our method is that it simultaneously reduces the number of dense features and eliminates redundant samples.1
We will formulate the SOM problem as a non-convex integer program problem that mainly includes two parts. The first part learns stable ordinal filters to project video data into a space in which the filtered data are separable with a maximum margin. This can be viewed as an instance of maximum margin clustering (MMC) [15]. The second finds self-correcting binary codes by balancing the projected real-value data and a rank-one ordinal matrix in a structured low-rank way. Weakly-supervised and supervised structures are considered for the ordinal matrix. We also integrate CNN feature representations into our method to enhance stability. An alternating optimization method provides an efficient discrete solution to deal with the discrete and low-rank constraints imposed on binary ordinal features. In addition, a simple voting classifier with a self-correcting process is proposed to efficiently compress and classify video clips. Experimental results on three commonly used face video databases show that our SOM method can achieve state-of-the-art recognition results using fewer features and samples. Compared to previous binary coding methods for still images (face or iris), SOM more efficiently utilizes the low-rank property of video data and hence is potentially useful for VFR problems.
There are three major contributions of this work:

(1)By employing the optimal ordinal matrices as output structures, SOM encourages ordinal features from the same class to have similar binary codes. To the best of our knowledge, SOM is the first algorithm that learns binary codes (or hashing) using output structures.(2)Assuming that face images of a video clip are similar and related, we propose a self-correcting method to discretely binarize both gallery and probe videos. Our method utilizes the continuous information in videos and hence is effective for VFR tasks.(3)As a by-product of SOM, we show that using a simple voting classifier improves over competing and complex classification models on fine grained datasets like the YouTube Celebrities dataset and offers an impressive compression ratio of CNN floating point features (20% face samples and 64-bit binary codes).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We briefly review some recent advances on binary coding methods in Section 2. In Section 3 and Section 4, we present the details of SOM and the optimal ordinal matrices respectively. Section 5 provides experimental results, prior to summary in Section 6.
