The Mastcam color imaging system on the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover acquires images within Gale crater for a variety of geologic and atmospheric studies (e.g., Malin et al., 2017, Bell et al., 2017, Grotzinger et al., 2012). Images are often JPEG compressed onboard the rover before being downlinked to Earth. While critical for transmitting images on a low-bandwidth connection, this compression style can result in small image artifacts most noticeable as anomalous brightness or color changes within or near 8×8-pixel JPEG compression block boundaries (Fig. 1). In high-frequency detail regions of some images, for example in regions showing fine layering or lamination in sedimentary rocks, the image must be retransmitted losslessly (i.e., without lossy JPEG compression) to avoid introducing difficulties in the scientific interpretation of the data. The process of identifying which images have been adversely affected by compression artifacts is performed manually by the Mastcam science team. As of sol 1928, Mastcam acquired 87,885 images and 18,800 (∼ 21%) of these were retransmitted losslessly. This process requires a significant time commitment from human experts and consumes critical portions of the available downlink data volume.Download : Download high-res image (760KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Mastcam M-34 image of finely-layered outcrop rocks acquired on Curiosity sol 1155, sequence mcam05219. The middle inset shows a zoomed-in view of some of the layers in the image original downlinked with JPEG compression factor 85. The bottom image is an example of the same scene without compression. (Adapted from Bell et al. (2017)).
In this work, we aim to facilitate the scientific image review process using context-dependent image quality assessment. We define context-dependent image quality assessment as a process wherein the context and intent behind the image observation determine acceptable image quality thresholds. We propose to automatically identify images in which quality might be problematic for analysis using a two-part machine learning solution. Our proposed solution relies on: 1) a logistic regression model that maps compression level and joint entropy between an uncompressed and compressed image to the image utility, defined as the probability that a scientist would accept the quality of the compressed image; and 2) a convolutional neural network (CNN) that learns to predict the image utility given only the pixel information in the compressed image. Our solution can characterize the perceived quality of an entire image or small image patches. To evaluate this methodology, we perform an experiment to assess the time and effort expended by a Mastcam scientist when identifying images to retransmit. We show experimentally that, when assisted by our proposed method, a Mastcam investigator could significantly reduce the time required to review images. We also present a user study that surveys Mastcam data users to measure the correlation between assessments by our model and perceptions of context-dependent image quality by scientists.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 details previous work related to context-dependent image quality assessment. In Section 3 we describe our source dataset. In Section 4 we present our method for automatically labeling examples for training. In Section 5 we present our CNN model for assessing context-dependent image quality. Section 6 details the experiments and results for evaluating our proposed method and Section 7 discusses the contribution of these results. Finally, Section 8 summarizes our conclusions and proposes directions for future work.
