Substantial evidence suggests that regular physical activity helps to improve the health and well-being of both healthy and chronically ill individuals [1]. Exercise-based rehabilitation in patients with Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) is widely recommended by the medical community in order to reduce their mortality and improve their quality of life [2], [3]. Today, exercise-based Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) is mainly performed by patient groups in a controlled environment (e.g., a specialized rehabilitation centre), under the supervision of physiotherapists or cardiac nurses. However, low uptake and poor adherence to exercise-based CR is a major problem which is caused by several barriers, including transport, cost, dislike of group sessions, and self-efficacy issues [4].
A potential solution to the issue of patient adherence to exercise therapy, is the uptake of computerized interventions which can be utilised within the home environment [5]. Computerized interventions enhanced with new and widely available sensing technologies, such as smart watches and depth cameras, can enable physical activity self-tracking on a daily basis without constant supervision by health professionals [6]. In this context, a major challenge is to identify robust ways of assisting patients in unsupervised exercise-based rehabilitation programs to reach their goals, through the processing and evaluation of sensed physical activity data along with potentially available other clinical and behavioural information.
The aim of this paper is to present the design, development and evaluation of a computerized decision support system (DSS), targeting at the personalized and beneficial execution of exercise-based CR programs by CVD patients at their home. The system uses a rule-based approach in order to: a) Process clinical data, as well as data from sensors such as a smart watch and a depth camera, and b) generate actions in terms of adapting the CR program according to the patient's performance. Communication interfaces in the form of web service operations were adopted toward developing an interoperable and extensible system which can be integrated in future home-based exercise platforms. The system has been successfully deployed in PATHway (Physical Activity Towards Health) [7], a computer-assisted platform employing a virtual coach for exercise-based CR at home. Results from the evaluation of the DSS are presented, in terms of performance and guidance of individuals to exercise within or above their beneficial HR zones, as obtained from both simulation and real-world studies.
To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first studies illustrating the development and evaluation outcomes of a technical infrastructure dedicated for computerized decision support in unsupervised exercise-based CR. Other studies employing rule-based systems have focused on conditions other than CVD. The systems described by Lim et al. [8], for tailored message generation, and Song et al. [9], for autonomous bicycle ergometer training, focus on diabetes and COPD, while Salvi et al. focused on educational and motivational aspects of exercise-based CR [10]. Long-term physical activity outcomes of interventions utilizing computerized decision support have been widely reported [11], [12], however it is less known how decision support components should be developed to contribute to the effectiveness of those interventions. To this end, our system is the first-of-its-kind which uniquely processes and evaluates sensed data, e.g., heart rate (HR) and motion accuracy, along with other clinical and behavioural information (e.g., exercise prescription, self-reports on exertion, patient performance history) during unsupervised exercise, toward the beneficial execution of exercise-based rehabilitation programs.
