Untreated epilepsy causes people with it very serious problems including death, disfigurement and social disgrace [1,2]. Untreated epilepsy is treatable with drugs with the expectation that about two thirds of people will be free of epileptic seizures [3]. But identifying people with untreated epilepsy is a problem because they are reluctant to attend health camps [4] and do not always admit to their problem on door-to-door surveys [5]. It is likely that raising community awareness of epilepsy may make identification easier and it is also likely that there will be local knowledge in a community about who may have epilepsy.
But once identified people needed diagnosed and treated. Indeed there is little point identifying them if they are not going to be treated. In many parts of the world however, especially in rural areas, there are no doctors to diagnose and treat [[6], [7], [8], [9]]. It has been suggested by the World Health Organisation (WHO) that non-physician health workers (NPHWs) could diagnose and manage patients if they were given suitable tools [10], and there are of course many more NPHWs1 than doctors. The first stage of the process of diagnosis is the determination about whether episodes of loss or alteration of consciousness are epileptic or non-epileptic in nature, and a tool in the form of a phone app for this purpose has been developed in Nepal [11]. This was derived using Bayesian principles by starting with the pre-test probability of episodes being epileptic and then calculating the likelihood ratios (LRs) of episodes being epileptic for each of 40 variables. The eventual algorithm asks the most eloquent 11 questions (those with LR > 3) about the episodes (Table 1), weights the answers based on the LR, and arrives at a probability score of the episodes being epileptic or not. The algorithm was converted into an app which can be used on both Android and IOS devices (NetProphets Cyberworks Pvt, Noida, India) [12].Table 1. Variables with Likelihood Ratios > 3 of episodes either being epileptic seizures (F) or not epileptic seizures (A).Prior to the episodeMale Gender (F)Predisposing factors excluding family history (F)During the episodeColour change to red or blue (F)Stiffness (F)Shaking (F)Tongue bitten (F)Incontinence of urine (F)Head turning to one side (F)Eyes closed (A)Able to communicate (A)After the episodeOne-sided weakness (F)From Ref. [11] with permission.
The app was subsequently validated in Nepal and India [13]. The NPHWs who participated in this validation study were computer-literate but in the real world many NPHWs may have a very incomplete formal education and no experience of smartphones or tablet computers, although most possess basic mobile phones. We have since shown that a group of computer-naïve NPHWs had no difficulty in the technological aspects of using an app on a tablet computer [14]. The study below reports how these computer-naïve NPHWs, using the app, can diagnose episodes as epileptic or not, and how their accuracy compares to local physicians, with the neurologist’s diagnosis as the “gold standard”. In other words how safe and effective is this method of diagnosis.
