Social media platforms, such as Twitter, offer educators new ways to conceptualize learning and collaboration. Teachers, school administrators, university professors, and many others in the education world use Twitter to share news and resources, to converse online, to participate in education conferences, and to establish professional connections (Britt & Paulus, 2016; Carpenter & Krutka, 2014, 2015; Donelan, 2016). Educators' growing interest in participating in Twitter-based online communities for professional development and learning has prompted researchers to study such communities. The findings of this research suggest that Twitter plays an important role in engaging educators in informal, just-in-time professional learning (Britt & Paulus, 2016; Carpenter & Krutka, 2014, 2015; Donelan, 2016) and that teachers can enrich their educations by participating in online professional learning communities (Holmes, Preston, Shaw, & Buchanan, 2013).
Although the use of social media expands educator education beyond “one-size-fits-all, sit-and-get professional development” (Ross, Maninger, LaPrairie, & Sullivan, 2015), studies have shown that educators' participation in such communities is largely uneven. For example, a 2017 study by one of the authors (withhold for review) found that the online synchronous chat that occurred among the members of a Twitter community for educators was dominated by a group of active members. These active members not only generated a large volume of tweets but also interacted actively with other participants. About half of all members tweeted only once, however, and the majority of the members had limited connections with others. These results raised the question of whether the seemingly less-engaged members would continue to participate in online communities for professional development and learning.
Continued participation is essential, both to the members of a professional learning community and to the community as a whole. The benefits of remaining involved in such a community depend to a great extent on the information exchanged among its members. If a member does not remain part of the community, they are less likely to receive whatever the benefits offered by the community (Wang, Kraut, & Levine, 2012). Moreover, a community's members are its primary source of resources, and a larger community is likely to know more about a given topic than a smaller one is (Butler, 2001). For these reasons, it is important to understand the factors that influence educators' commitment to online professional learning communities and to encourage sustained participation in these communities at the individual and community levels.
This study examined the participation of users in the Twitter chats under the hashtag #edchat to determine how some key features of online discourse affect user participation. Because this was a longitudinal study and considered more than 600,000 tweets generated over the course of six years, qualitative methods (such as interviews) and content analysis would have been prohibitively difficult. Moreover, traditional quantitative methods, like sampling and questionnaires, usually have sparse temporal granularity (Qiu et al., 2011), which renders them unsuitable for investigating detailed temporal and continuous-participation issues related to a large online community. For these reasons, this study examined user participation holistically by employing data mining methods to process all the collected tweets. A survival analysis was then conducted to quantify the effects of different features of online discourse on users' decisions to stay in the community. The findings can help us to understand why certain members stay in a community longer than others do and, in turn, can aid in the design of support mechanisms that can better promote users' commitment and the overall sustainability of online professional learning communities.
