Traditional wireless sensor networks (WSNs) consist many tiny sensor nodes with the capabilities of computing, sensing and communication. Hence, they have many useful applications in target tracking, military sensing, environment monitoring, etc. Moreover, they are useful techniques to build industrial Internet, such as Internet of things (IoT) and Internet of Vehicles (IoV). In IoT and IoV, many tiny sensor nodes are deployed on a smart equipment. These sensor nodes continuously monitor the efficiency of the smart equipment by measuring its vibration, pressure, temperature, humidity, power quality, etc. This helps to gather more comprehensive information so that the control centre can make better management control and decision making.
In Fig. 1, we show an overview of the network framework in WSNs that is consisted of four different entities: a service provider (SP), the sensor nodes, a gateway and some users. The SP is in charge of deploying the wireless sensor network (WSN), including the registration of users and sensor nodes. The users who want to access the WSN will be authorized by the SP. The sensor nodes have limited computation and storage resources, while the gateway has much higher storage and processing capability. It is assumed that the SP is always trusted and it can never be compromised. However, the gateway is honest but curious. When a user wants to access the monitoring data of the WSN, she first sends a query message to a sensor node. Then, the sensor node checks if the user is authorized to access the WSN. If yes, the sensor node sends the collected data to the user through a secure channel. Otherwise, the sensor node rejects the query request.Download : Download high-res image (406KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Network framework of wireless sensor networks.
In practice, side channel attacks can exploit several different types of physical leakages (e.g. power consumption, electromagnetic emanation, and timing information, etc.), in order to recover the target device’s internal secret states (e.g. the secret key). The principle of various side channel attacks is that there exists a certain statistical relationship between the physical leakage and the processed sensitive data. Moreover, any attacker can obtain more physical leakages through continuous leakage attacks, because the side channel attacks are performed repeatedly. Therefore, continuous leakage resilience is an indispensable security property for the cryptosystems, which can be used to hide the relationship between physical leakages and internal secret states. This implies that the adversary cannot find the relationship even if it obtains a certain amount of physical leakages of the secret key used by the target device.
As discussed above, to deploy a secure WSN, there exists two challenges regarding the access control:

(1)The limited capabilities of sensor nodes in terms of processing power, storage, energy, bandwidth, etc. In the literature, the security mechanisms for access control are normally designed using computational costly bilinear pairing. However, they are not suitable for the WSN environment with limited computation and storage resources.(2)The existing access control schemes were proposed in a weak security model, in which the leakage of internal secret states is ignored. Therefore, they cannot resist various side-channel attacks or cold-boot attacks, and they cannot ensure the desired security level when the adversary obtains some additional information of the user’s secret key. In other words, the existing schemes may become insecure in applications when the leakage attacks are real concerns.
To tackle these problems, we propose an efficient continuous leakage-resilient access control scheme for the underlying WSNs of the industrial Internet. Our solution not only resists the continuous leakage attacks, but also avoid using the costly bilinear pairings.
Related work. Using ring signature, He et al. [1] have proposed a distributed access control scheme for WSNs so that the privacy of the signer can be protected. Around the same time, Yu et al. [2] have presented a fine-grained distributed data access control scheme for WSNs based on attribute-based encryption (ABE). Using the same technique, Hur [3] also has proposed a fine-grained data access control scheme with efficient user revocation. To provide the privacy-preserving access control for WSNs, Zhang et al. [4] have designed a new distributed access control with blind signature.
Signcryption proposed in [5] is a new cryptographic primitive that combines the functions of public key encryption and digital signature in a logical way, so that the computational cost can be significantly lower than applying the traditional encryption-then-signature or signature-then-encryption methods. A signcryption scheme can simultaneously achieve confidentiality, integrity, authentication and non-repudiation with a lower computational cost. Due to the advantage of signcryption, several access control schemes for the WSNs were constructed [6], [7] using the corresponding signcryption scheme. However. these constructions [6], [7] need the traditional public key infrastructure (PKI).
To reduce the burden of the sensor nodes, identity-based cryptosystem (IBC) was used to design the security authentication schemes [8], [9] for WSNs. Compared with the PKI-based system, the IBC-based access control schemes do not need public key certificates. However, the lightweight IBC-based scheme has a weakness called key escrow problem since the private key generator (PKG) possesses all users’ private keys. Thus, the PKG can decrypt any ciphertext and forge a signature for any user. To solve the key escrow problem of IBC-based schemes, Li et al. [10] gives an access control scheme for the WSNs based on certificateless signcryption (CLSC). Compared with these schemes in [6], [7] with the traditional signcryption schemes, Li et al.’s scheme achieves better performance in computation efficiency, communication efficiency, etc. In CLSC, the user’s secret key is partly generated by the PKG, and the remaining part is created by the user itself. Thus, the PKG does not has the user’s full secret key, and there is no key escrow problem.
The security of the above constructions is proved in the traditional security model, which is a weak model, and it cannot resist the leakage attacks. Hence, in the actual applications, if the adversary obtains a certain amount of leakage on the secret key of user through various leakage attacks, then the corresponding access control schemes cannot hold the claimed security. To further solve this problem, in this paper, we design a novel access control scheme for WSNs to resist the leakage attacks, including the continuous leakage attacks.
(Continuous) Leakage resilience. In a traditional security model, legitimate participants hold internal secret states, such as those for the secret key of user and the master secret key, which are assumed completely inaccessible to the adversary. However, in the real world, an adversary can learn some information about internal secret states through various leakage attacks, such as side-channel attacks, cold-boot attacks, etc. Thus, if an adversary obtains a certain amount of leakage on the internal secret states, then the traditional cryptographic schemes may be unable to ensure their claimed security. Therefore, the leakage-resilient cryptographic schemes are important to meet the security requirements in the real world. However, most previous constructions only consider the bounded leakage attacks, such as the bounded leakage-resilient public-key encryption (PKE) [11], [12], the bounded leakage-resilient identity-based encryption (IBE) [13], [14], [15], the bounded leakage-resilient signatures [16], the bounded leakage-resilient certificate-based encryption (CBE) [17], [18], [19], etc. These constructions cannot keep their claimed security if continuous leakage is possible. Thus, for applications in the real world, the security schemes should maintain their claimed security in the continuous leakage model. In the literature, there are several constructions of cryptographic primitives, which have considered unbounded leakage and continuous leakage-resilience [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27]. However, these works are not suitable for WSNs because of their inefficiency.
Our contribution. To resist continuous leakage attacks, we design an access control scheme for WSNs. Because of the signcryption scheme is used in access control for WSNs [6], [7], [10], it can simultaneously authenticate the users and protect the query messages with a lower computational cost. Moreover, our solution uses certificate-based signcryption (CBS) to construct our access control scheme. The CBS still needs a trusted third party called the certificate authority (CA) who is responsible for producing the certificate using a master secret key, a user’s identity and its public key. However, in the CBS scheme, the certificate is not a public key certificate. Instead, we consider it as a part of the user’s secret key, which is generated by the CA. That is, in CBS, the user’s certificate is generated by the CA, and the completed private key is created by the user itself. Hence, there is no key escrow problem.
In this paper, we first propose a continuous leakage-resilient CBS scheme. The confidentiality and the unforgeability of proposed scheme are proved based on decisional Diffie–Hellman (DDH) and discrete logarithm (DL) assumptions, respectively. We also give an access control scheme for WSNs using our continuous leakage-resilient CBS scheme. Our scheme offers the ciphertext authenticity and the public verifiability that allow us to move the computational costs of the sensor nodes to the gateway. In addition, our scheme offers the insider security. The advantage of our scheme is that it is continuous leakage resilience, where in each round of the leakage attack, the adversary obtains a certain amount of leakage on the user’s secret key through leakage attacks. Compared with the existing access control schemes [6], [7], [10], our construction has several advantages, such as computational efficiency, communication efficiency, continuous leakage resilience, etc.
The following advantages are achieved when our scheme is used to create a smart city, the public verifiability allows any third party to check the validity of a query message. In addition, the ciphertext authenticity allows the gateway to check the validity of a query message without the knowledge of the message. The ciphertext authenticity reduces the burden of the sensor node. The insider security prevents an adversary from decrypting a ciphertext even if the adversary knows the secret value of the user. These properties contribute to the secure operation of a smart city.
