3D visualization of vascular structures is of practical value and importance within the field of computer assisted vascular analysis and morphometry (Preim and Oeltze, 2008). Direct volume rendering (DVR) technique is one of the most popular methods for the 3D visualization of vessels structures contained in a volume dataset. The image generated in this way can be quite suitable for the task of diagnosing vascular disease. However, just to be able to visualize the hidden vascular structures is far from sufficient. The accurate modeling of vascular geometry is essential in many other clinical applications. For vascular intervention planning, it is not an easy task to understand the topology of a vessel tree without the actual vascular geometry. In the case of computer-guided vascular surgery, it can be very difficult to accurately locate the vessel objects directly from the generated image by DVR technique. In addition, the accurate vascular models are of utmost importance to perform reliable simulations of blood flow (computational hemodynamic) (Kretschmer et al., 2013), which enables the study of hemodynamic characteristics such as wall shear stress and intra-aneurysmal flow patterns. A specific vascular geometry model enables us to design and evaluate possible modification of personalized vasculature, which is helpful for the treatment decision-making on vascular diseases. Furthermore, the modeling of vascular geometry is also the primary issue that needs to be solved for computer aided vascular surgery, and future fully automatic unmanned vascular surgery. Without the accurate information of vascular geometry, the computer-controlled manipulator is unable to perform the accurate collision detection, and therefore cannot achieve a fine vascular surgery.
In this paper, we propose to model the smooth vascular geometry based on automatic vessel segmentation. Usually, the segmented dataset is represented as a discrete point set, which is prone to produce poor visualization result and not suitable for the tasks required in many clinical applications, such as vessel shape analysis, blood flow simulation, vascular surgery planning and simulation, and so on. In addition, none of current segmentation methods can guarantee a perfect segmentation in all clinical scenarios, thus it is inevitable to perform a manual inspection of the automatically generated segmentation results to meet the requirements of different clinical cases (Kretschmer et al., 2013). In consequence, the accurate geometry modeling of vasculatures from the automatic vessel segmentation is necessary and essential to the clinical applications of vascular surgery and therapy.
Generally, the methods for modeling vascular geometry can be classified into two categories: explicit modeling and implicit modeling. Explicit modeling methods utilise either polygon meshes or parametric functions, e.g. non-uniform rational B-spline (NURBS) function to represent vascular surfaces. Explicit technique is relatively mature, and the explicitly modelled shapes are very efficient for rendering, thus, the explicit technique is widely applied to the geometry modeling of vasculatures in many medical software systems. However, explicitly modelled vasculatures are not suitable for computer assisted surgery, as performing collision detection for explicitly represented surfaces is a very challenging task, which is the primary problem needing to be solved for computer assisted vascular surgery. On the other hand, implicit modeling technique represents a geometric shape as a field function and has received increasing attention recently due to their natural way of representing solid objects and their innate properties on soft shape blending. In addition, when vasculatures are modelled as implicit functions, the problem of collision detection can be easily solved, as it is easy and convenient to tell whether a point lies inside or outside the vascular structures (Bartz, 2005). Implicit modeling techniques are particularly suitable for modeling branching geometric objects as modeling a complex tree-like geometric object can be reduced to a problem of modeling a set of cylindrical geometric objects, which is a very simple geometric modeling task. Hence, implicit modeling technique has great advantages over explicit method in future computer assisted automatic surgery.
In this paper, a new method is developed for the accurate geometry modeling of vasculatures based on the vascular centreline descriptions. In the proposed method, a set of points depicting the profiles of the vessel's cross-sections is extracted first using a cross-section based vascular-specific method. The extracted point set is then fitted with an implicit curve represented as 2D radial basis functions (Li et al., 2004). Then all the implicitly represented cross-sections are blended flexibly along the centreline using the partial shape-preserving splines (Li and Tian, 2011) to build smooth vessel branches; finally, different vessel branches are blended using the extended smooth maximum function (Li, 2007) to construct the complete vascular tree. The presented experiment results show that the modelled vascular shapes are of high smoothness and faithfulness. In addition, some qualitative and quantitative comparison with other methods have been carried out for the proposed technique to validate the accuracy and smoothness of the generated vascular models.
