Landfill disposal is the last but inevitable step in solid waste management (Dajić et al., 2016). A significant amount of waste is still disposed of in landfills. For instance, in the European Union, most of the member states dispose of more than 50% of their waste in landfills (EEA, 2013). In the United States, 50% of the total waste generated is also disposed of in landfills (USEPA, 2015). Solid waste landfills are engineering construction works under continuous development. They are facilities which, by nature, produce several impacts on the environment, such as land use or generation of liquid and gaseous contaminants (Slack et al., 2005). They can also have positive effects, such as power generation from the methane gas produced in them.
The negative environmental impact of landfills can be reduced by applying protection technologies in landfill design, such as the use of an appropriate impermeable material for bottom and top capping. The most important technical elements in the design of a landfill are details concerning the requirements and recommendations for water and soil protection (Dajić et al., 2016).
The optimal design of waste landfills is a complex, still unsolved issue. In the design process and operation of a landfill, several variables must be defined, including the height of the landfill layer, the thickness of the intermediate cover between layers (if one is present) and the material used, the waste compaction level or the leachate extraction systems. This paper refers to such variables as “design variables”.
The main processes occurring in landfills (hydrology, degradation, settlement) are closely linked to each other. Each design variable influences all the rest of them and, therefore, it is difficult to take all these interactions into account in order to optimize the overall landfill design. For example, if the intention is to exploit the landfill volume as much as possible, the height of the waste layer can be increased in order to reduce the space taken up by the intermediate covers. However, the consequences of this change on power generation or on the amount of pollution emitted should be investigated. Furthermore, boundary conditions such as the weather or the type of waste generated in a specific community affect these interactions, thus preventing the design criteria from being generally applicable in any geographical location.
Various works have analysed some of these design variables from an empirical point of view through laboratory tests (Ko et al., 2016, Ng et al., 2016, Reddy et al., 2011) and also from scale models (Albright et al., 2012, Andreas et al., 2014, Apiwantragoon et al., 2015). Although some interesting results have been obtained, various authors have highlighted the difficulty involved in attempting to extrapolate the laboratory results directly to reality (Dajić et al., 2016). Additionally, full-scale pilot cells have been built and monitored to obtain data which allow the analysis of the influence of the design variables (Mijares and Khire, 2012, Saravanathiiban and Khire, 2014). In this case the results have been satisfactory, but they have entailed enormous economic costs and require great amount of time. Besides, the full-scale tests are carried out for a particular case (with a given value for the design variables), in a certain geographical context and over a specific period of time (usually several years). Although nowadays, in the information society, it is possible to share, compare and integrate these experiences, it continues to be an expensive and cumbersome work method.
Scientific computing allows a large number of scenarios to be evaluated and analysed in a faster, cheaper and more secure way than with the traditional methods of prototyping and experimentation (Denning, 2000). Over the last few years various authors have proposed mathematical models which make it possible to achieve approximate descriptions of the processes involved in landfills. Such proposals include hydrological models such as HELP (Berger, 2015), degradation models (Gawande et al., 2010, Robqeck et al., 2011, Sanchez et al., 2010), biogas generation models, (Kamalan et al., 2011) and settlement models (Babu, 2010). Moreover, a number of different applications use these models to calculate certain processes, although very few of them make an integrated calculation of every process in full-scale landfills and over the course of time. With this aim, some authors have worked on the development of general-use software which adds hydrological, degradation and settlement models, for example: Hydro-Bio-Mechanical model (HBM) (McDougall, 2007), Landfill Degradation and Transport processes model (LDAT) (White et al., 2014) and MODUELO (Lobo and Tejero, 2007a, Lobo and Tejero, 2007b).
This study presents a new generalizable structured methodology for the optimization of the design variables of any environmental management system. The novelty of the proposal is the idea of analysing multiple design variables together, along with their interactions, in order to evaluate their relative importance in the impacts under consideration. It is based on the computer simulation of many scenarios and uses a calculation engine that integrates the main processes occurring in a full-scale landfill. In addition, the tools and techniques used to apply the proposed method are described, along with some of the results obtained in a case study focused on the design variables of a waste landfill, which allows its usefulness to be demonstrated.
By applying this methodology, two objectives can be achieved. Firstly, quantitative and qualitative information can be obtained about the effect of each design variable on the behaviour of the system under study, in this case, the waste landfill. Secondly, a decision support system can be developed. This allows the user to calculate the optimal values of the design variables for the system under study, once the relative importance of each impact to be evaluated has been quantified.
