Modeling the behavior of different materials under load has been of interest for the engineering community in general for centuries. Many engineering applications are focused on determining how the materials behave in the elastic regime, i.e., before any type of damage occurs in the system under study. However, for many other applications the focus is placed on the characteristics of material failure, fracture and fragmentation under certain loading conditions. Some examples include the simulation of hydrofracking operations, borehole stability problems, response of structures to blast loads, and mining applications such as pillar stability, slope stability, and bench blasting. For relatively simplified and small scale setups the failure of materials can be characterized by means of experimental data. However, if there is a need to predict the failure characteristics of certain materials on larger scales or in extreme conditions that cannot be easily or cost-effectively reproduced by experiments, then the numerical simulations are the best alternative to achieve that goal. In this regards, since the introduction of the combined finite-discrete element method (FDEM) many research groups around the world have been utilizing different implementations of the method for this purpose.
The combined FDEM was first introduced by Munjiza in the early 1990s1, 2 to model fracture and fragmentation processes in rock and cementitious materials. Since that time, FDEM has become one of the numerical methods of choice for modeling problems where solid fracture and fragmentation processes need to be described at different spatial scales. Early versions of FDEM considered a continuum-based approach to fracture modeling,1 which was implemented in many of the first FDEM computer codes.3, 4 However, this type of approach has a number of shortcomings, not being objective to mesh refinement being one of them.1 Many of the shortcomings presented by the continuum-based fracture model were resolved with the introduction of the combined single and smeared crack model,5 which lead to a numerical method able to describe a natural and seamless transition from continuum to discontinuum, which is the signature feature of FDEM. The user base of FDEM-based numerical tools saw a significant increase after the release in 2004 of the first publicly accessible research code, called Y-Code.2 Some of the key advantages of the FDEM are the incorporation of deformability formulations that allow for finite displacements, finite-rotations, and finite-strains. These formulations can then be combined with a variety of constitutive material laws. All these features are coupled with discrete crack initiation and crack propagation models which enables researchers to address problems where complex fracture patterns and eventual fragmentation processes are present. The FDEM has been applied to a number of different real world problems, such as studying the stability of underground structures,6, 7 rock slope stability,8 coastal protection,9 masonry wall stability,10 block caving, deep mining techniques (pillar strength,11 etc.), rock impact modeling,12 seismic waves, packing problems,13 and problems of rock stress state affected by heterogeneity.14
The input parameters needed for any FDEM-based simulation applied to rock mechanics problems include elastic properties of the material (i.e., Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio), density, tensile strength, cohesion or shear strength, internal friction coefficient and specific fracture energies for both normal and tangential directions. It is worth noting that in the FDEM implementation used in this work the Mohr-Coulomb model describes the strength of the interfaces in shear and that in the rest of the paper the intercept of the failure envelope with vertical axis (commonly known as cohesion) is referred to as shear strength. In this way, the shear behavior of the interfaces is considered to be composed of a cohesive part (described by the shear strength) plus a frictional part (described by the Coulomb friction model with a constant friction coefficient). The specific energies, i.e. energy per unit surface area, represent how much energy is dissipated when a material interface fails in tension (normal direction) or in shear (tangential direction). Within the FDEM framework, fracture is allowed to occur at the boundaries of the finite elements. Any two neighboring finite elements are connected by a set of cohesive points that keep them together. These cohesive points act as non-linear springs which have a certain strength (i.e., the material strength) both in tension and in shear. Once the tensile strength is reached, if the cohesive points are further strained, they enter into a strain softening area which determines the evolution of the strength of the damaged interface as a function of the displacements. The characteristics of this strain-softening behavior are not easily obtainable from experimental results, i.e., the amount of literature available on the subject is not very extensive and it is usually concentrated on a few typical rock materials. Because of this, the process of learning about this strain-softening material behavior by comparing simulation results against another, more readily available experimental data set appears as an opportunity to resolve the problem. In this work, the friction coefficient is not considered as an input parameter as that part of the analysis is beyond the scope of the paper.
In this paper, our immediate goal is to learn a set of FDEM inputs in the form of parameters in the material softening curve that maximize the agreement between the stress-time response in the code output and a SHPB experiment. Our broader goal, however, is to introduce a systematic calibration approach to the FDEM community that automatically accounts for parameter uncertainty. Thus, the results presented in this paper can be viewed as an illustration of a more general framework for which parameter calibration can be automatically performed. This type of analysis, combined with other efforts by other research groups15 form part of a FDEM verification and validation effort currently under way within the FDEM users community.
The remainder of this paper is laid out as follows. Background on the SHPB experiment, FDEM approach, and probabilistic calibration are discussed in Section 2. In Section 3, we present exploratory results from FDEM output. In Section 4, we present results from the calibration analysis. Finally, in Section 5, we discuss the results in the broader context of rock mechanics and touch on future work directions.
