A rapid increase in the incidence of breast cancer has been globally observed, perhaps due to the new lifestyle tendencies and the growth of the society demands [1]. Globally, it is reported that 2 out of 5 women will develop some form of cancer during their lifetime [2]. As a result, breast cancer is typified as the second cause of death in women since 2013 [1]. However, if breast cancer is discovered on its earlier stages, the survival rate is significantly enhanced [3], [4], [5]. This fact has encouraged researchers to generate new methods to assist in an accurate diagnosis. Many diagnostic tests have been benefited from the incorporation of image processing techniques, specially histopathological assessments [6], where the main goal is to contribute to the automatic segmentation of the different tissues present on a sample.
Traditional segmentation techniques have been widely used as the first step in computer vision applications to reduce redundant information by grouping similar pixels according to a criterion such as color, brightness or texture. In this sense, thresholding is the most used segmentation approach which consists in the categorization of pixels into a finite number of classes according to their intensity value and a set of thresholds [7]. This technique has prevailed due to its simplicity and robustness even while facing noisy images [7], [8]. According to the desired number of thresholds, the thresholding methodologies are divided into bi-level and multilevel thresholding [9], [10]. Bi-level thresholding is the simplest scenario where the pixels of the image are labeled as foreground if their value is greater than the threshold or background in the other case. In contrast, multilevel thresholding uses a finite number of threshold values to divide the pixels of the image into more than two homogeneous classes according to their intensity, where each class represent objects contained in the image [11]. Multilevel thresholding suitable for Since natural images since they often contain more than two regions of interest or objects [12]. To determine the best set of threshold values for a given image, many methods have been proposed over the years, and they fall into one of two categories; parametric or nonparametric [13]. Parametric approaches try to approximate the histogram of the image to determine the classes present in the image which is computer intensive. Contrary to parametric methods, the nonparametric techniques can evaluate the quality of a given set of threshold values, and the thresholding problem can be formulated as the optimization of a criterion. The most representative nonparametric method is the Otsu´s between-class variance [14]. Such method was originally proposed for bi-level thresholding and later reformulated as a multilevel technique with good performance [15]. However, the computational effort necessary to identify the best set of thresholds grows exponentially as more threshold values are incorporated [16]. This fact has driven the research community to search for nonparametric criteria with smaller computational cost.
The information theory has provided important tools to quantify, storage, and communicate information. Some of the most important tools are the entropies, which are designed to analyze the information content on a given collection of data. In this context, the likelihood of the occurrence of certain piece of data helps to quantify the information; events with high likelihood are associated with low information content, while unlikely events need more information to be represented [17]. Some of the most representative approaches used on image segmentation include the Shannon entropy proposed by Kapur et al. [18], Minimum Cross Entropy (MCE) [19], Renyi entropy [20], and Tsallis entropy [21], where all of them can have been successfully applied to image segmentation. The method proposed by Kapur was also known as maximum entropy is one of the most known nonparametric approaches. In the case of bi-level thresholding, Kapur´s methods search for a threshold value that maximizes the Shannon entropy of the thresholded image. It is reported that the maximum entropy can obtain good results if the histogram of the foreground and background of the original image have equal probability distribution [16]. Li and Tam proposed the formulation of the MCE as the theoretical distance between the probability distributions within the same set [22], and the optimal thresholds are obtained after the minimization of the cross entropy among the classes. Sahoo proposed the maximization of the Renyi entropy to identify thresholds and later Portes de Albuquerque presented the maximization of the Tsallis entropy for image thresholding. Both Renyi and Tsallis entropies are generalizations of the Shannon entropy [23], and equivalence relationship between both methods has been demonstrated in [24].
All previous entropy measures require the use of an optimization algorithm to correctly identify the best set of thresholds that minimize or maximize the evaluated entropy. The research community has used Evolutionary Algorithms (EA) to reduce the computational complexity over the last years with some of the most prominent algorithms being Differential Evolution (DE) [25], and Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) [26] among many other approaches [27], [28], [29]. In this sense, EAs are known for their ability to identify an optimal solution from a given search space. The use of EA is widespread in many research areas since EAs can solve difficult problems with high-quality solutions. In the context of image segmentation, many EAs have been applied to identify the best set of thresholds that segment an image. However, since thresholding approaches rely only on the information provided by the histogram of the image, the spatial information of each pixel is disregarded. In this sense, clustering approaches can obtain segmented images with sharp borders and clearer images [30]. Even though segmentation methods based on clustering generate interesting results, thresholding approaches can perform the segmentation while preserving structures and characteristics that can be used for higher level computer vision tasks [31].
Salimi proposed the Stochastic Fractal Search as a metaheuristic algorithm which mimics the natural growth phenomenon observed in nature [32]. To imitate the growth SFS uses the mathematical formulation of fractals. In its simplest form, a fractal can be described as a repeated pattern. Such patterns are commonly observed on natural objects such as leaves, flowers, and even electrical discharges. SFS uses the idea of generating fractals to guide the search through the search space. For this purpose, random fractals are generated with many methods such as Brownian motion, Gaussian walks, or even Levy flights. From a computational point of view, SFS performs two operations, diffusion, and updating. On the first, each solution diffuses around its position exploiting the area until a cluster is formed. The update operation is carried out using two steps to modify the position of each solution. The first step performs a mutation on the decision variables, and on the second step, the entire solution is modified. The updating operator is applied according to a probability contained in every solution which encourages the retainment of better solutions. The balance between exploration and exploitation of SFS has proven to be useful as many applications have incorporated SFS into their implementations [33], [34], [35].
In this paper, a comprehensive analysis of entropy-based segmentation techniques applied to breast histology is presented. For this purpose, the three most representative nonparametric entropies for thresholding (Kapur, MCE, Tsallis) are evaluated over three EAs namely Differential Evolution (DE), Artificial Bee Colony (ABC), and the Stochastic Fractal Search (SFS) to evaluate the performance of each approach regarding image quality using Peak Signal-to-Noise Ration Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index Metric (SSIM), and the Feature Similarity Index Metric (FSIM). Besides, the state-of-the-art Fast and Robust Fuzzy c-means Clustering (FRFCM) [30] is also considered in the comparison. Since SFS has not been applied to the image thresholding problem, in this paper, we pay special attention to this algorithm as it has proven to be competitive with other problems. Because entropy-based segmentation approaches are closely related, the nonparametric significance test of Kruskal–Wallis is evaluated for multiple comparisons to determine which experiments are significantly different from each other. Results indicate that the implementation of SFS and MCE perform better than the other approaches for the segmentation of breast histological imagery. In summary:

1.The proposal of EA-based segmentation techniques for the analysis of histological images; specifically, from breast tissues.2.Evaluate the performance of the proposed techniques considering its entropy nature and compare to a state-of-the-art segmentation method using image quality metrics.3.Analyze statistically the results using the Kruskal–Wallis significance test.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 analyses the problem formulation of the different entropies and how they can be incorporated into an optimization process. Section 3 describes the Stochastic Fractal Search Algorithm. Section 4 presents the experimental setup and the obtained results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
