Registered nurses are the primary practitioners accountable for the daily preparation and administration of approximately 7000 medication doses and devote 20 to 40% of their time to this task (Westbrook et al., 2011). Near-error situations and adverse events are disproportionately associated with treatment by novice registered nurses (Hickerson et al., 2016). Therefore, a solid and fundamental knowledge of generic drug names and classes, indications of use, dosages and side effects, pharmacokinetics1 and pharmacodynamics,2 food and drug interactions, and the medication-administration process should be grounded in nursing education and training (Choo et al., 2010). Teaching safe and effective pharmacotherapy is challenging, however; it is strongly based on the interactions between basic science concepts of the relevant physiology, anatomy, pathology, and microbiology (Banning and Cortazzi, 2004). Several studies have shown nursing curricula missing the required foundation of knowledge to undertake drug administration effectively and nurses lacking adequate knowledge of pharmacology (Meechan et al., 2011, Ndosi and Newell, 2009). Nurses and nursing students generally find pharmacology to be interesting but difficult, and they self-rate their pharmacology skills as low, especially for pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Studies have described the traditional education approach as causing “confusion, disinterest, inattentiveness … culminating in underachievement and poor learning outcomes” (Charles and Duffull, 2001, Dilles et al., 2011). These findings call for implementing innovative teaching concepts to replace the traditional pharmacology courses methodology (Lim et al., 2014, Thomas and Schuessler, 2016).
1.1. Conceptual Understanding Through the Lens of Complex SystemsThe domain of complex systems has evolved rapidly in the past 25 years with the development of novel ideas and tools and new ways of comprehending phenomena via basic and life sciences, computer science, and many other fields. Complex systems comprise micro-level entities (often referred to as agents), which interact with each other and with their environment. The interactions of numerous submicroscopic elements result in a higher-order or global behavior, a macro-level phenomenon. Such systems are emergent; although they are not regulated through a central control, they self-organize in coherent global patterns (Holland, 1995, Kauffman, 1995).A pharmacological process is a prime example of a complex system. Many different molecules interact with one another, with drug molecules (pharmacodynamic processes), and with normal body processes (pharmacokinetic processes) that lead to the emergence of therapeutic or toxic effects (Katzung et al., 2011). Moreover, medications actions are aimed at restoring physiological factors that maintain homeostasis in the body. Homeostasis, as a complex phenomenon, is difficult to teach and to understand (Jacobson and Wilensky, 2006, Zion and Klein, 2015). Since homeostasis means dynamic stability of conditions, it is difficult to understand that equilibrium is a dynamic state (Katzung et al., 2011). Moreover, biological-physiological mechanisms occur simultaneously within interrelated and interdepended systems (such as blood glucose level and condition of stress) (Zion and Klein, 2015). Physiological homeostasis becomes even more complex when abnormal states of multiple morbidities and pharmacological processes change its level. These pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic nonlinear interactions within the body's homeostasis are unique for each medication and vary for different patient clinical conditions.This paper presents the Pharmacology Inter-Leaved Learning-Cells (PILL-Cells) model-based learning environment, which enables students to learn the multi-level biochemical concepts related to diabetic mellitus drug actions, using agent-based computer models (Fig. 1) (Dubovi et al., 2014). The PILL-Cells environment was designed as part of a larger educational architecture aimed at bridging the gap between theory and practice in academic teaching for the nursing profession. The current study builds upon previous research on the value of computer models for learning science, by extending it to understand how models based on a complex-systems perspective may support pharmacology learning. Unique to the design of the computer models included in the environment are two factors. First is the complex-systems-based approach that parses the system to individual micro-level entities (e.g., molecules) and global macro-level phenomena (e.g., hypoglycemia). Second is the multi-level approach: interactions between molecules and organelles emerge into the cell's functioning; interactions between cells in distinct organs emerge into the function of organism as a whole. We hypothesized that double-staged presentation of mechanisms of human organisms increases the learnability of diabetic drug actions.Download : Download high-res image (806KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The PILL-Cells environment and picture of students learning with the environment.a and b. The PILL-Cells environment is a suite of multiscale molecular, cellular and organ interaction models within the sick or healthy cell organ. Using agent-based computer models, students can investigate the biochemical multi-level processes of medications. Students can zoom in on one cell type or zoom out on the four cell types responsible for glucose equilibrium (link for model sample of PILL-Cells environment: http://simnurse1.haifa.ac.il/Cells.html).c. Nursing students learning pharmacology with the PILL-Cells environment. The learning included exploration of computerized models with guided activities.We selected the diabetic mellitus matter due to the multilevel and complex nature of the glucose–blood equilibrium, its dysregulation with respect to the molecular level and metabolic mechanisms, the organs it involves, and the requirement of polypharmacy management and intensive follow-ups (Bauer and Nauck, 2014).
1.2. Research AimThe purpose of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of multiscale agent-based computer models for complex-systems levels of thinking to support nursing students' learning pharmacology, specifically diabetes molecular and somatic mechanisms and treatment-related medications. Moreover, in the current study we evaluate the use of the computer model environment in transferring conceptual pharmacology knowledge and complex-systems thinking to related topics of pharmacology other than diabetes mellitus.
