National Cancer Institute statistics indicate that more than 220,800 men were diagnosed with prostate cancer in the United States in 2015 and prostate cancer is identified as a major health threat [1]. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, due to its superior spatial resolution and tissue contrast, is the main imaging modality used to evaluate the prostate gland [2], [3]. Assessment of the tumor volume and extension through the gland capsule are important for diagnosis, management and prognosis. Currently, MR prostate segmentation is usually undertaken by radiologists and it is based on visual inspection, slice-by-slice, which is time consuming, requires a high degree of skill/concentration, is prone to intra- and inter-operator bias and is unsuitable for the evaluation of large-scale samples [4]. A number of semi or fully automated methods [5], [6], [7] have been proposed for the segmentation of various organs/tissues in medical images, however, the automated segmentation of prostate MR images remains a challenging task. The challenges mainly relate to the variability in size/shape/contours of the gland, heterogeneity in signal intensity around endorectal coils (ERCs), imaging artifacts and low contrast between the gland and adjacent structures [6], [8], [9].
In this paper, we propose a coarse-to-fine prostate segmentation approach based on a probabilistic atlas-based coarse segmentation and ensemble deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs)-based fine segmentation. The motivation of the proposed method is to introduce deep learning, which shows superior performance in a wide variety of vision problems, to prostate segmentation. In our approach, we first perform atlas registration based coarse segmentation to determine the potential boundary region. As a result, the ensemble DCNNs-based fine segmentation only needs to focus on this small boundary region, which can significantly reduce the time consumption of the proposed method. In fine segmentation, we fine-tune a set of pre-trained DCNNs using image patches and employ the image ensemble to predict the class label of voxels in the boundary region indicated by the coarse segmentation.
There are two main contributions of this paper. First, we show that the use of pre-trained VGG-19 can alleviate overfitting and transfer the knowledge about image representation learned on the ImageNet dataset to characterizing prostate images. Second, the experimental results demonstrate the use of ensemble learning can substantially improve the performance of prostate segmentation.
Pilot data from this research was reported at the 2017 International Symposium of Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2017, Melbourne, Vic, Australia, 18–21 April 2017). When compared to the pilot study, our current algorithm replaces the LeNet-5 network with a much deeper model VGG-19 network, which has shown superior performance in the ImageNet Challenge. The VGG-19 network has been pre-trained on the ImageNet Challenge dataset, and thus can largely overcome the difficulties caused by a small training dataset via transferring the knowledge about image representation learned on large scale natural images to characterize prostate MR images. We evaluated our approach against several state-of-the-art approaches on the Prostate MR Image Segmentation Challenge 2012 (PROMIS12) [8] and SPIE-AAPM-NCI PROSTATEx Classification Challenge 2017 (PROSTATEx17) datasets [10].
