Crowd management in the smart city is getting more proliferation due to its widespread of application and usage recently. Pedestrian crowd are the essential part of smart cities. To provide better solutions and services in the smart cities, crowd monitoring, planning, and crowd management are necessary [1]. Therefore, various mathematical simulations, theoretically based models, and efficient simulation tools as well as various intelligent support systems using computer vision approaches, pattern recognition and image processing for the crowd management play a vital role in monitoring and tracking of crowd motion [2]. In the smart cities, different surveillance systems are deployed to monitor the various activities and control and monitor the traffic in the several crowds at several places, such as shopping mall, traffic signals, roads, railways, and airport platforms, etc. The control and monitoring of crowd are important task and major changeling problems in the smart cities recently throughout the world [3].
Nowadays, crowd management and advance visual surveillance system of moving crowds in the smart cities have achieved much attention by scientific interests, research communities, and multidisciplinary researchers to improve crowd planning, management and monitoring of crowd and crowd safety in public facilities at the different places in the smart cities [3], [4]. Deep perspicacity into crowd dynamics and its management have contributed a better platform to several researchers and crowd control researcher groups for the understanding of individual behaviour, tracking of crowd motions in the smart cities. Based on the current approaches crowd consists of discrete individuals able to react with their surroundings [5].
In current years, numerous multidisciplinary researchers, scientists, and research committees have begun to understand and study the management of crowd by detection and tracking of individual behaviours in the crowd [6], [7]. The crowd management system monitors the crowd of smart cities by tracking and identifies the person in the crowds which is already started to prevent the catastrophic events. Therefore, it needs to design and develop automatic crowd management systems and better prediction of the crowded traffic flow in the smart cities across the world. The study of crowd motion is an NP-hard research problem in the computer vision because the individual trajectories of crowd movement are tough to predict the exact individual motions and different complex motions of individual are involved in it. The problem of crowd analysis becomes complicated due to changing nature of crowd density and background scenarios. In computer vision, some of the previous works have been done for the management of crowds as event recognition and anomaly detection [1], [2], [4], [5], [7], [8] in the smart city. However, these monitoring approaches failed to perform the correct prognostication and matching of events with corresponding stored crowd datasets. Other related works based on learning models are applied for evaluating interactions amongst a small number of persons to analyse the action [6], [9].
Similarly, the author proposed a system to distinguish the anomaly behaviours of individual in the dense crowd video in the paper [9]. However, the proposed approach was inadequate to detect the anomaly behaviours for classifying the individual. The traditional crowd management systems and tracking based crowd management system fail to provide a competent level of monitoring and tracking of individual in the crowds [10]. These approaches are also applied to solve the significant problems, such as pedestrian tracking, understanding, anomaly behaviour detection, and unattended baggage detection using computer vision methods [11]. However, these classical methods did not provide the satisfactory solutions to solve these major problems of crowd and management of groups in the smart cities [10], [12].
The development of various crowd monitoring approaches and machine learning models can be applied to track the trajectory of crowd motions of individual and this process provides a controlling mechanism of crowd. However, these methods are inadequate to perform the computation of extracted crowd motions for crowd surveillance in the crowds, because these approaches are not suitable for crowd detection or management crowd under various constraint scenarios, such as massive flow of data, complex background, and noises.
The crowd monitoring methods and machine learning models require a lot of effort to eliminate these adverse consequences of the vision-related factors [11], [12], [13]. The involved significant factors are essentially noises, occlusions, alignment and transformation of captured crowds or scenes and learning the scene-specific based features for the training the crowd motion models. Therefore, it is the requirement to design and develop an automatic crowd management based system for better crowd planning, crowd monitoring, event tracking, and estimating the crowd flows [13].
In this paper, we focus on crowd management in the smart city by extracting the individual features as well as holistic features of the crowd motion for the detection and tracking of people in the dense crowds by motion detection in the crowd video or scenes. The primary objective is to learn the discriminatory features of crowd-motions from the crowd trajectories. In this paper, it is done using agent-based motion model. The model extracts discriminatory features from the captured crowd trajectory for better representation of features. The proposed system caters the robust solutions for crowd management [14].
We have considered the trajectories of crowd motions of the individual in the given surveillance video or scenes. The primary motivation of own model is to classify the individual based on the extracted discriminatory features from the crowd video or scenes. For crowds tracking, we have applied the optical-flow-based methods for localizing to track the individuals in the crowds. In this paper, proposed system extracts the holistic and individual features from the crowd video for the localization and detection of crowd people in crowd video. We have applied the Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) [15], [16] descriptor-based technique for the detection and localization of important key points in the crowd video or crowd scene in the smart cities. To bridge the gap between models and trajectories of crowd motions, we have also applied the iterative crowd optimization algorithm. The Kalman-filtering based technique [17] and KL-divergence approach [18], [19] are used to evaluate how well the models are learned by particular discriminant features of crowd motions at both the individual feature level and the holistic feature level. The objective of this learning mechanism to achieve the different state transitions of crowd-motions. We have applied KL-divergence technique [19] to determine the distances matrices between these two distributions (the state transition based Gaussian distribution and the crowd states based Gaussian distribution).
1.1. Major contributions of the research work
1.In this paper, we propose a crowd management system for monitoring and tracking the crowds in the smart cites. The proposed system extracts the individual features and holistic features from the crowd data using multiple agent motion models based learning methods. These methods are applied for the extraction not only for global information but also for the individual information of crowd motion.2.The localization and detection of crowd people based on individual and holistic discriminatory feature of crowd scene are done using scale invariant feature transform technique.3.A better analysis of different Gaussian distributions of crowd state transition and sequence crowd states in a given time is done. The models are learned with particular discriminant features of crowd motion at both the individual feature level and the holistic feature level using Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL-divergence) technique [18], [19] between the crowd trajectories and any of agent motion models.4.The proposed system is learned by a holistic feature and an individual characteristic of crowd video for tracking the individual. Based on the extracted features, proposed approach performs the classification of crowd motions by applying multi-label classification technique.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the related works and background in the field of crowd management and its various approaches. Section 3 demonstrated the proposed system for the monitoring the crowd. It also illustrates how to evaluate the individual and holistic discriminatory features for the tracking the individuals in the crowd scenes. Section 4 presents the formulation of multi-classification of extracted features. The experimental results and discussion of proposed approach are illustrated. Finally, Section 6 briefly concludes this work.
