The meteoric rise of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in international development over the past three decades is well-documented. Such growth in NGOs is evident in places like Kenya, where registered NGOs grew from several hundred in 1990 to more than 8000 by 2012, and Bangladesh, where by 2005, 90% of villages were home to at least one NGO (Brass, 2012, Brass, 2016, Gauri and Galef, 2005). Growth has also occurred globally; the Union of International Associations estimates 37,500 active international NGOs in 2018, and more than 1000 new international NGOs are incorporated each year in the U.S. alone (Union of International Associations, 2018, Schnable, 2015). Simultaneously, NGOs have come to be deeply incorporated into the development process writ large. The World Bank reports that nearly 90% of currently financed projects involve the participation of an NGO or other civil society organization, compared to just 21% in 1990 (World Bank, 2018a). And, according to the OECD, more than 20% of all bilateral aid flows through NGOs (OECD, 2015).
The rise of NGOs has been fueled by an often-implicit assumption that private actors, including private not-for-profits, are effective in expanding democracy via a robust civil society, providing services when national governments lack sufficient resources or political will, and reducing global poverty through participatory and market-based methods (Brass, 2016). Donor mistrust of state intervention and a growing concern over corruption, as well as widespread resistance to structural adjustment programs, further amplified the NGO promise in the late 20th century (Banks, Hulme, & Edwards, 2015). Yet mounting skepticism has met the rise of NGOs. The cholera epidemic that followed the 2010 earthquake in Haiti called attention to the failure of many NGOs that responded (Schuller, 2012), and the diffusion of policies banning foreign funding for NGOs suggests a further backlash from developing country governments (Dupuy, Ron, & Prakash, 2016).
Debates over NGOs are not unique to development practitioners. Concurrent with the NGO boom, an interdisciplinary academic field drawn from a wide range of scholarly traditions has emerged. Fig. 1 illustrates the concurrent growth of academic articles on NGOs (see “Data and Methods”) and the number of NGOs that received consultancy status with the United Nations (Willetts, 2015) from 1980 to 2014. Some of this growth reflects trends driven by prominent academics like Robert Putnam (2000), who were instrumental in placing concepts like social capital – of which NGOs are thought to be a key component—onto the World Bank’s development agenda in the early 2000s. In contrast, Banks et al. (2015; see also Edwards and Hulme (1996)) have criticized the impact NGOs have had (or not had) on development, calling attention instead to their dependency on donors, fragile roots in civil society, and technocratic approaches to complex developmental challenges.Download : Download high-res image (154KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Growth in NGOs and Articles about NGOs, 1980–2014.
Despite (or perhaps because of) such conflicting views of NGOs among scholars, few have made efforts to systematically aggregate findings from the more than three decades of research that now exists. This paper represents a step toward accumulated knowledge, using a “systematic review”1 methodology that provides a level of rigor that most review articles do not achieve. The paper is part of a larger research agenda and data platform on which all scholars can collaborate, the NGO Knowledge Collective (www.ngoknowledgecollective.org). Based on computer-assisted content analysis of 3336 journal articles about NGOs published between 1980 and 2014, alongside a random sample of 300 articles from this corpus, we assess four broad questions.
First, who studies NGOs, and how do they study them? Here, our analysis reveals a truly interdisciplinary field that has produced a tremendous number of insights. At the same time, we identify potential sources of bias that may explain some of the knowledge gaps that exist. For example, we note a high level of author affiliation with the NGOs they write about, as well as disproportionate numbers of articles written by authors at Northern institutions. Knowing whether such biases exist in the literature matters—if the knowledge of NGOs stems from a non-representative sample of countries or sectors, we must take care in applying that knowledge to policy and program decisions affecting broader geographic regions or different sectors. Moreover, determining what has been researched extensively allows us to identify what is not known, a key precursor to designing useful new research.
Second, what is studied when NGOs are the object of analysis? Specifically, what geographies or sectors are studied, and what research questions or topics do scholars focus on? We first present data showing that governance and health are the most common topics, and that populous locations have many NGOs. We then identify a set of six, broad research questions and topics that the NGO literature has posed and briefly summarize some findings. We find that scholars have carried out significant work on a range of places, issues, and questions, but that clear gaps remain.
Third, we focus in on the most commonly asked question in the literature: what effects, if any, do NGO activities have on specific development outcomes? Although we cannot answer the question outright, we provide a synthesis of findings reported in published studies. By development outcomes, we follow Sen’s (1999) definition of development as expansions in freedoms—not only political freedoms, but also social opportunities, protective securities, economic opportunities and transparency guarantees. The outcomes associated with these freedoms include improvements in health, education, sanitation, and democratic governance, among others. Our goal in this analysis is to show the possibilities (and limits) of a systematic aggregation of research findings. Specifically, through a mixed-method analysis of a subset of our corpus, we summarize the conclusions authors have drawn about how NGOs affect specific health and governance outcomes, noting that authors usually report NGOs as having favorable effects.
Fourth, what path should the “NGO research agenda” take? Given the descriptive “lay of the land” of NGO scholarship, we provide a research agenda for the future based on four needs: to fill gaps in knowledge, particularly at the intersection of sectors and geographies; to incorporate more scholars from the global South and from NGOs themselves; to develop and implement better research designs, particularly those that include true counterfactuals, organizational comparisons, and analysis of contextual conditions; and finally, to share data and synthesize findings in more and better ways.
For the purposes of this research, we define “NGO” broadly as any nonprofit, non-governmental organization that works in the development, humanitarian, advocacy, or civil society sector in any country considered a developing country at some point during the period of study (1980–2014).2 These organizations are known by a number of terms in addition to NGOs, such as civil society organizations (CSOs), community based organizations (CBOs), grassroots organizations, private voluntary organizations, or faith-based organizations (FBOs). They can be international, regional, national, or local. Included are foundations and religious development organizations, but excluded are universities, hospitals, churches, political parties, and unions.3
