Computer-aided analysis of medical images plays a critical role at many stages of the clinical workflow from population screening and diagnosis to treatment delivery and monitoring. This role is poised to grow as analysis methods become more accurate and cost effective. In recent years, a key driver of such improvements has been the adoption of deep learning and convolutional neural networks in many medical image analysis and computer-assisted intervention tasks.
Deep learning refers to a deeply nested composition of many simple functions (principally linear combinations such as convolutions, scalar non-linearities and moment normalizations) parameterized by variables. The particular composition of functions, called the architecture, defines a parametric function (typically with millions of parameters) that can be optimized to minimize an objective, or ‘loss’, function, usually using some form of gradient descent.
Although the first use of neural networks for medical image analysis dates back more than twenty years [35], their usage has increased by orders of magnitude in the last five years. Recent reviews [34], [51] have highlighted that deep learning has been applied to a wide range of medical image analysis tasks (segmentation, classification, detection, registration, image reconstruction, enhancement, etc.) across a wide range of anatomical sites (brain, heart, lung, abdomen, breast, prostate, musculature, etc.). Although each of these applications have their own specificities, there is substantial overlap in software pipelines implemented by many research groups.
Deep-learning pipelines for medical image analysis comprise many interconnected components. Many of these are common to all deep-learning pipelines:

•separation of data into training, testing and validation sets;•randomized sampling during training;•image data loading and sampling;•data augmentation;•a network architecture defined as the composition of many simple functions;•a fast computational framework for optimization and inference;•metrics for evaluating performance during training and inference.
In medical image analysis, many of these components have domain specific idiosyncrasies, detailed in Section 4. For example, medical images are typically stored in specialized formats that handle large 3D images with anisotropic voxels and encode additional spatial information and/or patient information, requiring different data loading pipelines. Processing large volumetric images has high memory requirements and motivates domain-specific memory-efficient networks or custom data sampling strategies. Images are often acquired in standard anatomical views and can represent physical properties quantitatively, motivating domain-specific data augmentation and model priors. Additionally, the clinical implications of certain errors may warrant custom evaluation metrics. Independent reimplementation of all of this custom infrastructure results in substantial duplication of effort, poses a barrier to dissemination of research tools and inhibits fair comparisons between competing methods.
This work presents the open-source NiftyNet3 platform to 1) facilitate efficient deep learning research in medical image analysis and computer-assisted intervention; and 2) reduce duplication of effort. The NiftyNet platform comprises an implementation of the common infrastructure and common networks used in medical imaging, a database of pre-trained networks for specific applications and tools to facilitate the adaptation of deep learning research to new clinical applications with a shallow learning curve.
