Spurred by the proliferation of interactive modeling tools and visual programming languages, the Computer-Aided Design (CAD) framework and digital geometry processing have facilitated the design of spatial timber plate structures with complex geometries. To understand the structural performance of such systems, especially in terms of their functionality, numerical simulations are generally employed to simulate the structural response. Numerical models that include the geometrical and mechanical properties of the system under consideration are generally described as Computer-Aided Engineering (CAE) models. By and large, CAD and CAE models for spatial timber plate structures are constructed in different environments. As such, investigations have sought to develop methodologies to convert CAD data into CAE models, which are discussed in Section 1.1. The scope and motivation of the study are then outlined in Section 1.2.
1.1. Spatial timber plate structures and available CAD-to-CAE data exchange toolsData exchange tools are useful for timber plate structures with a large number of elements because of their ability to considerably reduce the time required to convert thousands of CAD assemblies to the corresponding CAE models. These tools also enable the idealization of CAD models so that the numerical simulations can be readily performed in a CAE platform. The CAD-to-CAE exchange for spatial free-form timber plates was first introduced by the Institute for Computational Design [1] and the Institute of Building Structures and Structural Design [2]. In particular, Li and Knippers [3], Krieg et al. [4], and La Magna et al. [5] developed CAD-to-FE exchange tools to simulate the behavior of segmented timber plate shells. The CAD model, which is constructed in Rhinoceros 3D [6] using the visual programming environment, Grasshopper 3D [7], consists of three-dimensional (3D) brick elements to represent the timber plates. The data transfer from the CAD to CAE platforms was done either statically via import/export of the corresponding dwg file or dynamically through a parametric modeling interface. A centralized repository is generated to encompass the datastructure associated with the CAE geometry, mechanical properties, and analysis handlers. The generated data is then mapped to an appropriate FE platform(s) such as SOFiSTiK [8] and/or ANYSIS® [9], where two-dimensional (2D) plane shell elements and one-dimensional (1D) springs are used to simulate the behavior of the timber panels and joints, respectively.Recently, the Laboratory for Timber Construction (IBOIS) at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) [10] has designed free-form Integrally-Attached Timber Plate (IATP) structures[11], [12], where elements are joined using the Integral Mechanical Attachment (IMA) technique (Fig. 1a). The defining feature of IMAs is that the connection between timber plates is established solely through their geometry without additional connectors such as nails, screws, dowels, and adhesives [11], [12]. The design process for IATP structures begins with the definition of the target surface established in a CAD environment (Fig. 1b). Using ShapeOp [13] along with Grasshopper 3D [7], Robeller et al. [14] introduced an iterative IATP optimization framework to develop and refine the design object, design the pattern, and establish the global form (Fig. 1c). The algorithm was formulated to introduce a new assembly-constrained tiling, and identify the pattern of timber plates, mesh discretization, the density of planar meshes, the curvature and segmentation of the design surface, the angle between adjacent plates, the position of IMAs, and the assembly pattern between the elements. ShapeOp finds the optimum geometry that satisfies fabrication and assembly constraints but does not consider the structural design objectives. The pseudocode associated with the NURBS subdivision used to obtain the quad mesh is provided in Appendix 1.1. The basis of the NURB subdivision algorithm was developed by Robeller et al. [14]. The CAD model was then completed by converting the segmented planes to 3D brick elements (Fig. 1d). The term 3D is used because the plate thickness is explicitly represented in the model. A data exchange algorithm was then introduced to convert the CAD model to the Computer-Aided Manufacturing (CAM) model [14]. The CAD-to-CAM algorithm provided the information about the orientation of the fabrication tool, which was described with tool center points and two Euler angles. Generating the upper and lower contours for each plate, the exchange algorithm outputs the corresponding G-code using a loft-like offset of the contours. The G-code is then used for 5-axis digital fabrication. The pseudocode associated with the generation of the CAD 3D model and the fabrication outlines is provided in Appendix 1.2. The CAD-to-CAM algorithm was developed by Robeller et al. [14].Download : Download high-res image (594KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) Integral Mechanical Attachment (IMA), (b) target surface, (c) Quad pattern, (d) CAD 3D Integrally-Attached Timber Plate (IATP) structure, (e) FE model.Recently, Nguyen et al. [15] developed an automated numerical tool that uses a parametric modeling framework to convert the CAD data associated with IATP structures to the corresponding FE numerical model (Fig. 1e). The CAD model was idealized using planar surfaces to represent timber plates, and line elements for the IMAs. The idealization process includes transformation algorithms such as detail removal [16], dimensional reduction [17], and non-manifold topological modeling [18]. The heterogeneous data exchange methodology [19] was employed to export the data associated with the model geometry from the CAD environment. Using the RhinoCommon library [20], plane-plane and line-plane intersection methods were used to generate the idealized geometry. The Initial Graphics Exchange Specification (IGES), consisting of only mathematical descriptions of the model geometry, was used as the neutral data format. The idealized geometry was then introduced to the FE modeling software ABAQUSTM using the scripting interface. Finite strain S4R shell elements were employed to simulate the behavior of planar surfaces and springs were used to simulate the behavior of the IMAs (Fig. 1e).
1.2. Motivation and scope of the current studyThe structural design of large-scale IATP structures requires several steps: (1) Understanding the behavior of IMAs under different load cases. For this step, physical experiments have been conducted by Rezaei Rad et al. [12], [11], [21] to gain insight into the behavior of joints under tensile, edgewise, and flatwise loads, respectively. (2) Introducing a computationally-efficient mechanical model, where the level of detail associated with the design object is adapted to simplify the design process. For this step, a macroscopic model that employs only beam and spring elements was introduced by Rezaei Rad et al. [22] to simulate the behavior of timber shells with IMAs. (3) Introducing an interface to automatically convert the design CAD geometry associated with hundreds of timber plates with thousands of IMAs to the corresponding macro model. The details of this step have not been formulated and is not available in typical building information modeling (BIM) tools and is a major challenge in the design and performance assessment of large-scale IATP structures. Therefore, the primary objective of the current study is to develop a CAD-to-CAE algorithmic data exchange framework that translates the CAD data associated with a custom-defined IATP structure to the corresponding CAE macro model. The proposed framework is demonstrated by evaluating the performance of large-scale IATP prototypes that have recently been constructed.Establishing an automatic link between the CAD and CAE macro models has multiple advantages. It considerably reduces the time required to prepare a CAE model. Furthermore, repetitive manual operations are removed from the design process and human errors are minimized. Moreover, instead of working with three or more software packages, the model integrity is maintained in one platform by using object-oriented programming. In addition, the proposed framework enhances the design flexibility of IATPs since multiple variants can be considered in the design process while the associated structural performance can be evaluated with minimal computational expense. The modeling and computational simulation of complex structures is also improved through the use of an open-source CAE platform.The parametric CAD-to-CAE exchange integrates data analysis and transformation, geometrical simplification, and structural analyis of timber plates with edgewise IMAs. Furthermore, while the concept and methodology of the proposed CAD-to-CAE data exchange algorithm are independent of the computational platform, the current study employs (1) the Rhinoceros .NET Software Development Kit (SDK) called RhinoCommon [20] and Rhino.Python [23] to construct the plugins and components for the CAD-to-CAE data transformation, and (2) The Open System for Earthquake Engineering Simulation, OpenSees [24], to perform the structural analysis. The data exchange framework is designed in the CAD environment while the output data generated by the framework is formulated such that it follows the syntax of OpenSees. The overall workflow of the current study is shown in Fig. 2.Download : Download high-res image (214KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. CAD-to-CAE data transformation using RhinoCommon .NET SDK and OpenSees, and performance assessment of IATP structures.The details of the macroscopic mechanical model for the structural analysis of spatial timber plates are reviewed in Section 2. The algorithmic CAD-to-CAE data exchange methodology and design workflow are outlined in Section 3. The integrative design approach, which encompasses the geometry generation and structural analysis, is also explained. Details of the exchange framework and the indexing algorithm used to define the macro model components are also presented. Section 4 applies the proposed framework to two design cases: prefabricated timber beams with standard geometries and a free-form IATP structure. The conclusions are summarized in Section 5. The pseudocode associated with the IATP design modules is provided in Appendix 1.3.
