Road accidents are one of the leading causes of death, therefore road safety is a crucial and a delicate matter for national governments to be solved. Over the last years, governments have launched a series of initiatives with the intention to significantly reduce road accidents by acting directly on the three basic interacting elements of the road: the human behaviour, the vehicles security features and the road infrastructure. Human behaviour is the most difficult to deal with, because it can be predicted only to a limited extend. The improvements in vehicle safety are dependent on the implementation of new technologies and security features by the manufacturers. Finally the road infrastructure has a key role in safety influencing both human behaviour and vehicles performances. Relevant road infrastructure factors include the quality of the road illumination, the presence and the readability of signs and road markings as well as the quality of the paving [1]. Road safety is hence the final outcome of regulations and prevention techniques that, acting on the above mentioned three basic elements, make roads more secure. A method to objectively measure the safety level of a road may help to choose the most effective intervention. The research for such a measure motivated many studies. All of these can be divided into two main categories: those based on the analysis of statistical data of accidents [1] and those based on road users analysis and inter-operation, called naturalistic studies [2]. Most of the statistical studies are performed by evaluating crash data collected over a long period of time. They focus on rigorous statistical models and can tell something about the level of safety only after a certain number of events has already occurred. However the naturalistic studies can find the causes that can lead to an accident in order to prevent it. The actual difficulty in naturalistic studies is to collect and access the data needed for a good output. Current technologies offer the opportunity to collect data continuously with networks of cameras, wireless sensor networks and on-board monitoring systems. The framework presented in this paper can automatically collect data, while moving on board of a vehicle, and locate dangerous places for road users in order to send alarms to experts and allow a prompt intervention to improve the safety level of the location. To this aim, the framework is composed of a video-based on-board monitoring system that exploits the model of the Traffic Conflict Technique (TCT) to compute safety measures in conjunction with computer vision techniques and classification algorithms. This framework mounted properly on a public bus transportation system, which runs every day the same roads, can create a distributed moving sensor network which continuously collects data directly on the field. Compared to other solutions of the state of the art, the proposed approach provides more information relative to pre-crash and crash events than what is currently available, it is less expensive. Moreover it allows to investigate with few sensors a very large territory and it has safety risk detection with real-time capabilities. Finally it is not based on the analysis of the driver behaviour, but it focuses only on the interaction between road users, making it less intrusive with respect to privacy issues.
The paper is organised as follows. The state of the art techniques related to traffic analysis approaches are discussed in Section 2. We then introduce the reader to the Traffic Conflict Technique fundamentals in Section 3. The proposed framework is described in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the experimental results obtained considering real data collected in the city of Catania – Italy. Finally, conclusion and directions for future works are given in Section 6.
