Collaboration is a key practice for success in the twenty-first century economy. Worldwide organizations like ATC21S consider productive, innovative, and efficient collaboration as necessary skills (Griffin, MacGaw, & Care, 2012). In education research, these necessary skills have been viewed as regulation of collaboration (Hadwin, Järvelä, & Miller, 2011). To succeed, collaborators are expected to negotiate task goals and standards, to act strategically while monitoring, to revise processes and outcomes, to use suitable technological tools, and to productively deal with the challenges they face. Studies have demonstrated that many learners experience difficulty in developing required competencies through classroom learning (Järvelä, Järvenoja, Malmberg, & Hadwin, 2013; Lust, Elen, & Clarebout, 2013; Strijbos, Kirschner, & Martens, 2004; Winne, Hadwin, & Perry, 2013; Wu, 2015).
In response to such circumstances, educational researchers have conducted studies for supporting student regulation in collaboration. The research comprises two streams: theory development research that examines how learners engage in regulatory processes (e.g., Rogat & Adams-Wiggins, 2015), and instructional intervention research that develops computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) systems (e.g., Järvelä et al., 2016; Raes, Schellens, De Wever, & Benoit, 2016).
1.1. Regulation of collaboration: theory development researchHadwin et al. (2011) describe four assumptions in the context of extending regulated learning from the individual level to the group level. The first is that regulated learning is intentional and goal-directed. Learners should be engaged in the process of setting and committing to learning goals. Goals are learners' interpretations of their tasks in the form of specific strategic objectives and directions (Winne & Hadwin, 1998, 2008), and these vary in nature. They primarily function as standards for monitoring and evaluating learner progress and outcomes (Winne et al., 2013). The second assumption is that regulated learning is metacognitive, namely, that self-regulated learners can appropriately plan, monitor, and revise their learning as necessary. The third assumption is that regulated learning involves sustained control of behavior, cognition, motivation, and emotion. In collaborative learning, learners should be engaged in two distinct processes: shared knowledge construction focused on the domain knowledge, and shared regulation focused on the construction of metacognitive, meta-motivational, and meta-emotional knowledge (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013; Winne et al., 2013). The fourth assumption is that regulated learning occurs in social contexts. Recent models of regulation of collaboration (Hadwin & Oshige, 2011; Hadwin et al., 2011; Volet, Vauras, & Salonen, 2009) emphasize the social nature of the regulatory process.When contributing to a collaborative task, learners must regulate themselves, others, and the group (Winne et al., 2013). In self-regulated learning (SRL), learners regulate their learning to contribute to group performance, based on individual perceptions of task and strategic knowledge. In co-regulated learning (CoRL), learners mutually engage in self-regulation. Specifically, each learner in a group self-modifies actions and supports others' processes while monitoring others' task perceptions, goals, and standards. In socially shared regulation of learning (SSRL), learners collectively regulate group cognition. In Hadwin et al. (2011), SSRL is defined as “interdependent or collectively shared regulatory processes, beliefs, and knowledge orchestrated in the service of a co-constructed or shared outcome/product” (p. 69). In SSRL, learners engage in the shared planning, monitoring, evaluation, and regulation of social, cognitive, and behavioral aspects of their learning.Studies over the last decade have empirically supported the importance of social regulatory processes for collaborative learning. For instance, Järvenoja and Järvelä (2009) found three forms of regulation—individual, other, and shared regulation—which are used to maintain group work when students encounter challenges. Moreover, they found that social regulation is associated with the use of productive learning strategies and learning transfer. Building on these findings, other studies (e.g., Hadwin & Oshige, 2011; Hadwin et al., 2011; Miller & Hadwin, 2015) have identified and described forms of co-regulation. Members sometimes support other group members such that both contribute to the collaboration. In another form of co-regulation, a single member attempts to co-regulate others in the group to maintain more productive collaboration. Rogat and Adams-Wiggins (2015) further extended the discussion by investigating members' co-regulatory strategies. They found two forms of co-regulation, directive and facilitative. In directive co-regulation, members attempt to control others' behavior and contributions based on their task perceptions and monitoring. Yet, this form of co-regulation often results in negative or disrespectful socio-emotional reactions. In another form of co-regulation, facilitative co-regulation, members attempt to support others' behavior and contributions while respecting their ideas and actions. In comparison with the directive approach, facilitative co-regulation usually results in positive socio-emotional interactions and respectful reactions.While learning outcomes might be more successful if learners appropriately engaged in SSRL, they often find it difficult to engage in metacognitive-level strategies. Miller and Hadwin (2015) summarize the difficulties students encounter when engaging in a collaborative task. In individual-level contexts, students may not appropriately or correctly interpret the academic task. This is even seen at the university level. Moreover, there can be significant misalignments in collaborative contexts if task interpretation and goal-setting varies among group members (Hadwin et al., 2011; Winne et al., 2013). The task perception phase plays a vital role in students' regulatory processes, but they often have difficulty in constructing task perceptions. For example, Rogat and Linnenbrink-Garcia (2011) have found that students do not pay attention to their perceptions of task completion. Considering these findings, accurate task perceptions should be shared among group members for fruitful and productive collaboration. However, this process requires students to engage in social interaction to compensate for their lack of metacognitive knowledge, regulatory skills, and strategies.
1.2. Instructional intervention research: CSCL for regulation of collaborationWith this theory development in mind, we now review instructional intervention research. This line can be divided into two types, studies for developing CSCL environments and elements for supporting learner regulation, and studies of CSCL intervention practices.1.2.1. CSCL environments for supporting regulation in collaborationThere are two approaches to supporting learner regulation through CSCL environments: focusing on educational affordance or on social affordance (Järvelä et al., 2015; Kreijns, Kirschner, & Vermeulen, 2013). CSCL environments focused on educational affordance attempt to determine particular actions taken in a given situation through instructional intervention. gStudy (Winne et al., 2006), a representative work taking the educational affordance approach, attempts to facilitate learner SRL, CoRL, and SSRL through various tools embedded in a CSCL environment (Hadwin, Oshige, Gress, & Winne, 2010; Winne, Hadwin, & Gress, 2010). gStudy is an environment for knowledge co-construction in which learners or instructors can create or import learning content (called learning kits). gStudy enables three types of activities: (1) working on individual learning kits and sharing the outcomes, (2) collaboratively working on learning kits, and (3) working on individual learning kits and sharing them as collaborative learning kits. Learners can work on learning kits using tools such as a chat tool where instructors can make prompts and give feedback, a guided chat tool where generic and role-assigning prompts are embedded, or template notes. These activities stimulate learner's SRL, CoRL, and SSRL, and the embedded tools enable instructor co-regulation. gStudy gathers detailed process data and metadata of learner actions to leverage feedback for learners, for analyses, and for the further development of CSCL tools (Hadwin et al., 2010; Kumar, Gress, Hadwin, & Winne, 2010; Winne et al., 2010). Meanwhile, van Joolingen, Jong, Lazonder, Savelsvergh, and Manlove (2005) developed an environment called Co-Lab that is augmented with a tool called the Process Coordinator. Co-Lab is an environment that facilitates collaborative discovery learning in the natural sciences. Process Coordinator supports learner's regulation processes such as planning, monitoring, and evaluation by providing a hierarchy of preset goals, hints and explanations, and a template for the final report. In this environment, learners engage in conducting experiments through simulations and expressing their understandings in a shared space, while the environment affords and supports their regulation process. In another study, Molenaar, van Boxtel, Sleegers, and Roda (2011) developed a dynamic scaffolding tool called AtgentSchool. AtgentSchool includes an attention management system that tracks and gathers information of learner acts in computer-based learning environments. AtgentSchool scaffolds learner cognition, metacognition, and motivation dynamically via a virtual agent by leveraging that information.Recent studies supporting learner regulation through CSCL environments have shown the importance of social affordance. Such CSCL environments attempt to determine specific social interactions to promote learner awareness of own, other, and group processes and performances. While poor interactions would clearly result in socio-emotional conflict and dysfunctional collaboration (Teasley & Roschelle, 1993; Barron, 2003), supporting those affective issues has been neglected in CSCL research (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009). Recent studies of developing Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (VCRI; Jaspers, Broeken, & Erkens, 2004; Phielix, Prins, & Kirschner, 2010) and SSRL tools (e.g., Järvelä et al., 2016) have thus focused on social affordance. VCRI has often been used to extend collaborative work in virtual settings via chat and co-writing (Co-Writer) tools while encouraging learners to self- and peer-assess their social and cognitive performance using a Radar tool. Learners further reflect on their individual and collaborative behavior and performance using a tool called Reflector (Phielix et al., 2010). The self- and peer-assessment data that Radar collects can be anonymously visualized for the group. The VCRI environment is expected to help learners improve their social performance in a way that results in better cognitive performance.The Adaptive Instrument for Regulation of Emotion (AIRE; Järvenoja & Järvelä, 2009; Järvenoja, Volet, & Järverä, 2013) marked a new stage in the development of SSRL tools. AIRE focuses on assessing learner experiences of socio-emotional challenges and the individual or socially shared regulation they executed. The instrument asks learners to rate how well generic statements and scenarios of goals, regulation strategies, and socio-emotional challenges describe their cognition and experiences on a 4- or 5-point Likert scale. AIRE data reveal learner goals, interpretations of socio-emotional challenges, the degree of SRL and SSRL, and coherence of these across group members. Implementation of AIRE found that interpretation of socio-emotional challenges varies among group members and among groups. The ideas and findings of AIRE were later adapted in SSRL tools such as the Socio-Emotional Sampling Tool (SEST; Webster & Hadwin, 2013), Individual Planning Tool and Shared Planning Tool (IPT and SPT; Hadwin, Miller, & Webster, 2013; Miller, Webster, & Hadwin, 2013; Miller & Hadwin, 2015), and OurPlanner and OurEvaluator (Järvelä et al., 2015). SEST supports learner regulation by scripting and prompting learners to monitor and evaluate their current emotions before, during, and after the task. SEST requires learners to complete a reflection essay related to motivation and emotion by filling in blanks and choosing items from drop-down menus. In contrast, AIRE asked learners to rate how well statements and scenarios describe their experiences. IPT and SPT help learners define tasks, set goals, make plans, and reflect on the challenges encountered individually (IPT) or collaboratively (SPT) using a series of questions asking them to fill in blank text boxes before each task.While developing these SSRL tools in consideration of VCRI, Järvelä et al. (2015) identified three design principles to support SSRL: “(1) increasing learners' awareness of their own and others' learning process, (2) supporting the externalization of students' and others' learning process and helping in sharing and interaction, and (3) prompting the acquisition and activation of regulatory processes” (p. 136). Furthermore, by building on VCRI while incorporating the ideas of SSRL tools, they reshaped VCRI to promote SSRL on the basis of these three design principles. They tailored the Radar tool and reformulated the Co-Writer, OurPlanner and OurEvaluator. The tailored Radar assisted promoting and sharing learner awareness of motivation, self-efficacy, group capableness, and task interpretation. OurPlanner and OurEvaluator facilitate shared planning and evaluation based on SPT. The three design principles they identified and the environment they developed presented a way to facilitate learners' mutual interactions and regulatory processes that improve cognitive performance. By incorporating the ideas of AIRE, they offered a new way to collect otherwise unobservable individual and shared metacognition during learner collaboration, which is useful for supporting learners and conducting research.1.2.2. CSCL intervention practicesSince CSCL intervention practices are being carried out concurrently with CSCL development research, there is educational practice research that leverages existing tools (e.g., Adobe Connect 9) in addition to using the CSCL environment described above. In this section, we provide a review of studies adopting the CSCL environment and utilizing existing CSCL tools, while describing research design based on the experimental approach and case-based methods.1.2.2.1. Experimental approachSome studies that used experimental design concluded that instructional interventions did not necessarily facilitate learning outcomes over the control condition (Janssen, Erkens, Kanselaar, & Jaspers, 2007; Manlove, Lazonder, & Jong, 2009; Molenaar, Roda, van Boxtel, & Sleegers, 2012; Raes et al., 2016). Manlove et al. (2009) carried out physics inquiry learning implementing the Co-Lab environment mentioned in section 1.2.1. Students using Process Coordinator from which all regulative directions were removed were assigned to the control condition while students using Process Coordinator with supports were assigned to the experimental condition. Contrary to expectations, they found that Process Coordinator with supports had only partial effects on supporting regulation. Compared with the control condition, it only increased the frequency of planning. Moreover, regardless of the condition, the more students used planning and content monitoring supports, the higher their lab report quality but the lower their physical model quality. Similar to Manlove et al. (2009), Molenaar et al. (2012) examined that how AtgentSchool (mentioned in section 1.2.1.) supports student SSRL. With the support of a virtual agent, students in the experimental condition worked in pairs over six lessons (45 min each), finding and writing reasons why they wish or do not wish to live in New Zealand. Students in the control condition did not receive supports. The results revealed that students under the experimental condition wrote better essays and asked more questions than did students under the control condition, but there were no significant differences between the conditions with regards to scores on tests regarding domain knowledge about New Zealand. Manlove et al. (2009) and Molenaar et al. (2012) argued that the instructional intervention they implemented led students to focus on lab report or essay content, but not on modeling work or acquisition of domain knowledge.In another study, Raes et al. (2016) carried out web-based inquiry learning using collaboration scripts provided in WISE (Slotta & Linn, 2009). Collaboration scripts assigned students working in pairs to a role responsible for searching the web and typing answers, or to a role responsible for metacognitive evaluation. Students were prompted to switch roles at the beginning of each new activity. Similar to findings in previous studies, only one marginally significant effect of collaboration scripts, namely, facilitating students to compare several sources and reach consensus about the usefulness of the source, was found as compared with the non-script condition. Moreover, they found that the scripted condition did not specifically influence group performance. Regardless of the condition, the task analysis led students to better group performance. This was also confirmed in a case analysis of four groups focusing on the best- and worst-performing groups in each condition. Results suggested that each member of the best-performing groups had the motive, ability, and responsibility for their role and belief that peers could perform their role. These resulted in even activity and careful elaboration of information processing, regardless of the assigned or emergent roles. Examining student improvement in strategic knowledge for web-based inquiry learning, Raes et al. (2016) moreover found that students in both the experimental and control conditions improved their strategic knowledge, and that there was no significant difference between the conditions. Similar to Raes et al. (2016), Janssen et al. (2007) reported that the CSCL environment they developed did not affect group performance. They augmented an early version of VCRI (Jaspers et al., 2004) with Participation Tool for students in the experimental group. The tool graphically represented each member's contribution to the group and to the community and facilitated student SSRL, but did not affect group performance in the experimental condition over the control condition.Results from some studies provide evidence that CSCL supports student regulation of collaboration. Jermann and Dillenbourg (2008), for instance, developed experimental equipment for evaluating graphical feedback for student contributions. They conducted two experiments that each required students to engage in a 1-h task, namely reducing traffic congestion by adjusting the timing of traffic lights in a simulation. In contrast with Janssen et al. (2007), they found that providing graphical feedback with a standard of desirable participation balance was most effective. This kind of feedback facilitated student planning, resulting in successful group performance.The above studies have yielded mixed results, and little is known about the generalizable effectiveness of scripting (e.g., Vogel, Wecker, Kollar, & Fischer, 2016). The studies further suggested that supports were particularly effective only when suited to each task, student, and group (Janssen et al., 2007; Manlove et al., 2009; Molenaar et al., 2012; Raes et al., 2016). Since the effectiveness of interventions and scripting depends on context, it is necessary to aggregate further findings by collecting narratives in more detail. The case-based method may provide more information on how learners in successful collaboration engage in regulatory processes and what is missing in unsuccessful groups.1.2.2.2. Case-based method studiesCase-based method studies are classified as (1) single case analyses and (2) comparative analyses of multiple cases. Näykki, Järvelä, Kirschner, and Järvenoja (2014) analyzed a group that had fallen into socio-emotional conflict while members worked on inventing a new teaching practice through the experience of engaging in technology-enhanced learning activity for twelve weeks. Students used Web 2.0 tools such as wikis (Laru, Näykki, & Järvelä, 2012). They indicated that students tend to adopt avoidance-focused emotion regulation when encountering socio-emotional conflict, and thus could not maintain a well-balanced atmosphere, resulting in lower performance. Further, negative social interactions such as overruling, undermining, and normative interaction created socio-emotional challenges. Meanwhile, Lajoie et al. (2015) analyzed regulation while medical students learned how to deliver bad news to patients in an international web-based, problem-based learning environment. They used Adobe Connect 9 as the CSCL environment. The students were supported by facilitators. They found that as activity advances, the frequency of metacognition trends higher, and planning, monitoring, and executing are followed by reflective phases such as monitoring, evaluation, and elaboration. In contrast to Näykki et al.'s (2014) case, they revealed that co-regulation and positive reciprocal actions tend to occur together to advance discussion and develop shared understanding.Lee, O'Donnell, and Rogat (2015) described a comparative case study of a shared regulation group and a directive co-regulation group. They analyzed chat logs of students engaged in three interrelated hour-long tasks to examine how students used regulatory sub-processes such as planning, monitoring, and evaluation. They used Sakai as the CSCL environment, and prompts facilitated shared regulation in each task. First, they revealed that the form of planning and task monitoring activities reflected group ambiance (socially shared or directive co-regulated). Members in the socially shared group engaged in shared planning and task monitoring and created a socially shared ambiance. In the directive co-regulated group, however, one member was responsible for planning and task monitoring, and other members followed. Second, content monitoring played a vital role in high-quality co-construction of knowledge. In both groups, students engaged in a high quality of shared content monitoring, such as monitoring the development of task responses using elaboration and revision, which is directly connected to the high-quality co-construction of knowledge. The directive co-regulation group maintained high-quality shared content monitoring and co-construction of knowledge as did the socially shared group, even though uneven sub-processing of regulation would be expected to result in low performance. Lee et al. (2015) suggested that members, except for co-regulators, in a directive co-regulation group could invest regulatory resources to content monitoring and co-constructing the task response, because the directive co-regulator oversaw planning and task monitoring. They further discussed non-face-to-face learning environments, where group members have limited access to social and affect reactions, resulting in successful directive co-regulation instead of socio-emotional conflict.Schoor and Bannert (2012) also conducted a comparative study between high- and low-performing groups working on a 90-min task to explore sequences of regulatory sub-processes and their relationships to group performance. Each student was provided with different learning texts on a statistical topic and asked to individually develop a handout. They then cooperated with students who studied different texts to create a joint handout. They communicated only via chat and a shared editor on the course management system (Schoor & Bannert, 2011). Students were prompted to first review each other's individually created handouts and develop consensus, and then to create a joint handout while elaborating it. Using a process-mining technique, they found no remarkable difference between the two groups. They further suggested that insufficient task interpretation resulted in lower group performance. Expanding on this study, Malmberg, Järvelä, Jävenoja, and Panadero (2015) implemented a tailored VCRI environment (mentioned in section 1.2.1) to collect further student information of unobservable metacognition (e.g., interpretation of the challenge) and to support regulation. Over two months, students wrote nine brief essays about how to leverage technology in educational contexts. Malmberg, Järvelä, Järvenoja, and Panadero (2015) identified 391 challenges, 383 regulation strategies, and 27 combinations of challenges and regulation strategies. Comparing the regulation processes of higher and lower performing groups, they found that the higher-performing group progressively focused on regulating cognitive, motivational, and social challenges, while the lower-performing group focused on regulating external constraints such as the learning environment and time. Kwon, Liu, and Johnson (2014) reported findings similar to those of Malmberg et al. (2015). They used discussion forums for group communication and wikis for collaborative writing, and assigned students with tasks for creating a clinical ethics case scenario. They found that successful collaborators interacted with each other from early stages of the sixteen-week task while maintaining positive socio-emotional interaction and adapting their regulation strategies as the task proceeds. Further, they found that poor collaborators showed few interactions and least socio-emotional interactions throughout projects, or rushed at the end of the project without negotiating a clear group coordination plan.Compared with studies using rigorous experimental designs (e.g., Janssen et al., 2007; Jermann & Dillenbourg, 2008; Manlove et al., 2009; Molenaar et al., 2012), case-based method studies provide more information on how learners engage in regulatory processes and what is lacking in unsuccessful groups. Successful learners engaged in adequate task monitoring and used correct task interpretations and high-quality content monitoring to elaborate their task response (Lee et al., 2015; Schoor & Bannert, 2012). They also adopted positive reciprocal actions to reduce and regulate motivational and socio-emotional challenges (Kwon et al., 2014; Lajoie et al., 2015; Malmberg et al., 2015; Näykki et al., 2014). Unsuccessful group members often failed to construct adequate task perceptions (Schoor & Bannert, 2012) and tended to engage in poor mutual interactions that resulted in socio-emotional conflict, avoidance-focused regulation when facing socio-emotional conflict, and regulating external challenges (Kwon et al., 2014; Malmberg et al., 2015; Näykki et al., 2014).1.2.3. Focus of the present studyAlthough many studies emphasize collaboration skills (Griffin, McGaw, & Care, 2012), few examine progress in learner regulation as improvement of collaboration skills and knowledge. For instance, many studies (e.g., Janssen et al., 2007; Jermann & Dillenbourg, 2008; Manlove et al., 2009; Molenaar et al., 2012; Raes et al., 2016) examined whether intervention facilitated student regulation and resulted in a high-quality domain-specific knowledge construction. Some studies (e.g., Lajoie et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2015) have elucidated how regulation strategies contribute to the construction of shared understanding and group atmosphere. Other studies (Kwon et al., 2014; Malmberg et al., 2015; Näykki et al., 2014; Schoor & Bannert, 2012) instead clarify how students who successfully create high-quality task responses were engaged in regulatory processes, and further identify how other students fail. These studies focus on regulation in relation to the task response, but do not examine progress in students' regulation of collaboration. For designing effective learning environments for learners to develop their regulatory skills and knowledge in collaboration, we further need to examine the relationship between collaborative learning process and change in their regulatory skills and knowledge as a consequence. Hence, the present study attempts to examine progress in student regulation of collaboration.To do so, we focused on ill-structured tasks that require learners to engage in long-term collaborative efforts to develop their thoughts and ideas for two reasons. First, long-term courses are necessary for examining progress in student regulation, because students significantly improve general learning skills when they use such skills extensively and repetitively (e.g., Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2014; Paavola, Lipponen, & Hakkarainen, 2004). In long-term course studies elucidating how students engaged in regulation processes (Kwon et al., 2014; Lajoie et al., 2015; Malmberg et al., 2015; Näykki et al., 2014), students were found to adapt their regulation strategies as the task advances. They engaged in a comprehensive regulatory process including motivational and socio-emotional regulation for successful task accomplishment. In short-term course studies (Lee et al., 2015; Schoor & Bannert, 2012), on the other hand, monitoring task and content played a vital role in completing tasks. Monitoring tasks and content is a part of the regulatory process, but it does not cover the comprehensive process. Long-term courses are therefore suited toward fostering students' regulatory skills. Second, an ill-structured long-term task requires learners to exert extra effort toward regulating motivational and socio-emotional aspects. When working on ill-structured tasks collaboratively, learners are challenged out of their comfort zones through confronting socio-cognitive challenges such as discussing and negotiating to consolidate ideas. They strive for identity and sense of belonging, because they often must change their initial beliefs, thoughts, and opinions during the elaborating process (Näykki et al., 2014; Paavola et al., 2004). Thus, they must reciprocally care for their emotions to smoothly accomplish tasks. Discomfort gives rise to socio-emotional conflicts. The studies that we classified as long-term courses above (Kwon et al., 2014; Lajoie et al., 2015; Malmberg et al., 2015; Näykki et al., 2014) also adopted ill-structured tasks and revealed that motivational and socio-emotional regulation were key processes for success. We therefore presume that long-term courses with ill-structured tasks meet our instructional goal: understanding how to manage collaborative learning. Considering the recent emphasis on long-term collaborative construction of ideas and knowledge as well as students' motivational and socio-emotional regulation (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2014; Dillenbourg et al., 2009; Paavola et al., 2004), studying how students progress in their regulation under such settings has profound significance in educational research.In examining the effectiveness of CSCL environments for facilitating student collaboration regulation, we attempted to extend the previous studies toward CSCL implementation for mediating face-to-face collaboration. As Dillenbourg et al. (2009) discussed, CSCL environments not only allow face-to-face collaboration in virtual settings, but also augment it. CSCL tools shape verbal interactions in several ways, such as scripting and graphical representations for both settings. To augment face-to-face collaboration, it is crucial to support unique computer-mediated interaction that is not available in simple face-to-face situations. For instance, Manlove et al. (2009), Molenaar et al. (2012), and Raes et al. (2016) implemented a computer-mediated learning environment and examined its effectiveness. However, it is necessary to further examine the effectiveness of the environment—while also aiming at facilitating progress in their regulation—of long-term courses with ill-structured tasks, because most previous studies have assigned students with short-term, well-structured tasks.
1.3. Current studyThis study aimed at designing a computer-mediated learning environment that facilitates regulation and its improvement while students work on an ill-structured task. We develop a long-term project-based learning course using Knowledge Forum (KF; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). We tailored KF based on the three design principles (awareness, supporting externalization, and prompting) by Järvelä et al. (2015). KF was used as a digital portfolio where students collaboratively reflected on face-to-face project-based learning. To activate regulation strategies, we provided learners with metacognitive question prompts by customizing KF's scaffold function.To facilitate and evaluate progress in student regulation of collaboration, we followed the “script theory of guidance” by Fischer, Kollar, Stegmann, and Wecker (2013). With four script components (play, scene, role, and scriptlet) and seven principles, the script theory of guidance provides a useful framework for examining how collaboration processes are shaped by learners' dynamically configured and reconfigured internal scripts, and how internal scripts develop through experiencing collaboration while considering the influence of external scripts. The internal scripts are learner knowledge regarding how to regulate collaboration, and are described from the abstract level (play) down to the concrete action level (scriptlets). Since we aimed at designing an environment that facilitates student regulation scripts, we focused on six interrelated principles of internal script development. According to the script theory of guidance, learner understanding and actions are guided by dynamically configured and reconfigured internal scripts (the “internal script guidance principle”), which are influenced by learner goals, by situational perception (the “internal script configuration principle”), and by external scripts that inhibit the automated use of available internal script components. External scripts induce a functional configuration of internal script components in order to orient learners toward productive actions (the “external script guidance principle”). Learners configure a new set of available internal script components when encountering unfamiliar situations (the “internal script induction principle”), and modify internal scripts that do not lead to understanding or successful actions (the “internal script reconfiguration principle”). Through experiencing collaboration and iterative reconfiguration of internal scripts, learners develop and internalize internal scripts as knowledge and collaboration skills that are also useful in other settings. External scripts are most effective for learners when they are not too specific (“over-scripting” (Dillenbourg, 2002)), do not prevent autonomous use of internal scripts and do not inhibit reconfiguring and developing a new set of internal script components (the “optimal external scripting level principle”).In our study, we examine students' regulation scripts as a repertoire of regulatory processes in SRL, CoRL and SSRL, and whether the repertoire had increased after the project-based learning. We also consider the optimal external scripting level principle as a design principle for developing the learning environment. Therefore, the research questions in this study are (1) do students augment regulation scripts through experiencing collaboration in the developed learning environment, and (2) how do they advance their regulation scripts?
