In the past decades, many corpus-based studies have argued for the necessity of lists of academic formulaic expressions for students and teachers of English for Academic Purposes (EAP), explored the methodological issues involved in compiling such lists, and presented several pedagogically useful lists of different types of academic expressions (e.g. Ackerman and Chen, 2013, Biber et al., 2004, Martinez and Schmitt, 2012, Morley, 2015, Nattinger and DeCarrico, 1992, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010). The EAP community has shown substantial interest in such lists and recognized the importance of their continued improvement and enrichment. One type of formulaic expression that is now increasingly seen as pedagogically relevant but that has not yet been systematically tackled in previous corpus-based endeavors is phrase-frames (hereafter p-frames), i.e. semi-fixed sequences that contain a variable slot that can be filled by different words, e.g. the * of the study, where the open slot may be filled by aim, goal, and purpose, among others. In this study, we extend recent efforts in compiling pedagogically useful lists of academic formulaic expressions by deriving a list of p-frames frequently used in a corpus of a specific part-genre, i.e. research article (RA) introductions, in six social science disciplines. In doing so, we hope to contribute to the methodological discussion of the extraction and selection of candidate p-frames as well as the usefulness and feasibility of functional categorization of the p-frames for pedagogical applications.
1.1. Language as phraseologyA growing body of research accumulated in the past two decades in corpus linguistics has significantly contributed to the contemporary understanding of “language as phraseology” (Hunston, 2002, p. 137). Language as phraseology is an assumption that positions the phrase, not individual words, as a fundamental unit of meaning. This assumption has a long history in the field of language pedagogy: language teachers were, possibly, the first to grapple with practical issues of formulaicity in language (Herbst, 2011, Sinclair et al., 2004, Stubbs, 2009). Indeed, any attempt by the learner to achieve a degree of native-like language ability inevitably results in realization that there exist multiple conventionalized ways of stringing words together in a particular language that are unpredictable based on the traditionally understood “rules of grammar”. The need to identify and, subsequently, teach conventionalized sequences was recognized as early as the 1930s. In fact, the coinage of the term collocation belongs to the English language teacher and researcher Harold E. Palmer. Palmer's definition of a collocation as “a succession of two or more words that must be learnt as an integral whole and not pieced together from its component parts” (Palmer, 1933 as cited in Stubbs, 2009, p. 17) was effectively adopted by John Sinclair, who took the term and the idea behind it to build a whole new field around it (Herbst, 2011, Johansson, 2011, Stubbs, 2009).The original notion of language as phraseology can be summarized along the lines of the Idiom Principle, which posits that “a language user has available to him or her a large number of semi-preconstructed phrases that constitute single choices, even though they might appear to be analyzable into segments” (Sinclair, 1991, p. 110). Corpus linguistics has provided evidence that formulaicity is omnipresent in language, and that formulaic sequences are fundamental to the way language is stored, processed, acquired and used (Hunston, 2002, Wray, 2008). Suggesting that every conventionalized recurrent communicative function has a conventionalized linguistic form, corpus linguistics has also effectively created a repository of research that showed which and what types of multi-word sequences, or formulae, tend to appear in which or what types of language modalities, registers, and genres1 (e.g. Biber et al., 2004, Hyland, 2008, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis, 2010). Biber et al. (2004) reported systematic differences in the distribution of lexical bundles of different structures and functions across the registers of conversation, classroom teaching, textbooks, and academic prose. Along similar lines, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) found that while some formulas occur frequently in both academic speaking and writing, many formulas occur primarily in one or the other. Based on these findings on mode and register variation in formulaic language use, many recent studies set out to analyze formulaic sequences in specific academic genres or part-genres, some with attention to inter-disciplinary variation. Hyland (2008), for example, analyzed a corpus of academic writing that consisted of research articles, dissertations, and theses, and systematically delineated variation in lexical bundle use among four disciplines. The understanding of language as phraseology and the insights from research into formulaic language use in different modalities, registers, and genres have impacted thinking on the teaching of academic language. In particular, it has been argued that incorporating analyses of formulaic sequences and their functions in specific modalities, registers, and genres of texts may improve the EAP writing curricula and learning outcomes (Coxhead and Byrd, 2007, Paltridge, 2004).
1.2. Pedagogically oriented lists of academic formulaic expressionsRecognizing the value of lists of academic formulaic expressions for facilitating EAP learners’ analyses and acquisition of formulaic sequences, corpus linguistics has made systematic efforts in deriving various types of such lists from corpora of academic language, such as the Academic Formulas List (AFL; Simpson-Vlach & Ellis, 2010) and the Phrasal Expressions List (PHRASE List; Martinez & Schmitt, 2012). Comparable to the aims of lists of academic vocabulary (e.g. Coxhead, 2000, Gardner and Davies, 2013), the AFL and the PHRASE List both aimed to represent pedagogically relevant contiguous formulaic sequences (e.g. in the present study) to be incorporated into curricula and teaching materials. Both lists were based on large corpora of academic speech and writing, which included different types of texts such as research articles and textbooks in the written portion, and lectures and seminars in the spoken portion. Methodologically, both teams approached the selection of possible formulas using a combination of quantitative corpus measures and qualitative analytical procedures, albeit with differential emphasis on them.Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) set out to generate a “formula teaching worth” (FTW) score for each formula, i.e. a composite score comprised of frequency and mutual information (MI) that could predict human judgement of the teaching worth of the formula. To that end, the authors recruited judges with teaching and testing experience to rate a random sample of 108 formulas, using such criteria as “whether or not they thought the phrase constituted ‘a formulaic expression, or fixed phrase, or chunk’ ” and “whether or not they thought the phrase was ‘worth teaching, as a bona fide phrase or expression’ ” (p.496). They subsequently ran multiple regression analysis on the rated sample to derive beta coefficients of frequency and MI as predictors of human rater scores and then used those coefficients to generate FTW scores for all formulas. They claimed that the final AFL list contained, in theory, only pedagogically useful formulaic expressions.Martinez and Schmitt (2012) cast doubt on the validity of the measure, whereby only a small subset of data was analyzed by human raters. They questioned such “strict adherence to statistically derived phrase selection” (p.306) and suggested that subjective judgment by raters with solid teaching and testing backgrounds should be included as a determinant for item inclusion. They incorporated several core criteria for the manual selection of candidates for the PHRASE List, based largely on Wray's (2008) criteria for formulaicity. Examples of their criteria included “Is the expression a Morpheme Equivalent Unit (MEU)?”, “Is the expression semantically transparent?”, etc. These criteria were applied to all expressions extracted from the British National Corpus. Martinez and Schmitt conceded that while such a methodology was “extremely time and labor intensive,” the resulting list was “clearly enhanced pedagogically” (p.310).Cortes (2013) and Morley (2015) took the qualitative analytical dimension a step further by aligning academic expressions with rhetorical functions. Both studies also focused on more specific EAP genres or part-genres. Cortes (2013) extracted a list of lexical bundles from a corpus of RA introductions and matched them to rhetorical moves and steps (e.g. one of the major was matched to the step ‘claiming relevance of field’). Morley (2015) extracted a list of phrases from a corpus of postgraduate dissertations and organized them by communicative function, e.g. ‘introducing problems and limitations’. He operationalized phrases broadly as expressions of variable length that were deemed useful for a communicative function, including both bundle-style items such as “The paper fails to specify …” and rather long items such as “Difficulties arise, however, when an attempt is made to implement the policy”.Taken together, existing corpus-based efforts in compiling lists of academic expressions all highlight the importance to consider both quantitative corpus statistics and qualitative analyses in identifying pedagogically relevant expressions. Meanwhile, these efforts have focused primarily on continuous formulaic expressions. In the current study, we expand this line of research by arguing that lists of academic formulaic expressions can be enriched with the inclusion of academic p-frames, a position which we explore in detail in the section below. While we leave the alignment of p-frames with rhetorical functions to a future study,2 we note that studies such as Cortes' (2013) and Morley's (2015) hold much promise in providing EAP students with not simply a list of academic expressions but a repository of linguistic units coupled with their specific rhetorical functions.
1.3. Phrase-framesIn our view, lists of academic formulaic expressions will be greatly enhanced by the inclusion of phrase-frames (Fletcher, 2006, Fletcher, 2011), i.e. multi-word sequences in which words form a ‘frame’ around a variable slot. The variants of a frame often form one or more semantically close or functionally similar clusters. For example, the variable slot in the * of the study may be filled in by purpose and goal as well as motivation and rationale. Many studies have underscored the importance of p-frames in the academic discourse. Biber (2009), for instance, found that academic writing relies heavily on discontinuous frames, while conversation relies more on continuous lexical sequences. Gray and Biber (2013) further showed that p-frames are more variable in academic writing than in conversation. These observations give us reason to believe that novice EAP writers stand to benefit from pedagogical resources that provide not only continuous set expressions such as on the one hand but also discontinuous frames and their variants. Teaching variable frames may allow teachers to introduce more language while lessening the cognitive demand on memory; at the same time, examining the variants that fill the variable slot may be a valuable exercise in understanding the degree of formulaicity of various constructions.To be fair, some of the lists reviewed above included some p-frames. For example, Simpson-Vlach and Ellis (2010) listed a few p-frames on the AFL (e.g. [a/large/the] number of), which they created by compounding multiple overlapping n-grams. Martinez and Schmitt (2012) also dealt with expressions “with a variable component” on the ad hoc basis, but they went a step further: when such an expression was noticed, they conducted “a careful follow-up search” in the corpus to “identify all variable forms of that expression” (p.312). However, the limited number of p-frames included in these lists were identified based on the procedure that extracts p-frames from overlapping high-frequency n-grams (or lexical bundles). Such a procedure has been problematized by Gray and Biber (2013), who reported that numerous discontinuous sequences were not associated with lexical bundles. The extraction of p-frames thus necessitates a separate procedure from that for extracting lexical bundles.In a recent study, Cunningham (2017) explored the use of p-frames in 128 mathematics RAs. She identified 180 p-frames specific to the mathematics discipline using a combination of frequency, range, and keyness criteria. These p-frames were then analyzed structurally and functionally. In her methodological procedure, the minimum frequency of each p-frame variant was set to three. This procedure suffered the same limitation noted by Gray and Biber (2013), leaving less frequent p-frame variants unanalyzed and many meaningful p-frames with diverse but less frequent variants unidentified. The study's singular focus on the mathematics discipline also calls for research on other disciplines.The argument for general, non-disciplinary academic word and phrase lists is largely well taken, since, after all, EAP courses do usually cater to students from diverse majors and specializations. Nevertheless, linguistic variation across registers, genres, and disciplines is well documented (Biber et al., 1999, Hyland, 2008), and the need to “determine how meaning creation works” in subsets of language (i.e. specific registers, genres, and disciplines) “that show a specialized grammar and vocabulary” (Römer, 2010, p. 308) has been called for. This need prompted us to investigate p-frames in a particular EAP part-genre, i.e. RA introductions, within a set of social science disciplines. Several studies reviewed above (e.g. Cortes, 2013, Cunningham, 2017, Morley, 2015) have generated valuable insights into formulaic language use in specific academic genres and disciplines. In line with such insights and keeping in mind the pedagogical imperative, we also hold the view that presenting lists of formulaic expressions for specific genres aids in fulfilling the promise of genre pedagogy, which sees “real benefits for learners as they pull together language, content, and contexts” (Hyland, 2007, p. 150).
1.4. Overview of the current studyThis study aims to add to recent corpus-based efforts in compiling lists of academic expressions by deriving a pedagogically useful list of p-frames for a specific part-genre, i.e. RA introductions, in six social science disciplines. To this end, we first identified a set of p-frames from a corpus of social science RA introductions and then subjected them to several manual filtering procedures. All p-frames included in the final list were analyzed structurally and functionally, and a subset was rated for pedagogical value by a panel of EAP writing instructors and student writers. In what follows, we detail our methodological procedure, present the results of the different steps of our procedure, and discuss the implications of our results for academic formulaic language research and academic writing pedagogy.
