The research of image analyzing and processing is of paramount importance due to the urgent needs and challenges of emerging digital camera applications. Image analysis can be defined as the extraction of meaningful information from images by means of digital image processing techniques  [1] and has been used extensively to obtain textile data  [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], such as accurate measurements and recognition of the geometry of woven textiles for quality assurance of the weaving process, textile modeling techniques for the prediction of material properties  [1], [7].
Realistic woven fabric appearance is very important for computer graphics applications. A wide and diverse range of applications, from computer game to material analysis, textile design and structure simulation, require interactive rendering of complex geometric details of woven fabrics. Accurately modeling structural detail of the fabric can produce realistic renderings effect of fabric appearance. The appearance of a particular woven fabric is determined by multi-scale geometric structure and light directional reflectance. This creates the need to visualize the scale-varying appearance of fabrics for multi-scale representation and rendering in woven fabric modeling. Woven fabrics are highly structured materials. Their appearance is influenced by their geometric structure. Fig. 1 shows three scales at which woven fabrics are commonly viewed, which can be hierarchically regarded as fabric scale, yarn scale and fiber scale.Download : Download high-res image (617KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Three scales of woven fabric.
It can be seen that the difference between the scale levels is roughly 1000 times, with units ranging from meters to micrometers. Woven structures and fiber distributions are better visualized at a variety of scales, and the modeling of woven fabric should be able to model these complex multi-scales.
Researchers have made tremendous efforts to model the woven fabric  [8]. The earlier research about modeling of textile geometry is reported by Peirce  [9]. Duan et al.  [10] and Etzmuß et al.  [11] used finite element method as the solution for cloth modeling. Wang reported a novel approach for modeling and simulation of helix twisting structure based on mass–spring model  [12]. The micro CT imaging was used to build volumetric appearance models of fabric  [13]. A structure-aware synthesis method was presented for predictive woven fabric appearance by Zhao  [14]. And the investigations about the braiding angle and the cover factor of the braided fabrics using image processing were reported by Kyosev in 2016  [15]. Wicking behavior of fabrics is described by simultaneously acquiring the images  [16].
However, there are many challenging aspects of modeling fabric structures, for example, the complexity of the textile structure topology and the contact between yarns. Yarns are highly flexible and their path and cross-sectional shape do not, in general, fit the usually assumed single geometrical form, for example, an elliptical cross section  [17]. It is difficult in capturing the diverse appearance from specified data to describe the fabric geometric model. There is a need for the development of more efficient computer techniques about the woven fabric modeling.
In this paper, a novel geometric method of modeling structural detail of woven fabric is presented based on the image. The important geometric features of woven fabric appearance can be represented. The challenges in the addressing problem include two issues. The first one is how to use the micro image to capture the geometric characters of fabric structure. The geometric model is required to capture the fine-scale detail of the woven fabric for the description of geometric structure. That includes fabric structure recognition and identification. The second is how to define the mathematical model for modeling the complex geometric details of woven fabrics. According to the processing results obtained in the first step, we model the yarn geometric structure with the Frenet Frame and use the Spiral Equation to present the helix twisting structure of fiber on the yarn. Then the fabric structure can be described by geometric method. Based on this geometric model, the woven fabric detail structure can be visualized realistically.
The main contributions are: 
(1)A novel geometric method for modeling structural detail of woven fabric based on the image is presented, which is a simple and easy-to-use method for visualizing the appearance of woven fabrics.(2)An efficient mathematical model for modeling the complex geometric details is developed, where the Frenet Frame is used to model the yarn geometric structure and the Spiral Equation is used to present the helix twisting structure of fiber on the yarn.
