Determining when to interrupt a user at appropriate times as s/he performs computer-based tasks is an ongoing problem (Altmann et al., 2014, Baethge et al., 2014, Iqbal and Bailey, 2010). From an algorithmic perspective, it is difficult to determine the precise time to interrupt a user. This is because there are several subproblems that need to be solved to be confident that an interruption will be beneficial to the user. Some subproblems include: i) determining the intent (or goal) of the user as s/he is performing the task; ii) determining the task difficulty (Gievska et al., 2005, Gievska and Sibert, 2004); iii) determining the user's current cognitive load (Gievska et al., 2005, Iqbal and Bailey, 2006); iv) estimating the cost of the interruption and the resumption lag time (Iqbal and Bailey, 2005); and v) incorporating personal user characteristics, such as sensitivity to being interrupted, distractibility level, etc. (Horvitz et al., 2003). A solution to these problems is needed to make accurate decisions about the timing of interruptions.
Since interruption is a key human-computer interaction problem, systems must be developed to manage interruptions in terms of reasoning about ideal timings of interruptions. In designing the classifier, the following desirable characteristics were identified:
1.make accurate decisions when uncertainty is present;2.be computationally efficient and able to make interruption decisions in real time (however, the classifier learning does not need to be real time);3.employ a user model (e.g., preferences, familiar tasks, etc.) that is used in the decision-making process;4.draw on direct measurements from user activities;5.learn from non-linear input data (i.e., assume input is not necessarily linear);6.provide a reasoning process that is easily interpretable by a human (i.e., the classifier's decision-making process to interrupt or defer an interruption must be easy to be examined and understood by a human). This characteristic provides the opportunity for deeper reasoning into why an interruption occurred as well as insight into the form and content of an appropriate message for user interaction;7.support supervised learning (capable of accepting input-output patterns and learning these associations); and8.learn quickly from a small number of training data sets.
1.1. Outcomes and contributionsWe created a machine learning classifier that performs as well as user-determined interruption points. The rationale why user-determined interruption timings are ideal is explained in the following sections. Additional outcomes and contributions include:1.The classifier incorporates a user model in its’ reasoning process. Our classifier includes both user and task contextual information—other classifiers include task details only.2.In the best models constructed, our classifier performs at an accuracy of 98% with historic event knowledge. This level of performance exceeds comparable studies in this area of HCI (Finn and Limerick, 2003, Lisetti and Nasoz, 2004, Picard, 2003, Pu et al., 2006).13.The classifier was implemented using an advanced machine learning technology (i.e., Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System)—which is a novel contribution.4.This research expands our understanding on reasoning about ideal interruption points for free-form tasks. Currently, this is largely an unsolved problem.5.The classifier was designed as a framework so it could be generalized to other tasks and problem domains.The structure of this paper is: Section 2 presents a literature review of interruption research and a survey of candidate machine learning algorithms. Section 3 presents the design and methodology including the classifier requirements, the Interruption Classifier, data capturing techniques, and the details of the machine learning technologies used in the implementation of the classifier. Section 4 presents the findings (analysis and evaluation), Section 5 presents a discussion on the implications of the empirical results for theories of interruption and implications for deploying classifiers for detecting interruptible moments in practice. Lastly, Section 6 presents the conclusions.
