Although most people with schizophrenia desire to work, vocational difficulties are common (Luciano and Meara, 2014), leading to economic hardship (Danziger et al., 2009) and poor psychosocial outcomes (Kukla et al., 2012; Twamley et al., 2008). Previous studies examining this vocational dysfunction have highlighted two notable contributors: neurocognitive deficits and negative self-expectations. Neurocognitive deficits including difficulties in learning and memory, executive functioning, attention, and social cognition predict poor work outcomes (Bryson and Bell, 2003; McGurk et al., 2003); these findings suggest that persons with schizophrenia may struggle at work when they have difficulty attending to, recalling, and flexibly thinking about work tasks. In parallel, defeatist beliefs and self-expectations of failure at work, low self-esteem, and underestimates of work-related skills have been linked to difficulties obtaining work and poor job performance (Campellone et al., 2016; Davis et al., 2004; Kukla et al., 2014).
Several studies have addressed the treatment of cognitive impairments in people with schizophrenia using cognitive remediation (CR) strategies. Prior studies demonstrate that CR improves core cognitive deficits in schizophrenia (McGurk et al., 2007), particularly when paired with psychiatric rehabilitation programs that allow persons to practice acquired skills in real world settings (Medalia and Saperstein, 2013). Going a step further, recent research has also found that CR augmentation of vocational rehabilitation is associated with a 20% higher employment rate and increases in hours worked and money earned among persons with schizophrenia (Chan et al., 2015).
Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT) approaches are well established as effective treatments addressing self-defeating beliefs and behaviors that occur in many disorders, including schizophrenia. Burgeoning evidence also indicates that CBT is a promising approach to ameliorate maladaptive work-related beliefs and behaviors, leading to significantly enhanced employment outcomes across domains (Kukla et al., 2016; Kukla et al., 2017; Lysaker et al., 2009; Mervis et al., 2016). However, most people with schizophrenia achieve only modest to moderate improvement in work functioning in response to CBT and a minority do not benefit at all from CBT. One possibility is that persisting cognitive deficits hinder the acquisition of cognitive and behavioral skills and application of these elements on the job.
This notion suggests that CR may be needed to amplify the effects of CBT leading to better work outcomes. For instance, it is possible that with improved memory acquired through CR, persons may be able to make more use of CBT in their lives, such as the use of cognitive restructuring on the job to promote positive self-expectations of work success. Another possibility is that with increased capacity for learning and problem solving, people with schizophrenia may be able to more effectively identify, practice, and apply useful behavioral coping strategies on the job. Third, increasing capacity in other neurocognitive areas may allow people to better relate to and have positive workplace interactions with co-workers and supervisors. Hence, to study the effects of CBT enhanced with CR, we compared a combined CBT and CR intervention (CBT + CR) to unenhanced CBT (CBT alone) and a vocational support condition on work and neurocognitive outcomes in adults with schizophrenia spectrum disorders engaged in vocational rehabilitation. First, we hypothesized that the CBT + CR group would experience greater gains in work outcomes compared with CBT alone and vocational support groups across the active study period. Second, we hypothesized that the CBT alone group would have better work outcomes compared to the control group across the active study period. Third, we hypothesized that the CBT + CR group would experience greater gains in neurocognition compared with CBT alone and vocational support groups at the 6 and 12 month follow up periods.
