The Iterative Fourier Transform Algorithm (IFTA) and its modified forms are the most popular algorithm used for generating holograms in holographic display and projection, as well as technologies where phase retrieval is required [[1], [2], [3]]. However, this type of algorithm often suffers from stagnation of convergence after a few iterations, which leads to reconstructed images with low accuracy, high speckle noise and large time cost. The degradation of reconstructed quality will seriously affect the observation effect especially in display applications such as head up display (HUD) and head mounted display (HMD) [4,5]. Consequently, the quality of holographic display is still far from achieving the standard of traditional display with high resolution, SNR and dynamic broadcast.
In the past decades, various algorithms have been proposed to improve the quality of reconstructed holographic images. The time-integral speckle averaging method is common means used to restrain speckles by sequentially loading sub-holograms with different initial phase on the spatial light modulator (SLM) [6,7]. A moving diffuser is also employed to destroy the coherence of the incident laser for speckle reduction [8]. Qi et al. presented a complex modulation based on double-phase method, where the complex amplitude of the holographic plane is encoded into the superposition of two pure phase sub-holograms with an advantage of short time cost, but the use of checkerboard will lead to the loss of resolution, as well as bring with artifacts, and the diffraction efficiency is low [9,10]. Tsang et al. proposed the bi-direction error diffusion method and localized error diffusion and redistribution method, which the complex Fresnel hologram is converted into a phase only hologram. The magnitude of each pixel is forced to be a constant value, while preserving the exact phase, then the resulting error is diffused to the neighboring pixels. The algorithm exceeding the capability of generating quality phase-only holograms in video rate, but the reconstructed image size can’t exceed the size of hologram, the speckles are still serious, and the diffraction efficiency is low [11,12]. Pang et al. further improved the error diffusion method, where the target image is first added with a special quadratic phase and then padded with zeros. The reconstructed image is clear and bright, but degraded with artifacts, and the diffraction efficiency is low [13]. Qu et al. proposed a small sampling interval method, for which the resolution of reconstructed image is 2 times of the previous reconstructed image that is not limited by the size of the spatial light modulator (SLM), and the speckles are well suppressed at the same time. However, it is easy to suffer from stagnation of the convergence and fall into a local minimum during the iteration, which leads to large time cost. Meanwhile, the amplitude of around padding points on the SLM can't reach zeros finally, hence good optimization results are difficult to be obtained [14,15].
In this paper, we further propose and investigate an effective design method of computer generated hologram (CGH) with high quality, high diffraction efficiency and short time cost. Small sampling interval Δξ=λf2Linstead of Δξ=λfL with high resolution 2M × 2N is set up on the reconstructed plane by using M × N sampling points padding with extra 3M × N zero amplitude on the holographic plane to reduce speckles and granularsensation. During the iteration, a special varying weighting factor is added to speed up constraining the amplitude distribution in the signal window. Considering the stagnation situation, another kind of constraint is applied to jump out the local minimum, which ensured the reconstruction with high accuracy, SNR, and less processing time. In the next section, we first provide a brief review of the small sampling interval method, and then described the proposed algorithm in detail. The simulation and experimental results of the proposed algorithm are demonstrated in Section 3, where multiplane 3D hologram and colorful hologram are also simulated to verify the performance of the proposed algorithm. In Section 4, we discussed the method can also be applied to leverage the image reconstruction performance for other types advanced holographic displays including denoising hologram, multiplane hologram, and colorful hologram. Finally, the content of this work is summarized in Section 5.
