Plastic pollution is a growing problem occurring at a global scale. Large scale industrial production of plastics has accelerated since the beginning of the plastics industry in the mid-1900s (Geyer et al., 2017). It is a preferred material due to its low cost, durability, low density, and the perception of its expendability. The development of single-use plastic, most notably in packaging, has increased its popularity and share of global municipal solid waste (Geyer et al., 2017; Jambeck et al., 2015). Plastic entering the environment accumulates and persists in near permanence (Barnes et al., 2009). Accordingly, plastic pollution has been documented in all major ocean basins and a growing number of freshwater and terrestrial environments (Rillig, 2012; Wagner et al., 2014).
Microplastics (i.e., particles < 5 mm) are an important component of global plastic pollution (Arthur et al., 2009; Cole et al., 2011; Dris et al., 2017). Primary microplastics are manufactured to this size class, such as microbeads (e.g., personal care products and industrial cleaners) and pre-production plastic pellets. In contrast, secondary microplastics originate as larger items and fragment or degrade into microplastic (Andrady, 2011; Browne et al., 2011). Secondary microplastics include uneven fragments, pellets, rounded granules, or filaments known as microfibers.
Microfibers are among the most common microplastic encountered on shorelines, lakes, and rivers worldwide (Browne et al., 2011; McCormick et al., 2016; Miller et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017). Microfibers are threads, approximately 0.1–5 mm long and ∼0.04 mm wide (Barrows et al., 2017b). Not all microfibers are plastic, as some are derived from non-synthetic textiles such as cotton, wool, silk or cellulose, the latter frequently made into a semi-synthetic material via further processing (e.g. rayon, viscose). A primary source of microfiber pollution is effluent from wastewater treatment plants which contains fibers fragmented from clothes during washing (Browne et al., 2011; Hoellein et al., 2017; McCormick et al., 2016). Atmospheric deposition is another potentially significant microfiber source into the aquatic environment (Dris et al., 2016, Dris et al., 2017).
While considered a major transporter of plastic pollution to global oceans (Lebreton et al., 2017), initial studies of microplastic in rivers show high spatial and temporal variation in plastic concentration (Miller et al., 2017; Vermaire et al., 2017; Yonkos et al., 2014). Like naturally occurring allochthonous particles (e.g., wood, leaf litter, and sediments), plastic particles that enter rivers can be transported, retained, buried, or degraded (Webster et al., 1999). Biological and physical degradation of plastic is very slow, so most research has focused on measuring abundance and movement of plastic within and across riverine habitats (McCormick and Hoellein, 2016). For example, longitudinal assessments of microplastic have been attempted to infer major sources and sinks in rivers. Some studies showed higher concentrations of microplastics near urbanized regions (Mani et al., 2015, McNeish et al., 2018) or downstream of wastewater treatment plant outfalls (McCormick et al., 2014, McCormick et al., 2016), while others show high longitudinal variation and no clear correlation with watershed land-use or landscape features (Hoellein et al., 2017; Klein et al., 2015; Miller et al., 2017). High variation of microplastic concentration appears to reflect the reality of in situ microplastic heterogeneity in river ecosystems. However, no previous research has used a watershed-scale approach to examine spatial and temporal patterns in microplastic concentrations. Quantifying microplastic throughout an individual watershed that contains contrasting land-use, and completed over different seasons, could help reveal factors driving microplastic abundance in lotic ecosystems.
The study was conducted within the Gallatin River Watershed (area = 485,622 ha) using a citizen science approach. The watershed contains a diversity of land-use types. The upper reaches include protected areas in Yellowstone National Park, National Forest lands, and a wilderness area. Much of the watershed is situated in Gallatin County, MT, one of the fastest growing regions in the United States (pop. 100,000). The Gallatin River, at the headwaters of the Missouri River watershed, is categorized as a ‘Blue Ribbon Trout stream’ (i.e., exceptionally high-quality fishing). The Gallatin watershed is popular for outdoor recreation, including kayaking, rafting, fishing, mountain biking, hiking, climbing, skiing, snowshoeing, ice climbing, and camping. An estimated 2.8 million non-Montana residents visited Gallatin County in 2017 with visitor surveys showing that 41% participated in hiking, and four of the top five sites visited were public lands. Because of the large study area, narrow time frames for seasonal sampling used in this analysis, and financial constraints, we used trained volunteers (i.e. citizen scientists) for data collection. Citizen science is growing in use in studies of large scale data collection on research for plastic pollution in general (Hoellein et al., 2015; McKinley et al., 2016) and microplastic in particular (Eriksen et al., 2014; Hidalgo-Ruz and Thiel, 2013; Law et al., 2014; Ogata et al., 2009; Zettler et al., 2017). We placed emphasis on data quality as opposed to providing an environmental education experience for volunteers, which should be mirrored in future citizen science efforts on microplastic research.
This study provides the first temporally and spatially explicit measurement of microplastic throughout an individual watershed. We hypothesized that (1) water samples near populated areas and in more developed sub-watersheds will show higher microplastic concentrations, (2) microfibers will be the predominant microplastic shape found at all sites and dates, and (3) microplastic will be highest at periods of peak discharge.
