In times of changing curricular standards induced through large-scale curricular reforms such as the Common Core State Standards Initiative (2010a, 2010b) or the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS; NGSS Lead States, 2013), it is critical to prepare teachers for the challenge to adequately align their teaching to new educational landscapes. Desimone's (2009) logic model for studying the effects of professional development (PD) suggests that teachers' PD participation is associated with knowledge and skill gains that relate to changes in instructional practice, which in turn lead to increased student learning and achievement. While this conceptual framework is widely accepted and adopted in the field, validation studies indicate mixed empirical evidence and call for more research to better understand how teacher PD translates into effective practice (Desimone & Garet, 2015). This study responds to this call for research by examining how teachers adapt to the redesign of the Advanced Placement (AP) science program from a perspective of Desimone's (2009) framework.
College Board, the provider of the AP examinations, responded to the recommendations of the National Research Council (2002) and revised the AP program in an attempt to increase student learning and preparation for study beyond high school. The AP program provides opportunities for high school students to engage in rigorous, college-level courses in a broad range of subject areas. Students often regard AP examinations as high-stakes because of perceived benefits for college admission and the potential to count passing scores toward college credit or placement in more advanced disciplinary courses. The revised AP curriculum reduces its former emphasis on broad content coverage and prescribed algorithmic procedures. In turn, the emphasis on scientific practices, critical thinking, inquiry, and depth of understanding of science concepts is increased. These changes are in line with the Framework for K-12 Science Education (National Research Council, 2012a) and the NGSS (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Teachers have strong incentives to engage in PD activities to align their instruction with the new AP program in order to properly prepare their students for the revised AP examinations. Hence, this large-scale, top-down, nationwide curriculum reform constitutes an excellent opportunity to contribute to the in-service secondary science teacher education research base and to validate selected elements of Desimone's (2009) framework for studying the effects of PD. In particular, this study analyzes associations of teachers' PD participation with teachers' instruction, as well as associations of teachers' instruction with student achievement, situated in the corresponding local contexts.
