As NASA plans to send humans to Mars in the 2030’s (https://www.nasa.gov/content/nasas-journey-to-mars; e.g., Head et al., 2015), it is vital to gain a further understanding of the role of the martian moons, Phobos and Deimos, in this next stage of planetary exploration. These bodies may facilitate later exploration of Mars, through exploitation of in situ resources, by providing radiation protection, or through contributions to the continuity of the martian program. It is crucial that a mission architecture is developed to serve as a roadmap for the exploration of Mars’ moons focusing on the questions: “What is the origin of Phobos and Deimos?” and “What is the role of Phobos and Deimos in the future exploration of Mars?”.
Besides our Moon, Phobos and Deimos are the only known natural satellites of the terrestrial planets. We seek to understand why our Moon is different than the martian moons, and what their presence tells us about the moon-less Mercury and Venus. Understanding these satellites can help us understand the origin and evolution of the martian system. To date, the origins of Phobos and Deimos are still unknown. The hypothesized formation theories have specific and distinct implications for the possibilities of finding pristine martian crust, primitive material, or volatiles (e.g., Murchie et al., 2014). Depending on their composition, these moons could greatly facilitate Mars exploration (e.g., Oberst et al., 2014) (Table 1).Table 1. Formation models of Phobos and Deimos and implications for water and carbon content.Origin modelWater content (wt%)Carbon contentCo-accretion∼1 (moderate) Sarafian et al. (2014)Low Murchie et al. (2014)Capture2–60+ (high–very high) Murchie et al., 2014, Lee et al., 2017High Murchie et al. (2014)Mars impact≤0.015 (low) Truong and Lee (2017)Low Murchie et al. (2014)
There are many strategic knowledge gaps concerning Phobos and Deimos science. Here we design a mission architecture that can, first, answer the fundamental scientific questions of the martian moons and, second, assess to what extent Phobos and Deimos can facilitate the later human exploration of Mars. This facilitation could occur in many ways (as discussed in-depth in Section 3), therefore it is crucial to develop a framework to serve as a roadmap before sending missions to Phobos and Deimos.
The major initial question driving our framework has a scientific motivation: “What is the origin of Phobos and Deimos?” The second question driving our framework asks how stopping at one or both moons could complement a human exploration program to Mars: “What is the role of Phobos and Deimos in the future exploration of Mars?”
To address the above questions, we outline major gaps remaining in Phobos and Deimos science that motivate future missions to the moons of Mars. We present a science exploration architecture consisting of orbiter, lander, and human exploration stages and discuss a framework designed to assess the role of Phobos and Deimos in the future exploration of Mars, specifically determining how these bodies might aid in the Mars program.
