More than 17 million Kazakh people reside throughout the world. They are mainly concentrated in several countries and regions in Central Asia, including Kazakhstan (approximately 11.24 million), Xinjiang Province in China (approximately 1.46 million), Uzbekistan (approximately 0.8 million), Russia (approximately 0.64 million), Afghanistan (approximately 0.44 million), and Mongolia (approximately 0.02 million). The Kazakh language is the main language used by Kazakh people in these areas, but this language is written using two different scripts. One, known as Arabic-Kazakh, is based on Arabic alphabet and is mainly used by Kazakh people in Xinjiang Province, China. The other, known as Cyrillic-Kazakh, is based on the Cyrillic alphabet and is mainly used by Kazakh people in other countries and regions. The Kazakh people who reside in China and the surrounding countries can communicate with each other using the spoken Kazakh language. However, text written in the Arabic-Kazakh alphabet needs to be converted into the Cyrillic-Kazakh alphabet to be understood by Kazakh people outside China. In recent years, with the growing cultural exchange and trading activities between China and its neighboring countries in Central Asia, Arabic-Kazakh has become an important script for international communication.
However, four Arabic-Kazakh vowels ( and ) are very difficult for computer programs to edit and display because of their special writing rules. The current Arabic-Kazakh processing rules defined in the international standard (Unicode) and the Chinese national standard (GB 21669) are insufficient to handle these four vowels. For the processing of Arabic-Kazakh, current information systems typically use combinations of four alternative Arabic-Kazakh vowels ( and ) with the character  (abbreviated name: high hamza) to represent the vowels  and  However, this approach relies on deliberate spelling errors. In addition, although these four alternative vowels may display correctly on screen, the fundamental differences between the two sets of vowels cannot be semantically distinguished by computer programs. Therefore, problems often occur in the sorting of Arabic-Kazakh texts. Moreover, additional issues arise in software applications that require semantic understanding, such as script conversion and speech synthesis. These challenges are the main reason why our group is seeking a better method that can handle the relevant display and editing needs while simultaneously addressing the language processing issues.
