Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome is a disease of monochorionic pregnancies in which abnormal anastomoses in the placental vasculature cause a net flow of blood from one twin fetus to the other.1 When left unmanaged, it is associated with a high rate of morbidity and mortality. While there are multiple options for managing twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, fetoscopic laser photocoagulation surgery is the only definitive treatment.2
In fetoscopic laser photocoagulation surgery, a fetoscope is introduced into the uterine environment via a transabdominal approach. The surgeon uses the fetoscope to inspect the placental vasculature and identify abnormal vascular formations. These formations are photocoagulated with a laser attached to the fetoscope.2
Most minimally invasive surgeries revolve around the use of a laparoscope that acquires high-resolution video. However, the nature of fetoscopy requires a specialized fetoscope of a smaller diameter than a general-purpose laparoscope.3 This reduces the maximum quality of the video that can be acquired through a fetoscope.3 Furthermore, while most modern laparoscopes are lens-based, intraoperative video in fetoscopy is often acquired through a fiber optic endoscope. Optical fiber bundles are useful in fetoscopy because they allow for a curved approach, which is sometimes made necessary by positioning of the fetus relative to the placenta. Video acquired through optical fiber bundles, however, has a grid-like pattern of dark circular artifacts corresponding to the empty regions between adjacent fibers within the bundle (Fig. 1). These artifacts reduce the clarity of the video.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Left: A zoomed-in detail of a small portion of a fetoscopic video frame that demonstrates the presence of optical fiber artifacts. The small dark areas in the image correspond to gaps in between the fibers of the optical fiber bundle. Right: The same region after the removal of optical fiber artifacts via the method described in this article.
The limited quality of fetoscopic video is compounded by the poor visibility conditions within intrauterine environment: Amniotic fluid is cloudy and discolored, often with a yellow or greenish hue.4 The cloudiness of the fluid reduces the maximum distance to which the surgeon's light source is able to penetrate. As a result, surfaces more than a few centimeters away from the fetoscope are often dark and indistinct. These effects are demonstrated in Fig. 2.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. A fetoscopic video frame that demonstrates the effect that the turbidity of amniotic fluid has on visibility in fetoscopic video. The discoloration of the amniotic fluid leads to poor contrast in the video frame which in turn makes it difficult to differentiate the blood vessel (which runs from the bottom left of the image to the top middle portion of the image) from the background.
The net effect of these visual challenges is to make it difficult for the surgeon to quickly and accurately identify blood vessels during fetoscopic laser photocoagulation surgery. In the worst case, these visual challenges could lead to the surgeon completely missing a subset of the problematic anastomoses and failing to ablate them, thereby necessitating a follow-up surgery.
Given the number of visual challenges present in fetoscopy, we believe that a computerized system for enhancing fetoscopic video can make the video clearer and more easily interpretable, thus providing a benefit to both the surgeon and the patient.
There has been relatively little prior research into the computerized enhancement of laparoscopic video given the high quality of video acquired from general-purpose laparoscopes. There have been many applications of computerized image enhancement in other medical domains, however. Contrast enhancement, for example, has been used to increase the readability of radiologic images such as mammograms and chest CTs.5, 6
There has also been research into methods for the computerized enhancement of endoscopic images and optical coherence tomography images,7, 8 which, like fetoscopic images, can be acquired through optical fiber bundles.
While contrast enhancement and optical fiber artifact removal have been used to enhance images in a variety of other medical domains, to the best our knowledge there is no existing work that has demonstrated the applicability of these existing methods to fetoscopy. In this work, we present the design of a computer algorithm for enhancing fetoscopic video, demonstrate that the algorithm is fast enough for real-time use, and demonstrate that the enhancement of video has positive effects on the ability of humans to quickly and accurately identify blood vessels in fetoscopic video.
