This article aims to provide a perspective on a number of new challenges and current trends in carbon science. A number of Carbon editors have contributed sections to this article in the spirit of motivating carbon scientists to discover new materials, exciting new properties, and to fabricate new functional devices. This document is crafted as part of a recent tradition of the editorial Carbon team, to provide a broad perspective of the state of carbon research [1].
The readers will agree that carbon is a fascinating element that can adopt different hybridizations: sp, sp2 and sp3 (Fig. 1). Different carbon allotropes result from controlling these hybridizations. Diamond (consisting of a three-dimensional sp3-hybridized carbon network), and graphite (made of stacked layers of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms) are two examples of bulk realizations. However, at the nanoscale, other carbon allotropes, such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes and graphene appear, and Carbon has published thousands of articles related to these forms. What is next? Is it possible to still predict and synthesize novel forms of carbon by controlling carbon hybridization at the nanoscale? While the most often explored systems today remain sp2 hybridized forms of carbon (Fig. 1), we note that sp and sp3 should now be explored more intensively at the nanoscale. In the following sections, we will summarize recent achievements and current challenges regarding the following carbon allotropes: 1) sp linear carbon chains, 2) sp2 graphene nanoribbons, 3) sp3 low-dimensional systems (flexible diamonds), and 4) three-dimensional (3D) graphene-based structures (Fig. 1). Although the physicochemical properties of pure carbon materials continue to surprise us with their diversity and novelty, the synthesis of hybrid structures containing carbon and other compounds have recently re-emerged with the appearance of a broad array of 2D materials. In this context, we will also describe novel photo-catalytic effects of graphene-chalcogenide systems, and how carbon-based materials will be key elements in the fabrication of wearable electronic devices. Finally, we will describe current challenges in the design of biocompatible carbon nanomaterials, where research efforts are focused on developing safer carbon materials to eventually become part of consumer products. We hope the readers will find this perspective article valuable and that some of the ideas and challenges presented will motivate the emergence of new research areas.Download : Download high-res image (715KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Diversity of carbon materials based on their hybridization. It is noteworthy that sp2 hybridized carbon is currently the most explored subject while sp and sp3 hybrids await exciting discoveries in the coming years.
