Computer virus is a type of harmful software program that has been created by people with malicious intentions. This virus can replicate itself. Thus, continuous spread and infection of this virus to other computer programs can cause enormous economic loss to the computer users. Moreover, new type viruses are continuously created. Consequently, understanding and controlling virusdiffusion have become a focus of research.
Many methods to detect and to prevent virus have been studied, as well as some defense mechanisms,such as with the use of firewall, intrusion detection system and anti-virus defending system. However, all these techniques against virus intrusion are generally based only on a known set of virus samples [1]. These techniques are stranded when facing a novel virus attack. As a new type of security mechanism, the honeynet technology breaks through the traditional passive defense mechanisms and brings a great change in the area of network security.
A honeynet consists of a large number of honeypots that are “a security resource whose value lies in being probed, attacked and compromised” [2]. Unlike traditional detection methods that depend on signature matching to identify known virus attacks [3], [4], the main advantage of this proposed approach is that it is designed to capture all known and novel attacks. The essence is to deceive the attacker in the way that hosts are deployed as traps with system vulnerabilities to lure the attacker to launch attacks and thus reduce threats to real systems. Honeypot technology can elucidate the virus’ characteristics by monitoring and analyzing the attacks, and then provide feedback on matching immunization strategy to the defender. Thus, a honeynet is often referred to as a network of computer systems purposefully designed to trap virus and to attract attackers. Currently, most studies on honeynet focus on its technology level, such as data capture [5], information collection [6] and virtualization technology [7]. However, honeynet potency within a systematic framework has not been theoretically assessed.
Virus epidemics, embodied by the long-term dynamics of the number of infected computers under attacks, are used to measure the honeynet potency in this study. Dynamical mathematical models have been widely adopted in studies. Initial representative epidemic model for the spreading of virus are the susceptible-infected (SI) and susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) type models that were first introduced by Kermack and Mckendrick [8], [9], [10]. Thereafter, attempts have been made to supplement these elementary model formulations from different perspectives of virus and network. For example, virus infection models have been considered in [11], [12], [13]. By introducing viral incubation, the delayed models are formulated and analyzed in [14], [15], [16], thereby elucidating that the delay plays a vital role in virus propagation. Previous research [17], [18], [19] has provided mathematical mixing models for virus propagation, with the virus countermeasures gaining insights into the growing concern about network security. Especially, with the popularity and complication of the communication/transmitting networks, increasing attention has been given to design propagation model for computer virus in accordance with specific network characteristics, such as wireless sensor networks [20], [21], ad hoc networks [22], patch-forwarding networks [23], decentralized peer-to-peer networks [24], mobile Internet [25]. Analysis of these models offers a reasonable academic understanding of the dynamical number of infected computers for restricting the virus diffusion among different transmission networks. The reason is that these networks provide a breeding ground for virus propagation, whereas the honeynet may turn into its nightmare. In such context, modeling and understanding of the way computer viruses spread over a honeynet are practically important not only to suppress virus propagation, but also to design an improved honeynet. However, to the best of our knowledge, this topic has not been explored yet.
When attempting to model virus propagation, the topology of networks should be considered. In real computer networks, the connection among the computers is unequal. Thus, connectivity patterns of the network can be regarded as heterogeneous, that is, all the computers under such totally different connection relationships shape a heterogeneous complex network. Concerns have been raised on the modeling and on the study of the spread dynamics of heterogeneous complex networks considering that the connectivity of computers follows a power-law degree distribution [26]. Many researchers have shown that network topology has significant effects on the dynamic propagation of virus in heterogeneous networks [27], [28], [29], [30].
Motivated by the above-mentioned work, a mathematical model for the spread of virus in a heterogeneous honeynet is developed and analyzed to theoretically explore the interplay between virus epidemics and honeynet potency. The existence and local and global asymptotic stabilities of positive equilibria, which can typically represent long-term dynamics of the model and reflect the honey potency, are investigated accompanied by a number of numerical examples presented to demonstrate the theoretical results. The main contributions of this study are as follows:

•On the basis of the detailed analysis of the interaction factors between virus epidemics and honeynet potency, a novel mathematical model for virus spreading in a heterogeneous honeynet is established and analyzed.•An epidemic threshold value is calculated. This value is related to the model parameters and determines the full dynamics of the model. The results of the analysis shows the conditions under which the amount of deployed honeypots within a honeynet is minimal to ensure that honeynet potency is maximally exploited. The results answer the question of how many honeypots are economically deployed per unit time for constructing a honeynet.•A virus-free equilibrium is acquired, and its local and global asymptotic stabilities associated with the epidemic threshold value are proved by applying Routh–Hurwitz criterion and by comparison method. These results can provide an explicit direction on how to drive the virus to extinction in a heterogeneous honeynet.•A virus-equilibrium is obtained, and the analysis shows that a higher degree honeypot can better attract the virus into a trap than a lower degree honeypot. This result answers the question of how to effectively deploy honeypot framework within a heterogeneous honeynet.•The honeypot with more system vulnerabilities is beneficial for mitigating the virus epidemics to a lower level. The honeynet with a lower power law index would better serve the purpose of acquiring the virus samples.
Based on the analysis results, a collection of practical suggestions for stopping virus spreading or for developing a honeynet is put forward. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, a dynamical model is formulated. In Section 3, the long-term dynamics of the model is analyzed. A number of numerical examples are presented in Section 4. Finally, the paper ends with some conclusions in Section 5.
