Currently, the large number and variety of platforms and resources focused on collaboration, along with the simplicity that exists in the context of Web 2.0 (blogs, wikis, collaborative documents, video and audio sharing platforms, etc.) offer new possibilities to enhance learning, and generate new challenges in the teaching and learning processes. It has been found, for example, that the use of a wiki in a classroom fosters collaborative learning among students [1]. It has also been shown that many collaborative activities based on Internet facilitate teamwork [2], social skills and basic computer skills [3].
These tools generate a large amount of data from the interactions among participants. These data can be used, for example, to analyze if any participant demonstrate collaborative problems during the performance of a task, or to improve and shape the learning process itself. Many tools have been developed to improve the learning processes; for example, intelligent assistants that are able to detect collaborative problems from the interaction among students in the context of a collaborative work platform either based on a work plan [4], or based on group interactions [5]. These intelligent assistants can alert teachers about the detected problems, so that they can intervene or make recommendations to students in order to take corrective actions.
Collaborative skills are specially important in CSCW environments where the participants of a shared task do not meet face-to-face. Then, in order to achieve an effective collaboration between participants, it is needed to identify which skills they have and which not. By identifying the collaborative skills of the participants, it is possible to build an intelligent system that assist them to achieve a better collaboration experience. For example, in the software market, the increasing complexity of applications requires the coordinated efforts of one or more teams to carry out the execution of any project. Teamwork is an issue frequently cited among managers and business owners: the team members can often feel that the participant members outshine their ideas, or that teamwork slows processes, rather than contribute positively to draft.
In order to be able to detect collaborative problems, we need some characterization of collaborative abilities. In this work, we used the Interaction Process Analysis method (IPA), which is one of the most elaborated, better validated and most used since its formulation.
In this article, we propose a multi-phase classification approach that analyze the interactions among participants of a collaborative work and matches the free text obtained from the chat of the collaborative platform to the interactions scheme proposed by the IPA method. We evaluated our approach in the context of a classroom capstone project, obtaining significant improvements respect to previous approaches.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present some related work. Then, Section 3 we present the materials and methods used in the proposed approach. We describe the CSCW environment selected (Section 3.1), the method for classifying the interactions (Section 3.2) and our three-phases classification approach (Section 3.3). In Sections 4 and 5 we present the experiments performed, describing the dataset constructed, the experiment process and the results obtained. Finally, in Section 6 we present our conclusions.
