Ultrasonography has become one of the most favorable imaging modalities in a wide range of clinical applications because it is safe, real-time and cost effective. However, ultrasound images are usually corrupted with granular patterns of white and dark spots that are referred as speckle [1]. Although speckle is sometimes considered as diagnostic clues on certain occasions, it has adverse effects on precise diagnosis and treatment in most cases [2]. In addition, speckle complicates automatic processing and analysis procedures of ultrasound images [3], including detection, segmentation, registration, and so on. Therefore, speckle reduction is a crucial prerequisite of many intelligent ultrasound systems [4].
Many ultrasound speckle reduction methods have been proposed. These methods can be roughly classified into two groups: wavelet-based filters [5] and spatial filters [2], [6], [7]. Assuming that the multiplicative speckle noise can be transformed into additive Gaussian noise by the logarithm operation, Wavelet-based methods decomposed the content of the transformed image into multiple sub-bands at different orientations and resolution scales. Although those methods can effectively remove speckle noise, they tended to produce the ringing artifacts when preserving features [8]. By exploiting the spatial correlation, spatial filters computed a despeckling result as a weighted average on a set of candidates. According to the candidate selection, those filters are divided into the local filters [6], [9] and nonlocal filters [7]. However, spatial filters would concentrate the blurring near edges and introduced the hole artifacts [10]. In order to overcome such limitation, the optimization-based approaches have been proposed with state-of-the-art results in many image processing tasks [11]. Those methods globally distributed such blurring in spatial filters into each pixel [12], causing excellent restored results without hole artifacts. In addition, the spatial filters cannot preserve sharp edges like the global optimization based filters [12]. Recently, a global optimization based despeckling method, which assigns different penalties for speckle noise and features in a weighted-least-squares filter manner [13], is proposed in [14]. However, in order to suppress speckle noise, salient edges unavoidably received some penalties, leading to reduce feature contrasts and blur features in some degrees. To circumvent this problem, Xu et al. [11] proposed a L0 norm based optimization to globally control how many non-zero entries are maintained using progressively thresholding procedures, and thus non-zero salient edges can be better preserved. Unfortunately, directly employing existing L0 minimization [11], [15], [16], [17] cannot achieve satisfactory results for speckle reduction, since the gradient information is inefficient to differentiate features from speckle noise in ultrasound images [18].
In this paper, we proposed a novel global optimization based on an L0 minimization framework for feature-preserving speckle reduction in ultrasound images. Motivated by the sparseness prior of the image gradient and the feature detection capability of the local phase based feature asymmetry (FA) operator [22], we defined a new measurement (namely GAP) combining the gradient and the FA operators together. The GAP inherits those two properties. Consequently, we proposed a L0 GAP minimization for speckle reduction in ultrasound image. It seeks for the L0 sparsity of the GAP by progressively reducing low GAP values, which correspond to the speckle noise, to zero. Meanwhile, the significant features with high GAP values are kept unchanged. The proposed approach also has better performance in preserving low contrast features than existing despeckling methods, due to the intensity invariant property of the phase-based operator (FA) for feature detection. In addition, we proposed an efficient solver to minimize the proposed L0 regularized objective function. A variable splitting strategy is employed to transfer the original optimization into the iterative optimization of a non-linear quadratic optimization and a L0 regularized least square with a hard thresholding closed-form solution. For the non-linear quadratic optimization, the nonlinear FA measurement is linearized, producing a series of pure quadratic minimizations, for which an efficient and robust solution exists. Fig. 1 compares the despeckling performance of different methods. As shown in the top row, the proposed approach effectively preserves the boundaries of important features while other methods tend to blur the edges in different degrees (see the green rectangle). The advantages of our approach can be further verified by carefully checking the intensity profile of a horizontal line in the bottom row. When smoothing out the intensity fluctuations caused by speckle noise, existing methods also remove or largely reduce the intensity peaks at some features. In contrast, our approach hardly alters the intensity values of those peaks so that the features are almost totally retained in the despeckled image.Download : Download high-res image (387KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Comparison of speckle reduction on an ultrasound image with gallstones, and the evaluation of the feature contrast preservation. (a) Original image with the intensity profile (blue curve) in a horizontal line. Despeckled result with its intensity profile (red curve) by (b) SRAD [19], (c) OBNLM [7], (d) ADLG [2], (e) NLMLS [8], (f) FPC [14], (g) BNLTV [20], (h) LDCNN [21], and (i) our method (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as:

•We present a sparsity prior in the ultrasound image based on the observation that the GAP values in the despeckled image is highly sparser than that in the speckled image.•We propose a L0 norm regularized global optimization framework to seek for the GAP sparsity. During the pursuit of the sparsity, the proposed L0 minimization can eliminate speckle noise in ultrasound images and better preserve features than previous despeckling techniques.•We propose an efficient and robust solver to minimize the proposed objective function by first splitting the intractable problem into tractable sub-problems with half-quadratic splitting method, followed by the decomposition of the non-convex sub-problem into linear systems using iteratively re-weighted least squares.
This work extends its conference version [23] with differences as follows: (1) We refine the optimization procedure of our numerical solution in Section 3.3, where we present how we devise the solution (shown in Eq. 11) of a non-linear term regularized quadratic optimization (see Eq. 9) using the iterative re-weighted least squares (IRLS) framework, as well as the solution (see Eq. 15) of the L0 regularized least squares (see Eq. 12) in the Appendix section. (2) We provide more validations (including comparisons with four recent despeckling works [8], [14], [20], [21]), more comparisons on new clinical images, and more results of our method on new clinical images. (3) We add a new application in Section 4.5 by comparing the lesion boundary preservation of different despeckled results, as shown in Fig. 15. From the results, we can find that our despeckled result has smallest MRD (see Eq. (20) for its definition) value among all the MRD results, which implies that the despeckling method has a better edge preservation after speckle reduction, compared to other despeckling techniques. We will release our code upon the publication of this work.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We first review some related works in Section 2. After that, details of our approach are described in Section 3, and Section 4 presents many experimental results on both synthetic and clinical ultrasound images, and two applications about the segmentation and the tumor boundary preservation. Finally, we conclude the paper and discuss some future work in Section 5.
