Physics-based simulation is becoming one of the most important techniques for interactive applications such as games. In this paper, we consider physics-based deformation, which has been studied extensively in computer graphics. However, it is still challenging to robustly produce visually convincing and stable deformation in real time. In real-time applications, the robustness and computational efficiency of deformation simulations are often more important than their accuracy.
Recently, several simulation techniques have been developed to compute positions directly instead of integrating velocities or accelerations to achieve better stability and efficiency. Position-based dynamics (PBD) [1] deals directly with mesh vertices, while meshless deformation [2] utilizes shape matching to compute the optimal rotation and translation for mesh vertices. These position-based methods are stable regardless of the time step size, and thus the deformation can be simulated very efficiently with large time steps.
Two remarkable approaches aim to further improve the PBD method. The first approach employs a simplified structure with a small number of oriented particles to simulate the complex geometry of meshes in a more efficient and robust manner [3]. The second approach called projective dynamics [4] reformulates the implicit time integration of deformation dynamics as energy minimization in a variational form. In PBD, the material stiffness of a deformable solid is tightly coupled with the convergence of the solver. The formulation of variational implicit integration is similar to PBD, but the projective dynamics method is advantageous because the material stiffness can be specified independently of the solution methods.
We found that these two approaches are complementary to each other and they can be combined to take advantage of their benefits. The key challenge is to reformulate the deformation energy and momentum potential energy to deal with an embedded graph of oriented particles. Our new formulation yields a compact formula via clever manipulation of the integral energies and it is extremely stable. Furthermore, our alternating local/global optimization solver is easy to implement and very efficient for simulating complex deformable models in real time. The deformable models can be manipulated interactively and the collision between deformable models can be handled efficiently. Our method can deal with one-dimensional (cable and rod), two-dimensional (shell), and three-dimensional (solid) models in a uniform manner.
