The new digital technologies may have far-reaching impacts on the labour market. Fears that the digital transformation may substitute jobs are a major concern in public as well as academic debates. Such fears are not new and go back to the technological unemployment approach of John Maynard Keynes (Keynes, 1933). However, it is controversial whether the new digital technologies substitute jobs or create more and new jobs. The study of Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014) states that the rapid technological advances in digital technologies may lead to job losses. Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) analyse the effects of industrial robots on the US labour market between 1990 and 2007 and find declining wages and employment. Dauth et al. (2017) analyse the effects of increasing industrial robots on the careers of individual manufacturing workers in Germany. They find no effect of robots on total employment but negative effects on manufacturing employment: one additional robot leads to two manufacturing jobs less on average, but these losses are offset by additional jobs in the service sector.
Fuelling the debates, Frey and Osborne (2017) calculate automation probabilities for occupations and suggest that approximately 47% of US employees are at risk of losing their jobs to automation in the next 10 to 20 years. For Germany, different studies transferred the results from Frey and Osborne (2017) by simply recoding the American occupational codes to international occupational codes (Bowles, 2014; Bonin et al., 2015; Brzeski and Burk, 2015; Arntz et al., 2016) and revealed similarly high values. However, these studies assume that entire occupations can be replaced by computers or computer-controlled machines. Although computers and computer-controlled machines can now perform many tasks faster, more perseveringly and with greater precision, they are generally not able to carry out all tasks involved in the exercise of an occupation completely. Accordingly, it is not possible to assess entire occupations, but rather tasks in the occupations can be assessed according to whether they could be carried out through the use of technologies.
Arntz et al. (2017) show in a recent study that when considering tasks within occupations, only 9% of US employees are at risk of losing their jobs to automation in the next 10 to 20 years. Nevertheless, they also use the automation probabilities of Frey and Osborne (2017). Their results are ultimately based on the automation probabilities that computer and technology experts have assessed for entire occupations in the US.
We directly calculate automation probabilities – labelled as substitution potentials – for occupations in Germany by using German occupational data from the BERUFENET, an expert database of the Federal Employment Agency that contains information that is quite similar to the US Occupational Information Network (O*NET). We start directly with the tasks and classify them into routine versus non-routine tasks. Considering approximately 8000 tasks, we assess whether they can be replaced by computers or computer-controlled machines according to programmable rules. We do not give a forecast for the future but assess current technological possibilities by researching whether there is a computer-controlled machine or a computer algorithm that can carry out this task fully automatically.
We can consider the substitution potentials in great detail for each of the 3900 occupations in Germany. We argue and demonstrate that previous studies overestimate automation probabilities because they assess entire occupations by their automation probabilities and do not start with the tasks. However, it is questionable if the substitution potentials are completely exhausted and can explain employment growth. To our knowledge, we are the first to provide evidence on the relationship between automation probabilities and employment growth.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature on the task-based approach and on automation probabilities. Section 3 describes the operationalisation of the substitution potentials based on German occupational data. Section 4 provides the results of the substitution potentials of occupations, whereas Section 5 shows how many jobs are currently susceptible to digital transformation in Germany. In Section 6, we analyse the relationship between the substitution potentials and employment growth. Finally, in Section 7 we summarise the results and derive some conclusions.
