Student ability in untracked primary classrooms may vary widely, which poses challenges for teachers. This variability does not only occur in schools with a policy of full inclusion, but in all classrooms that are created based on student age (Tomlinson et al., 2003). The quality of schools is largely determined by how teachers deal with these (cognitive) differences between students and by how they adapt their instruction to individual needs (e.g., Hamre & Pianta, 2005). This requires teachers to develop advanced professional skills in addition to their basic skills of classroom management and general didactics. Note that this hierarchy of professional skills stems from practice, not from principle: although taking into account individual student needs is fundamental of good teaching and therefore should be a basic skill, research shows that novice teachers first need to master other skills before they can start attending to differences between students well (Maulana, Helms-Lorenz, & van de Grift, 2015; Van de Grift, 2007; Van de Grift, Van der Wal, & Torenbeek, 2011). These advanced professional skills are summarized in the concept ‘differentiation’. Differentiation is a combination of careful progress monitoring and adapting instruction in response (Heitink, Van der Kleij, Veldkamp, Schildkamp, & Kippers, 2016; Prast et al., 2015, Roy et al., 2012). It is “an approach to teaching in which teachers proactively modify curricula, teaching methods, resources, learning activities, and student products to address the diverse needs of individual students and small groups of students to maximize the learning opportunity for each student in a classroom” (Tomlinson et al., 2003, p. 120). It is related to the concept of aptitude-treatment interaction, which emphasizes that education is most effective when instruction is closely matched to the student's own capacities and talents, and also acknowledges the complex interplay between characteristics of the student, task and instruction (Snow, 1989). Differentiation is an overall approach to teaching and can include combinations of many practices, like flexible (heterogeneous or homogeneous) grouping, detailed progress monitoring, using adaptive computer programs or learning materials, modifying learning content, adapting instruction for weaker students, and providing opportunities for acceleration for stronger students. Differentiation practices can be applied to areas of learning content, learning process, learning product (Roy et al., 2012). Tomlinson (2014) extends this list with affect or environment. Furthermore, teachers may not only take into account differences in students' cognitive abilities, but also other differences such as in students' motivation or interest for example. This broad array of differentiation options is appealing, but does pose some challenges in a theoretical sense because of the many practices and understandings that it may entail. To assure a clear focus, and therefore aim at larger practical and theoretical relevance, the current review study is limited to differentiation in which student differences in ability or performance are taken into account. The potential relevance of this type of differentiation is clear from theoretical underpinnings in theories such as Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development (1978), which describes how learning could be advanced by providing students tasks that are just outside their current level of mastery. Therefore, the definition of differentiation we will use is in this study is: teaching modified to address the diverse cognitive needs of all students.2
How teachers choose to apply differentiation seems to be related to the implicit or explicit learning goals they have for their classroom as a whole. From a theoretical point of view, teachers can strive for convergence or divergence (Blok, 2004; Bosker, 2005). Teachers aiming at convergence mainly focus on helping all their students to reach a basic performance level. This implies that they may dedicate additional time and effort to low-achieving students in order to help them reach a minimum performance level, even when this is at the expense of time they had reserved for high-ability students. Teachers aiming at divergence, on the contrary, mainly focus on helping all students to reach their highest potential, dividing attention equally between students with lower, average, and higher ability. Their use of ability-appropriate performance goals for (groups of) students at different ability levels may lead to a widening of the gap between lower- and higher-ability students. Convergent and divergent goals thus lead to different pedagogical-didactical decisions. In practice, though, most teachers are likely to combine convergent and divergent goals, and will aim to reach a minimum performance level with low-ability students while also offering high-ability students the opportunity to extend their knowledge without proceeding (too much) ahead of their classmates (Denessen, 2017).
Differentiation in education is a highly debated topic, especially when it is applied in the form of homogeneous grouping. Teachers appear less accurate in estimating students’ cognitive abilities when they are placed in homogeneous classrooms (Machts, Kaiser, Schmidt, & Möller, 2016). Most concerns regarding homogeneous grouping are related to the reduced learning opportunities for low-ability students: within these groups, students cannot profit from the input of higher-ability peers or from the role models that high-ability students can be (e.g., Burris, Heubert, & Levin, 2006). Furthermore, teachers may have lower expectations of low-ability students and, therefore, unconsciously limit their opportunity to learn. This is especially relevant for students from impoverished backgrounds or minority groups, who might be labeled as being of “low ability” even before they have had the opportunity to show their potential (Denessen, 2017). Teacher expectations and beliefs are found to correlate with the SES of students (e.g. Lee & Ginsburg, 2007; Ready & Wright, 2011). When students from low SES families are placed in a low-ability group too soon – based on general estimates or prejudices, rather than on actual performance level – they might encounter lower expectations and, as a result, less demanding teaching and unequal learning opportunities. The debate on how to implement differentiation in such a way that students of all ability levels profit from it should be informed by empirical research data. Review studies of the effects of differentiation practices are, therefore, important.
1.1. Evidence on the effects of differentiation: situation up to 1995One of the most common differentiation practices in primary education is within-class homogeneous ability grouping (e.g. Anderson & Algozzine, 2007; Chorzempa & Graham, 2006; George, 2005; Kulik & Kulik, 1984; Reezigt, 1993; Slavin, 1987a; de Koning, 1973). This organizational tool can be used as a context for fitting instruction to the needs of individual students in academically diverse classrooms. Five key systematic reviews and meta-analyses on differentiation in primary education until 1995 were conducted by Kulik and Kulik (1984, 1992), Lou et al. (1996), and Slavin (1987a; 1987b). Slavin's latter review has been part of a public academic dispute (see Kulik, Kulik, & Bangert-Drowns, 1990; Slavin, 1990a,b), which illustrates the relation between decisions of the researcher and outcomes of a (review) study, especially when fuzzy constructs like ‘differentiation’ are the topic of concern. We consider Slavin's review relevant for the current study, though. In addition, Steenbergen-Hu, Makel, and Olszewski-Kubilius (2016) conducted a meta-meta-analysis on reviews conducted up to 1995, which included three of the five reviews (Kulik & Kulik, 1984; Lou et al., 1996; Slavin, 1987a). However, in the meta-meta-analysis no distinction is made between primary and secondary education, which makes the results not fully comparable with the described systematic reviews and more difficult to interpret for the purpose of the current study. Four of the five reviews on differentiation as well as the meta-meta-analysis focus on different forms of grouping based on academic performance or ability: general whole-class homogeneous ability grouping; temporary whole-class homogeneous ability grouping for specific subjects (setting); temporary within-class homogeneous grouping for specific subjects; and small-group formation in general, whether homogeneous or heterogeneous. The fifth review is about mastery learning, a form of convergent differentiation.The review studies do not lead to a clear conclusion about the effects of differentiation. Different forms of grouping seem to create different opportunities for effectively adapting teaching to students’ needs. In general, homogeneous whole-class ability grouping does not seem to be very effective for students in primary education, nor does it seem to positively influence the well-being of students of all ability levels (in secondary education, Belfi, Goos, De Fraine, & Van Damme, 2012). Kulik and Kulik (1984) summarized the effects of 19 studies and report an overall effect size of +0.07. They found a higher effect size for homogeneous grouping of gifted and high performing students, but without information on the effects of the extraction of gifted and high performing students out of the classroom on other students, this finding biases the effect of homogeneous whole class grouping. Kulik (1992) reviewed 51 studies, of which 26 took (partly) place in primary education. The individual effect sizes of these 26 studies range from −0.95 to +0.46. Slavin (1987a) summarized 17 studies and reports an overall effect size of 0.00. The findings on the differential effects of this type of grouping are inconclusive, although there are some indications that this practice is more profitable for high performing students and less profitable for low performing students. The results of the meta-meta-analysis of Steenbergen-Hu et al. (2016) are in line the results of the reviews described above (effect sizes: overall −0.03; low ability +0.03, average ability −0.04, high ability +0.06; all effect sizes are non-significant).Homogeneous whole-class ability grouping for specific subjects (setting) seems more promising than full time whole-class homogeneous ability grouping. When students are temporarily regrouped across grades, high performing grade 2 students could for example be placed together with low performing grade 3 students for a specific subject. Slavin (1987a) reviewed 14 studies with this kind of arrangement and reported an overall effect size of +0.45. Kulik (1992) reviewed as well 14 studies on across grade grouping and reported an overall effect size of +0.33. Neither review study contained enough information on the performance of students of low, average and high ability to draw conclusions on differential effects. In the meta-meta-analysis (Steenbergen-Hu et al., 2016) a slightly lower overall effect size of +0.26 is reported, and no differential effects.Another, probably more feasible, form of grouping is within-class homogeneous ability grouping for specific subjects. This type of grouping has small positive overall effects, especially when it is compared with whole-class teaching. Slavin (1987a) reviewed 8 studies and reported an effect size of +0.32 (based on 5 of the 8 studies which used a randomized design). Kulik (1992) reviewed 11 studies on within class grouping, of which eight focused on primary education, and reported an overall effect size of +0.25. The positive effects of this type of grouping are smaller, however, when a comparison with within-class heterogeneous grouping is made. Lou et al. (1996) reviewed 20 studies on primary, secondary and post-secondary level which compared homogeneous with heterogeneous grouping and reported and overall effect size of +0.12. These findings indicate that the positive effects of within-class homogeneous grouping may be the result of forming small groups, rather than the result of a specific configuration of the groups. This suggestion is supported by the finding of Lou et al. (1996) that both homogeneous and heterogeneous within-class grouping are more effective than whole-class teaching (grades 1–3, ES = +0.08; grades 4–6, ES = +0.29). Again, differential effects are inconclusive. Kulik (1992) reports positive overall effects for students of low (ES = +0.16), average (ES = +0.18) and high (ES = +0.30) ability. Slavin (1987a) as well reported positive differential effects for students of all ability levels, although he did not calculate overall effect sizes. However, the review of Lou et al. (1996) in which homogeneous within-class grouping was compared with within-class heterogeneous grouping in primary to (post)secondary education, reported negative effects for low-ability students (ES = −0.60), positive effects for average-ability students (ES = +0.51), and small positive effects for high-ability students (ES = +0.09). The results of the meta-meta-analysis of Steenbergen-Hu et al. (2016) partly confirm the findings from the four systematic review studies described above: in line with the other studies, an overall positive effect for within-class homogeneous grouping is reported (+0.25), but no evidence for a negative effect of this type of grouping for subgroups of students are reported (low ability: +0.30, average ability: +0.19, high ability +0.29).The studies described above focused on different types of grouping as a context for differentiation. The fifth systematic review study focused on mastery learning as a differentiation strategy (Slavin, 1987b). mastery learning entails that regular progress assessments are used to check whether students have reached certain ability levels. The group of students that does not perform well enough receives additional instruction inside or outside the classroom. The group that meets the standards may receive advanced materials for enrichment. Key to mastery learning is allowing students enough time for learning, which implies some students will need more instruction and practice than others (Bloom, 1971). Five of the studies reviewd by Slavin were conducted in elementary classrooms, and included control classrooms which spent the same amount of time on the subject matter as the experimental classrooms and used standardized tests. The overall effects of mastery learning in this selection of studies ranged from 0.00 to +0.25. When studies in which experimenter-made tests were used instead of standardized tests were considered (n = 5), the range in effect sizes widened. No differential effects were reported.Overall, the conclusion that can be drawn from the review studies is that (homogeneous) ability grouping may have positive effects, especially when students are regrouped for specific subjects and when the resulting ability groups are small. Differential effects for low-, average-, and high-ability students are inconclusive, however. These mixed findings may be the result of the way grouping is used as a context for taking into account students’ needs. Clearly, just grouping students and placing them together physically does not ensure differentiated teaching. Referring to both homogeneous and heterogeneous grouping, Lou and colleagues state the obvious that “Overall, it appears that the positive effects of within-class grouping are maximized when the physical placement of students into groups for learning is accompanied by modifications to teaching methods and instructional materials. Merely placing students together is not sufficient for promoting substantive gains in achievement.” (Lou et al., 1996, p. 448). Lou et al. (1996) analyzed the results of a sub-selection of studies (conducted in primary, secondary, and postsecondary education) which gave (some) information on what teachers actually did after they created groups. As expected, they found larger effects for within-class grouping when teachers adapted their instruction (ES = +0.25) than when teachers provided their regular whole-class instruction to the small groups. Unfortunately, as Slavin (1987a) already noted, many researchers do not provide specified information on the instructional practices used in interaction with ability groups and therefore it is often hard to reconstruct the operationalization of differentiation in the different studies.
1.2. Research question and hypothesesDifferentiation practices seem promising, but due to the fuzziness of the concept under which conditions and in which form differentiation is effective for students of all ability levels remains unclear. The aim of the current review was to analyze recent evidence on the effects of differentiation and add to the understanding if and how differentiation in primary education can positively affect the language and math performance of low-, average-, and high-ability students. Our research question was as follows: What are the cognitive effects of differentiation practices on students in primary education? In answering this question, we also considered a related question on the operationalization of differentiation practices in different studies. The review builds on previous research and includes recent empirical studies, published since 1995.We expected differentiation in all its forms to have positive effects on students of all ability levels, as long as the teachers actually adapted their instructions to the needs of students. We expected grouping to be potentially effective, because it can serve as a good context for applying other differentiation practices specifically aimed at students’ needs, like explaining content again in another way to weaker students, providing additional worksheets for stronger students, or designing different assignments for small mixed-ability groups. Based on the findings of previous reviews described above, we did not expect overall effects of general whole-class homogeneous ability grouping. We expected positive effects of within-class homogeneous and heterogeneous ability grouping for specific subjects on the performance of students of all ability levels.
