Retina is an interior and important part of human eye whose function is to capture and send images to brain. It consists of different structures along with two types of blood vessels; veins and arteries. These retinal blood vessels are affected by number of eyes diseases such as HR, DR (diabetic retinopathy), etc. HR is caused due to constant high blood pressure in retinal blood vessels. A lot of peoples in the world are suffering HR disease; however, in most of cases, HR patients are unaware of it. The existence of HR and its severity can be detected by patient’s eye ophthalmologic examination. Most of the time, HR is diagnosed at the last stage which led the patient to blindness or vision loss; therefore, it is necessary for HR patient to make sure the regular examination of their eyes.
Health care industry has made great use of computer aided diagnostic systems. The automated diagnostic systems are very useful for both ophthalmologists and patients to diagnose different retinal diseases. With the help of automated systems, the ophthalmologists can monitor and make treatment plan of retinal diseases. So, it is a need to establish an automated system for HR detection and grading through retinal images. Fig. 1 shows the normal fundus retinal image and HR affected abnormal images.Download : Download high-res image (291KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) normal fundus image, whereas (b) and (c) are HR affected fundus images.
HR is considered as an indicator for damage of target organ and its signs may lead to guess the threats of cardiovascular disease, stroke, and mortality [1,2]. HR symptoms and signs frequently get mature in later stages, and these symptoms may help the ophthalmologists in clinical supervision and treatment [3,4].
The paper contains five sections in which Section 1 presents the introduction of HR disease and Section 2 describes the related work of A/V classification and computation of AVR. Section 3 presents the proposed model, color and intensity based features for A/V classifications, width computation of artery and vein segments, and finally calculation of AVR for HR detection and grading. Section 4 describes the experimental results on different datasets and Section 5 provides the discussion and conclusion along with future work.
