Emojis, or pictographs, are a recent development, extending what before were emoticons, which use ASCII character to represent facial expressions. They have become so popular that in 2015 the Oxford Dictionaries, for the first time ever, declared the emoji [] (a face with tears of joy) to be the “Word of the Year.”
In the last few decades, and with the prevalence of various computer-mediated communication technologies, emojis and their precursors, emoticons, have been widely used in online interactions. They are used in many online communication channels, such as emails, Facebook, WhatsApp, Instagram, etc. Their popularity has attracted scholarly attention (e.g., Walther and D’Addario, 2001, Derks et al., 2007, Provine et al., 2007, Garrison et al., 2011, Thompson and Filik, 2016). Many of these studies have focused on emoticons as indicators of emotional states. Furthermore, many examined the effect of emoticons in constructed texts; however, few have focused on how emojis are used in naturally occurring online interactions, and of those, very few have been conducted by linguists such as Dresner and Herring, 2010, Skovholt et al., 2014, Vandergriff, 2013, and Al Zidjaly (2017).
The majority of previous studies are on the English language although a few were conducted on the Japanese language (e.g., Katsuno and Yano, 2007) and other European languages, such as French (Amaghlobeli, 2012), and Norwegian, Danish, Swedish, and Finnish (Skovholt et al, 2014). This practice accords with Danet and Herring 's (2007) assertion that most computer-mediated communication (CMC) literature has focused on CMC practices of English speakers and neglected the developments of online communication among other populations speaking other languages. Although there are some studies on Arabic (e.g., Albawardi, 2018, Al Zidjaly, 2010, Palfreyman and al Khalil, 2003), few have examined emojis in CMC (e.g., Al Zidjaly, 2017).
Furthermore, little research has focused on the use of emojis on WhatsApp. Thus, this study proposes to fill these gaps by providing a linguistic understanding of how emojis are used in actual online conversations by examining interactions that took place in one group of women and one group of men in Arabic on WhatsApp.
WhatsApp is a cross-platform instant messaging application for smart phones. It enables users to exchange images, video, audio and text messages with individuals and groups of people across the internet (either via Wi-Fi or preexisting mobile data plans). It is ranked the top among other social media platforms in Oman (Al Abri, 2017). Omanis use it as a main communication tool to connect with friends, relatives and colleagues. It has replaced the role of telephone calls and text messages in the lives of many Omanis due to its low cost.
Al Shaaili (2013) used a survey to explore the prevalence of WhatsApp among 2053 participants (86% were students) in Oman. He found that 97% of his participants used WhatsApp. 57% of them mentioned that they send between one to 50 WhatsApp messages a day while 22% sent from 50 to 100 a day. 53% of the participants stated that they are members of two to five WhatsApp groups and only 28% of them were members of one group. The result also showed that 97% of the participants used emojis in their WhatsApp communication.
In what follows, I first review previous research on emoticons and emojis. Then, I introduce my data in more details. I then introduce the various functions served by emojis in the corpus by analyzing some representative excerpts.
