The use of learning games in educational contexts has expanded significantly, leading to the emergence of game-based learning as a recognized field of study. According to the recent literature (Ke, 2016; Klopfer, Osterweil, & Salen, 2009), a learning game is defined as a playful activity that is structured by rules for the pursuit of quantifiable outcomes (e.g., win states and points), and incorporates educational objectives (e.g., knowledge acquisition) as its own end. This definition comprises digital and non-digital games used for learning. However, current trends in game-based learning suggest a growing interest in and preference for the use of digital over non-digital games (Boyle et al., 2016; Connolly, Boyle, MacArthur, Hainey, & Boyle, 2012), and thus the present study echoes this focus.
Over the past few decades, digital games have been employed as a form of new media with enormous potential for learning in a broad range of subject areas, such as mathematics (Kebritchi, Hirumi, & Bai, 2010), history (Charsky & Ressler, 2011), engineering (Joiner et al., 2011), health (McHale et al., 2012; Sung & Hwang, 2013; Yang, Lin, & Liu, 2017), science (Sung & Hwang, 2013; Yang et al., 2017), and English (Yang, Lin, & Chen, 2018). Among these, language learning is considered a more promising discipline than many others (Young et al., 2012), largely because of the assumed benefits based on various language acquisition theories, such as immersive exposure to the language learning environment, lowered anxiety and other affective barriers to language learning, and increased use of the target language for interaction in gaming (Peterson, 2013; Reinders, 2012; Sykes & Reinhardt, 2013; Yang, Quadir, & Chen, 2016). In practice, there exist a wide variety of digital games for language learning. For example, Ragnarok Online and World of Warcraft are popular role-playing games that provide multiplayer gaming environments where language learners interact and communicate for authentic purposes in 3D virtual worlds (Reinders & Wattana, 2014; Zheng, Bischoff, & Gilliland, 2015). Other digital games, such as The Sims, engage language learners in simulated environments to support their learning in a fun way (Ranalli, 2008). Most proponents of game-based learning would agree that the educational affordances of such games may vary across disciplines, and the nature of digital games can be of vital importance in shaping the processes and outcomes of learning by gaming.
Despite the increasing attention being paid to the educational value of digital games, there is a dearth of empirical evidence regarding the effectiveness of this relatively new media in language education (Godwin-Jones, 2014). Two review attempts can be found in this growing field of study, with one focusing on a specific target language (Chiu, Kao, & Reynolds, 2012) and the other focusing on a specific digital game (Peterson, 2016). While both works provide valuable insights into the affordances of digital games for language learning, the field is still missing a comprehensive review that takes a broad variety of digital games into consideration, from a general standpoint of language education that involves the learning of first language (L1) and second language (L2). The present study is thus significant with regard to the development of the emerging literature on digital game-based language learning (DGBLL), and the following research questions were developed to guide this systematic review:
•What research methods were employed to examine the learning and teaching of languages in the selected DGBLL studies?•What digital games were used to support the learning and teaching of languages in the selected DGBLL studies?•What target languages and language learners were involved in the selected DGBLL studies?•What empirical evidence on student learning outcomes was presented in the selected DGBLL studies?•Were there any significant associations among the reviewed aspects with regard to digital games, target languages, language learners, and DGBLL outcomes of students?
