Community structure is a remarkable feature observed in complex networks and community detection has a giant impact on complex network analysis and mining [1], [2]. Communities are usually composed of tightly connected subgraphs in complex networks, for example, in a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, nodes and edges correspond proteins and interactions among the proteins, respectively, and each community may represent a biological organism with specific function [3]. A variety of methods have been proposed for community detection from different fields, such as traditional clustering methods [3], spectral methods [4], modularity optimization [5], stochastic block model [6], [7], non-negative matrix factorization [8], [9], [10] and so on. Detailed and comprehensive introductions for community detection can be seen in [11], [12], [13].
Furthermore, many social, biological, bibliographic, communication and computer systems can be modeled as temporal networks [14], i.e. the topological structures of which evolve with time, or multiplex network [15], i.e. each pair of nodes of which has multiple relations. On one side, in a mobile communication network, the links between each two individuals are dynamic with times and the time interval distribution of these interactions follows a power-low distribution [16]. A ecological network, which is constructed with the species or other categories of organisms and interactions among them, it may change with the seasons as organisms going through different phases of their life cycles [17]. On the other side, such as in a social network which has a multiplex structure, different slices may represent different social relationships (including Facebook, Twitter, etc); in a transportation network, nodes and different type links correspond to airports and different airline flights, respectively [18]. In the temporal or multiplex networks, the communities of which have their own characteristics. So finding the community structure for both these two types of network makes the problem of community detection more interesting and challenging. Otherwise, detecting anomalies in temporal networks has also received great attentions [19], [20].
In fact, over the topological structure varying with time, community structure of the temporal networks has its own characteristics which including community growth, contractions and so on [21]. For a multiplex network, each single layer of which has a piece of meaningful information from its perspective, and hence how to exploit and fuse the multi slices or multiplexes information to detect the community structure and analyze each layer of the network is an essential problem [22]. Some pioneering methods have been proposed for either the temporal networks or the multiplex networks, such as the methods based on independent clustering [21], incremental clustering [23], [24] and evolutionary clustering [25], [26] for temporal networks, matrix factorization [27] and pattern mining [28] for multiplex networks. However, the methods of community detection for temporal networks are not suitable for multiplex networks, because they did not make the best of multi slices structure of the networks. On the contrary, the methods for multiplex networks ignore the temporal information and could not analyze the evolution of the temporal networks.
In addition, how can we detect the community structures in each snapshots of the temporal networks or each slices of the multiplex networks and analyze their latent properties? Is there any internal consistency among these communities? How to generate the each slice of the multiplex network and the each snapshots of the temporal networks we observed by joining with the common cluster structure and the temporal or multiplex communities?
Aiming at these challenges, in this paper we present an intuitive, principal, interpretable and optimizable model, called constrained common cluster model (C3 model), to analyze and explore community structure and common cluster structure hidden in the temporal or multiplex networks. We assume that there are same nodes and fixed number of communities for each snapshot or each slice of the network, with varying link structure in the temporal network and different types of links at each slice in the multiplex network. The intrinsic assumption of the proposed model is that, there are common or coincident structure in the snapshots of temporal networks or slices of multiplex networks, which are called common clusters. In fact, we also assume that the number of common clusters is equal to the number of communities across the temporal or multiplex networks, and nodes are divided into different communities at each snapshot or slice. However, each cluster contains all the nodes of the network in the form of probability, which makes our model analyze the importance of each node in the network. In detail, We first construct the Markov steady-state matrices of each snapshot of temporal network or each slice of multiplex network. Next, we propose the object function of C3 model by combining the Markov steady-state matrices, similarity matrices and community membership matrices of the network in a theoretical way. Finally, a gradient descent algorithm based on non-negative matrix factorization is proposed for optimizing the object function. Experiments on both synthetic datasets and real-world networks demonstrate that our C3 model has competitive performance based on different evaluation indexes of community detection and could reveal interesting results in some networks.
The main contributions of this paper is summarized as follows:

•By assuming that there are common or coincident cluster structure in the temporal or multiplex network, we propose an intuitive, principal and interpretable statistical model C3, to detect the community structure, which is suitable for both these two types of networks.•Based on the common or coincident cluster structure hidden in the network, the proposed model could identify the importance of each node in the cluster of the network.•We propose an iterative algorithm to optimize the object function which is constituted by combing the Markov steady-state matrices, similarity matrices and community membership matrices of the network.•We test the proposed model and compare it with some widely used methods for community detection on a variety of temporal and multiplex networks, and the experimental results show the effectiveness and competitively performance of the proposed model.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we review some classic and widely used methods for community detection in temporal or multiplex networks in Section 2. Second, we give the detailed construction of our model and the algorithm in Sections 3 and 4, respectively. Third, experiments on both artificially generated networks and real world datasets are shown in Section 5. At last, we conclude our work and give some future extensions of the proposed model in Section 6.
