Authentication is the process by which a user can gain access to a system or protected resource. In the context of cloud-based systems, this could be access to a user's stored set of photos, cloud-storage backup, or webmail. Though a variety of approaches exist for authentication (including biometric methods (Sadhya and Singh, 2016)), the majority are still split between text-based passwords and graphical methods that require a user to interact with images. At the heart of authentication is the validation of secret information that only the true user should know, such as a password in text-based systems. However, text passwords are a source of frustration for most users, as rules for creating secure combinations of characters and symbols conversely result in less-memorable passwords (Jeyaraman and Topkara, 2005).
Graphical or image-based authentication, on the contrary, involves the manipulation of photos as the password. As an example, some systems require a user to select pre-registered points on an image to serve as validation of their identity. Alternatively, a user may be shown a set of images and must select one or more of their pre-registered images hidden among other images (image-selection authentication), Such graphical authentication methods have the advantage of the “pictorial superiority effect”, the phenomenon whereby images are more easily memorized than text (Nelson et al., 1976). Authentication systems are additionally categorized in one of two groups: recognition-based or recall-based. Graphical image-selection authentication is an example of a recognition-based system, where the user is presented with a number of images that require selection. In recall-based systems, the user must enter a secret, such as a text-based password. Cued-recall is a variation of such a system, where the user is provided with some hint to foster better recall. An example of this would be a “password hint” message that accompanies a text-based password prompt.
While image-selection methods have memorability on their side, they can be vulnerable to “shoulder-surfing attacks”, where an attacker observes the selected images and can identify this later to gain access. In addition, most approaches randomly select other images (called distractor images) that sit alongside the user's registered images (Mihajlov et al., 2016). This randomness, while seemingly a security feature, is actually a vulnerability, as it can allow an attacker to exploit user biases in image choices (such as the selection of female versus male faces in a face-based image authentication system) (English and Poet, 2011). A graphical authentication method would be better served by using distractor images that are similar to the “real” image in some fashion to offset these inherent user biases.
We introduce a novel method named Visual Question Authentication Protocol (VQAP) for authentication that is a hybrid between a graphical image-selection system and a text-based cued-recall system and contains an advanced method for selecting “distractor” images. These distractor images are selected from a different set than those registered by the current user, and are meant to make the selection of the correct image more difficult for an attacker to guess. This work is motivated by the task of Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Antol et al., 2015), a concrete example of a Visual Turing Test (VTT) (Geman et al., 2015) which requires an algorithm to provide a text-based answer when given an image and a question about that image. VQA systems are examples of multimodal approaches that learn a mapping between images and text. Recent research into the relevance between a question and an image have given rise to cooperative and context-aware VQA systems, called C2VQA (Toor, Wechsler, 2017, Toor et al, 2017). In VQAP, we utilize the interplay between visual content (V), questions (Q), and answers/image selection, which serve as the authentication secret (A).
In our approach, we propose a method where a user is presented with (at most) one registered image, a set of distractor images, and a question related to all of the presented images. Like in normal image-selection authentication, the user must select their registered image from among the other images. However, our approach requires that they must additionally answer the question correctly in order to authenticate successfully. Our proposed approach provides the security of a text-based password system with the memorability of a pure image-selection system. In addition, it provides enhanced security through the introduction of authentication challenge scenarios. While these challenges can take many forms, their purpose is to undermine the ability of an attacker to impersonate a user by presenting scenarios involving incorrect information that only the true user should be able to detect. Two of these challenge scenarios are presented here, one in which a question is presented that was never registered by the user and the other in which none of the user's registered images are displayed. These are labeled challenges because they appear to an attacker to be a “normal” scenario in which one of the images and/or the question are legitimate items that the user they are trying to impersonate might have registered. Our proposed algorithm for selecting distractor images is based on a machine-learning based classifier that determines the degree of relevance, or appropriateness, of a question to an image. Given an input question, this classification model can then be run against a set of images to split relevant images from irrelevant ones, which we refer to as triage. These types of authentication challenges and the method for selecting distractor images for authentication are novel concepts. Fig. 1 gives an overview visualization of the system, which is described in more detail in Section 3.Download : Download high-res image (83KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. VQAP system overview.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we cover background material and related work to our research. Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 describe the architecture, experiments, and results based on the machine-learning based component of VQAP. In Sections 7 and 8, we discuss the impact of our approach on privacy and cloud-based systems.
