A key aspect of the process safety management systems is considering human factors. The source of success of any organisation largely depends on performance of staff members (Crowl, 2007). Human factors were identified as root causes and contributing factors of major accidents such as Chernobyl, Three Mile Island, and Piper Alpha. Human factors that may affect safety are organisational, group and individual factors. The organisational factors influencing safety, incidents, and accidents include cost cutting programmes and the level of communication between work-sites. The relationships between work groups and the relationships between individuals and their supervisors are the main components of group factors influencing safety of an installation. The individual factors include the human-machine interface, competence of the individual, perceptual judgements, stress, motivation, health risks, and the contribution of human error to the probability of accidents (Gordon, 1998). The findings from the investigation conducted by Nuclear Power Operations indicated that organisational, group, and individual factors were the root causes of accidents in the nuclear industry. Deficient procedures or documentation were considered as potential determinants
of the occurrence of 43% of accidents, and lack of knowledge or training was the underlying causes of 18% of accidents. Deficient planning or scheduling, miscommunication, deficient supervision, and policy problems were reported as the main causes of 10%, 6%, 3%, and 2% of accidents, respectively. People were a cause in at least 92% of accidents (INPO, 1985). Human factors are the underlying cause of accidents in workplaces. Behavioural factors were the major causes of more than 90% of fatal accidents over three years in Australia (Stellman, 1998). Human failure was determined as the primary cause of over 80% of accidents in the chemical and petro-chemical industries (Kariuki and Löwe, 2007). Workers in the process industries face many hazards. The major causes of the BP refinery explosion in Texas City were a lack of process safety measures and insufficient risk reduction measures which lead to 15 deaths and more than 170 injuries (Khakzad et al., 2011). It has been argued that the lack of effective management of human factors has been considered as main contributory factors in some major accidents such as Piper Alpha, Esso Longford, Texaco Milford Haven, Chernobyl, and Bhopal (HSE, 2005).
The components of safety performance describe the behaviour of workers at workplaces. There are some frameworks indicated the importance of safety behaviours in the maintenance of overall system safety (Griffin and Neal, 2000). According to some findings, in addition to the factors such as safe working conditions, specific safety policies, and hazard controls that have been reported to show effects on good safety performance, organisational climate factors including support and communication provided by management to employees are also important determinants of safety performance (DeJoy et al., 2004). Some elements of human factors influencing performance in the process industries include process equipment design, process control systems, safety culture, procedures, emergency preparedness and response, safety systems, behaviour -based safety, workloads and staffing levels, environmental factors, shiftwork issues, and human/computer interface (Crowl, 2007; OGP, 2005). The important elements of human factors in the management of major accident hazards include identifying human failures, maintenance error, safety critical communications, alarm handling, managing fatigue risks, and organisational change and transition management (HSE, 2005).
Human error is the cause of many accidents (Bridges and Tew, 2010). Human factors principles are used to determine the root causes of events (Gosbee, 2002). Regulatory requirements are needed to deal with human factors issues in process safety and risk management systems. Human factors and related tools need to be more widely understood and recognized (Fabrizio et al., 2012). Human factors have contributed to the number of reported industrial accidents such as Flixborough, England, leading to 28 fatalities and 86 injured in1974, Pasadena, TX, in1989 leading to 23 fatalities and 132 injured, and etc. Poor change management, lack of proper
supervision by qualified engineer, and lack of training in hazard identification were human factors issues in the Flixborough disaster (Crowl, 2007). The aim of this study was to model and work on human factors elements affecting safety performance of control room operators in the oil industry in Iran using a hybrid intelligent approach. Safety performance among control room operators regarding human factors issues in the process industry (oil industry) was considered in the field and a hybrid intelligent model was employed to model the obtained data.
