As technology advances, image segmentation has become a popular branch of computer vision, which aims at dividing an image into several meaningful pieces with no intersection by some specific rules. More specifically, image segmentation completes a job in which an image is represented by a collection of meaningful and physically connected area. We can take full advantage of the segmented results to fit the needs of many other research fields, such as medical image analysis, military research, remote sensing meteorology service, and face hallucination [30].
Image segmentation plays an important role in image processing, which is a classical research domain. Since the 1970s, researchers have attached great efforts to image segmentation, and thousands of segmentation algorithms have been proposed. Most of these works concentrate on supervised image segmentation that exploits the prior knowledge about how to separate the foreground targets from the background scenes. Many segmentation algorithms fall into the category of graph-based method, such as the algorithms introduced in [2], [3], [4]. Shi et al. [3] proposed a novel approach for solving the perceptual grouping problem in vision, and the approach can be used in image segmentation. This work treats image segmentation as a graph partition problem and proposes a global criterion, the normalized cuts, for segmenting the graph. Taylor [4] improved the performance of image segmentation by tackling it using a simple but effective edge detection scheme that can be computed rapidly and the performance is comparable to the commonly used pB detector [27]. The authors also described an approach to computing a reduced-order normalized cut that captures the essential features of the original problem and can be computed in very short time. In addition, some other methods use region-based strategy that is more noise immune [5] and produces enclosed regions [6]. In [32], the authors segmented the sample images into patches and used a series of linear least square regressions to model the relationship between the high- and low-resolution images for image super-resolution. In [31], [33], image segmentation was put into a probabilistic framework to model the sketch-photo generation process. To this end, these works took spatial neighboring constraint between adjacent image patches into consideration
In recent years, with the development of deep learning, many researchers are interested in applying deep learning techniques to image segmentation. A representative method is Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN). Long et al. defined and detailed the space of fully convolutional networks in [1], and explained their application to spatially dense prediction tasks. Besides, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) with Conditional Random Fields (CRF) [24] is proposed in recent years and obtains excellent segmentation results with supervised data. The supervised image segmentation methods heavily depend on the training data with semantic labels that are usually created by hand. Data labeling is a very labor-intensive procedure and this should be an obstacle to the generalization and application of the supervised methods.
Compared with supervised image segmentation, unsupervised methods are much easier to realize because they do not need any labels of the data. On the other hand, owing to the same reason, unsupervised image segmentation is a much more challenging problem. The commonly adopted strategy is to perform some sorts of clustering algorithms on an image. However, the current unsupervised image segmentation methods rarely adopt deep learning techniques.
To this end, our concern in this paper is to achieve unsupervised image segmentation using deep learning technique. Specifically, we propose an unsupervised learning framework for image segmentation. First, we divide the training images into non-overlapped patches and extract features from these patches via a Stacked Denoising Auto-encoder (SDA). Second, we propose to perform multi-layer K-means clustering on the patch features and build a hierarchical indexing tree structure. At last, we break a testing image into patches of the same size as training patches and achieve patch-wise segmentation of the image using the indexing tree. The advantages of the proposed method are three-fold:

(1)This method is unsupervised, which means we do not need labels of the data and thus we can use as much big training set as possible without increasing the manual labor burden.(2)This method exploits the prior knowledge learnt from sample data, and can achieve segmentation results with better details compared with non-sample supported unsupervised methods.(3)Owing to the proposed indexing tree structure, our proposed segmentation has very high time efficiency.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we briefly review the related work. Section 3 introduces the proposed method in detail. Section 4 shows the details of the experiments as well as the experimental results. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the whole paper.
