The body dimension of livestock can reflect its body profile, structure and development status, and also can show the livestock’s physiological function, production performance, disease resistance, and the adaptability to external living conditions, etc. (Liu et al., 1998). Therefore, the livestock body size is widely used in its identification, breeding and sale. The conventional measurement of animal body size is often done manually, using the tools such as measuring rods, tape measure, and circular gauges to measure the parameters such as body height, body length, chest girth, cannon circumference, rump height, chest depth and chest width. With the upgrading of information-aware technology and precision breeding level, the way in acquisition of body size data for livestock are heading to a non-contact, high precision and high degree of automation (He et al., 2016).
Sheep industry, following the dairy industry and cashmere industry, is a new growth way for local economic development in Inner Mongolia and the surrounding western region in China. In recent years, the intensive facilities for sheep breeding has been greatly developed owing to the unique regional and resource advantages, overall drylot feeding and large-scale farming have become the trends of sheep industry (Xuan, 2016). The individual difference in the group should be considered in large-scale farming to achieve a high yield, high quality, high efficiency, safety and sustainable development.
There are some wide extensive researches on sheep breeding based on body size around worldwide (Wynn and Thwaites, 1981, Aziz and Sharaby, 1993, Janssens and Vandepitte, 2004, Jiang, 2004, Salako, 2006, Bingöl et al., 2012, Zhang et al., 2012). A variety of analytical methods were used for morphological evaluation and trait extraction, provided a guidance in animal breed selection and production. However, for traditional body measuring method, it is not only with a heavy measuring workload, but also has a strict demand for sheep standing posture, also the direct contact with sheep is stressful and harmful to the sheep, resulting the decline of production performance, the increase of disease, even death, heavily influenced the individual sheep as well as herd growth development, and increased the spread of zoonotic disease risk. In view of this, the techniques of measuring livestock’s body size have drawn the attention of scholars across the world. John C developed a method for determining the characteristics of animal skeletal structures based on optical and acoustical devices (ultrasound) (John, 2011), and using X-ray imaging technique for bone size determination (Cloete et al., 1998). However, ultrasonic imaging was still unable to realize non-contact measurement, and X-ray imaging technique has flaws of cell destruction and higher environmental demands. Therefore, optical based principles of animal body measurements have been emphasized and adopted, e.g. Doeschlwilson et al. (2004), measured pig's plan area and length of different body parts based on machine vision. Zwertvaegher et al. (2011) measured nipple morphology of dairy cow using CCD imaging and computer image analysis. Guo et al. (2014) used the point cloud equipment to measure the cow's body size. Through the literature study, it is known that the measurement based on visual principle is only focused on cattle and swines, but the feasibility of using machine vision technology for the live livestock body measurement has been proved. In recent years, the computer vision technology has been started to apply to the sheep body measurement, e.g. Zhu Lin et al. used embedded machine vision technology to measure the sheep height and body length (Zhu et al., 2014). Paolo et al. (2014) constructed a binocular stereoscopic vision system to assess the size and body weight of live sheep. Khojastehkey et al. (2016) based image processing technology to assess newborn lamb body size, and to estimate the effect of body size on the population genetic performance. The machine vision application in the field of automatic detection not only owns the visual function of human eye, but also performs like a part of human brain, which is just to meet the adjustment demands on the measurement of body size for live livestock.
In previous studies, there were some researches on sheep body dimension measurement based on visual technology, but the automation level was low and the detected parameters were limited. How to achieve more body size parameters through the non-contact, high precision and high automation measurements, to sort sheep and to automatically identify the measuring points on the profile are becoming the key questions. The objective of this research is to develop an algorithm of body dimension measurement that can be efficiently applied in the real farm environment without contact with sheep, and the obtained sheep body dimension is suitable for the conformation appraisal.
