Since the beginning of the 21st century, the development of next-generation information technologies such as Internet of Things (IoT), mobile Internet, big data, cloud computing, artificial intelligence (AI) and their deep integration with various industries have accelerated the advancement of human society into the era of big data and intelligence. The IoT in agriculture has nearly penetrated every functional area of industry and business today and has become an important form of technical support for decision-making. Massively aggregated IoT big data imply huge social, economic and scientific value, attracting high attention from various disciplines, industries and governments (Srinivasa et al., 2018). The computing power centred on IoT, big data and AI technology has become a focus of productivity at present (Reddy et al., 2018), bringing profound changes in commerce, finance, manufacturing and medical care, and promoting scientific advancement. Discovery, cutting-edge technological breakthroughs and industrial model innovations are accelerating the transformation and upgrading of traditional industries.
With the development of these new technologies, scientists have been able to systematically and efficiently study various phenotypic traits of plant populations. High-throughput phenotypic technology has emerged accordingly. The plant phenome is defined as the plant characteristics resulting from the realization of the genetic program stored in the cell under given environmental conditions. Targeted characteristics are either structural (dimensions, shape, position and orientation of cells, organs and plants), biochemical or based on energy or mass fluxes. (Pieruschka and Schurr, 2019; Pan, 2015a). With the rapid development of IoT in agriculture technology, modern imaging techniques and automated industrial equipment, high-throughput technology has become widely used in obtaining the phenotypic characteristics of plants in various growth environments through integrated imaging sensors. A number of equipment and facilities dedicated to plant phenotypic research have emerged, playing an increasingly important role in modern agricultural breeding and other fields. One of the main directions of modern agricultural breeding is the improvement of crop traits. A large volume of plant phenotypic information obtained via high-throughput plant phenotypic technology has improved the quality of research on breeding crops, thereby resulting in increased yield, and improved configuration and plant architecture (Zhou et al., 2018). Revealing the formation mechanism of specific biological traits, determining the laws of plant life science and improving the research level of plant functional genomics and molecular breeding are important objectives. High-throughput plant phenotypic platforms can quickly acquire a large variety of information on plants and has become a powerful tool in studying plant phenotypes and genomics, as well as investigating modern genetic breeding (dos Santos et al., 2019). The structure of the article is shown in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (820KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Framework of the article.
