In the societal change from an industrialized society towards a knowledge society, lifelong learning is gaining importance constantly (Gara, 2001). Knowledge as a factor of production as well as a factor of location influences the ability to compete internationally, which is essential in times of globalization (Mandl & Krause, 2001). Lifelong learning is only successful if learners are equipped with effective strategies and tools. Hence it is inevitable to explore how to optimize the learning processes and support learners in the best possible way. One key factor in this context is the motivation of learners (Roesler, 2011). Motivation can be defined as the orientation of thoughts and actions towards a positive goal (Rheinberg, 2004, p. 15). In the context of learning, motivation describes the intention to acquire skills or knowledge about a knowledge domain (Deimann, 2002), and motivation is a critical success factor as it helps to master difficult tasks and work with greater persistency (Zimmerman, 2011). The use of multimedia environments to support lifelong learning bears great potential, but is also demanding for the learners. Amongst other things, learners have to motivate themselves to start learning and not to quit the learning process. The novelty of the situation and the curiosity piqued by the technical learning support are not sufficient to keep learners motivated for extended periods of time (Keller & Suzuki, 2004). The importance of considering motivational factors while designing multimedia learning environments has already been demonstrated (e.g. ARCS model, Keller & Kopp, 1987, pp. 289–320). Especially when learners learn by themselves, without the support of a teacher or a peer, effective learning strategies help to maintain the level of motivation and thereby increase the learning outcome.
Social robots have attracted increasing attention in the last decade. They are supposed to support humans in areas such as education, therapy or care of the elderly (e.g. Tapus et al., 2007, Scassellati et al., 2012; Mubin, Stevens, Shahid, Mahmud, & Dong, 2013). In the domain of teaching and learning, social robots can be employed to assist learners during the learning process.
To explore the potential of a social robot to increase the motivation of a learner, this study combines findings from educational psychology (the ARCS model, Keller & Kopp, 1987, pp. 289–320) with the potential of a social robot to assist learners. Therefore, a learning environment was developed in which learners are supported by a social robot in learning a language. To the best of our knowledge, the potential of the ARCS model has not been explored using a social robot so far. The model provides strategies to promote the motivation of learners in a systematic way and has been used in various technology-based learning environments (e.g. Cook, Beckman, Thomas, & Thompson, 2009; Kim & Keller, 2008; Su & Cheng, 2015). We therefore used it as a basis for modelling the behaviour of the robot. The aim of this contribution is to investigate whether a social robot that exhibits motivational behaviour according to the ARCS model has an effect on the motivation of learners and, as a consequence, on the learning outcome.
