Dominant narratives concerning genomics have hitherto focused on the process and product of determining the order of bases (adenine, thymine, cytosine and guanine; A, T, C and G) along a given DNA strand. I call this the ‘thin’ sequencing perspective, and contrast it to a ‘thick’ perspective that encompasses all of the scientifically and technically important processes, procedures, materials and stages leading to intermediary and never-quite-complete sequence products. These thick sequences can potentially be used as a resource by various end-user communities not (necessarily) involved in the practices leading to the production of those sequences. These practices may include improving assemblies of sequences by closing gaps and correcting errors and annotating the sequences to indicate where genes lie on chromosomes. Thick sequencing draws our attention to procedures such as these just as much as the determination of the raw sequence that thin sequencing concentrates on; they are vital in ensuring that sequences can be used more fruitfully as a resource. Thick sequencing therefore calls attention to those processes and methods that do not themselves constitute DNA sequencing, but condition what is sequenced, how sequence data are compiled into assemblies and the augmentation of the sequence data to enable it to relay more information than a long string of bases.
I argue that interpretations of the science of genomics that foreground speed, acceleration, large-scale operations and automation are a product of a thin characterisation of sequencing that primarily concerns the procedures that take place in automated machines and associated computers. In the initial era of whole genome sequencing, sequencing machines were often arranged in parallel in factory-style centralised genome sequencing centres, an approach pioneered by J. Craig Venter at Celera and John Sulston at the Sanger Institute (Sulston & Ferry, 2002; Venter, 2008). This sequencing is therefore characterised by large-scale centralised facilities with automated sequencers, mainly staffed by technical employees. The thin picture of genomics has shifted somewhat, with the lowering of the cost of sequencing per base pair making work in large centralised facilities seem less necessary. This work is additionally devolved (for reasons of convenience or cost) to the corporations that build the machines (e.g. Illumina, Pacific Biosciences) and service-oriented laboratories. The process is nonetheless mainly automated, fast, and organised in an industrial way.
‘Thick sequencing’ is based on the idea that there is no final product, and that the work and insight required to create any publicly available sequence cannot be fully captured under a thin understanding of sequencing. In this interpretation, sequencing can include creating genome libraries, establishing a detailed physical map, and producing and validating the statistical tools and software required for analysis. As much as determining the base order, thick sequencing encompasses ongoing assembly to increase the size of contiguous stretches of sequence and close gaps, revision, modification, resequencing of particular areas of interest, improving the quality and coverage, verifying and comparing with other sequences. It is about the creation of annotated sequences indicating the position of genes and other potentially relevant genomic elements, which is in part driven by the prospective uses of the sequence. Many of these stages require active interpretation and intervention in the production of data.
Thick sequencing has no fixed referent: it does not denote a particular event, process, object or project. It is, rather, a concept that encourages scholars of genomics to concentrate efforts on understanding those aspects of genomics that, as I will demonstrate, are as crucial to the products and processes of sequencing as the well-studied and crucial stages in which sequence reads are generated and compiled in successive procedures to produce ever larger contiguous stretches of DNA sequence.1
In developing this distinction between thin and thick characterisations of sequencing, I am building upon Leonelli's (2016) work on data, which highlights the importance of understanding the processes involved in “packaging” data to enable it to be mobilised, integrated and employed by a variety of potential users. The distinction between thick and thin perspectives does not disrupt the centrality of data and data practices to our understanding of sequencing. Rather, the practices, collaborations, infrastructure and data that are included in the thick sequencing perspective are more varied, complex and networked than those associated with thin sequencing. Furthermore, reinterpreting sequencing as thick allows us to adopt the rich conceptual apparatus that has been developed to understand the epistemologies and pragmatics of data-centric or data-intensive science.2
In this paper, I provide a thick account of the mapping and sequencing of the genome of the domestic pig (Sus scrofa), encompassing more than just the production of ‘raw’ sequence. To quote Christopher Tuggle, a pig genome researcher at Iowa State University: “the sequence itself isn't very useful, we need to know where the landmarks are.”3 This concern with the usability of the sequence is allied with current policy directions in funding organisations that aim to improve and accelerate the translation of genomic data into (usually clinical) outcomes (e.g. Wellcome Trust, 2010; for the National Human Genome Research Institute, Green, Guyer, & National Human Genome Research Institute, 2011).
The pig genome sequencing work that I examine presents a well-resolved distinction between the thin and thick sequencing perspectives. For example, if we just take the determination of the order of bases, which was conducted between 2006 and 2009 at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute (in Hinxton, UK), then it looks centralised and automated. But considering the broader conception of sequencing provides a whole other picture in which a range of institutions contributed, over a longer timeframe, to both work preceding sequence determination and the development and processing of the Sanger Institute's raw sequence. This thick picture of sequencing includes the obtaining of DNA from several different breeds of pig, construction of four genomic DNA libraries containing clones of parts of this DNA, physical mapping, distributed revised assembly, sequencing genomic regions of particular interest in higher resolution, annotation and comparison with human and other species' genomes. This picture reveals a different organisation of the work and roles of particular skills.
Pig genome sequencing represents a genomics that took established organising principles and methodologies from prior projects, such as mice, cattle and – especially – human. The early stages of a new form of work involve a considerable amount of improvisation and trial-and-error. Early genome projects will therefore not necessarily be representative of sequencing once it became a more established part of biological research (García-Sancho, 2012, especially pp. 21–64). Pig genome sequencing used the two dominant approaches to sequencing that arose out of the efforts to sequence the human genome: map-based (hierarchical) shotgun and whole genome shotgun (see Fig. 1). The map-based sequencing relied on a physical map produced from 2003 to 2005, and the whole genome shotgun data supplemented the map-based sequence data. Additionally, the pig genome community was and is relatively small and it is therefore possible to investigate most of those who were involved.4 This helps me to avoid the reliance on accounts by prominent people based in large centres or ethnographic research conducted in those same centres, which methodologically structures a thin view of sequencing.5Download : Download high-res image (426KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A simplified depiction of the two chief approaches to genomics during and after the human genome project. On the left is the hierarchical map-based shotgun approach, which uses a physical map to produce a minimum tiling path to inform which Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) clones to sequence and consequently assemble into contigs. BACs and their yeast equivalent YACs are fragments of DNA sequences – clones – stored within the plasmids (circular DNA) of microorganisms. On the right is the whole genome shotgun approach in which the DNA is sheared into fragments, which are sequenced, and then assembled through high-powered computation to calculate the probabilities of overlaps between fragments.
In expounding upon the thick perspective, I outline an expanded view of sequencing. The explication of it in this paper concentrates, however, on only one aspect of genomics, the production of reference sequences. This is only one motivation for sequencing among many, and of one species among millions. The organisation of work and processes involved in the sequencing of other species, and for other purposes such as examining biological diversity, tracing evolutionary history, food testing, functional ecology and forensic investigation, may differ in significant respects from the account detailed in this paper. I make no claims for the representativeness either of the pig as the subject of sequencing, or of the production of reference sequences as its object. What I do aim to do is to demonstrate the power of the distinction I present and the possibilities opened up by taking a thick perspective on sequencing. Most pertinently, the thick perspective has the potential to stimulate an examination of all of the relevant practices and operations associated with sequencing conducted for different purposes, which would help to underpin more fine-grained comparative analyses between them.
This paper is based on archival research including on Alan Archibald's personal papers, documents and emails sent to me by key participants such as Lawrence Schook, examination of published materials and a series of oral history interviews that I have conducted with members of the pig genetics community and people who worked at the Sanger Institute.
I begin the paper with a discussion of the historiography of genome sequencing, before providing first an historical background to pig genomics, and then a detailed account of the sequencing of the pig genome. I demonstrate that the range of actors, practices and outcomes that the thick perspective covers is broader than those encompassed by thin sequencing. Throughout I will point to the historiographical and philosophical consequences of adopting a thick approach and including certain practices and processes in narratives of sequencing projects.
