Cybersecurity issues have an ever increasing social-economical impact both for citizens and enterprises. The success of a single cyber attack can lead to enormous financial losses, theft of intellectual property and loss of customer confidence and trust. It was estimated that cybercrime has a comprehensive monetary impact of billions of dollars per year, on society and government [1]. If we consider that last year saw a total of 304 million cyberattacks samples [2], more than a quarter of all malware samples ever recorded were produced in 2015 (27.63%), with Trojans, PUPs (Potentially Unwanted Programs) and distinct families of Cryptolocker causing considerable damage among larger businesses worldwide, the overall picture is extremely alarming. Therefore the availability of tools allowing to learn how to handle cyber space threats and to assess the effectiveness of prevention and defense solutions, is critical for the safeness of IT services. Traditionally, security assessment and penetration testing activities are performed on real networks while the training of security specialists is made on insulated and static virtualized systems. As stated in [3], the cost of cyber crime can be moderated by deploying enterprise security governance practices. The presence of expert staff in a company has the benefit of being able to reduce cyber crimes costs by an average of $1.5 million [3].
This paper proposes SmallWorld, a software platform enabling the assessment, teaching and learning of security-related aspects in different areas and for various purposes. SmallWorld exploits innovative and state-of-the art virtualization and cloud technologies for reproducing in a realistic setting a hybrid environment where large distributed computer systems can be deployed and from where they can interact with real life entities (users, software and hardware). Such scenarios are dynamic and reactive and a number of autonomous software agents can be deployed within them. Agents [4] are able to reproduce the behaviors of human users and/or malicious applications into a SmallWorld scenario, making it a more realistic testing environment. By using agents, according to their intelligence, the scenario may evolve over time and can produce, for example, unexpected and unpredictable events that are interesting to study and analyze through simulation logs. Keeping skills up to date is an extremely important requirement for security professionals. As example, penetration testing skills take time to develop while the information security landscape changes on a daily basis. A platform like SmallWorld allows penetration testers to build out complex virtual networks that can be used as practice labs. SmallWorld can also be useful for cybersecurity certification entities and incident response teams (SOC, CERT and CSIRT), by allowing to build real-like challenges for assessing skills of candidates/employees. SmallWorld can be used by researchers to generate real system logs in order to analyze the propagation of malwares and test the effectiveness of new intrusion detection/prevention algorithms. One of the key aspects that distinguishes SmallWorld compared to other solutions is the availability of a complete flow for cybersecurity assessment. SmallWorld is not limited to the creation and execution of scenarios, but it also fully supports post analysis, by integrating tools like business intelligence. Another application of SmallWorld is the support for cyber space users in advancing their learning path from familiarity to assessment by making available realistic training scenarios. In this way, users acquire practical skills performing exercises and get experience in the adverse nature of the field. Furthermore, they can apply their newly acquired skills to novel and mutable situations (thanks to agents) where success depends on their ability to make the right decisions quickly and eventually work in a team [5].
Here we summarize the motivation behind this work: (i) Organizations of any kind may suffer severe damage (e.g. financial) due to the cyber security threats they are exposed to. Such damage could be mitigated by teaching cyber security issues or training security teams; (ii) It might be difficult to perform teaching and training in a real system without causing any harm to it; (iii) A flexible and dynamic virtual environment would fully support the above-mentioned activities and at the same time it would solve the problem of unwanted damage to real assets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the related work. Section 3 details the SmallWorld architecture. Section 4 describes the tools made available by the proposed environment. Section 5 presents two case-studies showcasing some possible concrete usage scenarios. In addition quantitative experimental results about the scalability of the platform are therein shown. and Section 6 concludes the paper.
