The current information environment, notably characterized by the rapid proliferation of social media and partisan outlets, has sparked concerns about the deleterious consequences of fake news and other forms of inaccurate information to democratic societies (Mele et al., 2017, Mihailidis and Viotty, 2017). This concern has reached a climax during the US presidential election in 2016. A number of commentators suggested that the election results were altered by the substantial rise of so-called “fake news” — fabricated stories that were promoted on social media to deceive the public for ideological and/or financial gain (Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017, Jin et al., 2017; Pennycook, Cannon, & Rand, 2017).
One important effort to minimize the impact of fake news, along with other measures such as literacy education, bot control, and fact-checking, is to track down the root source of fake information and to reduce the promotion of such information from those sources (Mele et al., 2017). Thus far, a handful of websites have been reported to be major fake news producers during the 2016 US election period, and researchers have identified more than 100 websites that create and promote fake stories regularly (Shao, Ciampaglia, Flammini, & Menczer, 2016). Others also expressed concerns regarding bots and cyborgs, which may be used to facilitate the spread of false information on digital platforms (Ferrara, Varol, Davis, Menczer, & Flammini, 2016). These efforts and concerns revolve around the source of fake news stories. Therefore, to combat fake news, it is essential to identify the origins and spreading patterns of fake stories on social media (Jin et al., 2017, Mele et al., 2017). If the spread of information from those identified origins can be regulated by algorithms, then the flow of fake news might be mitigated considerably.
Unfortunately, there has been a dearth of scholarship in this area (Goel et al., 2015, González-Bailón and Wang, 2016). Most efforts using network analysis have focused on the identification of influential actors, offering little understanding of the origins of false information. These social network approaches have provided a snapshot of the network density but neglected critical elements for understanding the information-spreading process, such as origin, time, hierarchy, and content evolution.
This study aims to address these issues in the context of fake news tweets during the 2016 US presidential election. Using a recent development in the field of network science (i.e., evolution tree analysis), we examined the root content of fake information, producers of original content, and evolution patterns of fake news tweets. By retrieving 307,738 tweets about 30 fake and 30 real news stories, we also made significant comparisons between fake and real news content as well as between fake news favoring Hillary Clinton and fake news favoring Donald Trump. Our analysis will help elaborate on the following questions: Who is producing the root content of the fake information? Are those producers members of political/financial organizations, journalists, ordinary users, or bots? How do fake and real news stories evolve differently? How does the evolution of fake news differ depending on the partisan orientation of media content (favoring Clinton vs. Trump)? We will use these questions to articulate the evolution of fake and real news stories on social media platforms.
