Computer Interface systems facilitate communicating with and controlling external devices utilizing the brain activity of the system׳s user (Syan, Harnarinesingh, & Palaniappan, 2012). BCI paradigms revolve around users performing physical and/or mental tasks that represent the command to be communicated. As such, a BCI system recognizes the brain modulation via the Electroencephalography (EEG) signal and utilizes it to identify and communicate the intended command (Syan et al., 2012). Recently, numerous research efforts have examined various BCI modalities of different brain responses such as, Event Related Potentials (ERPs), Visual Evoked Potentials (VEPs), and Sensorimotor Rhythms (Jin et al., 2014, Li et al., 2013, Pfurtscheller et al., 2006, Pfurtscheller et al., 2010). A well-known type of VEPs, called Steady State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP), has attracted the attention of the research community due to its advantages, such as the high signal to noise ratio, the relatively high information transfer rates, and the minimal training requirements and ease of use (Prueckl & Guger, 2010). VEPs are essentially a potential difference obtained from the scalp of the subject׳s head following the subject׳s exposure to visual stimuli, such as flashing objects (Prueckl & Guger, 2010). In SSVEP paradigms, subjects focus on 1 of multiple flashing objects (i.e visual stimuli) that flicker with specific and different target frequencies. As such, SSVEPs that possess the same properties as the visual stimuli are generated, which allows the identification of the target frequencies by SSVEP target frequency identification algorithms (Sun & Zhou, 2014).
Numerous efforts investigated SSVEP-based BCI system and suggested SSVEP target identification methods, such as Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), Power Spectral Density Analysis (PSDA), time domain analysis, Hilbert Haung Transform (HHT), autoregressive models (AR models), and wavelet transform (Itai and Funase, 2012, Lin et al., 2007, Luo and Sullivan, 2010, Smondrk et al., 2013, Zhao et al., 2010). However, Smondrk et al. asserted that CCA and PSDA are the most common SSVEP-based BCI methods (Smondrk et al., 2013), while Wei et al. stated that CCA is in fact the state-of-the-art SSVEP identification method (Wei, Lin, Wang, Wang, & Jung, 2013). Nonetheless, BCI systems face numerous detrimental challenges that render BCI systems a technology suitable only inside laboratories, such as, the non-stationarity of the EEG signal, which can be represented by the distinct session variation and subject variation (Müller et al., 2008), EEG׳s susceptibility to noise, the non-linearity of the brain signal, setup time, and calibration requirements (Wei et al., 2013).
Various studies investigated EEG analysis in an effort to overcome and/or allay the effect of subject-to-subject variability on the BCI systems׳ performance. Jin-Jia and colleagues proposed a signal detection method that relies on Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) (Jin-Jia, Ke-Mei, & Chong-Xiao, 2010). Their experiment entails training GMMs on the brain signal while the subject is resting so as to aid in detecting real and/or imagined movement. The results of their study demonstrate a 75% accuracy when using the BCI Competition 2003 dataset, and an 82% accuracy when using the BCI Competition 2002 dataset. Prabhakar and his colleague Rajaguru shed light on predicting epileptic seizures using EEG signal (Prabhakar & Rajaguru, 2015). As such, they emphasized the importance of automatic detection algorithms to facilitate the prediction task. For feature extraction, they utilize Approximate Entropy. Subsequently, the classification of epilepsy risk levels is achieved by employing Sparse Representation Classifier (SRC) in addition to GMMs. Stastny et al employed an EEG-based subject identification method to investigate overcoming the subject variation issue (Šťastný, Sovka, & Radioengineering , 2014). Their investigation involved enabling the BCI device to adapt the classification process׳s parameters, which is facilitated by identifying the system׳s user automatically utilizing an EEG-based biometric algorithm. The feature extraction process involved utilizing the frequency zooming Auto-Regressive (AR) modeling method in order to determine the fundamental frequency׳s μ rhythm. The results of their investigation report a high subject identification accuracy of 96%. In another effort, Dehzangi et. al investigated time-varying and simultaneous frequency stimulation to alleviate the limited frequency stimulation for a mobile BCI for multi-class SSVEP-Based Brain-Computer Interface (Dehzangi and Jafari, 2015, Dehzangi et al., 2014).
Despite the significant advances, generating and processing Visual Evoked Potentials in the environments full of uncontrolled sources of noise is still an unresolved issue of BCI systems today. In this paper, we propose a portable and mobile setup of a BCI system comprised of a wireless EEG recording device coupled with an Android tablet-based visual stimuli. Therefore, more issues emerge and further deteriorate the system׳s performance in conjunction with the aforementioned drawbacks. The issues are characterized by the insufficient screen refresh rate of the visual stimuli, which generates inaccurate SSVEP paradigms, and the recurrent Android system interruptions. Ergo, to mitigate the ramifications of such issues and challenges simultaneously, we propose a signal processing recipe to project a high resolution delineation of the SSVEP responses in spite of the magnitude of uncertainty, and capture the subject-specific information more efficiently via deriving adaptive and discriminative training algorithms. First, the score spaces of CCA and PSDA are partitioned and the information from both CCA and PSDA model scores are extracted from each partition, and augmented in a fusion space (Farooq & Dehzangi, 2017). Subsequently, generative and discriminative GMM training methods are investigated to take into account subject discriminative information in the GMM-based transformation. The Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) is utilized as the baseline generative subject dependent GMM adaptation. Furthermore, we propose the Minimum Segment Classification Error (MSCE) algorithm to re-estimate the subject-dependent Gaussian Mixture means iteratively via minimizing the classification error on the training data. The re-estimated GMM models are employed as the discriminative transformation and are coupled with Support Vector Machine (SVM), which serves as our predictive model in this investigation, to generate the SSVEP identification decision. In order to select and evaluate the identification models the 10-Fold Cross Validation (10-CV) approach is utilized.
