Research and education networks (RENs) are characterized by high-speed backbone networks that support the needs of research and education communities within a geographic region. RENs often provide dedicated connections for individual research projects, and experimenters can establish and manage these connections through advance reservation systems  [1] such as the Internet2 advanced layer 2 service (AL2S)  [2] and the Energy Science Network (ESNet) on-demand secure circuits and advance reservation system (OSCARS)  [3]. Advance network reservation systems identify each connection by coarse-grained attributes such as endpoints (e.g., an IP address or an interface of a WAN border router), requested bandwidth, the start time, and the end time  [4]. However, a major problem with using such coarse-grained attributes to identify a network reservation is that an unauthorized user or application behind the point of ingress could consume the reservation, affecting the performance of legitimate users or applications. Moreover, setting up these reservations is a manual process that involves many network operators and can take from five to 45 days depending on the number of domains involved, as noted by Ibarra et al.  [5].
Software-defined networking (SDN) is a novel networking paradigm that enables global network programmability and rapid innovation by decoupling the control and data planes of network devices. An additional benefit of SDN is a fine-grained flow definition that allows for firewall-like services on network switches. SDN is widely used in data centers for network policy enforcement, traffic engineering, and tenant isolation. However, SDN is not enough to ensure network access control when user identification is required. Token-based authentication/authorization is widely used in web service architectures today. For instance, whenever a user accesses a third-party site with her Facebook credentials, the OAuth 2.0 protocol (RFC 6749), which uses tokens, is invoked to authorize the third-party site access to some credentials in that individual’s Facebook profile (e.g., username and email) for authentication purposes. Furthermore, OpenStack, a popular cloud orchestration open source project, uses tokens to authorize numerous application program interfaces (APIs) that require access to its services.
We present here a novel network architecture that provides advance reservation access control by leveraging SDN and token-based authorization. Our architecture is composed of three main elements: (1) an orchestrator that receives requests from users or applications and manages networking resources between sites, (2) a WAN controller that represents an advance reservation system connecting sites involved in a specific data transfer, and (3) site SDN controllers that manage the installation of flow rules on site switches so as to extend a reservation from the border router all the way to the data transfer node (DTN)  [6] in each site. The full workflow is automated, and no involvement from a network operator is required, thus reducing the provisioning time from several days to a few minutes. Our contributions are the following: 
1.A system that automates the advance reservation provisioning process using multidomain SDN orchestration.2.A system that uses tokens to strongly bind an end-to-end flow to the user or application that requested the reservation.
The reminder of this paper is as follows. Section  2 presents background material and Section  3 presents related work. Section  4 defines our system architecture. Section  5 describes our implementation and Section  6 presents our evaluation experiments. Section  7 discusses our results, and Section  8 presents our conclusions and future work.
