Computer vision applications have been part of industry operations for more than four decades. They are helpful in fasting the industrial process, automated many difficult tasks and also help in finding minor defects [1]. Many applications were using hand gesture recognition techniques for different purposes as hand gesture provides a natural way to communicate with machines [[2], [3], [4], [5]]. These applications were initially based on wired gloves, color strips or chemicals to detect a region of interest (ROI) smoothly. A survey of different devices and techniques used for hand gesture recognition can be found out in [6]. To make human-machine communication more effective, gesture recognition of bare hand had introduced where any person could use his hand in natural position [[7], [8], [9], [10]]. A lot of work has been done in the area of natural hand gesture recognition to make it more robust. Currently, this kind of applications [11] and games are more popular as a user feel comfortable and don’t need anything to operate the vision-based system.
Recently there has been a growing interest in the field of light intensity-invariant object recognition. For advanced applications in this area, one can set up a system in the laboratory with ideal conditions. However, in practical scenarios, the vision systems may have applications in public domain where the daylight can also have effect. The light intensity may not be the same everywhere, hence a robust system that operates in all types of light conditions is required. The light intensity has a large impact on the visual image processing algorithms as the image segmentation depends on the colors in the image and these colors depends on light intensity at the time of image capturing. If we are working with human skin detection then the scenario is not simple as with other objects. Different people have different skin color. Also, one skin color seems different if the light intensity is changed [12]. So, for image segmentation purpose, the threshold would be changed every time which is not possible if we need an autonomous general purpose application.
In this paper, a hand gesture recognition system has been discussed where the user’s hand gestures are interpreted by the system during the recognition process, whether it is a predefined valid gesture or not. If the gesture is included in the list of the predefined gestures then the system responds to the corresponding action as defined in the system. The corresponding action depends on the application type. The light intensity in predefined gestures and light intensity in the current system can be different, but the system should recognize it as the same gesture for the robustness of the system. The block diagram of the proposed system is shown in Fig. 1. As we are devoted to the natural interaction with machines using hand gestures, the analysis of the effect of light intensity was done on bare hand gesture and no extra sensor, cloth, or chemical was used on hand during gesture recognition process.Download : Download high-res image (173KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Block diagram of the light invariant system.
The light intensity at different times of the day, specifically every two hours was considered. The bare hand gesture recognition is also possible using Microsoft KINECT® [13] but that is a specialized hardware while our focus is on the natural hand gesture recognition with minimum resources. A simple webcam was used for the image capturing purpose in this research.
