The sciences develop internationally, but the funding is mainly national. In a time of “America first” and similar developments in other countries, national governments are challenged to legitimate funding in terms of national priorities. The tensions and trade-offs between international and national perspectives can be expected to differ among disciplines. While one can legitimately dispute positivism in “German sociology” (Adorno et al., 1969; Leydesdorff & Milojević, 2015), alternative approaches in physics, e.g., “Deutsche Physik" or biology on the basis of national aspirations can be considered obscure (Graham, 1974; Lecourt, 1976). However, there can be a tension between national and international research agendas. Hagendijk and Smeenk (1989) used the metaphor of “national subfields” which may be specific in the dependency on domains and resources like a specific lake district. Merton (1973) distinguished between the development of the international literature and national “styles” in the social sciences responsive to local conditions. Scientific elites can play a mediating role in appeasing the tensions that emerge between national resources and international main-stream research (Mulkay, 1976).
Adams (2013) has argued that there is a “fourth age” of research in which the growing divide between international and domestic research will influence each nation’s ability to draw on the global knowledge base and influence its national scientific wealth. From this perspective, one can expect that a comparative analysis of references in highly-cited papers may show some differences in the degree to which the most impactful (relatively highly-cited) research and its mainstream “platform” research might draw on an international or a relatively domestic knowledge base. Policy interventions might be deemed necessary where the disparity and connection between the domestic base and the international network grows too large, and the related management considerations might apply equally at institutional and national levels.
In this study, we review a diversity of specific bibliometric studies at the country level and identify a gap of policy significance. We suggest that one needs to ask not only “which country produces the highly-cited papers” but also “can we determine the countries on whose research the highly-cited papers build”? Whom do researchers cite given the pressures to maintain both a national and international profile? Is the orientation tout-court international (Merton, 1942) or are national contributions nevertheless cited above expectation? Abramo and D’Angelo (2018) noted that country affiliations of the citing authors can be used to trace the countries benefiting from results produced in a national research system.
To test national benefits we focus on the research output of three leading European research economies in the natural sciences and ask where their researchers look for the knowledge that underpins their most highly-cited papers. Is this restricted to national resources or does it reflect a growing differentiation between the domestic and the international research enterprise? Which implications does this have for growing international networks and the way knowledge is shared? And does the outcome indicate differences in the degree to which each country’s knowledge is useful for itself and other countries?
