
It is change, continuing change, inevitable change, that is the dominant factor in society today. No sensible decision can be made any longer without taking into account not only the world as it is, but the world as it will be. . This, in turn, means that our statesmen, our businessmen, our everyman must take on a science fictional way of thinking. Isaac Asimov (Asimov, 1978)
Well-presented fiction has the power to transport the reader to a plausible artificially constructed reality. Most often these artificial realities are constructed to entertain, but some are written to exercise and test new ideas for technology, business and society. Moreover, the creative processes employed in imagining such fictional worlds can be used as an engine for creativity and innovation, to generate new ideas and invent new products, business models or even socio-political structures. A number of researchers have proposed methods such as Design Fiction (Bleecker, 2009), Science Fiction Prototyping (Johnson, 2011) and Socio-Cultural Fiction Prototyping (Schwarz & Liebl, 2013). Both design fiction and science fiction prototyping use fictional stories written specially to describe the workings and benefits of particular product innovations that are set in realistic social settings, which are described to a level of detail that allows a type of pre-market test, before building and deploying the real product. Socio-Cultural Fiction encompasses novels, films etc. that are characterised by imaginative and creative content which, while created for entertainment, may provide an implicit source of inspiration for product innovation. Successful socio-cultural fiction authors are usually professionals in contrast to science-fiction prototyping writers who are frequently scientists extrapolating their work forward in time. From a product or process perspective, the key ingredient is imagining novel options which can, of course, arise from any fiction but are most commonly associated with science fiction or fantasy. Since this paper will use both genres, it is useful to consider their differences. In brief, science fiction draws imaginatively on scientific knowledge whereas fantasy draws on imagination, unrestricted by reality. As such, fantasy derives its plausibility not from science but from the observation of life as we experience it. However the boundary between science fiction and fantasy can be blurred as in, for example, the 2012 novel, Cinder (loosely based on the classic fairy-tale “Cinderella”) sets the leading character, Linh Cinder, as a young female cyborg living in a city of androids and humans as a second-class citizen. In reading this paper, it is important to understand that we do not draw a fine distinction between these genres, rather we seek to see either as a container of imaginative ideas to support the process of creative thinking.
