In the digital era, the protection of confidential data from unauthorized access is highly demanded. Reversible data hiding (RDH) plays an integral role in secure communication because the embedding process is done in such a way that the hidden data is unnoticeable to attackers. It has a variety of applications in the area of medical imagery, military imagery, etc. Clinical information can be embedded in a medical image and transmitted to a doctor who is sitting anywhere across the globe. Even a minute alteration in the original medical image is unacceptable for correct diagnosis. One can use the data hiding algorithm, which reversible [1, 2], so that the receiver can extricate the hidden data and also construct the original image.
Usually, the two main classifications of data hiding algorithms are reversible and irreversible. In the irreversible category, the restoration of the original image is not possible, but it renders high embedding rate. The effectiveness of a data-hiding scheme is evaluated mainly using parameters like embedding capacity and visual quality. Embedding capacity or payload capacity gives the total number of secret bits, which can be embedded into a cover image using the given algorithm. Succeeding the data embedding process, the cover image is called the stego image and is needed to compute the visual similarity between these two images. Normally, there is a trade-off between these two parameters. Thus, it is a challenging research area. Recently, a substantial bulk of work has been done in the field of RDH. Some researchers developed an algorithm in the spatial domain, while some have utilized frequency domain.
Image-based RDH schemes are appropriate for applications like medical imagery because we can hide large amounts of electronic patient record (EPR) data into a medical image. Interpolation is a technique used to find out unknown values using known information. Interpolation is used for up-sampling and the interpolated pixels are used for data embedding. A few research works are based on this idea and the original pixels are untouched in the process of data embedding. A novel approach has been put into use in this paper where along with the interpolated pixels, the original pixels were also utilized for data embedding so that the payload capacity of the algorithm is very high and we could reconstruct the original image as such. Recently remote diagnosis plays a key role in health care [3], and the security aspect of medical images in this context has gained significance.
The main stimulus for this work is the desire to implement a high-capacity RDH scheme suitable for medical applications. The considerable offerings of the proposed work are:
1A new image interpolation technique that outperforms the recently published interpolation techniques.2Implementation of a high-capacity data-hiding algorithm, which is reversible in nature.3On the basis of the analysis of the latest literature in accordance to the up-sampling and data embedding, it was observed that the original pixels were untouched. To boost the payload capacity of the proposed algorithm, the original pixels have also been utilized.4The outcome of the experiments authenticate that the prospective algorithm produces excellent visual quality stego images.
The remaining paper is structured in this way; Sect. 2 examines the analogous work in this area. Sect. 3 discusses the recommended method, and experimental results and analysis are given in Section 4. Finally, the concluding remarks are given.
