In this paper, we examine the consequences of a forty-year experiment in interdisciplinary collaboration between ecologists and economists. It is an experiment that has brought researchers from both disciplines together to understand anthropogenic impacts on the biosphere. The effort has sometimes been stimulated by economists, and sometimes by ecologists. Along the way it has spawned an array of new journals and professional societies, as well as new teaching and research programs. As an experiment, it has provoked more than its fair share of controversy. While it has united some ecologists and economists in a common cause, it has also led to rifts in each of the constituent disciplines. In what follows we consider the impact of this experiment on the science of anthropogenic biodiversity change.
This is not the only long-term effort to realize the potential gains from interdisciplinary collaboration. In announcing a new program of research designed to uncover the ‘rules of life’, the National Science Foundation recently noted that deep integration across disciplines has already put us “on the cusp of solving one of the greatest challenges in understanding the living world – namely, predicting how the set of observable characteristics (phenotype) arises from the genetic makeup of the individual in concert with environmental factors acting at diverse spatial and temporal scales” (National Science Foundation, 2017). Increasing collaboration across the biological sciences, computer and information sciences, engineering, geosciences, mathematical and physical sciences, and social, behavioral, and economic sciences has already deepened understanding of the emergent properties of living systems. Anthropogenic biosphere change expresses the emergent properties of living systems in a world in which environmental factors reflect the effects of economic growth and development, and in turn enable or constrain that growth.
The experiment we report has yielded a number of striking benefits for both disciplines. It has strengthened our understanding of the impact of anthropogenic biodiversity change on the dynamics of hierarchical ecological systems. Appreciation of the biological factors determining the carrying and assimilative capacity of the environment has provided a different perspective on the substitutability of produced and natural capital. Research on the linkages between biodiversity and ecosystem function has offered a proper scientific basis for the valuation of non-marketed environmental goods and services. Perhaps most important, work on the resilience of ecological systems has deepened our understanding of the stability and sustainability of economic states and processes.
In what follows we take the areas in which the experiment has affected the science of anthropogenic biodiversity change and ask how interdisciplinary collaboration has altered our approach to the problem. We consider the spatial and temporal scale at which the problem is addressed, the level of abstraction sought (the biophysical processes included or excluded from models of the coupled system), the data used to calibrate and validate those models, and the range of interventions considered. We do not offer an exhaustive review of the literature. It spans too many fields, and too wide an array of problems for this to be feasible. Instead we identify cases where the experiment has led to a change in approach that has given real traction on the problem.
Einstein famously said that a model should be as simple as possible but no simpler. In some cases, traction has been gained by adding ecological detail – taking account of processes that have traditionally been neglected or treated parametrically in economic models. In other cases it has come by redefining the spatial and temporal scale of the problem. Anthropogenic environmental change involves stocks whose dynamics play out at very different temporal scales. It also involves processes that have effects at very different spatial scales. More importantly, progress has come by developing an understanding of the ways in which the emergent properties of the coupled system reflect interactions between the organisms involved and the environment, broadly interpreted, in which they exist.
