Peri-urban place, referring to the population expanding regions that surrounds existing urban areas and cities, are becoming strategically more important in sustaining human welfare due to its large population size. More than half of Taipei metropolitan workers are currently living in the continuously expanding peri-urban New Taipei districts. Family settlement cost to the developing region is substantially cheaper due to relatively affordable land price, which to some extent determines parental professional profile of schoolchildren. This may have indirect ramification on disparity of school social environments due to peer influence (Shrewsbury & Wardle, 2008). Sedentary behaviors such as television screening and computer use are currently known to associate with the overweight for rural children (Bilinski et al., 2011, Cong et al., 2012). Existing data regarding to the difference in sedentary behaviors and overweight/obesity trend between peri-urban and urban districts within the same metropolitan area is currently lacking.
In East Asia, doing homework/reading is noted as one of the major sedentary behaviors among schoolchildren (Harrell, Gansky, Bradley, & McMurray, 1997), together with television screening and computer use. Data from a cross-sectional analysis on a small population of Canadian children (N = 511) suggest that a prolonged stressful homework is associated with fatness, particularly for boys than girls (Michaud, Chaput, O'Loughlin, Tremblay, & Mathieu, 2015). Population-based age-matched study at greater size regarding the link between homework/reading and weight status for peri-urban and urban children are currently unavailable. Here, we hypothesized 1) a higher overweight/obesity prevalence of peri-urban children than their urban peers at the same age level within Taipei metropolitan districts, and this disparity is associated with parental educational profile; 2) Time spent on homework/reading, television viewing, and computer use contributes to overweight/obesity for this disparity.
