The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) statistical report in 2017 shows that the year 2015 received 2,887,300 patent filing applications versus the year 2016 in which patent filing applications were 3,127,900 leading to an 8.3% growth is in terms of global IP activity [1]. This rapid growth has resulted in global patent stockpiles promoting enterprises and individuals to pay greater attention to the protection and analysis of intellectual property. Analyzing necessary and usable information from multiple, global patent archives is a very tedious task. Even though there are many patent analysis techniques used by scholars and legal analysts, few methods can quickly analyze the technologies' as well as the functions' distribution over a specific domain of patents. A technology function matrix (TFM) is a patent map used to analyze the distribution of patented technologies and the related functions that are claimed to be applied by the technologies. TFM helps researchers quickly understand the development of technologies and functions within a given domain.
The state of the art comprises manual and classification based approaches. Manual TFM construction methods are expert-derived, complex to build, difficult to use, and often yield highly subjective results [2]. The construction process relies on subject matter experts to read through all patents in consideration and assign data to relevant technology and function columns. Researchers alternatively use the patent classification code method, where the International Patent Classification (IPC) is used for technology representation and the United States Patent Classification (USPC) for function representation to generate a consistent TFM matrix [[2], [3], [4]]. Classification code based methods accelerate the construction process while limiting the validity and accuracy of the results. Since the year 2013, the USPC began an integration process with the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) system. This integration is the result of a joint partnership between the USPTO and the EPO to create a common classification scheme for sharing resources with improved searches [5]. Patents, granted from the year 2015, follow the revised CPC coding scheme. The TFMs based on IPC × USPC codes will not be automatically generated including the counts of newly granted patents (since 2015).
The aim of this study is to provide validation for a proposed domain ontology based eTFM methodology [[6], [7], [8]] that will serve as a reliable replacement for previously used IPC × USPC based TFM generation methodologies. A comparison is also presented for the ontology-based eTFM against the results of the IPC versus ontology TFM method. TFM construction using the proposed eTFM method consumes minutes whereas the manual method may consume days for the assignment of each individual patent. Automating the construction process reduces the times, costs, and increases in reliability, and durability of the methodology [3] [4]. Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), an essential part of Industry 4.0 manufacturing, is selected as the case domain to demonstrate the practical values of the proposed methods.
