Oil spills, occurring especially during damage to tankers or offshore rigs, are particularly catastrophic for coastal and marine environments (Mitsch, 2010). Additionally, they can cause serious losses in fishery and tourism. Therefore, there is a strong necessity to model the time evolution of such spreading processes. The quantities to be determined encompass the rates of changes in the physical and chemical properties of oil, as well as the rate of its natural removal. We expect the model to return the anticipated evolution of oil spills, thereby enabling appropriate actions aimed at minimizing the effects of disasters. For the above reasons, many models making it possible to simulate these incidents have been developed over the last decades. Among the available reviews, the following papers deserve special attention: (Huang, 1983; Reed et al., 1999; Spaulding, 1988). One can point out following computer programs for performing oil spill simulations: ADIOS2 (adios), Oil Spill Condindency and Response (OSCAR), General NOAA oil modeling environment (Beegle-Krause) and Medslik-II.
The course of oil spills at sea is governed by chemical, physical and biological processes, which are dependent on both oil properties (composition, density and viscosity, etc.) and external conditions (temperature, wind, sea current, pressure and salinity, etc.). Among these processes, the most important are: evaporation, natural dispersion, emulsification, advection, spreading and interaction of oil slicks with the shoreline. Effects of secondary significance may be distinguished as: photolysis, sedimentation, biodegradation and dissolution. A schematic diagram, shown in Fig. 1 demonstrates these phenomena. To construct a reliable model, each of the listed effects should be described by a mathematical formula. In Section 2.6 we have included comments on different possible approaches to the modeling of the considered processes.Download : Download high-res image (336KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The phenomena associated with oil slicks (based on the schema taken from Independent petroleum laboratory).
