Ticks and tick-borne diseases constitute one of the most lethal and widespread problems in many tropical areas, with major ramifications for livestock production, wildlife conservation, and human health (Minjauw and McLeod, 2003; De Castro et al., 1997; Gachohi et al., 2012; Bengis et al., 2002). TTBDs such as East Coast fever (ECF), Bovine babesiosis and Anaplasmosis, among others, constitute 60–80% of the pathogenic infections causing severe mortalities in humans, wildlife and domestic animals (Cleaveland et al., 2001; Jongejan and Uilenberg, 2004; Estrada-Peña and Salman, 2013). TTBDs may also reduce milk and beef production by 40–50% or lower the quality of skin for commercial purposes (Norval et al., 1988; Jonsson et al., 1998). In areas where wildlife and domestic co-occur, the spread of TTBDs is aggravated due to increased mobility and spread of ticks, increasing the potential risks of disease transmission (Keesing et al., 2013; Gachohi et al., 2012). When wildlife is perceived to be involved in the process of disease transmission such as TTBDs, human–wildlife conflicts often results to the detriment of conservation efforts (Benka, 2012). Human–wildlife conflict refers to the negative consequences of the interfaces between people and wildlife, often characterised by human deaths, injuries, crop and property destruction (Okello and D’amour, 2008; Kiringe et al., 2007), and transmissionof diseases (Benka, 2012). If uncontrolled, TTBDs therefore remain a threat to human health, food security, and cultural wellbeing, and they negatively affect relationships between farmers and conservationists.
In the eastern and southern Africa region, some widely applied TTBDs control strategies include the use of chemical acaricides (Minjauw and McLeod, 2003; Mugambi et al., 2012), burning of vegetation to reduce tick loads (Goodenough et al., 2017; Trollope, 2011), and keeping livestock thought to be resistant to tick attack, such as Boran cattle (Gachohi et al., 2012). However, cases of tick resistance to chemical acaricides have been reported (Mugambi et al., 2012). Despite all these control strategies applied in the region, TTBDs continue to be a major problem, and integrated approaches must be developed to control them effectively (Gachohi et al., 2012; Mugambi et al., 2012). To address this problem, Wageningen University and Research established an interdisciplinary project in 2015 – Environmental Virtual Observatories for Connective Actions (EVOCA) – that focuses, among other things, on mobile phone-based information sharing platforms for TTBDs in Kenya. Such integrated approaches may include collaboration and collective actions by many stakeholders directly or indirectly involved in TTBDs control, necessitating a robust means of information sharing and coordination, which may be addressed using mobile phones and other ICT-based tools (Cieslik et al., this special issue). Generally, mobile phones have become new methods for engaging participants through technology, and provide unprecedented ways for participants to have immediate access to their own and others’ observations, fostering effective information sharing (Graham et al., 2012; Now and Nominations, 2011). Because of the utility of mobile phones, there is an urgent need to explore how this technology may be leveraged to address the TTBDs problem.
To effectively coordinate and enhance the collaborations of many stakeholders with divergent views, interests, and perceptions, innovative approaches are critical to improve monitoring, offer extension services, and improve data or information sharing. The advent of the mobile phone and its widespread adoption and usage in many developing countries in African, such as Kenya, coupled with emerging information sharing approaches such as citizen science (Haklay, 2010), could offer a promising pathway to such efforts. To date, most citizen science approaches are well developed and embedded in Europe and other developed countries where mobile phones and citizen science approaches have increased knowledge and understanding of, for example, biodiversity distribution, disease surveillance, and interventions (Haklay, 2010). The term citizen science which is also referred to as environmental or participatory monitoring is used here to describe public engagement in scientific activities of collecting and disseminating data driven by a social conscience (Haklay, 2010). In developing countries in Africa, the citizen science approach has just started and is gaining traction. For example, in Kenya and Tanzania, human–wildlife conflicts are monitored and reported voluntarily, either directly or indirectly by the affected citizenry (Graham et al., 2012). However, to embed citizen science in developing countries, there is a need to understand various issues that may negatively impact on the approach, including the existing information sharing culture in an area.
The advent of citizen science approaches and advent of mobile phones could be leveraged in tackling complex environmental and agricultural problems such as TTBDs that have remained a serious threat to human health, food security, and the cultural well-being of many people, especially rural poor pastoralists relying on livestock production. The Environmental Virtual Observatories for Connective Actions (EVOCA) programme of Wageningen University and Research established in 2015 seeks to explore the potential role of mobile phones and citizen science approaches in addressing several complex environmental and agricultural problems in six case studies in Africa to transform the development landscape. The TTBDs on which we focus in this paper is one of those case studies. EVOCA in Kenya is envisaged to be developed by using an inclusive virtual platform for information sharing that enables effective mapping of the situation, linked to a participatory process that fosters collective action (herein connective action) for effective TTBD control (see Cieslik et al., this special issue). The assumption is that mobile phones and related technologies can be used for collective action – in light of the current lack of information and knowledge sharing, which is perceived to be one of the causes of poor control or eradication of diseases (Allen, 2015; Gustafson et al., 2015). The reasoning is that, in developing countries, formal organisations involved in addressing problems such as TTBDs are often weak and lack sufficient capital or suffer from lack of resources either to effectively control or provide elaborate extension services or to conduct long-term research (Minjauw and McLeod, 2003). Citizen science approaches can empower local people to bypass the need for such formal systems, thereby fostering collective action (Cieslik et al., this special issue). This warrants a critical examination of the views, perceptions, and the information sharing culture of all stakeholders involved in the TTBD problem in order to identify areas where ICT-based innovations can be embedded. In this paper we address the main research question: what is the potential role of mobile phones for sharing information on TTBDs?
In this paper, section 1 & 2 provide an introduction and the conceptual framework in which this study was anchored, while Section 3 provides the methodology that was used to collect and analyse the data. In section 4, we provide the results of our study with the historical perspectives of land ownership and rights issues in Laikipia, setting the scene of how it affects the dynamics of the issues of concern such as (in)security, human-wildlife conflicts and diseases, including TTBDs, and how it shapes the communication landscape in the area. In Section 5, we reflect on the implications of the dynamics of the issues of concern identified on the citizen science (EVOCA) for TTBDs in Kenya.
