Recently, fruits and vegetables consumption has gained a lot of importance in healthy eating. Statistics show that insufficient fruit and vegetable intake accounts for around 1.7 million deaths in the world yearly (World Health Organization, 2014). The minimum recommended daily intake of fruits and vegetables is 400 g (FAO, 2016, Miller et al., 2017). Every extra portion beyond the above recommendation per day brings further health benefits. Fruits, among other things, boost proper digestion, lower cholesterol and blood glucose level, provide folic acid. Besides, fruits are widely used to treat colds and infections and have huge detoxification effect on humans, clearing their bodies of heavy metal compounds (Appel et al., 2005, Schwingshackl et al., 2015). Significant amounts of bioactive compounds such as: caretonoids (beta-carotene, lycopene), vitamins A, C or E, fiber and potassium and other minerals constitute the basis for pro-health activity (phytonutrition) of fruits.
Strawberry fruit is very important for public health as it contains large amounts of nutrients. Classification of food products on the basis of Di Noia (Di Noia, 2014) indicated that strawberries are ranked first on the list of the most valuable fruits due to their nutritional density, which accounted for 17.59. Research shows that strawberries contain a lot of phenolic compounds with antioxidant (Tulipani et al., 2011, Diamanti et al., 2014), anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor, anti-atherogenic properties. On top of that, this fruit is very rich in vitamin C and other minerals (folic acid, fiber, magnesium, potassium, calcium, iron, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin and zinc) (Aaby et al., 2012, Giampieri et al., 2017). Due to the short shelf life of this fruit (Anandharamakrishnan and Ishwarya, 2015), scientists are looking for methods that will help to maintain its nutritional value (Peinado et al., 2015). For this purpose, various fruit processing techniques are used, which can take the form of juices, concentrates, smoothies and fruit powders.
In recent years, instant food products have become very popular; spray-dried fruit powders are important ingredients of such products. It is very important to maintain appropriate quality characteristics, such as color, size and structure of particles, bulk density, flowability etc., during the manufacturing process of instant food (Gawałek et al., 2017). Methods of rapid determination of the quality of powders during production are highly sought after.
Computer image analysis is an extensive technique of processing digital photos. Computer image analysis in the initial stage of image processing, allows to distinguish necessary information about a given image. The change relies on methods of image analysis through distinguishing representative features, determining contours, shapes and texture from the images. Image analysis is subject to interpretation consisting of: segmentation, location of objects and extract representative features from the image (Liu et al., 2016). These descriptors including geometrical parameters, color models and textures, should be carefully analyzed in order to perform a proper qualitative assessment of the product (Singh et al., 1993, Przybył et al., 2016). The focus was on the usage of neural image analysis to identify fruit and vegetable powders in the spray drying process based on photographs taken by scanning electron microscopy. Identification process was aimed at determining quality state of powders made from strawberry juice with the use of precise quality features. The empirical object in the study is not easy to interpret within the scope of food products. Sometimes analysis with digital camera alone is not sufficient to diagnose differences in digital image. Analysis powder images acquired with digital camera of products on the basis of their properties such as color, shape and texture, plays a major role in the process of food processing as well as in assessing the quality of fruits and vegetables (Orthoefer and List, 2015). The authors made use of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique (Gharibzahedi et al., 2014) in order to observe the quality stage of strawberry fruit powders. In literature, one can come across premise that the next dimension of fruit structure means the stage of the picked pear fruit ripeness, which was examined under the optic microscope as well as under the scanning and transmission electron microscopes (Konarska, 2013). In the presented article other dimension of morphological structure meant nothing else but the quality stage of strawberry fruit powders. Another appropriate solution apart from color analysis and shape factors, which the authors suggested greatly in the study of the usage of the color model and shape factors in the analysis of strawberry varieties (Yamamoto et al., 2015), is also the usage of texture features (Barnes et al., 2010). In the photos taken with SEM technique (Atrous et al., 2017), the usage of texture coefficients seems to be a powerful way of interpreting the structure. Popular studies on the use of GLCM matrix for the analysis of textural features are available (Haralick et al., 1973, Unser, 1995, Clausi, 2002, Mendoza and Aguilera, 2004, Jackman and Sun, 2013, Jacquot et al., 2015). Other studies also indicate the legitimacy of using artificial neural networks and computer image analysis to solve similar problems from various problem areas (Koszela et al., 2013, Przybyl et al., 2014).
The aim of the study was to compare morphometric features of microscopic images with images acquired with digital camera characterized by surface structure of strawberry fruit powder. As a result, it was assessed which type of the photographs, i.e. the microscopic or the digital ones, could precisely determine the quality class of strawberry fruit powder. It can be safely stated that the novelty of this work is the use of Artificial Neural Networks as well as computer image analysis system including texture as effective tools facilitating classification and decision making process within the scope of quality assessment. Conducting scientific research in the natural environment is often too expensive and labor-intensive. That is why, creating models reproducing complex processes and structures seem to be a better solution. Neural modeling constitutes one of the tools to be applied while solving extremely complex issues. That is why the research being conducted is to allow to implement such kind of solution in order to monitor spray-dried strawberry juice with the use of machine learning application in food industry. The neural model that was generated can be intended for the backup for the expert system aimed at identifying and classifying the quality of spray-dried strawberry powders in industrial process
