Semantic segmentation, which can be applied to still images, videos, or even 3D hyperspectral data, has been widely investigated in computer vision and machine learning areas for it can help achieve deep understanding of regions, objects, and scenes. Concretely, semantic segmentation tends to make dense predictions so that each pixel can be labeled with the class of enclosing region or object [1]. Semantic segmentation is highlighted by the fact that it can provide abundant semantic information for mid-level and high-level tasks, such as behavior analysis, abnormal detection, scene understanding, and autonomous driving [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. Semantic segmentation has been addressed by traditional models in the past decades and great progress has been made. Traditional approaches, which do not take Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) into consideration, mainly focus on domain knowledge and decision strategy. Generally, the choice of features plays an important role in traditional approaches, including local and global features. Pixel colors in different images spaces [8], [9], [10] and gradient features [11], [12], [13] are widely considered for their intuitive and straightforward properties. Besides, segmentation methods [10], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18] are another way to utilize domain knowledge and they tend to detect consistent regions or region boundaries. What’s more, decision models considering contextual information result in significant improvements, such as Markov Random Fields (MRFs) [19] and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) [20].
Despite the high popularity of those traditional models, the deep architectures, which can be usually regraded as CNNs, are showing distinct superiority for the ability of learning representations in an end-to-end manner instead of using hand-crafted features that require domain expertise [1]. Currently, the most successful state-of-the-art deep learning techniques for semantic segmentation is Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [21] and its varieties based on famous classification models, including AlexNet, VGG, GoogLeNet, and ResNet [21], [22], [23]. Recently, inspired by the FCN architecture, other deep models are developed to make it suitable for segmentation, such as SegNet [24], dilated convolution net [23], DeepLab model [25], CRF as RNN [26], skip connections net [27], and ParseNet [28].
Although lots works have been done and great progress has been made on semantic segmentation, some challenges still exist. The first one challenge which makes semantic segmentation difficult is the different perceptual complexities of semantic regions with various attributes. This phenomenon can be explained in two aspects. The first aspect lies in the thing and stuff. The thing is a semantic object with specific size and shape which is also known as foreground object, such as car, pedestrian, and traffic sign. Contrarily, the stuff is semantic region which is defined by a homogeneous or repetitive pattern with no specific spatial shape and it can be regarded as background object, such as road, building, and sky. These two kinds of semantic objects make the semantic segmentation model ambiguous for the various attributes. Another aspect is the unbalanced distribution of training samples, especially for background and foreground objects. Generally, background region tends to occupy large area and large number of training samples will be obtained in the manner of pixel-wise labeling. While the foreground object is on the contrary. These facts all make the simultaneous perception difficult and different perceptual procedures are essential for background and foreground object segmentation due to various attributes.
Another challenge is the accurate boundary determination of semantic regions. Due to the power of the deep neural networks, high-level features show a strong representation for semantic region. However, spatial information is largely eliminated due to pooling operation especially for deep CNNs, such as GoogleNet [29] and ResNet [30]. Since pooling is the inborn defect of CNN models for semantic segmentation [31] and it weakens the details of image features which are useful for accurate semantic segmentation, one intuitive method to overcome this shortage is removing pooling in deep network. Actually this intuitive way would result in shrinking receptive field for each neuron and the context information would also be lost. Another drawback of eliminating pooling is the dramatical increase of time complexity when the feature maps get large. Edges and contours are important for accurate segmentation since they give detail information. Therefore edge extractors obtaining the detail information is necessary. We propose to address these challenges by means of contour-aware network for scene parsing via adaptive depth, which takes contour detection neural network into consideration to determine the boundary of semantic regions. And a segmentation network through adaptive depth is also employed to address the different perceptual difficulties on semantic regions with various attributes as shown in Fig. 1. Experimental results indicate that even though the coarse segmentation net is not effective enough, contour detection net can increase the accuracy for better semantic segmentation performance. Overall, the main contributions of this work are summarized and explained as follows:Download : Download high-res image (638KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Adaptive-depth neural network for semantic segmentation. The horizontal arrow indicates the forward flow of the neural network, the vertical arrow indicates the pyramid modeling of the input image, and the symbol ⊕ represents upsampling and parallel-connected operations. Under the pyramid modeling, each vertical feature maps are parallel-connected after upsampling. Moreover, each semantic class can adaptively determine the specific decision layer where only small number of samples are classified.
(1) Semantic segmentation via adaptive depth network. Traditional methods tend to tackle samples with different semantic labels in the same procedure. However, different semantic regions with various attribute will make a simplex model confusion. This phenomenon is especially obvious for background and foreground regions. In this work, an adaptive-depth semantic segmentation model is proposed which can adaptively determine the feedback and forward neural network layer.
(2) Contour-aware neural network for semantic segmentation. For semantic segmentation, little previous works take the contour information into consideration. In this work, a simple and efficient contour detection model is proposed and the contour information is formulated as similarity value through an intuitive method. The semantic segment coherence is enhanced and the localization of semantic regions is also improved through contour detection.
(3) Global inference for final decision. It is difficult to transform contour information and coarse semantic segmentation results into a unified viewpoint for the contour line is not closed. In this work, both contour information and coarse semantic segmentation results are transformed into similarity values and CRF is served as a global inference model for the final decision.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Firstly, Section 2 introduces the related semantic segmentation methods in recent years. The formulation of the proposed method is described in detail in Section 3. Section 4 demonstrates the experimental setup and experimental results are also analyzed in this part. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
