The dental office workflow is rapidly evolving towards a more efficient and cost-effective chain using state-of-the-art technology [1], [2]. Digitalisation of dental records, computer assisted imaging techniques and virtual treatment planning or simulations, have revolutionized clinical practice. Gradually, and almost consecutively, digitalization has been adopted in the three major steps of the conventional patient workflow, resulting in three distinct processes:
1)Digital patient: the acquisition of patient data is digitized (clinical information, x-ray based information or casts) and can now be stored or archived in the patient’s digital records2)Virtual patient: mental planning of the patient’s rehabilitation can now be assisted with a digital treatment planning and on-screen simulation (computer-aided design or CAD).3)Real patient: treatment procedures may be assisted with computer-aided manufactured (CAM) devices using milling or 3D printing technology
This digital treatment workflow can be applied to all fields of dentistry or dentomaxillofacial practice (see Fig. 1), but is most advanced in implant and restorative dentistry.Download : Download high-res image (238KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Overview of the digital treatment workflow in dental implantology, restorative dentistry, endodontics and orthodontics.
By the late nineties, virtual implant simulations based on Computed Tomography (CT) volumetric data had been introduced with the ability to create surgical templates for the placement of implants. The use of such 3D interactive planning environments have been found to help reduce treatment complications [3] by improving accuracy of placement. When using radiographic guides and visualising the prosthetic outcome, more advanced planning can be accomplished while transfer of this planned data to a CAM unit may generate surgical templates that can assist in a more precise implant insertion [4]. With the advent of low dose 3D Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT), the 3D virtual planning of implant restorations has become widespread and by combining CBCT data with digital impressions, guided implant surgery has become an accurate and readily adopted tool [5].
In restorative dentistry digital impression-taking of preparations, has facilitated the design and production of restorations. With the introduction of many new CAM materials, laboratory procedures have become more efficient and immediate, same day, treatments have become more precise and widespread. The latter makes it more comfortable for the patient with a reduced number of visits, while it may even generate a more predictable aesthetic outcome [6], [7], [8].
Similarly, in orthodontic practice, virtual set-ups using digital models with on-screen simulation of orthodontic treatments have been found to be at least as accurate as conventional set-ups. In addition, such virtual planning may provide several advantages over the traditional approaches, for efficient storage, digital manipulation with reduction of manipulation errors and the ability to superimpose the stages of treatments at different time intervals [9]. Furthermore, transfer of the planning using guides and aligners, customized computer-manufactured appliances, guided piezo-assisted surgery, or even guided tooth transplantation may provide a more precise and predictable outcome [9], [10], [11], [12].
More recently, the same digital workflow can be observed in the planning of complex endodontic cases. When creating a 3D model of a desired tooth from the CBCT data, it is now possible to segment the canals and determine their curvature, and create a virtual simulation of the endodontic procedure by inserting digital files in the virtual set-up. This may prepare clinicians to better understand the complexity of the anatomy and avoid complications or even help in minimally invasive treatments [13], [14], [15]. Such approaches may also be of help in training and education programmes, providing consistent and replicable test cases.
Despite these advances many aspects of the digital workflow have not been thoroughly researched yet and improper use or understanding of the technology may lead to an accumulation of errors which may decrease these advantages over conventional techniques. From a clinical perspective, it is thus crucial to guarantee at least a similar precision in treatment outcome when adopting new techniques. For instance, when using novel x-ray based imaging, it is important to accomplish similar diagnostic results with at least similar but preferably reduced radiation doses. Digital impressions, say of a 3-unit bridge preparation, should have the same accuracy when compared to conventional elastomer materials.
What is obvious in the digital workflow of all above mentioned disciplines, is that digital planning is image based, which makes digital imaging a key aspect in the entire workflow. A thorough understanding of technology and the manipulation of such images may thus be crucial in the entire process.
