Facial attribute classification is an important and fundamental research area in computer vision and pattern recognition. The task of facial attribute classification is to predict the attributes of a facial image, including gender, attraction, race, etc. Recently, facial attribute classification has received increasing attention with a wide range of applications, such as face verification [1], [2], [3], face recognition [4], [5], [6], face retrieval [7]. However, it remains a challenging problem, because of the large facial appearance variations caused by pose, illumination and occlusion, etc.
Early works on facial attribute classification usually characterize the facial attributes based on the histogram representation [2], [3], [8]. For example, Kumar et al. [2] propose to firstly extract the low-level features from different regions of a face, and then predict facial attributes with the Support Vector Machine (SVM) for face verification. Cherniavsky et al. [8] develop a generative facial feature representation method based on the Haar-like features and investigate a semi-supervised method to predict facial attributes with SVM.
Recent research mainly focuses on using the Deep Neural Network (DNN) to predict facial attributes. Luo et al. [9] combine discriminative decision trees with the deep Sum-Product Network (SPN) for facial attribute classification. In [10], [11], [12], the authors firstly extract facial features using DNN and then classify facial attributes with SVM. Ehrlich et al. [13] learn the shared feature representation for facial attributes by directly operating on faces and facial landmark points. Rudd et al. [14] address the problem of imbalanced data to predict multiple facial attributes.
Generally speaking, methods for facial attribute classification can be divided into two categories: single-label learning based methods [2], [8], [10], [11], [12] and multi-label learning based methods [13], [14]. The single-label learning based methods predict facial attributes separately and thus do not consider the correlation between facial attributes. In contrast, the multi-label learning based methods, which attempt to predict facial attributes simultaneously by using labelled data, have drawn increasing attention. However, in real-world applications, only some commonly used attributes are provided with labelled information, while the other attributes have unlabelled data. Therefore, these methods [13], [14] fail to deal with the facial attribute classification problem when unlabelled information is available (recall that these methods are based on supervised learning).
Motivated by the above observations, we propose a novel facial attribute classification method, which performs transfer learning based on multi-label learning. More specifically, we take advantage of the transfer DNN technique to predict facial attributes that do not have labelled information in the target domain. To effectively exploit the labelled data in the source domain, we use the multi-label learning technique to predict multiple facial attributes simultaneously, considering the correlation between facial attributes. Fig. 1 shows an illustration of the correlation between different facial attributes. For different learning problems, some carefully designed networks are used, where these networks share the same structure at the former layers of the networks and they only differ at the latter layers. Therefore, the networks can be effectively trained via fine-tuning.Download : Download high-res image (575KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The correlation between facial attributes. Based on the work of Liu et al. [11], we obtain the correlation between different attributes. The facial attributes with high correlation can be clustered into the same group.
In this paper, we propose an effective deep transfer neural network method, termed FMTNet, which consists of three sub-networks for facial attribute classification. The first sub-network is the Face detection Network (FNet) for face detection. FNet is initialized by using the model learned from a large scale ImageNet dataset [15], and then is fine-tuned by using the facial images. The second sub-network is the Multi-label learning Network (MNet) for facial attribute classification with supervised learning, where multiple attributes are predicted simultaneously. Based on FNet, MNet is fine-tuned by using labelled attributes in the source domain. The network structures at the former layers of both MNet and FNet are the same, whereas the main difference is that multiple fully-connected layers are independently constructed in MNet. The third sub-network is the Transfer learning Network (TNet) for facial attribute classification, when labelled information is not available in the target domain. Based on MNet, TNet makes use of unsupervised domain adaptation to improve the performance of facial attribute classification.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

(1)Instead of using single-label learning for each attribute [4], [7], the proposed method effectively performs facial attribute classification based on multi-label learning for the labelled attributes in the source domain. Especially, we propose an effective loss weight scheme to explicitly exploit the correlation between facial attributes based on attribute grouping, which can significantly improve the generalization performance of the proposed method.(2)Based on multi-label learning, the proposed method leverages transfer learning to predict facial attributes for the unlabelled attributes in the target domain. The transfer neural network successfully transfers the features from the source domain (with labelled information) to the target domain (without labelled information), even when the probability distributions between the two domains are significantly different. Therefore, the proposed method alleviates the dependency on fully labelled training data, especially in the absence of labelled information for some attributes.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, some related work is discussed. In Section 3, the details of the proposed FMTNet method for facial attribute classification are described. In Section 4, the experimental results are reported. In Section 5, the conclusions are presented.
