The aim of this paper is to examine how children explore abstract concepts in a preschool context during a project about the spinning motion. The paper analyzes different learning activities during the project, and how teachers employ artifacts to enable ways for children to explore the concept of spinning across the science project.
The pedagogical aim of the preschools' project was for the children to learn, which specifically includes verbal reasoning about spinning, all in accordance with the Swedish preschool curricula. The project emerged from the children's interest in the spinning tops used by the characters of an animated TV-series. These spinning tops, called Beyblades, were sold as toys for children to play, or “duel” with. Noticing the children's engagement and play activities, the teachers used spinning tops to initiate a project on “centrifugal force”. Here, the teachers adapted the environment and staged both formal and informal activities in order to achieve science learning.
Vygotsky famously made the distinction between” spontaneous” or everyday and” scientific” or abstract concepts in the developing child, and the fundamental importance of cultural mediators. When elaborating upon this divide, Vygotsky (1986, p. 162) dynamically concluded that” we submit that the two concepts must differ in their development as well as in their functioning and that these two variants of the process of concept formation must influence each other's evolution.” This paper delves into this dynamic relation as preschool children (age 4–5) approach the spinning motion in the preschool setting, and more importantly, with a starting point in that children explore the concept mediated by linguistic as well as physical tools and artifacts.
In the cultural-historical psychological tradition, artifacts are seen as mediating between the individual and the environment and artifacts become “fundamental constituents of culture” (Cole, 1996, p. 144). In this tradition, material and intellectual tools, such as artifacts and concepts, are defining features of an institution, for example the preschool (Hedegaard, 2007). In the spinning project studied specific artifacts and concepts are employed in accordance with the institutional settings and curricular goals. This is in line with developments in the cultural-historical tradition, also known as Cultural-historical activity theory (CHAT), that has added insights on how development occurs through collective activities, where knowledge is distributed among social actors and artifacts of the environment (Cole & Engeström, 1993).
In this paper this is pinpointed in how children explore tools and artifacts that spins, such as spinning tops, during the preschool project. It specifically addresses how a sample of learning activities were mediating spinning artifacts are employed to promote ways for children to explore the concepts, and how the activities progress along the project. It is important to note that the preschool children explore their world and communicate their perceptions and understanding about it with different means – or as Finnegan (2014, p. 8) states, that humans “draw on a multitude of resources to interconnect with each other and in so doing interactively create their human world.” In so, it also maps the relation between spontaneous and scientific concepts, in situ of the project activities, when children develop conceptual understanding with others around the artifacts of the preschool (cf. Vygotsky, 1986).
