Among the major technological advances that have led to the flood of digital assistants in various fields of a human being's activities and life [1], [2] are technologies supporting natural modalities for inputting information and commands in hand-held devices [3]. As such, the incorporation of acquisition and real-time understanding of written and spoken natural language has progressively extended devices like tablets, phablets and smart phones into intelligent personal assistants, e.g., Siri, Cortana, Google Now [4].
Regarding the handwriting modality, ecological methods for input of information and command gestures can be based on natural handwriting practices. Hand-held devices offer nowadays multiple built-in options to digitize handwritten expressions. At first, most of these mobile devices have a built-in camera that enables the user to capture off-line handwriting on paper. Moreover, in its simplest form, finger-writing can be used on nearly all mobile devices as they have touch screens which can sample the position of the fingertip at a sufficient sampling rate. In some applications, it has been shown that finger writing is not very much different from writing with a pen. Finally, many mobile devices can also record electronic pen movements. Passive pens exist for touch displays. They have blunt tips that function as artificial fingertips. The drawback of many of these pens is that when the hand touches the display the device interprets such event as a 2-finger gesture.
In this paper, we focus on electronic pens that have a sharp tip that, thanks to technologies based on an electrostatic field or acoustic ultrasound, enables the device to calculate the location of the pen tip with high precision. We emphasize that the electronic pen-based hand-held devices might be converted into Personal Digital Body Guards (PDBs) thanks to the integration of research results conducted in some e-field dealing with the graphomotor dimension and the lognormal trend of human handwriting generation. These PDB would be able to provide new user-centred behavioural services in addition to those currently offered by the intelligent personal assistant.
Indeed, taking advantage of human movement control models, we can imagine in a near future that these pen-based hand-held devices will supplement people's sensitive data protection with automatic signature verification, equipment access security with writer authentication and handwritten CAPTCHAs processing (e-security), and will enhance human-machine interface through various gesture commands, word spotting and handwriting recognition (e-recognition. Moreover, for young children, these tools will turn into interactive toys helping them to learn and master their fine motor control and become better writers (e-learning), for advanced students they will turn into sophisticated e-testing tools.. Thanks to such on-line processing capabilities, PDBs will also provide the user with fine motor control monitoring, which can detect stress, aging and health problems (e-health).
Actually, research and development for hand-held devices are spreading out to wide applications without synchronization nor synergy. We put forward in this manuscript that if a more unifying concept was fostered as a potential design target, it would be possible to develop functions, utilities and services more consistently with far larger values for the users. In this context, this paper aims at bridging this gap, providing researchers with the current trends in on-line handwriting processing, pointing out the theoretical, methodological and architectural problems that need to be solved to fully design PDBs, focussing on important research fields that are not often addressed by the pattern recognition community, particularly the e-learning and e-health domains. Such a vision might seem far out of reach according to the current status of the hand-held device computing performance but it is expected that the breakthroughs made in these research domains will put pressure on equipment manufacturers in the forthcoming years to upgrade their hardware and software technologies in order to catch up with these e-applications and incorporate these in their operating systems. Such findings could even counterbalance the risk of unethical use of the text-typed and voice driven interface [5] by offering new opportunities to put the control of the whole digital environment into the hands of their users, clearly playing the role of a digital bodyguard.

Fig. 1 schematizes the global PDB concept using an imbedded shell diagram. In blue, the interface layer of the PDB with the external world is the first protection barrier, relying on active signature verification and/or passive personalized CAPTCHAs recognition. The next shell in orange is the application ring, which takes advantage of e-recognition and word spotting for ergonomic human-machine interactions. The next inner shell, in red, is the e-learning level, which can be used by children to learn how to write. It could also be used by adults learning a new script or following a rehabilitation program after an accident. All these imbricated processes are evaluated, monitored and followed up at the e-health level, in green, where among other things, neuromuscular information is extracted and analysed from the various handwriting tasks executed at the outer levels, in the context of the theoretical background deriving from the lognormality principle. All the pertinent information provided by these outer shells is then exploited by the main core e-security kernel (in beige) that keeps all the strategic information about the writer ID controlling the device, to check on-line if the initial user is still the one using the PDB.Download : Download high-res image (342KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A PDB shell architecture.
In a typical operational scenario, the owner of the PDB first get access to its hardware and software facilities by signing on the tablet surface or by recognizing personalized handwritten passwords generated by the system. Then he can interact with any commercial or proprietary applications, using hand driven commands relying on e-recognition and motor control performances of the user. In some specific situation, he might want to interact with the e-learning modules to monitor or improve his performance in mastering a new script. Some specific features of the writing gestures used at any of these outer shells are analysed in the background by the e-health shell to evaluate the fine motor control capabilities of the user to detect, for example, any potential health problems that would require medical intervention. The most stable and writer specific characteristics are also compared in the background at the core security level, with the writer ID metric, to prevent from any user substitution.
At first glance, such a scenario might look like a product white paper but, as it will be seen throughout the manuscript, it is a scientific white paper, the conducting thread that we use to describe the current status of research in these fields and to point out research directions that should be followed in the near future by investigators working on these topics, to make PBD a real technical breakthrough.
To do so, in the next section, we recall the basic ideas behind the Kinematic Theory, a human movement control model well adapted for PDB purposes, which constitutes the fundamental lead of the whole paper. In Section 3, we present a brief survey of the research in e-security applications, we raise open problems and point out some future research directions in this field while Section 4 is a survey of the state of the art in e-recognition on mobile devices. Sections 5 and 6 are devoted to these same double goals, survey and prospective, for e-learning and e-health applications. All these overviews are far from exhaustive since a special focus is made on recent projects involving pen-based-hand-held devices. In Section 7, prior to conclusion, we come back to the present devices on the market, pointing out the next improvements that need to be done, from a hardware and software designer perspective to facilitate the integration of these research results into future generations of pen-based hand-held devices. We specifically point out their future impact on e-testing worldwide. Overall published research is combined into an innovative target, a novel concept to inspire new possible directions for research and to facilitate steps towards realization and identification of gaps in the current research and new pathways. A precise scientific inventory of complementary areas of research is made to highlight one original and innovative concept (PDB) that may arise from these in the short terms, a concept of multiple systems, partly realized or at the development stage, working together to enable new functionalities.
