Image forgery is the process of intentional manipulation of an image in order to alter the information it conveys. The manipulation can be either adding, removing or modifying any of the image features or contents, without leaving any clue of the induced change. Due to the availability of a large number of free image editing tools and software, image forgery has become easier to be done, difficult to be detected and has eroded the confidence in the authenticity and integrity of an image. Hence, robust algorithms for automatic forgery detection have become essential and is one of the significant research problems in the area of image processing.
Of the different kinds of image forgery, copy-move forgery, also called as cloning, is the most common. In copy-move forgery, a portion of an image is copied and pasted into another portion of the same image. The main intention of this category of forgery is to hide undesirable objects, to duplicate some aspects of the image or to enhance the visual impact of an image. The copied regions can be of any dimension and shape and can be pasted at different locations within the same image, either once or multiple times. Usually image segments that easily merge with the background are chosen for this purpose, so that they do not leave any suspicious artifacts at the tampered locations. Once a region is copied from an image, it can either be used directly or some transformations like scaling, rotation etc. can be applied to it before being pasted in another region. Since the source and destination images are the same, the properties of the forged regions, such as color palette, texture, dynamic range, noise etc. will be compatible with the remaining portions of that image, making forgery detection more difficult (Singh and Kaur, 2016).
1.1. Conventional techniquesCopy-move forgery is a passive image forgery technique, which works in the absence of digital signatures or watermarks. Though tampering is done with that level of perfection such that it is undetectable by the human eye, copy-move forgery detection works on the assumption that the underlying image statistics are unaffected by such forgery techniques. Such image features can hence be used to identify copy-move forged regions.In the literature, there are numerous methods that detect copy-move forgery. All these methods can be grouped under any of the three categories: block-based methods (Fridrich et al., 2003, Mahmood et al., 2016, Mahmood et al., 2018, Mahmood et al., 2017, Bashar et al., 2010, Kang and Wei, 2008, Ardizzone et al., 2010, Hsu and Wang, 2012, Bayram et al., 2009, Mahdian and Saic, 2007, Wang et al., 2009, Ryu et al., 2010), keypoint based methods (Pan and Lyu, 2010, Lowe, 1999, Amerini et al., 2011, Kakar and Sudha, 2012, Huang et al., 2008) or segmentation based methods (Cozzolino et al., 2015, Li et al., 2015). The block-based methods divide the input image into overlapping blocks and these blocks are compared to identify connected regions that are almost similar. The main difference between various block-based techniques is in the feature used to match the blocks. The keypoint based methods extract features from the entire image and match these points to identify similar regions. Though both these methods detect the forged regions, their recall rate is low and also, the block-based methods are computationally expensive as they operate on overlapping blocks. Eliminating the limitations of block-based and keypoint based methods, an integrated approach which combines both these methods is also used (Pun et al., 2015). Though it has improved accuracy than conventional methods, it is computationally expensive and requires an experimentally computed threshold, which was found to be image-dependent. The segmentation based methods work by semantically segmenting the image into non-overlapping patches and detect suspicious patches by patch matching algorithms.A major drawback of all the three kinds of methods is that they are highly dependent on an experimentally computed threshold for feature matching, which reduces the robustness of the algorithms and also reduces the overall accuracy of detected results.
1.2. Overview of the proposed workIn order to avoid the threshold dependency of algorithms, reduce the computational complexity and improve the accuracy of forgery detection, we propose a new copy-move forgery detection method. The method integrates traditional block-based and keypoint based methods. A keypoint based strategy is used for feature detection and matching. Then, a block-based approach is used to localize the forged regions. We use a binary feature descriptor Compressed Binary Discriminative Features (CBDF) (Geng et al., 2016) for keypoint detection and feature matching. The binary nature of the descriptor, along with its reduced size, improves the ease of feature matching. The main advantage here is that no threshold values are required for feature matching. Keypoints with exactly the same descriptors are considered to be identical. The detected matching points give an indication of the suspected forged regions. To get a finer localization of the exact forged regions, the test image is segmented into non-overlapping superpixel blocks using SLIC algorithm. Then, the suspected region identification algorithm replaces each of the matching feature points with their corresponding superpixel and finally, the forgery region localization algorithm is used to accurately extract the forgery regions by merging the neighbouring blocks using a color similarity measure calculated using the color histogram matching. Finally, a morphological operation is applied on these merged regions to generate the detected forged regions. The use of binary features reduces the computational complexity as explained in Geng et al. (2016) and also the false matching rate, while the use of color histogram improves the accuracy of region localization. Experimental analysis shows the improved performance of the proposed method when compared with other existing methods of copy-move forgery detection.
1.3. Organization of the paperThe paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the literature survey on copy-move forgery detection. Section 3 describes the proposed methodology based on Binary Discriminative Features (BDF) and color histogram matching. Section 4 describes the details of the experimental analysis used to evaluate the performance of the algorithm and conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
