Advancements in computer network and cloud services in the last few years have substantially increased online monetary transactions. Large numbers of people now prefer to pay bills or purchase goods on electronic and mobile business platforms because of convenience and the availability of secure socket layer gateway payment systems. Online payments have attracted a form of web threat, called phishing, which involves developing malicious websites that visually replicate legitimate websites in order to deceive users (Thabtah et al., 2016). The deception involves illegally stealing users’ credentials and then using them to access confidential information such as banks account numbers, social security numbers, passwords, and credit card numbers among others so as to cause financial and reputation damages (Mohammad et al., 2016).
The most common way of phishing utilizes emails that users receive from known sources (Fette et al., 2007). These emails urge users to update their information online, following a server crash or system update, by clicking on a malicious hyperlink. When users click on the hyperlink they are redirected to the phishy website, and upon logging in, their credentials will be stolen. Phishing is considered by users, governments, businesses, and computer security experts to be a serious cybercrime because of the financial and social damages it causes (Basnet et al., 2008). For instance, over 2.8 billion dollars were lost in a single year by businesses and users because of phishing (Abdelhamid et al., 2014). In addition, users (and sometimes organizations) may become vulnerable to identity theft because of phishing, thus potentially damaging their reputation (Aburrous et al., 2010a). Therefore, developing anti-counterfeit techniques to combat phishing is essential for a safe online society.
Since phishing is renewable in the sense that deception techniques keep changing, it is vital for the online community to develop up to date solutions especially with the emerging technology of cloud computing (Zkik et al., 2017, Ibtihal and Hassan, 2017). With advancement(s) on cloud services it will be advantageous to investigate whether cybersecurity tactics have changed because of the high numbers transactions performed. Alleviating web and mobile security threats on cloud services especially on organisations offering the cloud services, are crucial (Memos et al., 2017). In addition, multimedia flash crowd is another vital issues that need to be considered especially on cloud platforms (Bhushan and Gupta, 2017). Initially, we believe that since cloud computing adopts tight security such as virtual private cloud, encryption and API keys these may help securing the data. However, a separate in depth study may provide more specific insights on security issues within cloud computing.
Other more recent solutions to reducing phishing risks are intelligent techniques that adopt data mining and machine learning algorithms. These techniques apply search heuristics to measure the correlation between website features and the type of website by building classification systems. Often, these classification systems are binary and automatically classify websites to just two class categories: phishing and legitimate. Several studies reported that intelligent techniques effectively generate anti-phishing classification systems, but these systems are hard to interpret and mange by the end users (Thabtah et al., 2016; Mohammad et al., 2014). The complexities of the systems are far more than users’ understanding of the phishing problem or the separation guidelines between phishing and legitimate websites. There needs to be new phishing detection techniques developed that are practical for end users to use, understand, and manage, as well as effective in terms of detection rate. These techniques should offer end users useful information about the relationship between features in the website and phishing activities in order to enrich their experience.
One of the least studied approaches in combating phishing is feature visualization, in which intelligently chosen features are tested then utilized as an alerting mechanism for online users. The most common visualization method used in cyber security research is toolbars that are embedded in web browsers, such as Netscape (Netscape. n. d.) and MacAfee Site Advisor (McAfee, n. d.), among others. These toolbars are useful as they rarely reveal security indicators visually to end users while users are actively browsing the Internet. For instance, Spoof Steak toolbar reveals the website domain name and Netcraft toolbar shows website rank, domain name, hosting country, and the date of registration (Netcraft, n. d.; SpoofStick n. d.). However, conventional toolbars are not as highly effective in detecting phishing attacks as reported (Wu et al., 2006). Wu et al. (2006), noticed that popup messages are more useful for end-users than security indicators shown by typical toolbars. In addition, there are limited features related to phishing that these toolbars display for novice users, and thus more features are needed to differentiate phishing attacks.
This article proposes a new visualization technique based on integrating feature analysis and fuzzy induction to identify small yet non-redundant features that can be utilized by novice user to detect website phishing activities. The features that have been detected based on the proposed technique having_IP_Address, having_At_symbol, Prefix_Suffix, having_sub_Domain, Request_URL, Redirect. The selection of these features has been done based on careful analysis of results derived by the minimal redundancy maximum relevancy (mRMR) and fuzzy induction techniques. To measure the impact of the features chosen, different classification algorithms have then been utilized. In particular, predictive classifiers from distinctive features sets have been derived to evaluate the influence of these features sets on phishing detection using evaluation metrics such as classification accuracy, false positive rates, and efficiency, among others (Section 4 gives further details). Results against real phishing dataset using the proposed technique show high accuracy in phishing detection besides novice can utilize the results (security indicators while browsing the World Wide Web). Finally, the fuzzy induction classifiers derived by our model offer rich rules that can exploited by different stakeholders including end-user and security administrators to understand and manage phishing attacks.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 highlights common anti-phishing approaches with a focus on visualization techniques. Section 3 is devoted to the methodology adopted in this paper and discusses the proposed hybrid anti-phishing technique and its major components. The dataset, features, experimental setting, and data analysis are discussed in Section 4. Finally, conclusions and potential future work is presented in Section 5.
