Artificial Intelligence (AI) is an interdisciplinary field with the goal of imitating the computational versatility of human intelligence with silicon technology. Neural networks composed of real or simulated neurons are capable of this flexibility and can solve computationally difficult problems like pattern recognition and classification [46]. However, simulating large neural networks with traditional computers has proven challenging due to the huge computational resources required.
One approach to solve this problem is to incorporate biological neurons into silicon technology to create a neurocomputer—a hybrid silicon-tissue computing machine that utilizes the processing power of biological neurons to perform computations on an input. Biological neurons can effortlessly make numerous interconnections between themselves and adapt those connections through Hebbian learning [43]. These advantages could be utilized in a neurocomputer to perform the same computations while sparing the resources required to simulate neurons like in a recurrent neural network.
This new computational paradigm provides its own unique challenges in areas such as device design and understanding of neural cultures. However, these neurocomputers may have some niche applications to traditionally incomputable problems, such as how DNA computing solved the Hamiltonian path problem [3]. Neurocomputers have shown promising results in the fields of spatiotemporal pattern classification [14], [27], [53], [54], simple image recognition [82], and liquid-state computing [26], [71]. The purpose of this paper is to explore and assemble a body of research that could aid in the advancement of the neurocomputer.
Within the scope of this paper, we explore key technologies which may prove pivotal in designing an interface to communicate between the silicon-instantiated and neuron-instantiated computational components, including silicon chip interfaces, complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) interfaces, two-dimensional (2D) microelectrode arrays (MEAs), improving biosimilarity between the two components, and three-dimensional (3D) neural cultures. Then, we explore the basic neural mechanisms which a neurocomputer would exploit to train the neural component of the device. We provide a brief history of the young field and explore notable applications of the technology, and close with challenges and future directions of the field.
