With its development, the database technology built based on business operating environment and platform cannot meet the needs of people in analysis and decision-making layers. The decision support system (DSS) has been developed based on the information management system [1], [2], [3]. To effectively provide important information for corporate and government management, data mining technology is applied in the field [4]. Data mining can be defined as a method to obtain useful knowledge and information by analyzing data in the database and data warehouse [5], [6], [7]. Data mining has shown an effective performance in the decision-making system [8], [9], [10], [11]. The basic architecture of DSS is depicted in Fig. 1. The decision support system usually focuses on semi-structured or unstructured decisions. There is no certain pattern or procedure to be followed in solving these two kinds of decisions, which need to be decided based on previous experiences and insights. The decision support system applies computer technology to make the analysis and solution methods logical, digitize, and program the logic judgment program into the computer.
The intelligent decision-making system helps decision-makers to make semi-structured and unstructured decisions. It combines database, model base, method base, and knowledge base techniques [12]. In general, an intelligent decision support system consists of a decision support system and intelligent modules. Besides, systematic human–computer interaction is also a key component of the decision support system. To this end, system developers not only need to study the overall structure of the software but also need to understand the user’s concept of interaction and the degree of mastering the computer, to design the interface of layout and platform management and the auxiliary control function that can automatically adjust and guide users to better conduct decision-making. The intelligent human–computer interaction system utilizes artificial intelligence and expert systems in the user interface; thus, the interface contains the most knowledge while users are required to learn the least knowledge. In general, the decision support system is used by users to input decision requirements to the computer through interactive devices, and then select the output form, such as image, and table, on the screen. Then, the computer processes these requests and outputs an optimal solution [13].
Data mining aims to discover the informative relationship, model, and trends of big data [14], [15]. Data mining extracts implicit, unknown knowledge, and rules from a large number of noisy, fuzzy, or random data, which have potential value for decision-making, and can make result prediction for the non-occurrence behavior according to the existing information, providing the basis for business decision-making and market planning. Data mining technology is a new business information processing technology in essence, which improves the user’s application of data from low-level online query operation to higher-level application of decision support, analysis, and prediction. Data mining can deal with massive data, and even if these data are incomplete, redundant, and random, the user data can be chosen for building a knowledge model through data cleaning methods. Data mining technology has brought about the structural change of the traditional decision support system. The existing database system can achieve the effective input, modification, statistics and query functions, but it fails to find the relationships and rules in the data, and it cannot predict the future development trend according to the existing data.
In this paper, we propose a visual decision-making system based on data mining. Likewise, we analyze the basic structure of the decision support system. Further, a human–computer interaction system is designed to provide feedback to modify the decision. The main contributions of this paper include:

•The proposal of a novel visual decision-making system.•The approval of the proposed decision support system performance on data mining topics.•Designing a new HCI system for providing feedback and notifications.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The related works including HCI and data mining are given in Section 2. The proposed method is introduced in Section 3. Section 4 presents the experiment analysis and results, while Section 5 concludes.
