Next generation wireless networks will be characterized by larger volume, faster information transfer, and diversity. Wireless industry has been altering conventional license-based spectrum access policies through approaches utilizing unlicensed spectrum. This leads to dynamic spectrum access (DSA), where unlicensed use of a spectrum should avoid harm to licensed users, or should ensure a fair share of spectrum with other unlicensed users. DSA places an additional burden on business operations because revenue needs to be generated over dynamically changing resources, while providing expected quality of service to potential users. To address the challenges of spectrum, pricing, and privacy in the next-generation DSA solutions, it is necessary to utilize testbed capable of emulating realistic networks to model the complex behaviors of radio networks and environments.
Meanwhile, as today’s Internet of Things applications bring new requirements to the evolving wireless standards, tomorrow’s advanced use cases will derive these innovations through Internet of Advanced Things. Heterogeneous wireless technologies in public safety, infrastructure, smart agriculture, and rural broadband connectivity require a seamless wireless continuum across underground and over-the-air and urban and rural settings to bridge the digital divide. As a result, a variety of environmental configurations and experimental tools are required, which would be burdensome and sometimes prohibitive for many researchers to build. Open testbeds [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] would facilitate innovations by providing researchers experimental platforms.
Moreover, the emergence of data-driven wireless technologies, such as Radio Frequency Machine Learning (RFML), are shifting the ways of work towards ones that emphasize realistic radio environments, standardized and/or open datasets for repeatability, and intense computations. RFML is envisioned to replicate the success of deep learning in computer vision in which rapid advancements are achieved from repeatable and comparable experiments based on open datasets. To facilitate researches in RFML, testbeds need to have realistic radio environments, standardized experimental configurations, reusable datasets, as well as advanced computational resources.
To address aforementioned requirements, a city-wide testbed, Cognitive Secure Cloud-Radio Access Network (CoSeC-RAN), is developed through the collaboration with the City of Lincoln. CoSeC-RAN covers 1.1 square miles across two campuses of University of Nebraska-Lincoln and a public street in the city of Lincoln. It contains 5 high-end software-defined distribution units (SD-DUs) at the edge of Cloud-Radio Access Networks (C-RAN). Each SD-DU is equipped a sub-6 GHz Software-Defined Radio (SDR) transceiver and a 4 × 4 MIMO antenna array and connected to cloud-based central unit via 20Gbps fronthaul network. Additionally, two SD-DUs are equipped with underground (UG) MIMO antennas for researches of underground wireless sensors. The CoSeC-RAN has rich computational resources. High performance computing clusters with arrays of Central Processing Units (CPUs) and Graphics processing units (GPUs) are provided by the cloud at Holland Computing Center (HCC) [8], Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) are available at the SD-DUs (edge) and fronthaul network. Projects at various scales and stages could be supported by a variety of general cloud computing resources, such as dedicated virtual machine and computing clusters.
