Beliefs about the nature of knowledge in a certain academic discipline will likely influence learning and information processing of those studying that discipline. Since Perry introduced his scheme of the intellectual and ethical development in 1970, such beliefs have been investigated under the term epistemic (or epistemological) beliefs. A growing body of literature emphasizes positive effects of more “sophisticated” epistemic beliefs on information processing (e.g., Kardash & Howell, 2000), learning (e.g., Cano, 2005, Mason et al., 2011), and academic achievement (e.g., Schommer, 1993).
What constitutes “sophisticated” beliefs, in contrast, has been subject to much debate. More traditional approaches almost exclusively view high absolute beliefs (i.e., a view of scientific knowledge as an accumulation of certain facts and absolute truths) as obstructive for learning (Hofer and Pintrich, 1997, Kuhn and Weinstock, 2002). In contrast, multiplistic beliefs (i.e., a view of scientific knowledge as tentative, evolving, and personally constructed) are deemed sophisticated and thus beneficial. Research has repeatedly challenged this assumption (Bromme et al., 2010, Elby and Hammer, 2001, Elby et al., 2016, Muis and Franco, 2010). For example, Elby and Hammer stress that it strongly depends on the discipline in question whether one may see a certain type of belief as correct (i.e., espoused by experts in that particular discipline) and productive (i.e., facilitating learning).
Longitudinal studies might shed light on such disciplinary differences regarding epistemic beliefs changes, which also allows making inferences about what constitutes a “sophisticated” set of beliefs in a certain discipline. Unfortunately, even though a significant part of epistemic belief research was initially founded on longitudinal data (e.g., Baxter Magolda, 1992, Perry, 1970, Schommer, 1993), such studies have become rare lately. Moreover, we are not aware of any longitudinal studies that explicitly investigated the role of disciplinary differences in the development of epistemic beliefs. This is striking since especially newer approaches posit epistemic beliefs to be shaped by students' instructional environment (i.e., the TIDE framework; Muis et al., 2006, Muis et al., 2015). The present article therefore analyzes the following research questions: How do discipline-specific epistemic beliefs of students from two exemplary disciplines (psychology and computer science) differ at the beginning of their studies, and how do these beliefs subsequently evolve longitudinally?
1.1. Theoretical conceptsKuhn and Weinstock (2002) conceive the development of epistemic beliefs as a sequence of three stages. Development begins in a stage called absolutism, in which individuals conceptualize knowledge in dualistic, absolute contrasts (e.g., right-and-wrong or truth-and-untruth; Kuhn & Weinstock, 2002). Once this view of certain and absolute knowledge is dismissed, the model posits that individuals move on to a stage called multiplism. Individuals holding multiplistic beliefs stress the subjectivity of knowledge and expect different opinions to be equally valid and exchangeable. In its extreme form, sometimes called radical subjectivity (Hofer & Pintrich, 1997), they devaluate science as a whole since they expect laypersons' opinions to be just as valid as scientific findings. In the final stage, called evaluativism, individuals acknowledge that truth depends, to a large extent, on the issue in question and on its context. They thus compare, evaluate and weigh different positions to issues and try to integrate conflicting points of view.Even though Kuhn and Weinstock's (2002) model has become well-established in the literature, one may criticize it for positing a fixed developmental sequence. In fact, already in 2001, Elby and Hammer argued that it strongly depends on the issue in question whether a certain belief type might be seen as correct (i.e., according to an expert consensus) and productive (i.e., beneficial for learning). Take, for example, rapper B.o.B, who doubts that the earth is round (Brait, 2016). According to more traditional approaches, this would be classified as a multiplistic and thus rather “sophisticated” belief. Nevertheless, not only is this belief incorrect according to a vast majority of astrophysicists; it might also make it harder for B.o.B to study for a geography test. Laboriously weighting the pros and cons of the earth being round, which is deemed a core component of evaluativism, might not be that productive either. In contrast, just accepting the earth being round as an absolute truth can very well be seen as both productive and correct (Elby & Hammer, 2001). In this instance, absolute beliefs would thus be the most advanced belief type, which is not compatible with Kuhn and Weinstock's (2002) assumption of a sequential development over time. More recent research has formulated similar arguments (e.g., Bromme et al., 2008, Bromme et al., 2010).Bromme et al. (2010) further substantiate this point of view by arguing that due to the uneven distribution of knowledge in our societies, many claims can only be evaluated by specialized experts (since laypersons simply lack the necessary prior knowledge). Evaluativistic beliefs would thus be unsuited in many situations. Determining the trustworthiness of an expert and subsequently adopting this experts' judgment (which is a central component of absolutism), in contrast, might be more “advanced” than an evaluative approach. In addition, Muis and Franco (2010) argue that learning is facilitated when the epistemic nature of a learning task corresponds with the individual epistemic beliefs of a person (so-called consistency hypothesis). A development towards consistency between an individual's beliefs and the epistemic nature of a learning task (or the typical learning tasks in a particular discipline) might thus be preferable over the fixed sequence suggested by Kuhn and Weinstock (2002).
1.2. Epistemic beliefs in psychology and computer scienceThe Theory of Integrated Domains in Epistemology (TIDE) posits that even though general (i.e., discipline-unspecific) epistemic beliefs are intertwined with discipline-specific beliefs, the latter become more influential throughout education (Muis et al., 2006, Muis et al., 2015). Accordingly, research has found both inter-individual (e.g., Paulsen & Wells, 1998) and intra-individual (e.g., Stahl & Bromme, 2007) differences in epistemic beliefs pertaining to different disciplines.To categorize academic disciplines, researchers often refer to Biglan's (1973) classification scheme, in particular to the dimensions hard/soft (i.e., existence of a unified paradigm or not) and pure/applied (i.e., focusing on theory vs. on practice). Even though a specific classification might not apply to all facets of the respective discipline (Muis et al., 2006), research shows that the scheme is surprisingly persistent (Stoecker, 1993), even half a century later (Simpson, 2015).Knowledge structures strongly differ depending on whether a unified paradigm exists in a specific discipline or not (Muis et al., 2006). Given that a discipline's knowledge structure likely explains a considerable amount of variance in students' conceptions of that knowledge, Biglan's (1973) first dimension (hard/soft) seems particularly relevant in research on epistemic beliefs. To avoid bias, we further argue that when empirically contrasting two disciplines, they should primarily differ in one of the two dimensions. Contrasting physics (hard and pure; Simpson, 2015) and psychology (soft and applied; Simpson, 2015) might thus be problematic since one does not know to which of the two dimensions potential differences in epistemic beliefs may actually be traced back to. In line with both these arguments, we chose to analyze epistemic belief development in two prototypical disciplines that primarily differ in Biglan's (1973) first dimension: Psychology, which is assumed to be soft and applied, and computer science, which in turn is considered hard and applied (Simpson, 2015).In computer science, knowledge can be conceptualized as more “absolute” than in softer disciplines. In fact, computer science has a strong focus on applied mathematics (Association for Computing Machinery & IEEE Computer Society, 2013), thus allowing that “the parameters of the problems can be specified with a high degree of certainty and … deductive logic and complex, logical manipulations are central tools of the discipline” (King, Wood, & Mines, 1990, p. 170). Therefore, due to its highly formalized and axiomatic structures, computer science is often described as well-defined (King et al., 1990). According to the consistency hypothesis1 by Muis and colleagues (e.g., Franco et al., 2012, Muis and Franco, 2010), absolute beliefs will thus be productive (i.e., facilitate learning) in computer science because many learning tasks in that discipline have a more absolute epistemic nature. This is in line with Elby and Hammer's (2001) argument that absolute beliefs are productive with regard to complex and counterintuitive learning contents in introductory physics (e.g., Newton's laws). Moreover, given the strongly formalized structure in hard sciences and the relatively large consensus on what constitutes accepted proofs and theorems (King et al., 1990, Muis et al., 2006), absolute beliefs might also be more correct in computer science, especially when compared to soft sciences. We therefore expect computer science students to have higher absolute beliefs than students from “softer” sciences (e.g., psychology). Evidence for this expectation comes from King et al. (1990), who found that students majoring in computer science, applied mathematics, or pure mathematics had stronger absolute beliefs than students from psychology or sociology. Further corresponding evidence can be found in a small-scale qualitative interview study by Whitmire (2003).In psychology, by contrast, knowledge is structured much more loosely. Concepts often lack a clear definition and many theories are inconsistent, which is why the structure of psychological knowledge is often seen as ill-defined (Muis et al., 2006). This requires students and researchers to constantly weigh evidence, critically evaluate theories, and search for moderating factors (Rosman, Mayer, Peter, & Krampen, 2016). In contrast to computer science, the nature of psychological knowledge is therefore significantly less absolute. Instead, the argumentation above supports a view of psychological knowledge as having an “evaluativistic” nature, which is why the consistency hypothesis would predict that absolute beliefs impair the acquisition of psychological knowledge and that evaluativism is beneficial. With regard to multiplism, however, matters are more complicated. Even though some might perceive psychological knowledge as “multiplistic” due to its ill-defined structure, multiplism is likely neither correct nor productive in psychology. First, one cannot reasonably expect that the scientific community espouses a view of psychological knowledge as an accumulation of subjective opinions. Viewing psychological knowledge as multiplistic would thus be incorrect in Elby and Hammer's terms (Elby and Hammer, 2001, Elby et al., 2016). Moreover, high amounts of multiplism are likely to thwart students' intellectual commitment (Hofer, 2001) since it inclines them to devaluate expertise and see all views on an issue to be equally legitimate “opinions” (Hofer & Pintrich, 1997). In line with this, Rosman, Peter, Mayer, and Krampen (2016) have shown that high levels of multiplism impair the development of academic skills in psychology students. Moreover, several studies have shown that multiplism impedes information integration from multiple documents (a common task when dealing with psychological knowledge; Barzilai and Eshet-Alkalai, 2015, Bråten et al., 2013, Bråten et al., 2008). In view of this evidence, multiplistic beliefs do not seem to be productive in psychology either. Unfortunately, probably because of the ill-defined knowledge structure in psychology, psychology students nevertheless seem to have rather high discipline-specific multiplistic beliefs, especially when compared to students from “hard” sciences (Green and Hood, 2013, Rowley et al., 2008). This is why we see it as essential for psychology students to overcome multiplism and to orientate themselves towards evaluativism, so that they can cope with the “evaluativistic” nature of their field by evaluating and weighting different positions to issues.
1.3. Discipline-specific development of epistemic beliefsIn addition to its assumptions about the structure of epistemic beliefs, the TIDE framework also suggests that discipline-specific beliefs are shaped by the instructional environment of the discipline students engage in (Muis et al., 2006). It hardly needs mentioning that this instructional environment varies greatly among different disciplines. For example, undergraduate computer science curricula primarily aim at conveying facts and basic knowledge about central concepts and their interrelations (e.g., on algorithms or software development fundamentals; Association for Computing Machinery & IEEE Computer Society, 2013, Birke et al., 2016). One might therefore suppose that computer science lecturers (and curricula) provide, especially in the first few study semesters, more guidance and practice in solving well-defined problems (King et al., 1990, Prince et al., 2002), so that students learn how to cope with typical study requirements. Over time, this will give the impression that clear and unambiguous answers are omnipresent in computer science, thus strengthening absolute beliefs. As outlined above, such a development is beneficial for learning in terms of the consistency hypothesis since many learning tasks in computer science have a more absolute epistemic nature. Moreover, in light of the absolute knowledge structure in computer science (King et al., 1990), it also implies a development towards more correct beliefs. Due to the well-defined knowledge structure in computer science, we expect multiplistic beliefs, in contrast, to be rather low and stable (e.g., King et al., 1990, Whitmire, 2003).In contrast to computer science, scientific inquiry and critical thinking are essential learning goals in psychology and in the social sciences (American Psychological Association, 2013, McGovern et al., 1991, Yanchar et al., 2008). For example, lecturers frequently emphasize the presence of multiple explanations for a phenomenon, and value discussion and social construction of knowledge as tools for learning (Palmer & Marra, 2008). Psychology students thus receive more guidance and practice in working with ill-structured problems. In view of the ill-defined nature of psychological knowledge, they nevertheless also have to cope with significantly more ill-structured problems (e.g., contradictory theories and findings) than students from harder disciplines (Muis et al., 2006). Kienhues, Ferguson, and Stahl (2016) as well as Bromme et al. (2008) argue that knowledge about the research methods in a certain discipline influences epistemic thinking. Therefore, the huge number of ill-structured problems will likely pose a significant challenge to psychology freshmen who still lack the necessary methodical competencies to adequately evaluate theories and weigh evidence.The development of epistemic beliefs in psychology students might thus not be as straightforward as in computer science. In fact, the heterogeneity of findings and theories in introductory courses (for an overview see Gurung et al., 2016) might, together with a lack of knowledge about psychological research methods, lead students to stress the subjectivity of psychological theories as well as findings and become more multiplistic at first (Peter, Rosman, Mayer, Leichner, & Krampen, 2016). Upon completion of the first research methods courses, this trend might nevertheless invert. In fact, students then have the tools at hand to “scientifically” evaluate and weigh knowledge claims, thus allowing them to make evaluativistic judgments (Bromme et al., 2008) and no longer inclining them to endorse multiplistic beliefs. This is in line with prior cross-sectional research suggesting that evaluativism constantly increases from second year to final year psychology students (Kaartinen-Koutaniemi & Lindblom-Ylänne, 2012). Such a development towards evaluativism would again, in terms of the consistency hypothesis, be beneficial for learning and thus productive (Franco et al., 2012, Muis and Franco, 2010). Moreover, in light of the evaluativistic nature of knowledge in psychology (see above), it would imply a development towards more correct beliefs (Elby and Hammer, 2001, Elby et al., 2016). Absolute beliefs, in contrast, are likely to be rather low and stable since it is quite clear that absolute truths do not exist and that a certain amount of subjectivity is inherent in psychology (Rosman, Peter et al., 2016). Even though longitudinal research on the development of epistemic beliefs in higher education is rare, the denoted developmental patterns were found in cross-sectional analyses by Peter et al. (2016). Based on the differences between psychology and computer science outlined above, we suggest the following hypotheses:Hypothesis 1Compared to psychology students, computer science students start their studies with higher absolute beliefs (H1a). Compared to computer science students, psychology students start their studies with higher multiplistic beliefs (H1b).Hypothesis 2Absolute beliefs of computer science students increase over the first half of their undergraduate studies (H2a), whereas absolute beliefs of psychology students are rather stable (H2b).Hypothesis 3Multiplistic beliefs of psychology students follow an inversely U-shaped developmental path: An increase at the beginning of studies is followed by a subsequent decrease (H3a), whereas multiplistic beliefs of computer science students are rather stable (H3b).
