Research on opinions of computer science students from Novi Sad, Serbia either considering gender differences (Ivanović et al., 2011, Ivanović et al., 2013a), or privacy issues (Ivanović et al., 2013b, Ivanović et al., 2009), has been going on for some time now. A large and interested base of students joined within common DAAD educational project1 (Budimac et al., 2012, Budimac et al., 2014), and with bilateral and multilateral educational projects (SE-CSERC, 2014, eLearning, 2014) was considered. Thus, there was an opportunity to survey their views and expectations for the future life in general and success within a field of computer science.
The conducted survey included four universities, from four countries. Three of those countries came out from the same country, Yugoslavia. The fourth country belongs to the same region, so the expectation is that the results should be comparable. The main reason for that assumption is that all countries emerged from the similar background and have the similar level of the economic development. Observed universities are part of the mentioned DAAD project, and they conducted the same survey, dealing with three connected issues of computer science studies:
•General data about students,•Questions considering students motivation for studying computer science, and•Questions trying to investigate students' ambitions and vision of future career.
Results were analyzed and two articles with the joint opinions and combined results for four countries were already published (Ivanović et al., 2013a, Ivanović et al., 2011). Still, looking into the data, there remained a suspicion that students from different countries might have diverse opinions on certain issues. Unfortunately, at that moment, the lack of data prevented deeper study of the problem. Finally now, after collecting enough data, it is possible to analyse if there is a statistically significant difference of opinions between countries or genders. For start, Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics concerning the number of students participating in our survey.Table 1. Students participating in a survey presented by country.Gender/CountryFemaleMaleAlbania1113Bosnia and Herzegovina2031Serbia4266FYR Macedonia58114Total131224
Our research of the gathered data showed not only that the opinions are different, but further that this difference is sometimes statistically significant. As it will be presented in this article, this difference is both visible between students from Novi Sad, Serbia and the rest of the countries. Also the difference exists between male population of Novi Sad students and the “rest of the world” surveyed.
The rest of the article is organized as follows: in the second section, related work and overview of the literature is presented. Section three explains the questionnaire used and methodology in more details, while sections four and five present the most interesting statistical findings reached. The last section presents some conclusions, and directions for the future work.
