Internship plays an important role in preparing students for real life situations, including at work and other settings that are necessary for their future careers and skills acquired during their formal education (Posner, 2008). Internship training is a course that is commonly offered to undergraduate students in many universities around the world. More often than not, such training programs are mandatory before graduation. The need to conduct internship training at the undergraduate level pertains to providing students with an opportunity to improve their academic knowledge and enhance their soft skills as well as to acquire additional skills that are highly needed in the workplace later on.
A formal learning environment will never be able to fully provide students with the complexities that the problem-solving and analysis skills pose in the real world of workplace (D’Abate & Youndt, 2009). In Jordan, it has particularly become crucial for most of the actors in the job market to seek potential workers with 1–3 years of work experience – a requirement that is quite difficult for fresh graduates to meet. In order to keep abreast with the developments of the national and regional economies, Jordanian universities nowadays face a tremendous challenge to prepare students with theoretical knowledge, and professional soft skills required by the various industries. Such training programs are highly recommended for junior and senior students of Information Technology and Computer Science in order to increase their employability.
The internship training program for Information Technology and Computer Science juniors and seniors is conducted over the course of four months every semester. An internal study in late 2015 reported that almost all of the graduates completed their internship training within four months. Internship periods vary from one institution to another. The objectives of introducing internship are to develop students’ ability to apply academic knowledge and theories at workplace, enhance student soft skills and familiarize them with the actual environment of a workplace setting and experience. At the same time, such a program aims at making student skills relevant in job market by exploring and engaging various partners and networks among the Jordanian industries and market actors. Students are expected to be able to find a job opportunity after graduation in the fields of education, programming and development, system analysis, and entrepreneurship. Furthermore, the new policy of the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research in Jordan aims at preparing the graduates to act as job creators rather than job seekers only. This training is also part and parcel of the faculty’s responsibility to provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to succeed in the real workplace experience once they have completed their studies at the university.
The research objectives of this paper are:
1.To identify the student satisfaction levels about the internship training program; and2.To explore student comments and suggestions with regards to improving internship training program.
The paper is organized in 6 sections. Section 2 describes the statement of the problem while some related works are presented in Section 3. Research methodology of the study is presented in Section 4. Section 5 illustrates and discusses results and findings of the study while Section 6 introduces the conclusions of the study.
