We live in a digital era where it seems easy to find any piece of information in the Internet, where millions of people and organizations produce, share and consume tons of data every second. However, the existence of this huge amount of information greatly hinders the finding of the information that is actually needed. It is difficult to identify which information is reliable and which one is erroneous, incomplete or even false.
Research tasks have benefited from this great availability of information in the last 20 years, but the problem of identifying relevant information with the required level of quality has worsened. Information-seeking is of high relevance for research activities, since the quality of the found information directly affects the quality of the overall research activity. There is a certain degree of variability between researchers regarding the specific information-seeking strategies, but there are important commonalities that can be gathered and are relevant for supporting the task of researchers. Understanding all the elements that form part of the information-seeking process and how they interrelate will provide a deeper understanding of the tasks involved and the challenges for the researcher. Conceptual models are a way of representing elements in a particular domain and their relations, and they can serve as a reference material used to train novices in the field, or to provide support to the tasks represented in different ways, either by means of technology or via specialized professionals working in the field.
A pictorial conceptual model (Järvelin & Wilson, 2003) provides the information in a conceptual model in a visual form. We believe this kind of representation can serve to more clearly transmit the relevant information to stakeholders due to the excellent human capacity to process visual information. Conceptualizing in this way all the information related to the information-seeking process, and more specifically to the documents used in research, can be very useful for librarianship researchers and staff, as this kind of models make explicit and visual all the concepts and relations they have to manage, in a self-explanatory way.
Conceptual models can also serve as a tool for software designers, guiding the design process along the user view of the relevant elements to consider. In this direction, Preece, Rogers & Sharp state that “most interface applications are actually based on well-established conceptual models” (Preece, Rogers, & Sharp, 2015).
Each research field may have differences in terms of the information-seeking process, but we expect that most elements will be shared between researchers of different fields. We have focused in particular in the information-seeking activities carried out by researchers in Computer Science (CS). For the elaboration of a conceptual model about such activities, we have carried out two qualitative studies to be able to discover all the relevant elements for the CS researchers involved in the studies, without any assumptions on our part. This approach has been widely used by many other authors (Ellis, 1989a, Ellis and Haugan, 1997, Foster, 2004, George et al., 2006, Gralewska-Vickery, 1976, Hertzum and Pejtersen, 2000, Makri et al., 2008, Meho and Tibbo, 2003). To be more specific, we chose to apply a focus group and a series of in-depth semi-structured interviews. Such techniques are described in Krueger and Casey (2015) and DiCicco-Bloom and Crabtree (2006), respectively. As a result of the qualitative studies, we obtained a set of 169 codes categorized in 13 categories. The codes have formed the basis for creating the conceptual model, structured as a high-level general model, further detailed through four sub-models, namely a conceptual sub-model of the documents used during the information-seeking activities, a conceptual sub-model of the tasks that have to be carried out when seeking information, a third sub-model of the user — in our case, a researcher in the CS field —, and, finally, a sub-model conceptualizing the context in which an information-seeking activity is carried out. As far as the authors know, there are no detailed conceptual models about the information-seeking process represented through visual means, like the one proposed in the present work.
In the following section we review the literature in order check what other authors have proposed regarding the modeling of the information-seeking process. In Section 3 we detail the empirical design of the qualitative studies and how we have formalized the representation of the conceptual model using a well-known and widely-used standard representation (UML). Subsequently, Section 4 introduces the main model representing all the actors and components that can intervene in an information-seeking process. From there, each section is used to explain each one of these entities more in detail with the help of a more concrete sub-model: Section 5 details the characteristics of the documents, both individually and as a collection; Section 6 presents the tasks that are performed in an information-seeking activity and how they are carried out; Section 7 details which are the main characteristics and specificities of CS researchers when seeking information; and finally, the context in which an information-seeking activity takes place is presented in Section 8. In Section 9 are presented some of the practical applications of the conceptual model presented in this article. Then, in Section 10 is discussed where are our results situated in comparison with the most relevant related works, and Section 11 raises the possible limitations of the proposed model. Finally, Section 12 summarizes the main gathered conclusions and defines the future lines of work based on these results.
