Over the past decades, studies on educational technology have shown that innovative technology-rich curricula can provide great opportunities for engaging students in inquiry practices (e.g., Lee, Linn, Varma, & Liu, 2010). By interacting with computer tools, students can generate and test hypotheses, collect and visualize data, evaluate evidence, construct explanations and express their models (Linn et al., 2004, van Joolingen et al., 2007). In addition to well-designed inquiry activities and suitable affordances provided by technology, studies have highlighted the significant roles teachers play in student learning of computer-based inquiry curricula in classroom settings (Kim et al., 2007, Urhahne et al., 2010, Webb and Cox, 2004). In order to facilitate student learning in computer-based inquiry environments, teachers have to envision the lesson, enable collaboration, encourage students, ensure learning, and evaluate achievement (Urhahne et al., 2010). This is demanding as it requires knowledge of and familiarization with computer tools for integrating inquiry elements into the curriculum, and to identify and respond to students’ needs (Webb & Cox, 2004). Although some studies have pinpointed the challenges and constraints teachers encounter (Kim et al., 2007), few have explicated how teachers should act when traditional teaching settings are transformed into computer-based environments (e.g. Chang, 2013, van Joolingen et al., 2007).
Due to different knowledge, beliefs, values and experience, the ways in which teachers enact computer-based inquiry curricula can be very different, and have consequences for student learning (e.g., Liu et al., 2010, McDonald and Songer, 2008). Through the analysis of the relationships between teachers' enactments and students' learning performance, these studies identified some promising forms of teacher instruction to support students' conceptual understanding, such as helping students make links between learning activities and science concepts (Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Goldstein, 2007) and responding to students' needs during instruction (Chang, 2013). Although these instructional suggestions provided insightful applications, it remains largely unknown what kinds of teaching strategies teachers use across the sessions, what types of classroom social norms are shaped, and how students' inquiry practices are influenced by various teaching enactments. Following the preceding research, this study aimed to explore teachers' enactments of a computer-based inquiry curriculum on a continuous and more extended time scale, in contrast with the in-depth analysis of discrete events in previous studies. We employed different dimensions and levels of analysis to understand teachers' enactments of a web-based learning unit on the topic of plate tectonics, and examined how their enactments might contribute to students’ conceptual understanding and inquiry performance.
Based on Duschl (2008) and Furtak, Seidel, Iverson, and Briggs' (2012) perspectives on inquiry-based science teaching, the study proposed a framework for capturing teachers' enactments of a computer-based inquiry curriculum. The framework adopted two dimensions: the guidance and cognitive dimensions, to depict teaching practices. The cognitive dimension identifies the teaching strategies (identified from the video analysis) and the domains (conceptual, epistemic, social or technological) that the teacher draws upon to support students' learning, whereas the guidance dimension illustrates how the teacher strikes a balance between teacher-led instruction and students' discovery learning (Furtak, Seidel, Iverson, & Briggs, 2012). This two-dimensional framework provides multiple perspectives on teaching practices of computer-based inquiry curricula, and helps us better understand how that might influence students’ science learning.
