As mechanization, urbanization, globalization, financial and social developments have led to a richer and better life in human daily affairs, alterations in diets consumed by man have also brought about greater possibilities of developing certain diseases including Diabetes Mellitus (DM). Human pancreas is positioned just behind the stomach. It encloses clusters of beta cells that produce insulin which are released into the bloodstream and absorbed by the body cells. Thus, result in dysfunction or failure of end organs such as the nerves, blood vessels, kidneys, heart, and retina. Diabetes is a multifaceted metabolic disorder affecting the status of glucose in human body; and traditionally, majority of the cases are of either Type 1 or Type 2 pathogenetic categories. As the most common form, Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) accounts for 90%–95% of total cases, and its development is secondary to a relative insulin deficiency. Rather, its primary defect is insulin resistance, a condition in which the insulin produced by human pancreas cannot aid proper absorption of food substances by the body system. As reported in previous studies [1], [2], T2DM is one of the major health problems amongst people of all ages, and one of the top ten causes of death with high prevalence all over the world. The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) estimates that 381.8 million people with pre-diabetes in the world as at 2016 with a projected increase of 55% to 591.9 million by 2035 [3].
People with T2DM depend on expensive life-saving insulin which must be taken as long as they want to exist in the world. Hence, this unhealthy condition continues to drain assets of individuals, families, and nations’ economies if left unaddressed, properly. However, early diagnosis and proper therapeutic actions can be put in place to avoid paying huge price as dire consequences for healthy living and well-being of pre-diabetic patients. With special attention to diagnosis, high level of uncertainties emanate as numerous attributes are considered while analyzing the diabetes status of patients in medical institutions. This is a major challenge for physicians when handling DM and related cases [4]. Similarly, patients often find it challenging to present their exact health status to physicians when they are asked about the types and levels of discomfort being experienced [5]. Occasionally, physicians find it demanding to make conclusions in shortest possible time as a result of several laboratory procedures carried out for single cases. While, the connection of obesity, adipose tissues, and pancreatic cells with DM are common research focus, studies on inflammation-targeted methods for diagnosis and therapy of DM pathophysiology have increased [1], [6]. Obesity is the major factor for T2DM with up to 85% risk of developing the insulin-resistant situation. Other causative factors of insulin resistance are inflammatory cytokines, endothelial dysfunction, deranged fatty acid metabolism, and cellular processes such as endoplasmic reticulum stress. Previous studies have established links between obesity, an indication to pre-diabetes, and inappropriate or poor dietaries [7], [8], [9]. Obesity occurs when excess fat accumulates in the body; thus, reducing life expectancy. In conventional medicine, obesity was not regarded as chronic disease but the excessive fat is a predominant cause of T2DM, cardiovascular diseases, which have high mortality rates [10], [11], [12]. Basically, diabetes therapy requires closely watching blood sugar levels and body fat using a combination of proper diet, medications, exercise. Hence, food selection remains a typical and effective method of ensuring healthy life as hale diets could sustain balanced body weight, enhanced growth, and boost the immune system necessary to promote good mental function for daily activities.
Human beings could tend to consume foods without proper consideration of their health status. In many cases, this situation occurs due to lack of dieticians who could guide towards appropriate food choices. However, recent adoption of expert system (ES) in modern societies has introduced paradigm shift in managing some health conditions [13]. Decision support systems based on Artificial Intelligence (AI) have been deployed to handle uncertainty and imprecision in vague information. This technique has shown greater feats in practical application of computer based diagnostic tools for early diagnosis of several diseases [14]. Moreover, advancement in ES has empowered taking quality decisions in several aspects of medical practices [15], [16]. ES advances artificial intelligence by modeling procedures of human experts for medical diagnosis and assistive interventions [17], [18], [19]. Recommender system (RS) is an emerging expert system recently adapted to develop and support business logics in different fields. This advancement can be employed for stable health management subsequent to effective diagnosis of food related diseases as today’s society lacks a more personalized system for healthy management of DM [20]. Existing systems are either capable of diagnosis or diet management and there is no single system with combined diagnostic and diet recommendation capabilities for personalized assistance. Besides, the existing food recommendation systems do not highlight the benefits of diet personalization in foods. As a result, patients with diabetes are not predisposed to complete information that needed to improve their diabetes status.
In this study, an affective learning-based system is proposed to support clinical management of DM. The system includes a newly proposed multimodal adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference model built for learning vital patterns of variables used for diabetes diagnosis, and a recommender model [21] adapted for personalized diet menu recommendation. The latter was designed to combine diagnosis results with total energy required for daily activities to generate weekly diet menu. The multimodal diagnostic model was trained and validated with the publicly available Pima and Schorling datasets, and retrospectively evaluated with fourteen diabetes cases administered at Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospital Complex (OAUTHC), Ile-Ife, Nigeria. The remaining parts of this work is organized as follows; a review of literature on application of AI in medical diagnosis, diet recommender systems, and diet personalization is presented in Section 2; details of the proposed affective learning-based system is presented in Section 3; while experimental results and system evaluation are discussed in Section 4; and finally, conclusion of the study and future works are in Section 5.
