Parallel and distributed systems are critical to our lives and livelihood. Services we rely upon daily such as search (e.g., Google, Bing), e-commerce (e.g., Amazon, Paypal), social media (e.g., Twitter, Facebook), entertainment (e.g., Netflix, Hulu), and banking (e.g., CapitalOne, CitiBank) could not function without parallel and distributed processing on large scale systems in datacenters across the world. Scientific discoveries in health (e.g., gene manipulation) and medicine (e.g., drug discovery) leverage scientific computing that relies on parallel and distributed processing on supercomputers. Despite its importance, the average US citizen knows very little about parallel computation and how it affects them.
We describe a new approach to parallel and distributed computing (PDC) education for broad audiences. We have created a cluster computer in which compute nodes are attached to servo mechanisms that actuate in response to changes in workload. This enables dynamic, kinetic visualizations of the parallel computations that evolve in response to a parallel algorithm running on the system. In this way, viewers see and interact with the very computations that are purposely hidden deep within layers of software in services like Google search that they use everyday.
We identify three goals for our kinetic cluster: entertain and educate all audiences to improve the PDC pipeline; personalize the importance of parallel computation; and inspire participants to learn more. In particular, SeeMore attracts and compels current and future CS students to learn more about parallel computing and ultimately contributes to the pipeline for parallel and distributed computing education. We have incorporated the kinetic cluster in coursework at Virginia Tech for undergraduate, graduate, and local high-school students. These experiences range from asking students to program single system movement of a node to having students propose and implement new algorithms and interfaces for the full kinetic cluster. The SeeMore Vancouver and Manhattan algorithms and interfaces were implemented by undergraduate students from CS2506.
The 256-node SeeMore kinetic cluster is an experiential classroom of sorts. Just as students learn by visiting an art or science museum, SeeMore was designed to teach through an immersive experience. SeeMore has been visited by groups as varied as K-12 students, teachers, adults, seniors, girl scout troops, university presidents, legislators, and the director of the National Science Foundation. In these groups unfamiliar with parallel computing concepts our primary educational focus is imparting the basics of parallel computing and their importance. Our intent is to encourage and enable others to build prototypes of their own for themselves or their students to continue the experiential learning process SeeMore exemplifies.
