Currently, we live in the information era. We have many things in our daily life with access to the Internet and capable of making our daily life more comfortable like smartphones, tablets, computers, some cars, Smart TVs, and so on. Every new day, we have more devices and better Internet connection  [1]. These devices are able to run programmes, which use the devices’ sensors, or to do other tasks like creating alarms or notifications, turning on or turning off the device, and et cetera. These objects are known as Smart Objects  [2].
Smart Objects provide us with many possibilities and every day we have more different Smart Objects. However, Smart Objects can be more useful in the case of being interconnected with each other and with other objects like sensors or actuators  [2]. This interconnection is called the Internet of Things (IoT). The Internet of Things allows creating huge or small networks in order to obtain a collective intelligence through the processing of objects’ information. The first example is how the IoT was born because the first idea was its implementation in supply chains  [3]. Other examples are the object identification in chemistry plants, people, and animal using Smart Tags as Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID) and Near Field Communication (NFC)  [4], [5], [6]. The IoT can be applied in cities, also known as Smart Cities, in order to offer different services that improve citizens’ ‘livability’  [7]. Smart Towns use a similar application although they use the IoT to preserve their culture, folks, and heritage in small cities and towns  [8]. In other cases, we can use the IoT to create Smart Homes that can control and automate certain things of our houses like doors, windows, fridges [9], [10], [11], irrigation systems, lights, distribution multimedia  [12], and so on. By the contrary, some governments apply the IoT to control and care in the better way the Earth, which is also known as Smart Earth  [13], in front of different dangers like fire, earthquakes, tsunamis, or floods. Moreover, we can use the IoT to anticipate and prevent human disasters like the case of the Deepwater Horizon at Gulf of Mexico  [14] or the problem in the security system of the Nuclear Central of Fukushima to detect the tsunami and automate the turn off of the diesel motors or activate an protection over the motors. Nonetheless, these systems need a central service to control and manage their data and their objects. Besides, sometimes these systems need to create intelligence and take the decisions. Thus, they need an IoT platform.
There are several IoT platforms for many and different uses: business platforms, research platforms, platforms in beta state, and open source platforms  [15]. All these platforms are more or less similar because they allow working with objects and interconnecting them. Some platforms offer people an Application Programming Interface (API) to facilitate this task.
A very interesting application for the IoT would be the recognition of people using Computer Vision. Integrating Computer Vision in an IoT platform could offer more security systems to Smart Cities, Smart Towns, Smart Homes, and Smart Earth because they could recognise a person in the incorrect place at the wrong hour because, maybe, he is a thief or a potentially dangerous person for the environment like a pyromaniac. We could obtain this functionality without the need of a person to supervise the camera and facilitate this labour to revise only the critical pictures. We can see a similar research in  [16], where they use sensors to obtain data and in the case of these data accomplish certain conditions then the camera will take pictures. A similar idea was proposed in  [8] in order to protect the heritage of Smart Towns. Notwithstanding, they did not apply Computer Vision because they only take a picture under certain conditions. After that, they need a person to see that picture and evaluate the situation.
For these reasons our hypotheses were: Could we integrate Computer Vision in the Internet of Things? Could we use the pictures from an Internet Protocol (IP) Camera as a sensor? Could we obtain a good accuracy to automate or semi-automate this kind of events?
A possible solution for solving these hypotheses is the creation of a Computer Vision module and the integration of this module in an IoT platform. In our case, we used the Midgar IoT platform [15], [17]. We developed a Computer Vision module and modified Midgar to support Computer Vision. To test our first one hypothesis, we used an IP camera connected to the IoT platform and we took different pictures to test the functionality. To test the last both hypotheses, we took many pictures of the inside of the laboratory. After, we tested all these pictures in a batch process with our Computer Vision module to obtain the accuracy that the module has. However, in order to improve the possible detection of people, we analysed the entire sequence to find people instead of analysing picture by picture in the way of improving the identification of people by the use of all pictures of a movement.
In the rest of this article, we will discuss, in Section  2, about what the Internet of Things and Smart Objects are, and explain the different IoT applications like Smart Cities, Smart Towns, and Smart Homes. Besides, we will explain a brief of Computer Vision, we will continue talking about the current and more relevant IoT platforms, and we will present the related work. In Section  3, we will describe the case study, in our case, the Midgar IoT platform. After, in Section  4, we will explain the methodology that we used and show all the results of our evaluation and the discussion of the results. To finalise this paper, we will present our conclusions in Section  5 and show possible future work to do from this research in Section  6.
