Computers & Industrial Engineering (CIE) is one of the leading journals in the field of industrial engineering. Dr. Hamed K. Eldin, the founding editor, published the first issue in 1976. The publisher of the journal was Pergamon press, which was later acquired by Elsevier. In 1998, Mohamed Dessouky from the University of Southern California, USA, became editor-in-chief after Eldin passed away unexpectedly in December 1997. Today, the journal is very well recognized in the scientific community. In the 2016 Journal Citation Reports of Thomson & Reuters Web of Science, CIE had an impact factor of 2.623 and was ranked in the 9th position out of 44 journals in the Web of Science category of Engineering, Industrial. The journal also appears in the Web of Science category of Computer Science, Interdisciplinary Applications in the 28th position out of 105 journals.
In 2016, the journal celebrated its 40th anniversary. This milestone stimulated an interest in conducting a general bibliometric analysis of the principal trends that have occurred in the journal during this period. The study analyzes the productivity and influence of the journal and shows the leading topics, authors, institutions and countries. For doing so, the work uses the Web of Science (WoS) Core Collection database to collect and analyze the bibliographic material. Moreover, the paper also uses the visualization of similarities (VOS) viewer software (Van Eck & Waltman, 2010) to map graphically the bibliographic data. For developing the mapping analysis, the work uses bibliographic coupling (Kessler, 1963), co-citation (Small, 1973), citation, co-authorship and co-occurrence of keywords. Note that Uys, Schutte, and Van Zyl (2011) developed a textual analysis perspective of CIE. However, still nobody has developed a general bibliometric overview of the journal.
In the literature, it is very common to develop some special activities when the journal reaches a significant anniversary including the organization of an editorial (Barley, 2016, Shugan, 2006), a review (Van Fleet et al., 2006) or a special issue (Meyer & Winer, 2014). Particularly, it is very interesting to develop a bibliometric overview of the journal because it gives some general and historical results that permit to develop a retrospective evaluation (Schwert, 1993). Many studies have already been developed a long time ago (Heck & Bremser, 1986). However, in recent years it is becoming very popular and practical, due to the strong technological development of computers and internet over the last years. For example, García-Merino, Pereira-do-Carmo, and Santos-Álvarez (2006) developed a bibliometric analysis of the first twenty-five years of Technovation, Biemans, Griffin, and Moenaert (2007) of the first twenty years of Journal of Product Innovation Management and Dereli, Durmusoglu, Delibas, and Avlanmaz (2011) of the papers published in Total Quality Management & Business Excellence between 1995 and 2008. Merigó, Mas-Tur, Roig-Tierno, and Ribeiro-Soriano (2015a) developed a bibliometric overview of the Journal of Business Research between 1973 and 2014 and Cobo, Martínez, Gutiérrez-Salcedo, Fujita, and Herrera-Viedma (2015) for the first twenty-five years of Knowledge-Based Systems. Recently, motivated by the thirtieth anniversary, Merigó, Blanco-Mesa, Gil-Lafuente, and Yager (2017) presented an overview of the International Journal of Intelligent Systems and Valenzuela, Merigó, Johnston, Nicolás, and Jaramillo (2017) of the Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing. Finally, note that nowadays, there are many studies published in this direction and probably in the future (Laengle et al., 2017).
This paper first presents an editorial perspective of journal’s history, policy, editorial process and performance. Section 3 briefly describes the bibliometric methods used throughout the paper. Section 4 presents the bibliometric results of the WoS Core Collection and Section 5 develops a graphical analysis of the bibliographic material. Section 6 gives a short description of the main findings and conclusions of the paper.
