Traffic safety analysis has traditionally relied on historical crash data which has several shortcomings. First, relying on crash data is a reactive approach that requires a prolonged period for collecting crash data to conduct a reliable safety analysis. Other shortcomings include the limited availability, unreliability and poor quality of collision data [1]. Therefore, there is growing interest in using traffic safety analysis techniques that rely on surrogate safety measures such as traffic conflicts. Traffic conflicts occur more frequently than collisions, can be clearly observed, and are of marginal social cost. Moreover, the use of traffic conflicts is a proactive approach and provides a much better understanding of collision contributing factors [2]. The increased use of traffic conflicts in safety analysis has been aided by advances in video-based automated computer vision techniques which were shown to accurately detect and evaluate the severity of traffic conflicts [3].
Traffic simulation has also emerged as a popular approach for road safety analysis in recent years [4], [5], [6], [7]. The use of simulation models in traffic safety analysis provides an easy way to collect simulated conflicts data instantly without actual field observation [8]. More importantly, the use of simulation models for road safety analysis enables the evaluation of the safety impact to changes in the design and/or traffic control that have not been implemented, and to evaluate unconventional traffic designs [9]. However, recent studies evaluating the validity of using simulation models for safety analysis have raised several concerns [10]. These concerns relate to the difficulty of representing unsafe road user interactions and near misses given the existence of rules aiming at collision avoidance. Furthermore, the validity of simulated traffic conflicts is challenged by whether they can produce reasonable and reliable safety estimates beyond what can be expected from using exposure based models [10].
To improve the ability of simulation models to evaluate safety, a proper calibration of simulation models is of considerable importance. Previous studies have proposed calibration procedures for simulation models with the aim of obtaining a high correlation between the simulated and field-measured conflicts [8,[10], [11], [12], [13]]. However, a high correlation between the number of simulated and field-measured conflicts for a specific threshold of conflict indicator (e.g., Time-to-collision) does not guarantee a proper matching between the simulated and field-measured conflict severity distributions. Moreover, since the ultimate goal of safety studies is to reduce crashes, the simulation model needs to be calibrated to ensure an accurate estimation of crashes. Extreme value theory (EVT) provides a statistical tool that can enable the extrapolation from simulated traffic conflicts to extreme events such as crashes. As such, the combined use of traffic simulation and the EVT approach can lead to a more realistic traffic safety analysis [14,15].
This study proposes an innovative calibration method of microsimulation models based on extreme value theory. The calibration procedure includes two steps. The first-step is to calibrate the arrival type and average vehicle delay time to match the real traffic conditions. The second-step is to calibrate VISSIM parameters to produce an extreme value distribution of simulated conflicts that matches the one of field-measured conflicts. Thirty-six hours of video data at a signalized intersection were used in this study. Automated traffic conflicts analysis using computer vision techniques is used to extract the field-measured conflicts. Simulated conflicts were estimated from VISSIM trajectories using the SSAM tool.
Different from existing safety simulation studies which focused on obtaining a good correlation between simulated and observed conflicts, the contribution of this study is to ensure the extreme value distribution of simulated conflicts matches that of field-measured conflicts through the calibration of simulation model. This should provide calibration of estimated crash risk from the simulation models. As well, the relationship between crashes estimated from simulation models and actual crashes is enhanced.
