Web-based markets are becoming increasingly prevalent in our daily lives [23], [5]. Examples include cell-phone and credit card plans, car insurance, bank accounts, pension plans and many more. The growth of these market is facilitated by technology, which allows service providers to tailor plans to the needs of different types of customers, while customers are able to change plans and service providers easily and quickly.
In addition to these benefits, web-based markets also bring new challenges. From the perspective of customers, the existence of a wide array of different plans and possible service providers makes it time consuming and challenging to negotiate over contracts. From the perspective of suppliers, the need to attract and continuously maintain a large base of customers makes it difficult to stay profitable.
This paper studies how computer agents can balance the trade-off between profitability and competition when negotiating over contracts with people in a three-player market settings. The first contribution of this paper is the design of a “contract game” which is analogous to a market setting in which participants need to reach agreements on contracts over time. The game comprises three players, two service providers and one customer that are allocated resources at the onset of the game. The service providers compete to make contract offers to the customer that consist of resource exchanges. The objectives for all players is to maximize their profits, measured by the amount of resources they are able to collect by the end of the game and whether they can reach the goal.
The second contribution of this paper is to formally define the type of offers and contracts that arise in the contract game and to define sub-game perfect equilibrium strategies for the game. The equilibrium explicitly reasons about the probability that a customer player makes irrational moves during the game. We show that for a particular class of contract games, the contracts reached in equilibria involve a commitment between the customer and one of the service providers that prevent the customer from signing a contract with the other provider.
The third contribution of this paper is to evaluate computer agents playing the equilibria strategies in extensive empirical studies carried out in three different countries, the U.S., Israel and China. We hypothesized the following: First, that people will vary in the way they play the game, but by including commitments in their strategies the equilibrium agents will be able to play well with people. Second, that defining off-the-equilibrium path strategies is crucial to interacting with people in the game, because they may not necessarily adhere to the specified equilibrium strategies.
We ran several configurations in which two human participants played with a single agent participant in various role configurations in the game. The computer agents used several types of equilibrium strategies that varied in whether they reason about possible irrational behavior by people. We measured whether the agents can (gain more utility) in the same role (service provider or responder) when playing other people (not when playing them directly). This supports the use of the computer agents as proxies for people who negotiate with other people or computer agents in e-commerce situations. Our results showed that the computer agent using the sub-game perfect equilibrium strategies for the customer role was able to outperform people in the same role all three countries. In particular, the customer agent made significantly more commitment type proposals than people, and requested significantly more resources from service providers than did people. The service provider agent was able to gain more utility than people playing the same role by reasoning about the probability that people will make irrational moves in the game. This probability was tuned separately for each country using prior data of people's play, which enabled the service provider to adapt different negotiation behavior for each country.
Lastly, we saw significant differences in the performance of the provider agents playing Nash equilibrium strategies between the different countries. Specifically, in China, people were able to outperform the provider agent, while in Israel the performance of the service provider agent was similar to that of people.
Our results have insight for agent-designer in human–computer negotiation settings in which it is difficult to use data-driven approaches. We show that despite people's inherent tendency to deviate from rational strategies, equilibrium strategies can form the basis of computational agents for negotiating with people in different cultures, provided that two conditions are met: First, these agents directly reason about people's possible irrational behavior in the game. Second, the agents compute and are able to use off-the-equilibrium path strategies. The paper provides further evidence that although equilibrium strategies are prone to fail in game settings such as the ultimatum game they can be successful in other domains, namely market competition settings, and that the extent to which people engage in sub-optimal behavior seems to be culturally influenced. It is the first study showing the value of equilibrium strategies for negotiating with people from different cultures.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section describes relevant work on automated negotiations that include both people and computer agents. Section 3 presents the game that we used in our study. Our three-player market game was configured using the Colored Trails (CT) game [10] which provides a realistic analog to task settings. Section 4 provides a formalization of the game and provides necessary definitions. Section 5 presents the sub-game perfect equilibrium and correctness proof. Section 6 presents an empirical study with 500 human subjects from three countries. We end this section with a discussion on the reasons for the successes of the computer agent using the sub-game perfect equilibrium strategies playing the customer role and the modified agent that plays the role of a service provider. We characterize the situations in which sub-game perfect equilibrium agents can be beneficial and discuss the benefits and limitations of our approach. Lastly, Section 7 concludes the paper and presents some ongoing and future directions on agent-design for market settings that involve people.
