Nowadays, most of us are familiar with online retailer webpages asking their users to retype a selection of distorted characters from an image before allowing them access to their online services. At times, this process may be frustrating and can require a considerable amount of time and effort to visually inspect and type out these blurry characters and numbers. These distorted images are an example of CAPTCHAs (Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart). CAPTCHAs (von Ahn et al., 2004) were developed to protect websites and online service providers from possible cyber-attacks originating from automated computer programs (bots), and are the principal shield in protecting websites from being abused by bots and spams. The term “CAPTCHA” was first introduced by Luis von Ahn in the year 2000 at Carnegie Mellon University (CAPTCHA: Telling Humans and Computers Apart Automatically, 2000–2010a). This process has also been referred to as the “Reverse Turing Test” (Chellapilla et al., 2005). An example of one of the famous current CAPTCHA models, known as ReCAPTCHA is shown in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (49KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Example of one of the most popular current CAPTCHAs, known as ReCAPTCHA (Marc, 2011).
As demand for online services rapidly grows, it is essential to have a mechanism that cannot only recognise the users as genuine, but at the same time can also ensure that users are real humans rather than automated computer programs (or “bots”). There is a direct correlation between growing numbers of online users, and a rapid rise in the number of cyber-attacks in recent years. Automated computer attacks abuse online service providers by supplying false information to systems and acting as human users (Crimeware: Bots, 2014). Human Interactive Proofs (HIPs) or CAPTCHAs are a set of challenge/response protocols designed in the form of a challenge or a test that can be presented to the users in order to distinguish human users from computer automated programs (Chewa and Baird, 2003). HIPs are designed to be easy for human users to solve, and should be very challenging (and ideally impossible) for automated computer programs to break.
CAPTCHAs are used for a variety of online applications such as free email accounts, e-commerce, online polling, chatrooms, and many other interactive online services (CAPTCHA: Telling Humans and Computers Apart Automatically, 2000–2010b). According to von Ahn et al. (2003), the idea behind a CAPTCHA is to use the sophisticated abilities of the human perceptual system in order to resolve a problem, which cannot be addressed by computer programs. Over the past decade, various CAPTCHA models were introduced and used widely by major online service providers such as Yahoo!, Google and Microsoft as well as social networks such as Facebook, in order to provide better security against automated computer attacks.
However, there has been extensive research on the security of CAPTCHAs as most CAPTCHA models have been broken using sophisticated recognition techniques. In this paper, a novel CAPTCHA model is introduced called Visual Integration CAPTCHA (VICAP), which makes use of the abilities of the human visual perception system to superimpose and integrate fleeting image frames of noisy partial information in order to create a final object, which can then be recognised by the brain. The proposed approach involves generating a sequence of image frames, which are obtained by sampling the binarized version of the original image, consisting of a string of characters, and adding in background noise to increase the security of the model. Next, the sequence of these images is played back at an appropriate frame rate so that the brain perceives it as a continuous animation, and thus, recognising the original object.
When consecutive frames are displayed at very high speeds, visual information can be integrated into the Visual Short-Term Memory (VSTM), which allows humans to perceive and complete the image of the original object. Each individual frame contains only a part of the original object pixels. Therefore, by analysing and processing a single frame, no useful information regarding the original object can be retrieved, thus rendering it unsuitable for OCR algorithms. The robustness of the proposed CAPTCHA model was tested using the state of the art CAPTCHA Breaker program. The final results demonstrate that the proposed CAPTCHA model is robust against various types of cyber security attacks.
Our main contributions to this research can be listed as follows:
•We have used the concept of visual psychophysics to design a novel CAPTCHA model, which would only be understandable for human users and not current computer recognition programmes.•POV has been applied to the new CAPTCHA model to superimpose and integrate all the CAPTCHA images to form an object using the human brain.•The Recognition Improvement Level (RIL) for human users has been seen to have a 50% increase in recognition success rates compared to current computer recognition programmes based on multi-frames scenarios.•The new CAPTCHA's ability to be unrecognisable to current OCR programmes has increased by over 99% (close to 100%) based on single-frame scenarios and 50% based on multi-frame scenario compared to the current text-based CAPTCHA models.•In terms of usability and performance, our proposed VICAP model has improved by 92% in terms of time to solve, and similarly 65% in terms of difficulty level. Furthermore, as the user satisfaction results confirm, we have achieved a 35% improvement in terms of clarity and ambiguity level of the CAPTCHA characters.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 1 will give a brief introduction regarding computer security and the importance of CAPTCHA in our daily online activities. Key background information on CAPTCHA, together with discussion of types of CAPTCHA categories, will then be discussed in Section 2. Sections 3 and 4 will present our proposed CAPTCHA model and the relevant methodologies behind it. In Section 5, some of the evaluation and experimental results will be provided and discussed. Finally, Section 6 will draw together the conclusions from our study.
