The rapid development of the World Wide Web has enabled millions of people around the world to communicate, collaborate and share content on the web. To analyze such complex and heterogeneous data, researchers often represented this ubiquitous networked data as networks, where nodes and links represent the entities and their relationships, respectively [1]. To facilitate machine learning-based network analysis, Network Representation Learning (NRL) is widely studied to automatically learn low-dimension vector representation of nodes (a.k.a. node embedding) while preserving the main structural properties of the original network [2], [3]. A common assumption of NRL is that the proximities among the vectors can reflect the relationships among the corresponding nodes such as similarity, type and polarity.
Recently, Signed Network Representation Learning (SNRL) methods have gained considerable attention because the polarity of the links, i.e., positive and negative relationship among entities in a complex networked system [4] can be naturally modelled in a signed network. It is reported that link polarities information can improve the performance of traditional tasks [5], [6] and thus signed networks have a wide range of application scenarios such as support/opposite relationships in social networks, synergistic/antagonistic drugs in Healthcare, and symbiotic/competitive animals in Ecosystem.
Scale-free1 is an important property widely existed in real-world signed networks. In Fig. 1, we show that both positive and negative degree distributions of real-world signed networks in Table 1 follow power-law distributions.2 This result suggests that the hierarchy may be ubiquitous in many signed social networks because the scale-free property is the consequence of the underlying hierarchy [7], [8]. For example, nodes with higher hierarchy are more likely to be connected by other nodes and vice versa.Download : Download high-res image (385KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The degree distribution of positive and negative links of four real-world signed networks. All of them follow power-law degree distributions, which implies that these networks underlie hierarchical organizations.Table 1. The summary of seven real world signed networks used in the experiments.Data#node#positive links#negative linksaverage degreedirectionalWiki-editor20,198268,42078,79834.4FalseWiki-rfa11,259132,75138,81130.5TrueEpinions127,503265,24946,79922.7TrueEpinions2119,130586,223118,34911.8TrueSlashdot177,350353,595114,95912.1TrueSlashdot279,120350,005117,86411.8TrueCoW13791523716.8False
However, none of the previous methods considers this intrinsic property of signed networks. Beseides, existing works learn node embeddings in Euclidean space where geometry constraints are imposed, and they may not be sufficient enough to model the data with latent hierarchies such as text, social networks and the web [9], [10]. For example, considering the task of projecting a tree (can be seen as a simplified network) into a low-dimension Euclidean space where the distances between each pair of nodes are larger than a threshold. When the level of a tree increases, the dimensionality of the embedding space needs to be dramatically enlarged because it grows only polynomially while the size of the tree grows exponentially.
On the other hand, non-Euclidean NRL methods such as hyperbolic embedding methods have been proposed to model network structured data as well as unstructured data such as text [9], [11], [12]. As a non-Euclidean space, hyperbolic space is suitable for modeling datasets with power-law distributions while capturing the latent hierarchical structures. One reason is that the hyperbolic space has a negative curvature so that space can expand exponentially for the radius.3 The hyperbolic space can be seen as a continuous tree such that the positions of nodes in the hyperbolic space can reflect the underlying hierarchical pattern of the networks (i.e., nodes closer to the center can serve as the root nodes of a network, while those nodes far apart the center are the leaf nodes).
Thus, in this work, we aim to answer the question: Whether the hyperbolic space is a good choice to represent signed networks? We propose a non-Euclidean representation learning method for signed networks named Hyperbolic Signed Network Embedding (HSNE). Specifically, we employ the structural balance theory from social theory to construct an effective objective function. The key idea is that nodes connected by positive links are more similar than those connected by negative links. For example, in a politician social network, a positive link between two politicians represents they support each other, while a negative edge implies they are foes. The structural balance theory is consistent in many signed social network and can provide us with guidance to learn the node embeddings [13]. Secondly, we develop an efficient learning framework based on Riemannian stochastic gradient descent [14]. The gradient calculation in hyperbolic space is more complex and time-consuming than that in Euclidean space. In this work, we sample a batch of nodes and their positive and negative neighbor nodes to train the model. We assume that these triples are independent of each other so that HSNE can scale to large scale dataset. Finally, we perform extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of HSNE. We compare HSNE with Euclidean-based baselines on link sign prediction and reconstruction tasks, and the results show that our method can achieve similar or better performance in terms of the ability of generalization and capacity.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are:
1)To the best of our knowledge, HSNE is the first SNRL method based on non-Euclidean geometry. It embeds the nodes of a signed network to a Poincaré ball in a hyperbolic space. We develop an efficient learning framework based on structural balance theory and Riemannian stochastic gradient descent.2)Benefited from the properties of hyperbolic geometry, our method can preserve the ubiquitous hierarchy and scale-free characteristics in signed networks, which are not considered in existing methods.3)To evaluate the effectiveness of HSNE, we perform experiments on three network analysis tasks on seven real-world datasets. The experimental results show that our approach performs similar or better than the state-of-the-art Euclidean counterparts.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we propose a new non-Euclidean SNRL framework based on structural balance theory and hyperbolic embedding. We present experimental results on seven real-world networks in Section 3, and in Section 4 we briefly reviews the related works such as network representation learning and hyperbolic embedding. In the last section, we summarize the results of this work and discuss future works.
