Traditionally, the communication devices were limited to telephone handsets and cell phones. Today this definition has been expanded to wider range of devices such as mobile devices, notebooks, and personal computers. Moreover, with the advent of networked personal computers, and especially with the connection of those networked computers to the outside world, and to each other over the Internet, computer devices with the necessary hardware to speak and hear (i.e. microphone and speaker) and the voice communication software (i.e. Skype) are widely used for communication. Meanwhile, the combination of anonymity, ease of access and free offerings of VoIP services provide fertile ground for criminal activity. Though, interpretation, and authentication of recorded VoIP calls are important for forensic investigation. Although beginning the past few years, the communications are more difficult to intercept, it is quite possible to collect call recording evidence during crime investigation. In addition, sometimes the recorded calls are submitted by the attorneys to the court of law for preservation, examination, and analysis. An example for such evidence could be the recorded conversations by the bank employee, recorded conversations by the bank customer, recorded conversations discovered in the crime scene or recorded conversations discovered in any digital storage device that belongs to the suspect.
Authenticity of the audio recording has been proven based on different techniques such as identification and verification of the recording environment, the recording device, or the recording device power source. Nevertheless, the performance of the environment-based techniques [2] depends on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) levels and reverberation rates. In addition, the use of recent audio editing software allows to counterfeit environmental sounds without leaving perceptible traces in audio signal. Furthermore, in spite of high accuracy and novelty of the ENF-based techniques [3], ENF is only sometimes embedded in the recording and even if the ENF exists; tracing the ENF requires the availability of the ENF archive. Due to the limited applications of the ENF and environment-based techniques, forensic characterization of audio devices has become an important approach. Identification through forensic characterization implies identifying the type, make, model, configuration and other specifications of the device through retrieving information from its output data. The majority of these approaches are defined as blind because they never use the original content and the information from the real device for the analysis.
Unfortunately, the indagation of this technique in audio forensics introduces more challenges. This is because, apart from signal variations due to acquisition devices, an audio recording may contain signal variations due to speakers, speech context, environment, loudspeaker, or communicating devices. Using spectral analysis techniques, mel-frequency cepstrum coefficients (MFCCs) were firstly proposed for the purpose of speech recognition. This feature set have been adopted for audio source acquisition device identification because it utilizes homomorphic filtering to model the distortion caused by device multiplicative transfer functions through converting it into additive terms. However, MFCCs alone lack robustness against effects of speech and signal loudness, and it is more practical to extract MFCCs from near-silent segments in order to focus on pitch of low intensity signal with small variations of its spectral envelope through time. This paper aims to extend the previous study in Ref. [4] on identifying the individual computer devices that their VoIP conversation was received and recorded by the other party, whereby the computer device response function was determined by extracting entropy of mel cepstrum coefficients from near-silent segments of the call recording signals. In another word, the initial study lacks justification and reasoning on modelling the computer device response function, whereas the existing study introduces in-depth technical and experimental evaluation. In summary, our key contributions are:
•a control system model for mathematical modelling of the computer device response function based on PC-to-PC VoIP communication signal processing pipeline;•acceptable justification on the use of entropy-MFCC feature set to capture computer device specific information, based on the assumed model;•critical test via collecting original call and microphone recording dataset corresponding to computer devices to investigate influences such as speech, environments, inter- and intra-model similarities and communication channel on call recording signal;•an extensive analysis of the feasibility of the entropy-MFCCs against entropy-linear frequency cepstrum coefficients (LFCCs), entropy-bark frequency cepstrum coefficients (BFCCs) and mean-MFCCs through different types of classification [e.g., support vector machine (SVM), naïve Bayesian, and logistic regression] and clustering techniques [e.g., Simple K-means, Expectation Maximization (EM)], which are well known machine learning algorithms.
Thus, the proposed identification system allows forensic investigators to identify transmitting computer devices from recorded VoIP call without using the network. As a result, the framework focuses on analysing the recorded call, whereby the query VoIP call was received from an anonymous computer device. The use of recorded VoIP call rather than the intercepted call is more practical because today the most popular VoIP applications are encrypted. In overall, forensic preservation, examination, and analysis of recorded VoIP calls has several potential advantages during crime scene investigation. Occasionally, the law enforcement agencies take advantage of recorded VoIP calls, in order:
•to verify that the type, model or brand of the communication device is matched with the one discovered at the crime scene,•to identify the type, model or brand of the communication device utilized by the criminal from the call recording evidence discovered at the victims’ premise.
For example, these methods might be used to identify the adversary in cases such as VoIP scams, as shown in Fig. 1. For such cases, attacker forges the Caller-IDs of the banks to call a large number of bank customers. Hence, proving that the recorded call in the victim’s phone was made by the computer device owned by the attacker provides strong evidence for his crime. It also proves the authenticity of the call recording submitted to the court as evidence.Download : Download high-res image (761KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. General scenario diagram on VoIP Pear-to-Pear call initiated from PC, possible VoIP scams and tracking scenario.
The rest of this paper is divided into five sections: Section 2 provides the brief summary on previous works in audio source device identification. A detailed outline of the methodology is described in Section 3. Sections 4 and 5 explains the recording setup and the experiments, and then evaluates the performance of the proposed method. Finally, Section 6 presents the explanatory report based on the results, recommends actions, and discusses limitations and future applications.
