Nature has crafty ways to solve problems. The knowledge retrieved from its observation has been a source of inspiration for computer scientists throughout the years, which aim to derive solutions for problems that may be otherwise hard or impossible to solve with other methods, possibly having higher computational complexity. In the cases where analytic expressions are not available, nature-inspired computing may be able to find sub-optimal solutions efficiently. Nature-inspired algorithms abstract the phenomena found in the wild and are subject to evolutionary steps or computing layers in order to converge to a solution. Examples include Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) and Artificial Immune Systems (AISs).
AISs abstract many theories of the biological immune system, which is not fully understood to this date. The immune system has the responsibility of protecting the body from foreign and potentially dangerous microorganisms called pathogens. To fight them off, the immune system has developed the innate and the adaptive immune subsystems. The translation of the immune system to the computing realm seems to be contextually correct and particularly suited for security purposes. The seminal works of Forrest et al. [1] and Kephart [2], in 1994, for the detection of malware underline that view.
One of the best things about the immune system is that it is capable of distributively detecting a vast number of unknown patterns using limited body resources. The ability to retain memory is also a key feature of the immune system, allowing faster responses to be triggered for pathogens that has encountered before. This behavior has distinct applications in computer security, specifically in the detection of anomalies in networks or computers. AISs are modeled with positive or negative samples so that nonself (anomalous object(s)) is distinguished from self, the set characterizing normalcy of the monitored system. Research on information and network security, particularly with the purpose of detecting security incidents, can be broken up according to different criteria. For example, one can consider deployment, purpose or scope of security solutions for such classification. For deployment and scope, systems built either for hosts, network or applications can be characterized under distinct topics. Fig. 1 depicts five of those topics, namely malicious process detection, anomaly detection, intrusion detection, scan and flood detection, and fraud detection. Whereas the detection of malicious processes is done at the host level, detection of intrusions, scans or floods is a problem addressed at network points. Studies under fraud detection analyze subjects such as spam and phishing, thereby conveying the more broad meaning of the art of deception. Anomaly detection refers to more generic works that attempt to provide all-in-one, agnostic solutions for the detection of abnormality. The topics illustrated in Fig. 1 are later used for organizing this survey on AISs in Section 5. These topics cover the subjects of the related works while segregating them in a consistent manner.
Various works [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13] published throughout the time have reviewed the field of AISs to some extent, elaborating on the theory behind AIS algorithms or gathering works on a specific topic. The goal of this article is to give an introductory view on the subject and systematically review much of the works available in the literature, considering the identification of future guidelines in the process. The literature review is confined to the application of AISs to security problems, mentioning details of other nature-inspired techniques only for completeness purposes when applicable. The contributions of this work are, therefore, threefold. Firstly, a tutorial-like description of the biological and the computational concepts is provided. Secondly, much of the security research of AISs is reviewed substantially. Thirdly, a novel application of AISs is identified toward the end of the article.Download : Download high-res image (102KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Application of AISs to computer security.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 motivates the need for this survey, reviewing other works surveying the subject at hand. Section 3 goes through the basics of the biological immune system and introduces several important concepts about AISs. Section 4 provides a thorough description of popular algorithms found in the literature. Section 5 reviews studies covering AISs applied to security purposes, followed by Section 6, which summarizes them and extracts valuable lessons. Section 7 concludes this article.
