Weiser (1991) in the early 1990s predicted that computers and machines would become ubiquitous in our lives. Though it is premature to assert that we are becoming indistinguishable from computers, we have been accustomed to viewing computers as our assistants and perceiving them as social actors (Fogg, 2002, Nass and Moon, 2000, Reeves and Nass, 1996).
This study will focus on how individuals follow suggestions from computer agents and conform to their group norms. According to Lieberman (1997), a computer agent can be defined as a program that can be regarded as a facilitator or an assistant instead of a tool. An agent should display some characteristics that people can relate to human intelligence (Lieberman, 1997). As computers have been enabled with complex algorithms to work autonomously, computer agents have advanced to work in ways that are perceived as intelligent and influential in changing people's attitude and decisions (Shinozawa, Naya, Yamato, & Kogure, 2004). An example of autonomous technologies in the 1990s could be the cognitive adaptive computer help (COACH) system. COACH system generates personalized advice based on recorded user experience and analysis of use efficiency (Selker, 1994). Another example would be Letizia, an autonomous interface agent for web browsing. Letizia provides individualized and non-coercive advice through simulating users' online searching behaviors (Lieberman, 1997).
Today's computer technologies are not limited to providing assistive help in browsing webpages. Adding to the equation was the recommendation algorithms that record and demonstrate our preferences against others (Gillespie, 2014). On Amazon.com, recommendation algorithms track users' interests, build models of users' preferences, and personalize customers' online shopping experience (Lops, De Gemmis, & Semeraro, 2011). Customized search engines and intelligent software agents also have been used to assist in filtering, sorting, and sharing information (Montaner, Lopez, & De La Rosa, 2003).
In addition to individualized service, computer-generated content has made a breakthrough in affecting users' judgments. Clerwall (2014) and Van Der Kaa and Krahmer (2014) found that newsreaders perceived no difference between computer writers and human journalists in their credibility and expertise. Considering that news agencies such as Thomson Reuters and AP have started to use algorithms to compile news stories (Van Dalen, 2012), it could be expected that readers will receive more robot-generated news in the future.
Computer technologies are also taking humans' social roles in part and attempting to become effective in informing and assisting humans. Some computer programs have been designed to be cooperative and to act as tutors and secretaries (Bocionek, 1995, Clarke and Smyth, 1993, Viadero, 2010). As people are becoming reliant on these computer agents in their daily decision making (e.g., Google Now, Microsoft Cortana), this study will specifically examine how individuals engage with computer agents in group discussion and how computer agents as group members may exert social influence on individuals' decision making.
There will be theoretical implications for studying computer agents' social influence on individuals. First, research on the Computers are Social Actors (CASA) paradigm suggests that individuals perceive computers as social actors through the cues of language use, voice, praise, and so on (Nass and Moon, 2000, Nass, 2004). However, less research has centered on whether individuals may succumb to “peer pressure” from multiple computing sources (Fogg, 2002). By examining the social dynamics of computer agents, this study can contribute to the research gap in the CASA research.
Second, the Social Identity Model of Deindividuation Effects (SIDE) suggests that lack of individuating cues in group communication may lead individuals to shift their personal identity to group identity. Group members may thus exert social influence on individuals through salient group identity or norms (Reicher et al., 1995, Spears and Postmes, 2015). However, most SIDE research has been conducted in the context of computer-mediated communication (CMC) where group members are presumed to be humans. It remains unknown whether the SIDE model can be applied to human-computer interaction. By applying computer agents as group members, this study will have the potential to expand the theoretical scope of SIDE from traditional CMC to human-computer interaction (HCI).
