In therapeutic imaging and analytical radiology as a key subject matter of research Computer aided diagnostic (CAD) has emerged. CAD has applicability in numerous medical imaging modalities. Some of which are computerized tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), ultrasound (US) imaging, and nuclear medicine [1], [2], [3], [4]. For US liver image diagnosis CAD strongly depend by the quality of data. The comparatively substandard of clinical US images reduces the success of early liver ailment finding and analysis. There are distinctive objectives [5] which make the system assignment complex, such as speckle, attenuation, signal dropout and shadows. It is due to the orientation dependence of acquisition that can outcome in losing boundaries. Additional complexities appear due to the highly variable shape of the liver, reduced contrast and intensity inhomogeneity within liver, weak boundaries to its nearest organs say heart and stomach, and intensity homogeneity to nearer organs. So, liver diagnosing from US device seems an exigent task that has called the attention of many researchers in recent times.
The data generated by the automated computer processes while diagnosis is helpful to the radiologist to realize the US liver images. So, the precision of image diagnosis is better, and the time required by regular methods in peruse an image is reduced [6]. Henceforth, utilizing CAD the analysis of diseases has become a vibrant area of research [7]. There is greater requirement of precisely analyzing the therapeutic images and lessening the time requisite for proper analysis of liver cancer.
The key objective of this review is emphasizing on the potentiality of intelligent computer systems to be utilized in clinical application to support pathologists to analyze and classify US liver cancerous tissue images. On the basis of methodical analysis of various liver conditions, CAD methods and organized summary of algorithm, we categorize the computerized system according to the four primary stages of analyzing liver US image. Here the using of general procedures including data preprocessing, lesion segmentation, feature extraction and selection, and depicting of cancer by means of a classifier [8] better summarizing the performance of each category leads to find the ideal solution for automatic computerized system performance and the four stages are given in Fig. 1.1Data preprocessing: The preprocessing task is to restrain the noise and to increase the image without eliminating the important features of Liver US images.2Image segmentation: Here image is divided into a number of small portions, and it forms the background the lesions detached. The edges of the lesions are outlined for feature withdrawal.3Feature extraction and selection: The stage identifies a feature set of liver cancer lesions that can precisely differentiate normal tissue or abnormal cancer tissue. The feature space could be vast and intricate, so withdrawal and choosing the finest features is decisive.4Classification: After the selected features, the apprehensive regions will be characterized into distinctive classifications, say normal tissue or cancerous tissue.Download : Download high-res image (156KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Flow diagram of CAD for liver cancer.
In following manner, this paper is arranged. Classification of liver cancer is presented in Section 2. The literature review about the four stages of the CAD system in US liver diagnosis is discussed in section 3. Relevant research works are detailed in section 4. In section 5 concluding part is presented.
