In qualitative genetics, Mendel assumed that factors affecting phenotypes are composed of several factors (Mendel, 1866). In quantitative genetics, Fisher and Bateson and Punnett assumed that factors affecting phenotypes are composed of infinite factors (Bateson and Punnett, 1905, Fisher, 1918). Mendel ignored data that did not follow his laws while Fisher ignored data that did not follow a normal distribution and call them ‘outliers’. This paper does not eliminate or assume normality in data. The Reverse Threshold Model Theory (RTMT) respects normality as only part of the truth and consider outliers can be valuable information. There was no elimination of outliers in this experiment.
Threshold was defined by Wright (1916) in his guinea pig analysis as the accumulation of small factors to some level that changes the phenotype and that can be classified visually. This paper reversed his way of thinking in that qualitative phenotypes can be explained by some limiting factor (LF) under Liebigs's Law of the Minimum. By transformation of the raw data into an LF, all random errors that always exist in the Conventional Model (CM) are eliminated (Faarungsang, 2009).
The RTMT model is an analytical concept recently introduced to solve the estimation of parametric problems where the assumptions do not follow normal statistical theory. Two sources of Internet Service Provider were compared, namely Kasetsart University (KU) and the home. While the averaged value of data transmission at KU was higher, by using RTMT, it was found that the home was the better source. However, RTMT has not been sufficiently applied in other contexts (Faarungsang, 2009, Faarungsang, 2010) and no research has been reported to compare RTMT efficiency with CM. Thus this investigation assessed the efficiency of RTMT in comparison with CM based on the ratio of probability given by using the two models.
The study of threshold inheritance was first conducted by Wright (1916), who found that guinea pigs normally have four digits on their front feet and three digits on their hind feet. However, it was observed that some guinea pigs have extra digits based on several factors including genetic characteristics (Wright, 1916, Wright, 1933). The probability of an animal having several categorical traits was determined (Gianola, 1982, Gianola, 1983) using a Bayesian statistical approach. Notably, a reverse based on the threshold model has never been reported.
The original concept of threshold assumes that some qualitative traits are composed of several small additive factors and behave in an accumulated fashion up to the threshold level. The qualitative appearance will change after the accumulated factor is below or above the threshold. The current investigation proposed a reverse concept to the original one. In this alternative concept, it is assumed that the quantitative traits that have been assumed to be composed of several small additive effects can be accumulated to a noticeable qualitative amount called the “threshold” quantity based only on one LF effect being present or absent in the model. Furthermore, the current study extended the terminology “threshold” to cover all things: quantitative traits, qualitative traits, the left hand side of model (traits) and the right hand side of model (effects). Furthermore this study assumed that all things do have their own thresholds which may or may not be apparent. Thus, while all things do have an infinite number of factors to yield effect under given conditions, there will only be a few factors (namely LFs) that truly cause effect. By this, it is implied that the LF and threshold are considered to be the same. If specific conditions change, another factor that previously was not significant may change to be the next LF and thus cause the research process to enter into an endless mode by nature.
The concept of LF was reported by Taylor (1934) who based it on Leibig's Law of the Minimum. In animal nutrition, the first LF is lysine and the second LF is methionine. This means that even if an animal is fed with nutritious food abundantly, it will not grow up as well as it should with lysine and methionine, respectively.
The meaning of the RTMT concept has been discussed (Faarungsang, 2009, Faarungsang, 2010, Faarungsang and Pannoppha, 2007, Faarungsang and Parisuthikul, 2009) but its application has not been reported. The core rationale and concept of RTMT is summed up as follows. In all statistical models, the left hand side (LHS) contains a single variable to represent a reasonable key performance index (KPI). The variable on the LHS can be composed of an infinite number of variables or effects, which most statisticians would place on the right hand side (RHS) of their models. The effects of the RHS that are not clearly stated and will always be assumed to be randomly and independently distributed and are summed as the random errors. Both the LHS and RHS are based on assumptions using a common scientific method that may not be correct. It may be better to assume that even if there are infinite components on the RHS of the model, only a few effects can play an important role at the same time under a specific condition. These effects can be called the LFs or threshold characters. The quantitative effects on the RHS of the model by itself can be considered as the LHS. Transformation of it into an LF or threshold may fit with nature better than following the conventional approach. This is called reverse thinking and has been coined as part of the RTMT concept as presented in this paper. Events on the RHS of the model may have joint effects called interactions based on their behavior being both synergistic and antagonistic. Most things occurring in reality contain only a few LFs at the same time. After a change in specific conditions, the next LF would appear which causes an infinite loop of research on the same topic. It cannot be guaranteed that the old LF will return while the new LF exists. The task of all valuable research is simply to define the LF and then make use of it.
This paper reports an attempt to prove that RTMT is more efficient than CM by using Monte Carlo simulation in the “One Laptop Per Child” (SSS/OLPC) data.
