Computers have the potential to drastically improve productivity in education. Computers enable students to engage with educational software, take better notes, complete tasks more quickly, stay more organized, and instantly access a broad range of learning resources. However, as the number of Internet and computer-based distractions increase, so do concerns about student cyberslacking and non-productive computer use. If students are sufficiently susceptible to distractions or other unproductive behaviors associated with computer use, then the costs of computer use may outweigh the benefits. As computer use in the classroom becomes pervasive, it is increasingly important to identify whether computers help or hinder student performance and what policies may lead to improved student outcomes. Despite the significant role computers play in the classroom and the low costs of implementing classroom computer policies, relatively little is known about how computer use impacts student productivity.
Several recent trends highlight why understanding the impact of computer use on student outcomes is becoming increasingly important. First, the prevalence of computer use in the classroom has increased dramatically in recent years; in 2011 57% of recent college graduates reported using a smartphone, laptop, or tablet in class at least some of the time (Parker, Lenhart, & Moore, 2011). In more recent studies, computer use is much higher. In our study, we find that 72% of students use laptops in the classroom and Carter, Greenberg, and Walker (2017) find that 79% of students use laptops.2 Additionally, the efficacy of classroom learning is becoming increasingly important as the ratio of class to study time has increased to the point where the average college student spends more time in the classroom than studying outside of it. Babcock and Marks (2011) find that although the time college students spend in the classroom each week has remained roughly constant at about 16 h a week over the last 50 years, the time students spend outside the classroom studying each week has fallen precipitously from 24 h in 1961 to just 11 h in 2004. Also, concerns about equity motivate a study of the impact of computer use in the college classroom. African American and Hispanic students, as well as those from economically disadvantaged backgrounds, are less likely to own laptops (Lenhart, Purcell, Smith, & Zickuhr, 2010). These patterns of computer ownership may widen or shrink gaps in student outcomes depending on the effect of computers inside and outside the classroom. Finally, identifying the effects of computer use in a college classroom environment informs the potential impact of computers on productivity in settings where straightforward measures of productivity are unavailable, such as the workplace.
In this paper we present quasi-experimental evidence of the impact of computer use in college classrooms on academic outcomes. This study takes advantage of a college policy that requires all students to own a laptop computer, but allows individual instructors to require, allow, or ban computers in their classrooms. We conduct surveys among a subset of students (n=229) and find that students who are required to bring computers to any of their classes on a certain day are 21% more likely to use computers in laptop-optional classes than students who are not required to bring computers to any of their classes. Similarly, we find that students who are prohibited from bringing computers to at least one class on a certain day are 49% less likely to use computers in laptop-optional classes. We treat computer-use policies in same-day classes as an instrument for computer use in laptop-optional classes and compare the grades of students (n=5571, obs=32,959) who are and who are not influenced to bring computers to class by their course schedules. This approach yields reduced-form evidence that computers have a significant negative impact on course grades. We find that a requirement to bring a computer to school decreases a student’s course grades in classes that allow laptops by between 0.04 and 0.05 grade points while a laptop prohibition improves a student’s course grades in laptop-optional courses by between 0.05 and 0.09 grade points. When scaled by our first-stage survey results,3 our estimates suggest that computer use decreases course grades by between 0.14 and 0.37 grade points or 0.17 and 0.46 standard deviations. Our results are robust to multiple specifications and are consistent across multiple identification strategies. Additional heterogeneity analysis suggests that the negative effect of computer use is strongest among male students and driven by weaker students as identified by their cumulative GPA. We also find that computer use has more negative effects in quantitative courses and in courses within a student’s major.
Our results are compelling in light of other recent efforts to determine what improves academic performance in higher education. Need-based financial aid has a small or insignificant effect on student grade point averages (GPAs) (Denning, Goldrick-Rab, Kelchen, Harris, Benson, 2016); performance-based financial aid may improve academic performance (e.g. Scott-Clayton, 2011), but is expensive and can generate unintended behavioral responses (Cornwell, Lee, & Mustard, 2005); and counseling services alone do not appear to significantly improve academic performance (Angrist, Lang, & Oreopoulos, 2009). In contrast, policies that limit computer use in the classroom are inexpensive and may significantly improve student academic performance.
