Improving individuals' personal resources (e.g., self-efficacy) is increasingly viewed as one of the most important approaches to heightening their level of engagement at work and, consequently, their personal and work performance (e.g., Bakker and Xanthopoulou, 2013, Halbesleben et al., 2009, Rich et al., 2010, Xanthopoulou et al., 2013). Personal resources refer to aspects of the self that are generally linked to resiliency and individuals' sense of their ability to successfully control and impact their environment (Hobfoll, Johnson, Ennis, & Jackson, 2003). Despite the fact that many studies examine the role of personal resources in improving individuals' work engagement (e.g., Xanthopoulou, Bakker, Demerouti, & Schaufeli, 2007), fewer studies consider late-middle- and old-aged individuals. Unemployment and job seeking among late-middle- and old-aged individuals has become one of the most severe social issues in many Asian countries because many companies have been downsizing and/or closing due to globalization and the loss of their competitive advantage worldwide. A great number of individuals who have been laid off, especially those in their late-middle and even old years, experienced a forced layoff. Therefore, these individuals attend cram schools to learn extra skills in an attempt to find a new job to support their long-term living and to broaden the types of occupations in which they could be employed.
In contrast to the past, today, companies generally rely on computers. Thus, computer-related skills are considered basic criteria in the hiring process. Crams schools that offer computer-related education and training programs have, therefore, become popular among job seekers, including those in their late-middle and old years. However, the learning performance of job seekers who are in their late-middle and old years is typically weaker than that of younger job seekers. Recent studies reveal that in technology-related environments (e.g., computer-related cram schools and workplaces that require employees to use computers), poor performance does not seem to be associated with the vocational education and training education systems; rather, it is mostly due to age (e.g., Hämäläinen, De Wever, Malin, & Cincinnato, 2015). Empirical studies find that the cognitive ability to learn decreases with age (e.g., Germine et al., 2011, Willette et al., 2013). Hence, contemporary research suggests that education providers may need to specifically develop computer training and education programs for this target population (i.e., late-middle- and old-aged learners) (e.g., Yoon, Jang, & Xie, 2015). However, we argue that this solution may not be pragmatic because compared with younger learners, late-middle- and old-aged learners are relatively small groups. Therefore, from education providers' (e.g., cram schools') viewpoint, the return on investment may be low; thus, they may be less likely to implement this solution.
Given the above considerations, in this study, we aim to investigate whether late-middle- and old-aged job seekers' computer self-efficacy (i.e., personal resources; Compeau & Higgins, 1995) in computer-related cram schools influences their learning engagement and subsequent learning performance. This study makes two contributions to the literature. First, this study may be viewed as a reexamination of the recently developed and important concept of work engagement. Specifically, the study examines whether personal resources (e.g., self-efficacy) contribute to individuals' level of work engagement and subsequent job performance in an increasingly important sample that has not yet been investigated in the literature. In this study, we adopt the personal resource of (computer) self-efficacy for the following reason. When individuals reach late-middle and even older ages, they often have lower levels of self-efficacy about their ability to perform and view themselves as less likely to be successful at work (Heckhausen and Schulz, 1995, Ng and Feldman, 2009). Based on Bandura, 1988, Bandura, 1990 claim, individuals with weak intrapersonal influences (e.g., personal resources) have low goal orientations (Bateman & Zeithaml, 1989), tend to dwell on the things that can eventually go wrong, and visualize failure scenarios that hinder their actual abilities and undermine their performance (Bandura, 1988, Bandura, 1990).
Hence, we assume that these individuals' weaker self-efficacy may contribute to their generally poor learning performance in terms of computer skills. To the best of our knowledge, this topic has not yet been discussed in the contemporary work engagement literature. Additionally, we claim that students in cram schools may be technically regarded as employees because the education providers of those schools widely use the students' learning performance (e.g., acquiring domestic and international computer licenses and certificates) to market their brand names via various commercial channels and, in turn, attract more potential students. Therefore, we argue that students' learning engagement may represent a specific type of work engagement and that their learning performance may represent a specific type of job performance. Thus, while we build our hypotheses based on research on work engagement and job performance, we use the terms learning engagement and learning performance in our hypotheses to reflect our study aim.
Second, we seek to provide education providers of computer-related cram schools with a less costly and psychological approach to effectively improving the learning performance of students who are in their late-middle and old years. To investigate the abovementioned relationship, this study adopts the conservation of resources (COR) theory (Hobfoll, 1989, Hobfoll, 2002) and a theoretically extended job demands-resources (JD-R) model (Crawford, LePine, & Rich, 2010). Specifically, the COR is used to articulate the innate behaviors of individuals, particularly those with self-efficacy, toward resources at workplace. Then, the extended JD-R model is adopted to articulate the notion how these resources psychologically impact their engagement level at work.
