As long as dogs have been domesticated, humans have spent time and effort to train them to perform a multitude of tasks. Research in applied behavior analysis suggests the most effective approach to animal training emphasizes the use of positive reinforcement (Hiby et al., 2004), which involves giving something the animal desires such as food to reward the sought-after behavior. Training is a process by which animals learn to perform specific, desired behaviors when instructed. One common training procedure is to allow an animal to produce a desired natural behavior, such as “sit.” Then, the animal is immediately rewarded with a primary reinforcer (a food treat), delivered by the human trainer. Over time, the rewarded behavior (sit) occurs with increasing frequency. Then, the auditory cue, “sit”, is given by the trainer antecedent to the behavior and an association between the cue and action is established. Training is often slowed due to inadequate knowledge or skill on the part of the trainer. Fundamental concepts that affect the animal׳s performance are timing, criteria, and rate of reinforcement (Bailey and Farhoody, 2015). Human trainers, especially novices, often struggle to provide timely and consistent reinforcement when teaching animals. Indiscriminately reinforcing multiple behaviors or failing to recognize correct behaviors are examples of inadequate training criteria and can slow down the learning process, while reinforcing the wrong behavior can teach the dog to do an undesirable action. Timing is critical: reinforcement is most effective when delivered as close as possible to the desired behavior; a delay greater than 0.5 seconds can retard a dog׳s ability to create the association between the instruction, the behavior, and the reinforcement (Yamamoto et al., 2009).
Computers, on the other hand, excel at extremely accurate timing and maintaining consistent criteria and could be used to enhance the process of training animals and by reducing human error, might reduct ambiguity and improve the human–canine relationship. Thus, human–animal–computer interactions could enhance our inter-species relationships with the animals we live or work with (Mancini, 2011)—a computer training system would improve communication and benefit the dog. We believe that computer-assisted training of animals has the potential to improve the state-of-the-art in animal training while improving the human–canine relationship. Since inadequate or ineffective training may lead to dogs being relinquished to animal shelters, a semi-autonomous computer training system for dogs could help eliminate training issues which would help reduce the number of dogs sent to shelters. In addition, a semi-autonomous training system could be used in animal shelters to train dogs to provide beneficial stimulation (Mancini et al., 2014) and to enhance adoptability. Research has shown that shelter dogs that sit or stand in response to interest from a potential adopter are more likely to be adopted (Wells and Hepper, 1992). Our future research work would be to test this system on shelter dogs where human involvement in training might be costly or logistically prohibitive.
Accordingly, we have developed a semi-autonomous training system consisting of a smart harness outfitted with inertial measurement units (IMUs) worn by a dog, a laptop computer that collects data from the IMUs, algorithms for classifying postures, and a computer-controlled treat dispenser to provide reinforcement in response to desired behaviors. An illustration of the system appears in Fig. 1. In this paper, as a first step towards achieving real-world computer-assisted training, we address the issues of creating a system to provide accurate timing of reinforcement and maintaining consistent behavioral criteria. In computational terms, these two factors directly translate to response latency and noise sensitivity when designing algorithms for capturing and reinforcing postures.Download : Download high-res image (162KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The Computer-Assisted Training platform, including a smart harness with IMUs, a laptop with algorithms for posture detection, and a computer-controlled treat dispenser to reinforce desirable behavior.
In the remainder of this paper we will discuss how knowledge of behavior analysis has informed the performance and ergonomic design criteria for our system, some of the practical issues in the design of a computer-assisted canine training system, the efforts made to ensure the dog׳s comfort and acceptance of the system, and present the hardware and software we have developed in some detail. We will then present the results of three experiments that address:
1.Algorithmic noise sensitivity and response latency in the context of data pre-processing.2.Timing and accuracy in comparison to a professional trainer.3.Evidence of dogs learning as it relates to timing and accuracy.
