In recent years, an important dissemination of computer and communication technologies has been observed in Japan and in other industrialized countries. This diffusion in economic activities is a broad and international movement with country specific timeline. According to Murata (2010), this process begins in Japan in the 1950s via the acquisition of a US computer (Bendix G-15) by the Railway Technical Research Institute (1957) and continued through the 1960s by the introduction of second and third generation of computers.1 These machines which were both imported and produced locally, were progressively dedicated to special purpose terminals in manufacturing, distributions and financial industries in the 1970s. During the 1980s, Japan undergone a massive development of office automation benefiting from the invention of Personal Computer (PC) and other specific programs such spreadsheets or word processors.2 The spread of computers has continued until now and they are used every day in a large range of economic activities. In parallel, technical advance and deregulation policies have caused the emergence of networks supported by computer infrastructure. This concerns the use of the fax machine in the 1980s and above all the development of the Internet and mobile phone in the 1990s and 2000s. Networks have hugely modified the modalities of communication and reduced their costs. The actual situation is characterized by a massive access to these networks: 90% of Japanese people have an access to Internet and the ownership rate of mobile phone is equal to 120% (International Telecommunication Union, 2015).
Another aspect of the actual technological diffusion is the massive development of robotics that can be viewed as a component of the computer revolution (Spong et al., 2012).3 In this field, Japan is a key country both in terms of production and use to the point that it was labelled as “robot kingdom” (Schodt, 1988). Indeed, Japan has a long and fruitful history in this matter which began in the 1960s by the introduction of industrial robots dedicated to welding, assembling or painting, followed by the first mobile robots used in inspection, transport or spatial tasks in the 1980s (Kumaresan and Miyazaki, 1999). Production and use of robots continue at a large scale and were extended through the development of micro-robots and services robots. Illustrations of this trend are the actual efforts in the humanoid robotic field initiated by researchers of Waseda University who created Wabot 1 (1973) as well as other famous examples as ASIMO (Honda), Wakamaru (Mitsubishi), or Pepper (Aldebaran Robotics and Softbank). Data also show the importance of robotics diffusion in Japan. In 2013, this country has the second highest robot density in the world (323 units per 10,000 workers) behind the Republic of Korea and has the most important robot density in the automotive industry with 1520 industrial robots per 10,000 employees (International Federation of Robotics, 2014).4
All these digital devices share a common theoretical and technical background based on binary logic and basic electronic components such as transistor or microprocessor.5 Many scholars suggest that this set is not a simple group of incremental innovations but constitute a “Technological Revolution” or a “technological-discontinuity” (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011) able to “transform profoundly the rest of the economy” and produce a “new economic paradigm” (Perez, 2009).
Indeed, efforts of characterization of technologies in the literature suggest that innovations or interrelated cluster of innovations are not comparable in their scale and their degree. In this perspective, ICT can be viewed as a major technological set susceptible to produce large-scale impacts. In support of this vision, the literature on “General Purpose Technology” (GPT) (Bresnahan, Trajtenberg, 1995, Rosenberg, Trajtenberg, 2004) supposes that the most important technologies share the feature of generality. This crucial point was anticipated by Simon (1987) which stress that the higher is the level of generality of a technology, the higher is its potential because there is a very important number of possible applications. In the case of computer technology, the degree of generality is very high because all economic activities include information processing tasks.
This view is reinforced by the actual process of digitization of human activities which makes the amount of information available more and more important (“Big Data”). Furthermore, digitization is coupled with an impressive improvement of ICT capacities in information processing as well as in terms of transmission, storage and transformation of information (Nordhaus, 2007, Nagy, Farmer, Trancik, Gonzales, 2011, Koomey, Berard, Sanchez, Wong, 2010). Thus, it supposes that the field of application of computer technology is growing, a characteristic that could have notable effects on many economic matters. Among the possible consequences of ICT adoption, an important aspect is its potential destabilizing impact on employment. Indeed, labor activities do not escape this trend of digitization: in production activities, there are many tasks consisting of manipulation of information but also that some other tasks can be modeled as information flows. For example, accounting calculations is a task which consists of transferring, stocking and transforming information. On the other hand, some physical activities such as assembly, construction, transport can also be represented as information. Material elements, the space in which they are situated, and movements can be defined as mathematical objects. From this perspective, these tasks are susceptible of being carried out by robots within computer programs representing physical objects, environment and motions in information way.
Indeed, in addition to digitization and growing computing capacity processes, significant efforts have been made in computer science as in machine learning to improve data processing. We could point the example of “deep learning” which made possible breakthroughs in many fields such as image and speech recognition or natural language understanding (LeCun et al., 2015). A spectacular example of this improvement is the victory of AlphaGo program designed by Google-Deepmind over the Go master Lee Sedol in March 2016. These news techniques constitute a major qualitative leap opening new economics applications.
At the same time, there are important developments in robotics that benefit from the machine learning advances. We refer, for instance, to mobile robots in use or at an advanced stage of development. The best known example is the autonomous car currently developed by many firms such as Toyota or Mercedes-Benz. Several firms also work on autonomous trucks (see European Truck Platooning Challenge6) while many drones are designed for observation, security, delivery (Rakuten, Amazon, DHL...) or military applications. We also note the apparition of industrial and service machines such as warehouse robots, cleaning robots, gardening robots...This new generation of information technologies strongly proposes capacities and application fields very extended with large number of economic applications. This is the scale of the potential of this new wave which makes the issue of automation particularly important.
With this in mind, it could be expected that a large number of tasks in a wide variety of fields could be given over to computers now and in the near future. This perspective constitutes a biggest challenge for modern economies. Acknowledging the importance of this topic, our aim in this paper is to investigate the risk of job destructions in Japan due to computer technology.
The perspective from which a growing share of tasks will be performed by computer capital has strong implications for several Japanese specific economic questions especially those pertaining to the labor market. Among these issues, we can mention the ageing process sustained by gains in longevity, while life expectancy is already one the highest in the world, and low immigration flows. Even if this process concerns several countries in Europe (Germany, France) or in Asia (Korea, China), it is important to stress that “Japan has the most rapidly aging population in the world” (IMF, 2013). On the supply side of the labor market, significant consequences of this evolution are the massive reduction of the overall labor-force, or a dependency ratio reduction in the coming years and decades. A possible response face to this scenario is to call to the technological solution. Growth of ICT capital stock could contribute to maintain the level of production and to help in the care of elderly people. On the demand side, we note that the Japanese labor market has experienced the introduction of more flexibility from the 1980s. This situation originates in the labor law reform in a context of asset-inflated bubble economy collapse (Asao, 2011). The system characterized by job rigidity and wage flexibility (shūshinkoyō) has progressively left space for a growing number of non regular jobs which represent roughly twenty millions people (Statistics Bureau, 2015). It is important to underline that if computer technology will replace workforce, it could do it differently according to the type of employment. Indeed, it is possible that computer technology destroys more easily non-regular employment either because dismissals are facilitated by legal disposition or because computer technology realizes rather tasks typically carried by non-regular workers. Inversely, if computer and communication tools threaten regular jobs, we can expect that the share of non-regular workers in overall active population increases significantly, thus profoundly affecting the structure of Japanese workforce. We also note that the computer revolution could have notable effects on other questions such as the participation of women in the workplace or could significantly modify the “return to education”.
Turning to methodological issues, in order to assess the potential risk for Japanese workers associated with the diffusion of computer technology, we use Career matrix data from the Japan Institute for Labour Policy and Training (JILPT) and we build a training sample containing occupations without doubt automatable and other occupations that could be considered as non-automatable. With this sample, we estimate a model explaining the probability of computerization by the differential dotation in non-automatable skills. Estimation is achieved by using the “Random Forest” algorithm, which builds several uncorrelated decision trees from bootstrap samples from the training set and averages the results to obtain the final estimation. Then, by using our estimates and data from the Population Census (2010), we evaluate the number of jobs threatened by technology and we study the distribution of the probabilities by gender and type of employment.
Our results suggest that a large share of jobs could be performed by computer system in the coming years. More precisely, according to our estimates, one half of Japanese jobs are susceptible to be destroyed by computer technology. However, this global result masks differential effects according to the kind of workers since non-regular workers seem to be more exposed. On the contrary, we don’t find results differentiated by gender.
It is important to clarify that this work is based on technical criteria by relating the probability of automation by occupation and the differential endowments in non-computerizable skills. However, the capital/labor substitution is a multifactorial process including technological determinants such as capacities, quality, and reliability of technologies but also economic and social drivers. We refer, for instance, to the relative cost of labor and computer capital, the acceptation by consumers and producers or the reaction of public authorities. These economic and social variables have unpredictable future states making it impossible to have a clear idea of the extend of the future capital/labor substitution.
Since we compute the probability of automation by taking into account only technical determinants, we are particularly careful to the terminology used. This is why we talk of “risk” or “probable” job destructions, “vulnerability” or “job threatened” to underline there is not technological determinism. An effective “job destructions” would be is the situation where technological, economic and social conditions conduct to an execution of all the tasks of a job by ICT capital. Although we build a statistical model able to make prediction, the aim of this study is not to make precise forecast but rather to define a “technical sensibility”, a degree of exposition to ICT diffusion. This also implies that the objective of this work is not to evaluate directly a possible technological unemployment. A growing participation of computer capital in the production process doesn’t imply an increase of unemployment. This is a possible situation but a qualitative change of the production is also conceivable (see Section 2). The effect on the level of employment is unknown.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the literature. Section 3 presents the methodology. Section 4 presents the results and Section 5 concludes.
