Self-directed learning (SDL) has been an important area of study of adult education since the 1970s. It has shifted the focus of education and the learning process from teacher-directed to learner- or self-controlled (Candy, 1991), and expects learners to take responsibility for their own learning. The learner's control may be characterized in a range of processes, from needs analysis, selection of material and learning strategies to evaluation of learning outcomes (Knowles, 1975). This new learning experience and process is believed to be more suitable for adult learners as they are expected to be more capable of managing their own learning process than younger learners (e.g., teenagers) within formal learning settings (Grover, Miller, Swearingen, & Wood, 2014).
SDL has attracted a lot of attention in various disciplines in adult education, including the field of language learning and teaching. Like other disciplines, SDL in the field of language learning and teaching calls for the learner's own direction and management of the learning process with limited, or no, peer assistance or teacher guidance to achieve a long-term language learning goal (Benson, 2011, Holec, 1996). However, as Benson (2011) has pointed out, the extent of learning effectiveness in an SDL context may hinge on the language learner's capacity to manage and control the SDL process. With a view to facilitating SDL, some language researchers have recommended a variety of methods including, but not limited to, the provision of expert guidance (Lai, 2015, Morrison, 2011), support in self-reflection and management (Du, 2012, Gan, 2009, Lai et al., 2013, Lee et al., 2014), and enhanced competence in the use of computer technology (Benson, 2011, Lai et al., 2016) in self-access centers or guided programs in the university context. Some studies have further investigated individual learners' attitudes towards the use of computer technology (Lai, 2013) and cultural values (Lai, Wang, Li, & Hu, 2016), as the computer is used by many learners as a tool to aid or improve language. All these studies, despite promoting SDL for university students and examining the learning and teaching effectiveness of the new learning process, have failed to take into account a basic determining factor – readiness. That is, students' level of readiness for SDL and for using the computer in language learning, and their interplay with personal factors, has not been rigorously explored.
In light of the need to address the basic factor, the present study adopted a between-network approach (Arens, Yeung, Craven, & Hasselhorn, 2011) to examine the relationships between personal factors, readiness for SDL and for using the computer to learn on their own. Three key factors of readiness within the constructs of SDL developed by Fisher, King, and Tague (2001) and further supported by Fisher and King (2010) are: (a) the ability to manage oneself (self-management), (b) the learner's desire for learning, and (c) the ability to control oneself (self-control). In the present study, these three factors were investigated together with the learner's use of computer technology and related personal factors (age, gender, anxiety associated with language learning, and language learning style) in a specific domain – English language learning in the university context. Language learning anxiety was chosen to be used as a negative construct and individual learning style as a positive construct to highlight the contrasting relationships among constructs. The purpose was to identify which SDL factors would impact English language learning, and the extent to which individual differences play a role. Data were collected from a survey which asked over 400 university students in English courses offered by two universities in Hong Kong about their SDL and use of computers to learn language by themselves. Findings have practical implications for optimizing university English learners' computer use for SDL.
