Congenital heart disease (CHD) is a leading cause of infant mortality, with an estimated incidence of approximately 4–13 per 1000 live births [1]. Fetal ultrasound echocardiography is widely used to detect CHD, because of its advantages of non-invasiveness, convenience, and safety. The basic cardiac screening examination is interpreted from a four-chamber view of the fetal heart [2]. In particular, the accurate cardiac cycle phase [i.e., end-systolic (ES) and end-diastolic (ED) frames] detection is a necessary processing step for fetal biometric measurement and disease diagnosis. For example, the quantification of cardiac chamber size and function can be estimated based on the identification of the ES and ED phases from ultrasound (US) videos. Several fetal measurements and calculations, such as left ventricular (LV) dimension, LV ejection fraction (EF), and global longitudinal strain, rely on using the precise labeling of the ES and ED frames [3]. In terms of prenatal US diagnosis, a complete cardiac cycle phase can dynamically reflect fetal heart anatomy clearly for disease diagnosis, which is generally an important basis for experts to determine whether the fetus has CHD. For example, the morphology of ED and ED LV can be used to estimate cardiovascular risk factors. The ED frame is defined as the first frame following closure of the mitral valve (MVC), denoting the largest LV volume [4]. Likewise, the first frame after the closure of the aortic valve (AVC) is defined as the ES frame, which denotes the smallest LV volume. Fig. 1 contains the ES and ED frames of a cardiac image sequence.
More variation exists when collecting fetal cardiac cycles data compared to adults. Because of the difference of fetal position and the incident angle of the sound beam, three types of four-chamber views are obtained during the fetal echocardiography. Fig. 2 shows the ES frame corresponding to three key anatomical structures of fetal four-chamber views; specifically, three types of fetal four-chamber views: (1) apical four-chamber (A4C) view, (2) parasternal four-chamber (P4C) view, and (3) basal four-chamber (B4C) view. Cardiologists choose to obtain several types of four-chamber views for one fetus depending on clinical needs and fetal position. In terms of CHD screening, the A4C and B4C views can contribute to observing the abnormal of the four chambers and atrioventricular valves, which is adverse to judging a ventricular septum because of ultrasonic incident angle. Likewise, P4C can contribute to observing ventricular septum defects and is adverse to judging regurgitation of the atrioventricular valve. If the back of the fetus is face forward, it is almost impossible to acquire A4C, even for experienced obstetricians. Therefore, in obstetric US examination, the detection of ES and ED frames of three types of four-chamber views are clinical needs.Download : Download high-res image (194KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Typical example of fetal cardiac sequences of B4C. Red and green rectangles denote ES and ED frames, respectively. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Detection of a complete cardiac cycle phase by manual selection in complex clinical conditions is time-consuming and usually subject to uncertainty. Therefore, the task of detecting the fetal cardiac cycle phase is required to be done by well-experienced operators. It would be very challenging for less experienced US operators, which can result in the acquisition of a poor cardiac cycle phase that can negatively affect diagnostic and fetal biometric measurement accuracy. Accurate acquisition of cardiac cycle phase is commonly obtained by hand with a laborious maneuver of the probe in searching the desirable view in clinical practice, which requires many years of practice to gain expert anatomical knowledge and adequate hand-eye coordination. Motivated by the aforementioned issues, accurate automatic detection of fetal cardiac cycle can promote the development of fetal biometric measurement and disease diagnosis systems, alleviating the routinely obstetric workload.Download : Download high-res image (216KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Illustration of different fetal four-chamber views for A4C, P4C, and B4C, respectively (left-hand and right-hand columns illustrate anatomical structures and corresponding US image examples, respectively, and red rectangles denote the ROI).
However, the automatic detection of fetal cardiac cycle phase has been ignored in recent years, and according to our investigations there are, to the best of our knowledge, few related studies on ES and ED frame automatic-detection of fetuses in obstetric examinations. Compared with previous studies of the detection for adult four-chamber views, there are more challenges for detecting fetal cardiac cycle phases from US videos. The added challenges for automated detection of the fetal cardiac cycle can be summarized as having three aspects: (1) Diversity in gestational weeks and the difference of fetal positions; (2) different types of the four-chamber views of fetus are shown in Fig. 3, which increases the difficulty of detecting the ES and ED frames; and (3) the fetus’s heartbeat is faster, which may reduce the temporal dependence of US videos.
In the above-mentioned new challenges, previous approaches may not be suitable. In previous studies [3], [5], [6], [7], most regression methods used are applicable to single A4C or A2C datasets for cardiac cycle phase detection of adults. Using regression methods may cause poorly converged on a multi-resource fetal US videos dataset, which is difficult for training a stable model because of the complex various situations of multi-resource fetal US videos. We formulate this problem as a classification problem. Classification algorithms do not need to give each frame of a definite value as the label, but must give the categories, which is easier for training and only needs to learn the features that distinguish categories. Therefore, a hybrid classification framework for cardiac cycle phase detection is proposed in this paper. Based on class score of every index frame, the ES and ED frames can be localized. The contributions of this work are summarized as follows.Download : Download high-res image (516KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Examples of ES and ED frames in 2D echocardiograms of A4C, B4C, and P4C views.

•A hybrid classification framework to detect ES and ED frames is explored. To our best knowledge, this is the first application of a hybrid classification framework for detection of ES and ED frames of a fetus.•A RD (ROI detection) module is introduced to activate the cardiac cycle detection algorithm when scanning the four-chamber process. In addition, using the attention areas of images in classification can also improve classification performance.•The temporal difference of the frames of neighboring ES and ED frames is integrated into the image channel, which can keep the temporal correlation of the sequence around ES and ED frames.•An add-classification phase strategy is proposed, which changes binary classification to a three-class task. It can more accurately localize ES and ED frames based on class score.•Our method is evaluated on free-hand fetal echocardiogram dataset of hospital. The results demonstrate the advantages and the possibility of using the proposed approach in clinical practice.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. An overview of related work is given in Section 2. The details of the method are described in Section 3. Experimental results and analysis are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, the limitations and advantages of the proposed method are discussed. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
