Through the advent of recent information technologies, written communication has become a prevalent method of delivering information both in formal, as well as in informal learning settings. For instance, at schools, teachers use learning management systems to provide instructional explanations to their students (Almarashdeh, 2016); in organizations, employees explain distinct organizational routines within knowledge management systems to potential freshmen (Wang & Wang, 2016), or in informal settings, such as free online encyclopedias (e.g., Wikipedia), millions of voluntary authors write explanations on any conceivable topic in the world (Oeberst, Halatchliyski, Kimmerle, & Cress, 2014). These examples illustrate that providing written explanations has become paramount for delivering subject matter information to others (National Commission on Writing, 2004, Rowan, 1988).
University faculty, however, often lament that students often struggle with the demand of writing explanatory texts that convey the intended information in a structured and comprehensible manner that effectively supports a reader's understanding (Cho and MacArthur, 2011, Lachner and Nückles, 2015). One practical limitation is that students rarely receive feedback for their writing products, as feedback is considered as very laborious and time-consuming. This especially holds true for large-lecture classes - still the dominant type of learning environments at public universities - with hundreds of students and a relatively low degree of interaction between instructor and students. Hence, these lectures may only provide marginal opportunities for students to receive feedback on their writing products. However, formative feedback would be relevant to further develop their writing skills (Cho & MacArthur, 2011).
One alternative to feedback by instructors could be to implement computer-based feedback in such large university lectures (Moore & MacArthur, 2016). Computer-based feedback has been shown to be effective to foster students' writing in diverse instructional settings (e.g., Graham et al., 2015, Lachner et al., 2017, Roscoe and McNamara, 2013, Wade-Stein and Kintsch, 2004). Despite the potential of computer-based feedback, however, the effects of computer-based feedback on students' writing were mainly tested in small-scale field studies with rather highly selective groups of students (e.g., Caccamise et al., 2007, Wade-Stein and Kintsch, 2004), or in very controlled laboratory single-session experiments (e.g., Lachner et al., 2017), which potentially restrict the transfer of these findings to large-scale lectures which are perceived as more anonymous and less engaging (Anderson and Shattuck, 2012, Trees and Jackson, 2007).
Furthermore, it is less clear, how computer-based feedback should be designed to optimally foster students' writing. Therefore, the aim of the experimental field-study reported in this paper was to investigate how different formats of computer-based feedback affect students' cohesive writing in an authentic large-scale university lecture.
