In the field of applied ergonomics, the setup of the seated computer workstation is a major target in the prevention and mitigation of computer work related musculoskeletal disorders. This approach is based on the idea that specific placement and arrangement of a computer workstation affect upper extremity biomechanics (Burgess-Limerick et al., 1999, Dennerlein and Johnson, 2006a, Dennerlein and Johnson, 2006b, Jensen et al., 1998).
In the modern workplace, highly adjustable sit-stand workstations have become very popular with some evidence suggesting that they reduce musculoskeletal discomfort and improve worker wellbeing (Wilks et al., 2006). The review by Karakolis and Callaghan 2014 concluded that use of sit-stand workstations is associated with reduced discomfort. For example, Pronk et al. have shown that standing workstations reduce the discomfort of upper extremity (Pronk et al., 2011). Robertson also demonstrated that those who take advantage of the standing option in a sit-to-stand workstation had less discomfort, improved their performance, and varied their posture more (Robertson et al., 2013), which can be protective of discomfort (Davis et al., 2009; Srinivasan and Mathiassen, 2012). Comparing to sitting, a standing workstation removes the task chair and requires users to find alternative ways of arm and body support (Marshall et al., 2011; Nelson-Wong and Callaghan, 2010). Thus, a standing workstation may afford users to change their postures and muscle activities more frequently while seeking support, compared to a sitting workstation. In addition, changing using a sit-stand workstation can change postures of the lumbar spine during sitting (Karakolis et al., 2016). However, how standing computer workstations impact user's upper extremity posture and muscle activity differently from sitting workstations remains unclear.
These highly adjustable workstations provide a number of possible workstation set up configurations for both sitting and standing that in turn affect the biomechanics of the users. Previous work done by Asundi has demonstrated that when given adjustable workstations, users often select set ups that are not within the recommended guidelines (Asundi et al., 2011). Asundi also went on to show that the postures while using these non-conforming workstation setups were well within the guidelines.
Lin et al., 2016 demonstrated that many users chose workstation sets ups for a sit-to-stand work station that do not completely conform to recommended guidelines for seated work and often for standing work (Lin et al., 2016), work surface heights were lower than guidelines for standing work (Sanders and McCormick, 1993). Lin et al., 2016 did not report the effects of the wide variability of workstation set up selected by the users on the postures and muscle activity.
Therefore, the primary objective of this study is to evaluate the magnitude and variations of postures, muscle activity and discomfort for both sitting and standing workstations based on users' preferred workstation set up. As part of a psychophysical workstation protocol, where users self-selected their desk height, keyboard, mouse, and monitor positions (Lin et al., 2016), users’ upper extremity posture and muscle activity were measured while they were sitting and standing. Due to the change in workstation setup in standing, it is hypothesized that more neutral postures, lower muscle activity, and lower perceived discomfort will associate with a standing computer workstation compared to a sitting computer workstation. It is also hypothesized that this reduction in support during standing will be associated with greater joint movement and more dynamic muscle activity ranges compared to the sitting workstation.
