Internet-enabled classroom technology is nearly universal at all levels of education in the United States. Between 1994–2005, the percentage of U.S. public school classrooms with Internet access increased from 3 to 94%, while the ratio of students to computers with Internet access in these classrooms decreased from 12.1 to 3.8 (Wells & Lewis, 2006). Further improvement of classroom Internet access remains a major policy initiative for the U.S. government. In 2013, President Obama introduced the ConnectED initiative, which included a goal of providing “next generation” broadband Internet access to 99% of U.S. students by 2018 through classrooms and libraries.1 More recently, the U.S. Department of Education emphasized its policy commitment to Internet-enabled pedagogical reform in the 2016 National Education Technology Plan.2 Moreover, this proliferation of technology and Internet access for educational purposes is not confined to the U.S. Reports show that high school students in many European countries have the same or higher computer access as students in the U.S.3
At the college level, campus Internet access has become a competitive margin as schools battle to attract the best students. Students have become accustomed to near-constant Internet access at home and in the classroom. As a result, reduced bandwidth and/or Internet “dead zones” may negatively impact student perceptions of the quality of a university's education. College rating services, noting these student preferences, rank institutions according to their wireless connectivity, and undergraduate institutions market the ease of student access to the Internet as a recruiting tool.4
As institutions, including the one in this study,5 push for faster and continuous access to wireless Internet to support the proliferation of web-enabled educational resources, it is unclear how permitting computers in the classroom impacts student performance. Many Internet-enabled innovations may enhance the learning environment, including group activities and providing immediate feedback to instructors through question responses. In a traditional classroom, where computers and tablets are only used to take notes, benefits may include the ability to take notes faster, store copies of notes, and carry the notes with you at all times without carrying various notebooks. Consistent with this, survey evidence from 2006 suggests that students enjoy having computers in the classroom (Barak, Lipson, & Lerman, 2006). Outside of the classroom, increased connectivity on college campuses provides opportunities for students and teachers to collaborate outside of the classroom. Personal computers provide convenient options for student research via university library-enabled online search engines. Electronic textbooks also allow students to easily carry their entire curriculum with them at all times. “Enhanced” textbooks offer students the capability to watch embedded videos, follow hyperlinks to pertinent articles on the Internet.6
Despite the potential benefits of computers in the classroom, other evidence suggests that permitting computers negatively impacts student learning. Several studies suggest that potential distractions from web-surfing, e-mail checking, and electronic chatting with friends have negative effects. Fried (2008) finds that students report increased multitasking when laptops are in the classroom. Kraushaar and Novak (2010) and Grace-Martin and Gay (2001) monitor activity usage and find negative correlation between non-class related activity on their computer and performance. Relatedly, multiple laboratory-style studies demonstrate negative effects of laptop multi-tasking on test performance (e.g., Hembrooke and Gay, 2003, Sana et al., 2013). While distractions and multi-tasking are one potential channel through which computers may negatively impact performance, another potential channel is that students recall less information when they are required to take notes with computers rather than by hand, as suggested in a lab experiment by Mueller and Oppenheimer (2014).7
This paper contributes to the debate surrounding the impact of computers in the classroom through an experiment that randomly allowed students to access their laptop and tablet computers during an introductory economics course at the United States Military Academy at West Point, NY. We divided classrooms into a control group or one of two treatment groups. Classrooms in the first treatment group permitted students to use laptops and tablets without restriction. In the second treatment group, hereafter referred to as the “modified-tablet” treatment group, students were only permitted to use tablets, but the tablet had to remain flat on the desk surface. Meanwhile, students assigned to classrooms in the control group were not permitted to use laptops or tablets in any fashion during class.
Our experiment expands upon the previous research in a number of dimensions. In contrast to laboratory studies that demonstrate a negative impact of computers on learning (e.g., Hembrooke and Gay, 2003, Mueller and Oppenheimer, 2014, Sana et al., 2013), our study measures the cumulative effects of Internet-enabled classroom technology over the course of a semester, as opposed to its impact on immediate or short-term (less than one week) recall of knowledge. Furthermore, some of the negative effects found in lab experiments could partially be attributed to experimental designs that require students to perform tasks or behave in a way that is abnormal or out of character, such as forcing students to multi-task, as in Sana et al. (2013), or requiring students to use computers, as in Mueller and Oppenheimer (2014).8 Our research design intentionally seeks to limit the influence of such artificial behaviors by not requiring students to use computers. While laboratory experiments certainly allow the researcher to limit the potential channel through which computers can affect learning, students may behave differently when the outcome of interest is performance on an inconsequential or random topic than when faced with an assessment that may impact their GPA. Thus, an investigation of the effects of technology in the context of an actual course is an important extension of laboratory research.
Our randomized control trial design also allows us to improve upon previous research done in real classrooms as well. First, we are able to control for selection into computer usage and avoid the problems associated with students self-reporting computer activity. Second, our comprehensive dataset allows us to control for a wide range of relevant observable characteristics, which has been an insurmountable issue for many of the aforementioned researchers. Finally, we examine the effect on final exam scores where students are incentivized to do well both for their GPA and for their class rank which affects their future job choice.
The results of our study suggest that permitting computing devices in the classroom reduces final exam scores by 0.18 standard deviations. By way of comparison, this effect is as large as the average difference in exam scores for two students whose cumulative GPAs at the start of the semester differ by one-third of a standard deviation. Our results also indicate that the negative impact of computers occurs in classrooms that permit laptops and tablets without restriction and in classrooms that only permit modified-tablet usage.
The results of our study are consistent with other recent research on the impact of technology on classroom performance that is causal in nature. Beland and Murphy (2016) exploit variation in school mobile phone policies to find that banning mobile phones is associated with a 0.07 standard deviation increase in exam scores among UK high school students. Elsewhere, Patterson and Patterson (2016) instrument for computer usage in classes that allow laptops with the laptop policies from students’ other classes during the day and find that computer usage reduces academic performance among undergraduate students at a private liberal arts college. Our experiment complements these studies by directly investigating the potential impact of a teacher's decision to permit or restrict laptops and tablets in their classrooms.9

Section 2 of this paper provides background on West Point for the purposes of generalization, and Section 3 discusses our experimental design. Sections 4 and 5 discuss our empirical framework, sample selection, data, and evidence of successful random assignment. Section 6 presents the results of our regression analysis, Section 7 discusses additional robustness checks, and Section 8 concludes.
