Chlorophyll is a green pigment found in plants, algae, and bacteria that gives them their green color. It also enables them to absorb the light necessary for photosynthesis. Nitrogen (N2) is an essential nutrient element for chlorophyll synthesis and is a part of the chlorophyll molecule that enhances photosynthesis [1], [2]. The conditions that affect the production and maintenance of leaf chlorophyll can result from a limited supply of nutrients and from other environmental factors such as excess heavy metal content [3], [4]. The deficiency of any of these several nutrient elements generally reduces pigment formation and subsequent leaf color (green to pale yellow); limiting those nutrients would increase reflectance because of decreased radiation absorption. To increase crop yield, techniques for monitoring the nutritional status of crop plants, which involve the routine collection of foliar tissue and chemical analysis (solvent extraction method), have been developed. Such monitoring techniques are relatively expensive and time consuming. Thus, easier and more efficient methods of rapid screening would be useful to farmers.
The SPAD-502 chlorophyll meter (Spectrum Technologies Inc., Plainfield, IL), is a rapid, non-destructive, and hand held spectral device that is widely used for in-situ measurement of N deficiency in the laboratory and in the field [5], [6], [7], [8]. Plant greenness can be measured non-destructively using a SPAD-502 meter. This meter, which is sensitive to photosynthetic green pigment of individual leaf, is suitable for small plot areas. The SPAD meter reading is related to the amount of chlorophyll present in the leaf. These meter readings are related to leaf greenness by transmitting light from light emitting diode through a leaf at wavelengths 650 and 940 nm. The 650 nm light corresponds to a peak chlorophyll attenuation of red light. The infrared (IR) 940 nm signal is not absorbed by chlorophyll. The signal from the silicon photo diodes used to detect the transmitted light is received by a microprocessor, which linearizes the signal and calculates a unit-less SPAD value [9]:(1)SPAD=Alog10RC∘RC-log10IRC∘IRC+Bwhere A and B are constants; RC and IRC are current (amperes) from red and infrared (IR) detectors, respectively, with the sample in place; RC∘ and IRC are currents from the red and IR detectors, respectively, without a sample [10]. A SPAD or chlorophyll meter reading is calculated by a microprocessor and is determined from the difference in light attenuation.
Generally, the SPAD (chlorophyll) meter clamps on intact leaves and instantly generates readings that ranged from 0 to 50. Those readings are merely the indication of greenness, not the chlorophyll concentration. Thus, it is necessary to find a numerical correlation between SPAD meter readings and the foliar chlorophyll concentration to predict the chlorophyll amount in plant leaves [6]. Relationship (R2) between SPAD-502 meter readings and extractable total chlorophyll (fresh weight basis) in strawberry leaves was reported to be 0.92 [11]. The regression between total chlorophyll contents and SPAD readings of wheat, rice, and soybean leave samples extracted with dimethyl sulfoxide results a relationship (R2) of 0.93 [12]. Similarly, a relationship (R2) of 0.98 was found between fresh leave tissue chlorophyll determined using solvent extraction methods and SPAD meter readings [8]. They also reported that chlorophyll values were differed by ∼6% when SPAD values converted from radiometric to solvent extracted chlorophyll units.
Chlorophyll meter readings can be influenced by many factors other than nitrogen (N) alone such as environmental and crop leaves characteristics [2], [13], [14]. Anything that can alter the color of plants (i.e., diseases, other nutrient deficiencies, variety differences, etc.) can influence the chlorophyll meter readings [15]. It is also recommended that growers use a calibration curve specific for each crop variety. The SPAD meter has been used to estimate chlorophyll concentrations and infer the nitrogen status of single leaves of wheat and corn, and other crops [10], [16]. Its use for characterizing the senescence of whole canopies is limited by operator bias particularly in selecting leaves for SPAD measurements [9]. On the other hand, repeated measurements on the same leaf over time may affect its physiological status [9]. Piekielek and Fox [17] found that chlorophyll meters detect N deficiency in corn as early as the V6 growth stage by measurement on the fifth leaf.
The SPAD meters cannot be used for on-the-go measurements of nitrogen due to their configurations and working principle that needs physical contact with leaves [18]. In contrast, portable handheld radiometers measure reflected light remotely without making any contact, and the same area can be measured without any damage to the plants or leaves. In this technique, many plants are averaged in a single measurement, avoiding point sampling problems with the SPAD meter. Use of a CCD (charge-coupled device) camera to capture images offers an additional method for assessing greenness of crops as well as the parameters that can be sensed remotely. Dymond and Trotter [19] used a CCD camera to obtain color images of forest and posture targets from aircraft. Clarke [20] used a pair of black and white cameras with filters in paired with a thermal imaging system in an aircraft to estimate water stress in muskmelon. All these systems demonstrated that a CCD camera could produce data that can be used to assess the status of the plants in the field. Therefore, the overall goal of this research was to determine the suitability of a computer imaging technique (using black and white CCD camera) to predict chlorophyll content of potato plants. The objective of this paper was to evaluate the capability of a monochrome computer imaging technique for predicting SPAD meter readings while acquiring pictures on potato leaves.
