Adolescent male drivers in the 16–19 year age group have a nine-fold increase in their crash risk (relative risk [RR], 9.8 [CI not available]) (Elvik et al., 2009). During the novice driver period (i.e., usually middle adolescence until a driver licence has been held for two years), there is an increased crash risk compared to after this period (Elvik et al., 2009). Driving eventually improves and becomes an overlearned skill (Fox et al., 1998); that is, it no longer requires controlled cognitive processing (Shinar et al., 1998).
One distinct group of young drivers, those with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), are recognised as being at additional crash risk relative to their aged matched counterparts. The RR for drivers diagnosed with ADHD is 1.36, 95% CI 1.18, 1.57 and the presence of comorbid behavioural problems such as Oppositional defiant disorder, further increases the RR to 1.86, 95% CI,1.27, 2.75 (Vaa, 2014).
ADHD is the most common disorder of neural development in children (Rowland et al., 2002). The worldwide-pooled prevalence of ADHD is approximately 5% (Polanczyk et al., 2007). In males, the prevalence rate can be as high as 9% (Szatmari et al., 1989). Females with ADHD are identified less often as they more typically present with less disruptive behaviour (Berry et al., 1985). Executive dysfunction is a common sequela of ADHD (Barkley, 1997).
Executive function is crucial for safe driving, given the need to be able to plan and take evasive action (Groeger, 2000). Impaired executive function in people with ADHD may reflect poor behavioural or response inhibition. This may be associated with secondary problems such as poor working memory (Barkley, 1997). These problems with executive function in young drivers often manifest as risk-taking behaviour (Jonah, 1986) and poor hazard detection (Mckenna and Horswill, 1999, Cox and Taylor Davis, 2009).
Risk-taking behaviour in adolescence, such as reckless driving and substance misuse, can be deleterious to health. This behaviour may increase in the presence of peers (Steinberg, 2007). Such behaviours can also increase in the presence of ADHD (Richards et al., 2002, Devito et al., 2008) due to an immature cognitive-control network. Frontal lobe maturation is implicated in cognitive-control and is reported to be delayed in the setting of ADHD (Giedd and Rapoport, 2010). However less is known about the extent of hazard perception skill impairment and reaction time in drivers with ADHD.
Research has demonstrated that hazard perception latency can be improved in this group of drivers using computer training software (Poulsen et al., 2010). Understanding risk and having well developed hazard perception skills are requisite for managing danger in the traffic environment (Horswill and Mckenna, 2004, Brown and Groeger, 1988); the latter correlating with crash risk (Mckenna and Horswill, 1999). Given the established link between hazard perception and crash risk, this research seeks to establish if the hazard perception skills of young drivers with ADHD can be improved with intervention.
Several studies have investigated the benefits of pharmacological treatment to ameliorate the executive dysfunction that affects drivers with ADHD (Cox et al., 2004, Cox and Taylor Davis, 2009). However, stimulant medication adherence is poor (Firestone, 1982, Perwien et al., 2004), with young people at particularly high risk for non-compliance (Marcus et al., 2005). Moreover a structured interruption of a pharmacological treatment (drug holiday) is commonly used to control adverse side effects, and monitor effectiveness (Graham et al., 2011). Although a number of factors relate to crash risk, such as the influence of passengers and the time of day, ‘drug holidays’ also coincide with disproportionately high crash rates on weekends in young males (Doherty et al., 1998).
While drug treatments may improve driving safety by reducing impairments associated with ADHD, a more holistic approach that improves driver skills may also be of benefit. There is growing evidence that video and computer-based training improves performance on hazard perception tests in both an ADHD population and healthy individuals (Pradhan et al., 2009, Isler et al., 2009, Poulsen et al., 2010, Bruce et al., 2014). Various forms of training, such as Drive Smart (Regan et al., 2000), have been designed to expedite the development of driver-related cognitive perceptual skills. Drive Smart uses simulation-based research and was created in conjunction with an aviation and defence simulation developer (Triggs and Regan, 1998).
The approach to developing Drive Smart was based on risk perception (ability to detect, perceive and assess risk); attention control (ability to prioritise attention); time-sharing (sharing available processing time between multiple driving tasks) and calibration (moderation of task demands according to performance capacity) (Triggs and Regan, 1998). Results from a simulator-based evaluation of Drive Smart suggested that it is effective in training attention control and risk perception skills (Regan et al., 2000). As a skill-based therapy, Drive Smart may be a plausible adjunct to pharmacological intervention for young drivers with ADHD.
The current research investigates the feasibility and explores the potential effectiveness of a non-pharmacological intervention for drivers with ADHD − skill based training of attention control and hazard perception skills using computer-based training. The primary outcome of the effect of the intervention will be a reduction (improvement) in hazard perception response time. Moreover, this study addresses a gap in the literature by reporting 6-week follow-up data to establish if changes observed are maintained over time. These data will enable sample size calculation and determine recruitment strategy for a full-scale evaluation of Drive Smart training.
The primary aim of this study was to pilot test a computer-based driver training program, Drive Smart, for young drivers with ADHD to:
•determine the presence and magnitude of a between-group difference in change in hazard perception skills (primary outcome), in young drivers with ADHD who receive Drive Smart training compared to a control intervention.•determine the within-group change in hazard perception skills between control and delayed intervention phases in the Delayed Intervention group.•determine whether training-facilitated change in hazard perception is maintained over time.
As a pilot, feasibility study we also aimed to:
•estimate the magnitude and variance of within-subject change in hazard perception skills pre-post intervention to enable sample size calculation for a future larger randomised controlled trial (RCT).•determine the rate of recruitment and retention of participants in order to establish if a full scale evaluation of Drive Smart is feasible.
