For generations, humans dream about the interaction with computer through brain activities. It was a fantasy thing that the scientists and others dream about through science fiction movies and imagination. This dream comes true and currently we are able through advanced electronic devices to capture the brain signals and control the real world devices. Certainly, still there are some of the constraints and challenges but we believe that in the few coming years, there will be too much to do with brain signals and effective solutions for many of its current research problems.
Brain Computer Interface (BCI) is a complete system including the software and hardware that manipulate human signals to control Computers and different communication devices. However, some other definitions are presented in the literature as follows:
1.Donoghue et al. in [65] defined the BCI as Brain Machine Interface (BMI) in which its major goal is to provide a command signal from the cortex that controls disabled body parts or physical devices, such as computers or robotic limbs.2.Wolpaw et al. in [69] defined the BCI as a device that provides the brain with a new, non-muscular communication and control channel.3.Schwartz et al. in [2] defined the BCI as “Microelectrodes embedded chronically in the cerebral cortex hold promise for using neural activity to control devices with enough speed and agility to replace natural, animate movements in paralyzed individuals.”
Such definitions describe the overall functionalities of the BCI in terms of capturing the brain signals, processing the received signals, classifying them, and utilizing these signals for control. Therefore, the terms BMI and BCI could be used interchangeably describing the communication between the brain and the computer and/or external devices.
The direct effect of the BCI is on people having neuromuscular injuries and neurodegenerative diseases. Such disabilities include amyotrophic lateral sclerosis that affects nerve cells in the brain and the spinal cord which makes the persons’ cognitive function intact. The most severe disability is the locked-in syndrome (LiS). LiS is named after Plum and Posner where it means that a person is completely paralyzed [78]. In complete LiS, the person is lost control in every part of his/her body including eye movements while in incomplete LiS, a person can control the movement of some of the muscles such as head and toes [39]. In classical LiS, the vertical eye movements are possible as well. There are two causes of LiS which are lesion in the pons of the brainstem and neuro-degenerative diseases [118]. So, instead of direct contact with computer using for instance mouse and image processing, which it could not be possible in some cases, new software and hardware enable the recognition of people's thinking and their physiology. A continuous improvement to software and hardware is expected to add more accuracy and performance to the BCI systems.
In the near past, research in BCI was not that attractive to researchers due to the rejection of deciphering brain signals and thoughts. The brain activity research was limited to the clinic and laboratory exploring the brain functions. At the same time, signals deciphering technology and devices were not available or highly expensive. This led to only limited number of research groups to work in this field. However, in the last two decades a drastic change to the research in the BCI field has been occurred. Using sensors and brain signals, many research articles have come to a conclusion that the new technology would advance the BCI science [5], [80], [95], [102], [125]. In addition, instead of only 8 research groups were working on the BCI field in the last 10 years [68], currently, till writing this article, more than 116 groups are investigating different problems in the field [14]. In addition, more than 76 companies are working on BCI devices and systems around the world [13].
In fact, large body of research and publications of the BCI have been increased significantly in the last 10 years and different Universities have recognized the importance of the BCI and even funding agents. Fig. 1 shows the distribution of the BCI research groups around the world. As can be seen, the largest number of these groups are in USA with 33 research groups followed by Germany with 10 groups. Fig. 2 also shows the number and the distribution of BCI companies around the world. Again USA ranked the first by 26 companies working on the BCI field followed by Netherlands by 9 companies. Looking at the BCI devices, more than 50,000 assistive devices have been produced [9] for people daily activities and some others for assisting people with disabilities.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. BCI research groups distribution around the world.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. BCI companies distribution around the world.
The reason behind this large research activity is due to the advances of computers hardware and software as well as the social acceptance to the devices that serve disabled people. In addition, new companies have been specialized in production of BCI devices which encouraged new researchers to direct their research interest to the field. This is just indicators to the witnessed research activities in the field BCI in the last few years.
This paper is one of the three survey papers prepared to introduce the field of BCI to academia and industry alike. The paper gives a complete view to BCI along with simplifying and organizing the ideas to the readers. The contributions of the paper in hand are: 1) identifying Brain signals, their types, and their classifications, 2) surveying the current BCI technology in terms of hardware and software and 3) stating the challenges and future directions of BCI research. It also direct the BCI research towards the open problems and challenges. Moreover, this paper lists all of the most used hardware and software tools for new as well as experienced researchers and summarized their features. The second paper focuses on the algorithms and techniques used for BCI signal detection, feature extraction, classification, and control. The Third paper is targeting current BCI systems and applications in some details.
The paper roadmap is as follows: Section 2 introduces the brain architecture; Section 3 classifies the BCI; Neuroimaging Methods are introduced in Section 4; mental control signals are classified in Section 5, BCI technologies in terms of hardware and software platforms are summarized in Section 6; Section 7 elaborates on the BCI challenges and open problems; future directions are stated in Section 8; finally the paper concludes in Section 9.
