Social networking sites (SNSs) such as Facebook, WhatsApp, Twitter and Instagram, are created for social networking among people who share interests and activities. SNSs have attracted billions of users, many of whom have integrated these sites into their daily practices, and the number of SNS users is increasing. For example, the number of monthly active Facebook users has increased from 1.00 billion in 2012 to 1.65 billion in the first quarter of 2016 (The Statistics Portal, 2016).
SNSs, including Facebook, are found to have both positive and negative effects on users, especially teenagers' social, emotional, cognitive and academic development, which would further influence their self-esteem and well-being (Aida et al., 2014, Vural, 2015). Hence research has been conducted to understand the attitude of SNS users (e.g., Andreassen et al., 2014, Hughes et al., 2011, Moore and McElroy, 2012, Ryan and Xenos, 2011, Smock et al., 2011, Wang et al., 2015, Wang et al., 2012). Most of the studies focus on the causal relationship between personality and attitude of SNS users. Research on the influence of computer-mediated communication (CMC) competencies of Facebook users and their attitude is scarce. There is currently a dearth of evidence of the influences of CMC competencies, such as CMC skills on the relationship between personality and attitude of Facebook users.
The present study focuses on the direct and indirect effects of the relationship between five main personality traits and attitudes toward Facebook. The indirect effects are the mediating effects of the three computer-mediated communication competence components: CMC knowledge, skill and motivation. Previous research has not been carried out on the indirect effects of CMC components. Studying these indirect effects is important because the relationship between personality traits and attitude toward Facebook (as a whole) as reported in previous studies is the total of the direct and indirect effects. Without studying the indirect effect of CMC competencies, we can only identify the relationship between personality and attitude without knowing how much of the relationship is caused by personality and how much of it is caused by the indirect mediating effect of CMC competencies. The uniqueness of the present study is that it sets out primarily to explore the causal relationship between personality and attitude toward Facebook and to investigate whether the relationship would be indirectly mediated by computer-mediated communication skill, knowledge and motivation. We believe that the findings of this study will contribute to the body of knowledge regarding social networks, as well as increasing our understanding of the relationship between personality and attitude toward Facebook.
