Computer Mediated Social Networks (CMSN) continue to raise questions about user privacy. CMSN sites, including Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter, and others are always looking for ways to collect large amounts of accurate data about their users' online behavior to fuel targeted advertising efforts. This process often brings with it privacy concerns, as this information may not always be used as intended and is often mishandled (Acquisti and Gross, 2006, Chen et al., 2009, Jones and Soltren, 2005). When privacy concerns arise, we would expect that users respond using a number of privacy protective behaviors, most notably reduced usage or abandonment of the CMSN (Smith et al., 1996, Son and Kim, 2008). This study is prompted by what appears to be a paradox concerning CMSN usage, particularly the use of Facebook. Although the company has had no dearth of privacy issues in its history, without fail, each change to Facebook's privacy policies and practices is accompanied by an initial outcry, yet adoption of the technology eventually continues unabated, with Facebook now reporting an active user base of 1.86 billion (Facebook, 2016) with an estimated 45% of Facebook users checking the CMSN at least twice a day (Duggan, Ellison, Lampe, Lenhart, & Madden, 2015) while smartphone users checked the CMSN 14 times a day on an average (Subbaraman, 2013). Researchers have suggested that there is a disconnect between privacy attitudes and privacy behaviors (Acquisti and Gross, 2006, Westin, 1967). Debatin, Lovejoy, Horn, and Hughes (2009) showed that users claim to understand privacy issues, yet behave in ways that are contrary to the protection of their personal information.
We believe that this paradox can be explained by recognizing that CMSN provide powerful hedonic motivations that overwhelm and suppress privacy protective behaviors that we might expect in other contexts (Parameswaran & Whinston, 2007). The powerful social engagement that a person receives from developing and maintaining relationships in a computer-mediated social context changes the way individuals weigh privacy concerns, and may impact the actions that individuals are willing to take when faced with situations that compromise their privacy. For this reason, it is critical to understand the way in which the enjoyment received from these social exchange relationships impacts privacy concerns. This study helps to further our understanding in this area. Specifically, we ask “How are privacy concerns mitigated by perceptions of enjoyment gained through the use of CMSN, and what are the antecedents that contribute to these perceptions?”
Although past research supports the notion of enjoyment causing a decrease in privacy concerns (Dwyer, Hiltz, & Passerini, 2007), there is none that explains the mechanism by which the enjoyment is achieved. We address this gap in literature by empirically testing a model based on the established social network theories of social capital and social exchange. To this end, the theoretical foundations for this study rely on social capital theory (Putnam, 2000) and social exchange theory (Blau, 1964, Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005, Emerson, 1976, Gefen and Ridings, 2002). According to social capital theory, the connections among individuals in a social network leads to the creation of social capital as a community level resource which adds value to the social network (Putnam, 2000). Social exchange theory states that individuals behave with the expectation that these behaviors will result in the same or similar social responses in return (Emerson, 1976). In the CMSN context, we propose that the hedonic enjoyment received from these social exchanges is sufficient to override the privacy concerns of individuals. This reduction in privacy concerns decreases the likelihood of engaging in privacy protective response behavior (Son & Kim, 2008), and is hypothesized to explain the continued use of CMSN in the presence privacy concerns.
This study makes important contributions to both CMSN theory and practice. On the theory side, researchers continue to look for models to explain the reasons why individuals use CMSN (Hu & Kettinger, 2008). We are not the first to argue that use of these systems should be examined hedonically (Sledgianowski and Kulviwat, 2009, van der Heijden, 2004). However, hedonic explanations for CMSN behavior stand directly at odds with the large body of work that speaks to the value CMSN users place on their privacy. Our study builds a theoretical bridge between these seemingly opposing streams by providing a hedonic explanation for the prevalence of continued CMSN usage in the presence of privacy concerns. At the same time, CMSN practitioners will also benefit from the study through an understanding of how privacy concerns, as obstacles to information sharing and revenue generation, can be overcome in a way that is in fact enjoyable and beneficial to end users. The study therefore offers some suggestions on how to go about obtaining the data that CMSN urgently need, while still preserving positive experiences for the user base. By doing so, we add to extant literature (Fu, Wu, & Cho, 2017) which focuses on how brand marketers can use CMSN to effectively target consumers.
The remainder the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we examine the extant literature that exists around CMSN usage in the presence of privacy concerns. Section 3 presents our research model and outlines the study's hypotheses. In section 4, we discuss the data collection and our research methods, the results of which are presented in section 5. Section 6 discusses the paper's findings in detail, before concluding with some final thoughts in section 7.
