Studying learner interactions and relations is the key to understanding how learning occurs in computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) settings. As technologies for CSCL become more advanced, there is a greater call for analysis methods that can derive insights about learner interactions from large amounts of computer-generated data, such as log files, messages, and other artifacts (Jeong, Hmelo-Silver, & Yu, 2014). Techniques from computer science and learning analytics could be a step in the right direction in addressing these issues (Martin & Sherin, 2013). One such technique is social network analysis (SNA), an application of graph theory which allows for the analysis of patterns of relationships between actors that interact with each other (Sie et al., 2012, Wasserman and Faust, 1994). SNA has had a long history predating the use of computers; nevertheless, promising SNA findings have already led to meaningful insights and future directions in educational research and technology-enhanced learning (Cela, Sicilia, & Sanchez, 2015). However, the ways in which SNA has been and could be valuable in CSCL research has not yet been explored systematically. The present review examines trends in the applications of SNA as a research method for analyzing learner interactions during CSCL.
1.1. Summary of important SNA conceptsIn SNA, the relationships that link individual actors in a community are of central importance. In educational settings, these actors could be learners, groups of learners and teachers, as well as non-human agents such as classes, courses, learning materials, or features of the learning environment that persons interact with or participate in Carolan (2014). Social networks can be composed of actors of the same type (e.g., learners) or of two or more types (e.g., learners and learning materials), these are called one-mode and two/multimodal networks, respectively. An actor is connected to another actor by the presence of at least one type of relation between them; some common relational ties in education include interaction and communication (e.g., talking or sending messages to each other), association (e.g., taking the same courses), and social relations (e.g., friendships). In computer-mediated learning settings, information about these relations can be collected by asking actors about their relationships within the network (e.g., “Who did you talk to in class today?”) or from digital trace data (e.g., a chat log that shows who talked to whom). Given these elements, SNA is concerned with the structure of relational ties between a group of actors and the implications of these structural patterns on learners’ behavior and attitudes. SNA allows for the study of relationships among actors that interact with one another and/or their environment in a particular way.Relational data can be measured on several levels (Carolan, 2014). Local (egocentric) level analysis emphasizes how individual actors are embedded in the network in relation to other actors (e.g., “Who is the most active learner in the discussion forum?”). Global level analysis provides a “snapshot” of the network structure by describing the patterns of relations in the network (e.g., “How engaged are the learners in discussions with each other?”). Networks can be further analyzed by detecting subgroups of actors that are connected to each other at a high rate (e.g., “Do learners communicate with certain learners more than with others?”) and positions of actors that occupy the same place or have similar patterns of relations with others (e.g., “Which learners have yet to establish a relationship with each other?”).SNA data may be represented in two ways: visually using node-link representations and mathematically. Graphical representation of networks is achieved using network graphs, known as sociograms, whereby actors are represented as nodes and the relational ties as lines connecting nodes to each other, which may be weighted depending on the strength or frequency of the relationship. This provides an intuitive display of the patterns of relationships in a group. Based on the number of actors and number, strength or frequency of relations in the network, different local and global measures or indices can be calculated to succinctly quantify characterize network relations. Some of the most common SNA measures, particularly in the social sciences, are centrality as a local measure and density as a global measure (Knoke & Yang, 2008). Centrality is calculated based on the number of relational ties an actor has: a highly central actor is one that is directly connected to many actors (degree centrality), has the shortest connections to many actors (closeness centrality), or serves as a mediator between two groups of actors (betweenness centrality). It is often used to determine the most prominent and important participants in the network (Carolan, 2014). The density of the network refers to the total number of ties in the network divided by the number of all possible ties (Carolan, 2014). The density value ranges from 0 to 1; the closer the value is to 1, the denser and more cohesive are the nodes in the network.
1.2. The role of SNA in CSCL research1.2.1. Definition of CSCLCSCL can be described as activities in which two or more learners interact and are mutually engaged towards the accomplishment of a common learning goal with the support of information and communication technologies (Lipponen, 2002, Suthers, 2012). The emphasis on mutual engagement helps to distinguish CSCL from other technology-enhanced learning such as e-learning, commonly defined as the use of technology to deliver information for learning purposes (Sangrà, Vlachopoulos, & Cabrera, 2012). Although e-learning platforms may have interactive elements, e-learning activities themselves do not have to be collaborative in nature in order to result in effective e-learning outcomes (Sun, Tsai, Finger, Chen, & Yeh, 2008). For example, e-learning interventions may include videos explaining a topic followed by a quiz to test the learner on the videos’ content, which can be completed successfully without interacting with other learners (Lahti, Hätönen, & Välimäki, 2014). Moreover, the role of computers in CSCL is supportive in that it facilitates interaction and stimulates learning, which does not exclusively mean information delivery. This means CSCL interactions may occur face-to-face (e.g., working together using a multitouch table), remotely (e.g., online distance courses) or a combination of both (e.g., blended classrooms, Jeong et al., 2014).CSCL extends where the definition of e-learning stops at “deliver information for learning purposes” by encompassing activities designed to foster productive learner interactions in an effort to establish a shared understanding of the learning task (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009). Different forms of CSCL interactions exist (Suthers, Dwyer, Medina, & Vatrapu, 2010). Effective direct interaction, whether through synchronous or asynchronous communication, is necessary to achieve joint information processing during collaboration (Rummel, Deiglmayr, Spada, Kahrimanis, & Avouris, 2011). However, learning also occurs when learners engage in mediated or indirect interaction via engaging in shared artifacts and objects relevant to the learning tasks. These artifacts may be technological (e.g., web applications through which learners communicate) or instructional (e.g., studying course content, exchanging helpful learning resources) in nature; or may be knowledge artifacts which are the product of the collaborative activity (e.g., developing a joint concept map, or collaboratively writing an article; Stahl, Ludvigsen, Law, & Cress, 2014). Artifacts serve as a common ground for learners in a group, facilitating direct interaction and forming the basis for their shared understanding of the learning goals or the co-construction of the group product (Stahl, 2006).CSCL is also the name of the interdisciplinary research field concerned with evaluating both individual and shared learning outcomes due to learner interactions with the support of computers (Lipponen, Hakkarainen, & Paavola, 2004). These outcomes occur on a cognitive/metacognitive level (acquiring new knowledge), but also on social/metasocial (e.g., better team functioning) and motivational/affective levels (e.g., coping and regulation; Kirschner & Erkens, 2013). These learning outcomes are difficult to abstract from each other, as the result of learning at one level influences the outcome at another level. For this reason, CSCL research commonly involves triangulation of multiple data sources using different analytical methods to gain a more detailed picture of the learning that occurred (Jeong et al., 2014). For example, multiple-choice questions and essays may be used to assess content learning, along with a content analysis of learner discussions to investigate how group dynamics may have informed knowledge acquisition.In sum, CSCL could be conceived as an approach to e-learning that emphasizes meaningful interactions between learners, both directly through communication and mediated by artifacts, as a prerequisite for learning (Jeong and Hmelo-Silver, 2016, Stahl et al., 2006). Learning can occur on the cognitive, social, or motivational levels, which is often measured and triangulated based on a variety of data sources and analysis methods.1.2.2. Potential uses of SNA for analyzing CSCL interactionsThe common assumption of SNA and CSCL that “relationships matter” is what makes SNA an appropriate method for revealing relational structures that arise from CSCL interactions. CSCL makes clear and deliberate links between learning, social activity, and the use of computer technologies; learners develop into social networks by engaging, communicating, and sharing knowledge with each other via computers (Haythornthwaite, 1999a, Haythornthwaite, 1999b). More than simply transmitting information, however, is the notion that learning in CSCL is “distributed” over individuals and artifacts their environment, meaning that knowledge emerges from the relations that transpire during interaction, and is “situated” in these networks of distributed activities of participation (Lipponen et al., 2004). SNA provides researchers with measures and visualizations that explicitly take into account relational phenomena associated with members of a group, thereby capturing distributed and situated learning.Although existing methods for analyzing CSCL interactions include qualitative and quantitative techniques, most of them utilize verbal or text-based data from communication between learners, such as dialogue transcripts, chat logs or discussion forum posts (Puntambekar, Erkens, & Hmelo-Silver, 2011). However, there is growing demand in CSCL research for methods that can efficiently and meaningfully analyze large amounts of digital trace data from CSCL settings, a relatively untapped data source given the dominance of qualitative code-and-count analyses of discourse data in CSCL research (Jeong et al., 2014). Digital trace data can be a source of non-verbal interaction between learners and various artifacts in the learning environment (e.g., editing a wiki), which could result in patterns that are meaningful for understanding verbal data (Suthers & Medina, 2011). SNA can harness a large amount of digital data consisting of thousands and even millions of users (actors) from computer log files that register user behavior (ties), allowing researchers to infer collaborative learning processes in very large groups (Nurmela, Lehtinen, & Palonen, 1999).The visual component of SNA can be applied to research on visualizing interactions in CSCL. Law and colleagues (Law, Yuen, Wong, & Leng, 2011) have distinguished two main categories of visual representations: linear, which present information in sequence, usually chronologically; and non-linear, to which SNA sociograms belong which, present information independent of time, “[providing] meaningful snapshots of CSCL discourses” (p. 60). Visual representations are useful for detecting and interpreting complex patterns in CSCL environments. Moreover, since individual learning is nested in group processes, data from CSCL allows for variation in the unit of analysis that suits the levels of analysis of SNA: from individuals (egocentric level analysis) to dyads, small groups and communities (global level analysis; Lipponen et al., 2004). The application of SNA in CSCL would enable an analysis of the interplay of individual and group processes, without neglecting the influence of one unit of analysis in favor of another—a common problem encountered in other quantitative methods (Cress, 2008).
1.3. Current trends and limitations of SNA in online learning: what do they mean for CSCL?Despite its apparent advantages, the use of SNA in CSCL have not yet been studied extensively (Jeong et al., 2014). A preliminary review of SNA in 37 “e-learning” papers (Cela et al., 2015) outlined a number of trends in the current research body related to online learning. The results indicate that SNA is most commonly applied to study collaborative learning between learners in online discussion forums based on their communication patterns (e.g., posting messages), thus involving only one-mode networks. The most common SNA measures are centrality and density indexes, and SNA is often combined with qualitative content analysis to provide a deeper understanding of the nature of learner relations within the network.These results point to the potential usefulness of SNA to study direct communication between learners collaborating via computers. However, as noted previously in Section 1.2, the main search term used, “e-learning”, refers to the medium through which information is transmitted for learning purposes. Thus, the findings of the review, specifically with regards to (1) the relational ties and network modes being studied, and (2) analysis methods used in conjunction with SNA results, give a limited insight into the relevance of SNA in CSCL.1. Relational ties and network modes: Focusing only on communication patterns limits the understanding of important relational mechanisms and interactions in CSCL (Wellman et al., 1996). The dominance of communication-based relations has been attributed to convenient access to computer data sources, such as log files, that store this information. However, Enriquez (2008) points out that log files would not be able to detect potentially important relational ties, such as discussion forum “reading ties” which are established whenever a learner reads a forum topic but does not post a reply. This act of reading may have resulted in the acquisition of new knowledge, but this is overlooked when only verbal data is considered. Communication patterns may not fully encompass the degree to which learning in a CSCL activity has truly occurred or whether a relation has indeed been established.Similarly, focusing only on one-mode learner-learner networks may ignore the artifacts that facilitate or co-constructed during the collaborative activity (Stahl et al., 2014). Two-mode networks (e.g., networks with more than one type of node, such as learners and the learning materials they engaged with) may be applied to reveal indirect/mediated interaction between learners based on their engagement in technological/instructional/knowledge artifacts or common activities. These artifacts are essential for mediating communication and interaction between participants of a CSCL activity. When SNA is applied, these non-human agents are treated analytically in the same way as human-human interactions (Jones, 2015), which provides more information on the interaction that took place. For instance, Oshima and colleagues (Oshima, Oshima, & Matsuzawa, 2012) note that if analyzing communication is the goal of the SNA in a CSCL environment, learner-learner networks do not provide any information on the content of the discussions, thus not capturing how knowledge advances during collaboration in the same way that, for example, a network of learners and shared key terms in the discussion would.2. Analysis methods: Analysis of SNA results are often limited to descriptions of network properties by visual inspection of sociograms and reporting the values of the SNA measures (Carolan, 2014). For example, the density of a network is often reported as a value between 0 and 1, or a description of the connectedness of nodes in a sociogram. However, SNA results in and of themselves do not indicate whether the interaction led to learning. Content analysis may compensate for this problem, but this can only be applied to text data (e.g., communication transcripts), which sets limits as to what can be inferred about the collaborative process from the SNA data. Since a highly dense, one-mode communication network does not bear information on what was discussed, it is not possible to infer whether the information exchange is associated with learning gains. As noted earlier, learning outcomes in CSCL are found at various levels, which necessitates a multimethod approach to research. SNA measures may be further analyzed in conjunction with quantitative indicators of these cognitive, social and/or motivational outcomes collected from other research methods (e.g., correlating density with final grades). Doing so extends the findings of SNA beyond description and onto inferences about impact of relational ties on learning outcomes (Carolan, 2014).In sum, SNA is a promising technique for revealing relational structures that arise from CSCL interactions. Although direct communication between online learners has been widely examined using SNA (Cela et al., 2015), it is currently unclear whether (1) SNA has been applied to analyze indirect/mediated interactions between learners via artifacts in their environment, and (2) whether the analysis methods have been used to supplement SNA results to gain more insight into the impact of interactions on learning. In order to maximize its analytical potential in CSCL research, SNA should also include non-human agents such as learning artifacts, and relational ties that are “more than [indents] in a thread … [but rather] a shared article, experience, story, lessons, etc.…that may constitute the collaborative practices and process of learning” (Enriquez, 2008, p. 125). Furthermore, more efforts should be exerted not only into using different SNA measures and procedures, but also performing further analysis with SNA data to move beyond simply describing the network to explain how CSCL groups are influenced by their relationships.
1.4. Research questionsPrevious evaluations of SNA in online learning (Cela et al., 2015) have demonstrated the usefulness of SNA as a means to describe direct communication networks between learners. However, established CSCL frameworks (e.g., Dillenbourg et al., 2009, Kirschner and Erkens, 2013) have noted that (1) beyond direct communication, there is a wealth of nonverbal interactions that occur in CSCL environments between learners and artifacts alike; and (2) interactions have implications on CSCL learning outcomes at different levels. Since a systematic investigation of SNA in CSCL has not been undertaken, the main objective of this methodological review is to examine whether current applications of SNA have incorporated these crucial aspects of CSCL activities. The following research questions address this goal:RQ1: Do current applications of SNA in CSCL research reflect the diversity of CSCL actors and interactions that influence learning?The first research question investigates whether current SNA applications in CSCL studies have taken into account that different direct and mediated interactions between learners and artifacts in the learning environment are essential for establishing a shared understanding of CSCL learning tasks. To do so, it is necessary to outline which CSCL actors and relational ties have been studied using SNA.RQ2: How are SNA measures related to CSCL learning outcomes on the cognitive, social, and motivational levels?CSCL is an interdisciplinary, multimethod field that acknowledges that learning occurs at different levels due to relational ties established between actors in a network. The second research question investigates whether those relational ties as measured by SNA indices have any implications on CSCL cognitive, social, and/or motivational outcomes. Thus, to answer this question it is necessary to outline which SNA measures have been applied to analyze these actors and relational ties and which analysis methods have been applied to relate SNA measures with CSCL outcomes.From the results of this review, it is possible to uncover how the research community views CSCL from a social network perspective, and the extent to which it aligns with established foundations of the field.
