Three-dimensional (3D) display on a computer screen is becoming popular, especially for computer game fanciers. Existing commercial 3D display technologies for computer screens belong to the stereoscopic and auto-stereoscopic types, which both are based on the binocular parallax theory. Under the scheme of this theory, two perspective views are provided to two pupils of the viewer separately by utilizing spectral, polarization, temporal, or other characteristics of the two images [1]. The viewer gets a 3D sense through the convergence of the light beams from the two perspective views. However, to see the corresponding perspective views clearly, the eyes have to focus on the screen. Thus, a discrepancy between the convergence distance and the focusing distance exists. This kind of accommodation-convergence conflict violates humen's physiological habits and causes visual fatigue to the viewers [2].
By attaching a micro-lens array onto the computer screen, Integral Imaging could enable a 3D display free of accommodation-convergence conflict on computer screens [3]. Through the corresponding micro-lenses, an elemental image projects light beams along specific directions [4]. Light beams from different elemental images overlap into a real spatial light field that the eye can focus on naturally, thus the accommodation-convergence conflict is got rid of. However, pixels of the computer screen are allocated to different elemental images in the Integral Imaging, thus leading to an inherent low display resolution for the displayed 3D object. Replacing an elemental image by a 3D pixel which consists of multiple LCD pixels at different horizontal positions, Takaki demonstrated a technology similar to the Integral Imaging 3D display on the computer screen [5]. The defined 3D pixel was placed on the focal plane of the corresponding micro-lens. Through the micro-lens, each LCD pixel of a 3D pixel could provide a light beam along a specific direction and multiple light beams from a 3D pixel propagate along different directions. This situation was applicable to all 3D pixels. Thus, groups of parallel light beams from all 3D pixels got generated. With the angle pitch between adjacent directions being designed small enough, different groups of parallel light beams overlapped into spatial light spots that the pupil could focus on. Similarly, due to the sacrifice of LCD pixels for obtaining multiple light beam directions in Y. Takaki's work, the display resolution of the displayed object was hard to be satisfactory basing on the state-of-the-art computer screen. Urey proposed a super stereoscopy 3D display technique for panel display screens to overcome the accommodation-convergence conflict [6]. In this super stereoscopy system, two light selective filters were designed and installed on each eye-piece of the stereo glasses. Through each filter, the corresponding stereo-image got visible based on the anaglyph theory. Thus, the two stereo-images delivered to a pupil converged into a spatial object that the pupil could focus on naturally. As an anaglyph technology, the super stereoscopy technology encountered color rivalry and unpleasant after-effects (transitory shifts in chromatic adaption) that restricted its further extension and application [1].
In this paper, based on Super Multi-view (SMV) technology, we propose a new 3D technology free from accommodation-convergence conflict for computer screen applications. Four horizontally aligned liquid crystal light valves, which can be gated sequentially, are placed before two eyes of the viewer respectively. Through refreshing the display content on the display screen synchronously, two light beams passing through a displayed point can be presented to each eye of the viewer. When the time interval between the appearances of adjacent light beams small enough, these light beams converge into a flicker-free spatial point that the eye can focus on naturally, thus implementing consistent accommodation and convergence distances. Compared with existing accommodation-convergence-conflict-free 3D display techniques, the proposed technology not only is free from color rivalry, but also presents perspective views with a full display resolution, thus offering great potentials for comfortable 3D display on commercialized computer screen.
