The touchscreen interface has several specific advantages, such as direct interaction with what is shown on the display, faster target selection compared to mouse or stylus, and various modes of operation through multi-touch gestures (Cockburn et al., 2012, Kin et al., 2009). The direct interaction and the ability to conduct various operations with multi-finger gestures have made the touchscreen interface one of the main interfaces for mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets. Although it has become popular for mobile devices, the touchscreen interface has not been widely used for desktop or notebook computers to date. Unlike interaction with mobile devices, which requires only finger and wrist movements, interaction with computer touchscreens often requires entire arm movements without hand or arm support, possibly constituting one of the key reasons that made the touchscreen interface less popular for computers (Al-Megren et al., 2015, Juan David et al., 2014, Shin and Zhu, 2011).
A touchscreen interface requires users to tap a certain target and conduct a touch gesture while looking at the target. Placing targets lower on a screen reduces arm elevation but increases neck flexion to look down at the target. In contrast, placing targets near eye height reduces neck flexion but it leads to greater arm elevation to reach the target. Common guidelines for computer workstations, such as ‘placing the keyboard at the height of elbow and the top line of display at or slightly below eye height’ (ANSI/HFES, 2007, OSHA, 2001), do not work for computer touchscreens. Recent studies have suggested some recommendations for users of computer touchscreens such as the use of sloped and extended armrests to minimize the duration of floating arm posture and alternating hands frequently to reduce cumulative fatigue on the dominant hand and arm (Kang and Shin, 2014, Shin and Zhu, 2011). While these recommendations may help users utilize computer touchscreens with less physical discomfort, there are still numerous understudied factors that may influence the physical demands of the interface.
An underexplored but potentially important factor in touchscreen interface design is the location of touch targets. The vertical and horizontal location of a target relative to a user may influence the movement and muscle activities of the upper extremities, as observed in studies of finger pointing tasks and light manual work (Schuldt et al., 1987, Sporrong et al., 1998). Performance in touch gestures such as tapping accuracy or task completion time may vary depending on where the target is located from the user, as reported in a study with a commercial standing kiosk (Leahy and Hix, 1990). Although findings in previous research suggest potential effects of target location on task performance and physical demands of computer touchscreens, there has been little research investigating the quantitative relationship between them.
The primary objective of this experimental study was to determine the effects of target location and display position on task performance and physical demands when interacting with a computer touchscreen. Task performance and physical demands were evaluated by quantifying touch accuracy, completion time and electromyography (EMG) of the shoulder and neck extensor muscles while conducting reach-tap-return trials. The study results can provide recommendations for proper touchscreen display location and target layout.
