Traditional evaluation process of meat quality is tedious, laborious, highly repetitive, costly, time-consuming and requires trained specialists (Sun, 2011, Sun, 2012, Qiao et al., 2007, Chen and Qin, 2008, Jackman et al., 2009, Liu et al., 2012, Huang et al., 2013). Several studies have highlighted marbling as an important meat quality parameter; however, the traditional evaluation approaches can be influenced by the subjective visual and sensory criteria adopted by the involved specialists (Xiong et al., 2014).
Marbling consists in visible portions of intramuscular fat and it influences other meat attributes such as tenderness, flavor and texture. Furthermore, marbling level influences consumers choice, since a high marbling degree indicates a superior meat quality (Faucitano et al., 2005, Killinger et al., 2004).
In general, specialists determine marbling scores based on a visual assessment supported by standard meat images. Meat standards are labelled according to numerical scales related to the visible amount of intramuscular fat. Several standards have been defined for marbling classification according to country, meat type and animal species, such as the Japanese standard, the Australian standard, the Canadian standard and the USDA standard. Therefore, a generalised approach capable of handling various types of meat and different standard scales could constitute a valuable help to facilitate meat marbling assessment (Cheng et al., 2015).
Liu et al. (2012) described several research works focused on objective marbling assessment in specific species, mainly dealing with colour contrast differences. Several Computer Vision Systems (CVS) were proposed, that are however designed for specific marbling standards and animal species. This implies that various parameters and thresholds need to be tuned depending on the specific problem at hand, i.e., based on the considered marbling standard and on the particular animal species that is evaluated.
CVS has been widely used in food industry for food quality evaluation and control (Jackman et al., 2012). Marbling assessment can be performed by a CVS by means of a digital camera, which is inexpensive and widely available. However, a general approach that can lead to good results independently of muscle colour, contrast, standard or species is still a challenge. This challenge can be tackled using a CVS approach combined with machine learning algorithms. In (Qiao et al., 2007, Jackman et al., 2009, Huang et al., 2013), CVS has been used for marbling assessment, leading to satisfactory results. However, these works report expensive solutions based on quite controlled environments, costly equipments and parametrised algorithms for image processing.
In Jackman et al. (2009) a marbling segmentation algorithm has been proposed. Actually, in this paper the Authors did not calculate a marbling score after the segmentation phase. However, they suggested the use of artificial intelligence based processes that could learn from the panellists assessments, in order to gain more advanced levels of adaptability. Furthermore, in this paper as well as in other research works dealing with similar issues (Chen and Qin, 2008, Peña et al., 2013), the image acquisition step requires to consider a controlled environment, often using specific camera models and configurations (exposure compensation, aperture, lens and ISO). These issues cause difficulties in CVS reproduction and industrial application.
Some CVS need to deal with nonlinearities between the image features and the marbling score of interest, making use of sophisticated modelling techniques from artificial intelligence. Furthermore, specific parametrisation and thresholds could lead to scarcely reproducible solutions. Thus, in order to implement a robust CVS able to cope with more complex scenarios, it is recommended to apply machine learning algorithms. Machine Learning (ML) is an effective tool for exploratory data analysis and is widely employed for various applications, including Computer Vision. (Ropodi et al., 2016).
The application of ML algorithms for food evaluation has been widely investigated (Du and Sun, 2006, Balasubramanian et al., 2009, Chen et al., 2010, Valous et al., 2010, Wang et al., 2012, Liu et al., 2013, Papadopoulou et al., 2013, Prevolnik et al., 2014, Muñoz et al., 2015), demonstrating that ML can be applied to uncover non-trivial relationships by automatically learning from a set of training data, thus producing knowledge which in turn can be used to interpret new data.
The choice of the most proper machine learning algorithm is related to its properties and to the set of assumptions used by the learner to estimate the output for those examples that have not been considered in the training phase (which is known as inductive bias); these aspects are mainly related to data representation and local-versus-global learning (García et al., 2008). In particular, in the present work we aimed at considering the smallest possible number of instances enabling to predict classes (marbling score values) with acceptable accuracy. For this reason, k-Nearest Neighbour (k-NN) classifier was considered, since it is a simple supervised learning scheme which classifies unknown instances by finding the closest previously observed instances (Brighton and Mellish, 2002). Learners which apply this classification method are named Instance-Based Learners.
O‘Farrell et al. (2005) compared k-NN usage to ANN (Artificial Neural Networks), more precisely to a MLP (Multi-layer Perceptron), in order to verify whether a simple classification technique like k-NN could fit for quality control in food industry. The Authors, citing also several research works on food matrices, concluded that k-NN may be entirely satisfactory and is computationally very simple. In Barbon et al. (2016), the performance of k-NN to predict pork storage time was compared to seven other algorithms (Random Forest, MLP, Support Vector Machine, J48 and Naïve Bayes, and two different Fuzzy methods), leading to the second best accuracy values.
In this context, this paper contributes to the current research in the field by presenting a method to perform marbling grading based on image analysis, designed in a way to be able to handle different muscles of various animal species, and to be adaptable to diverse marbling standards. In particular, our CVS is based on dynamic thresholding, illumination normalisation, adaptive contrast enhancement and instance-based decision for marbling grading.The performance of the proposed method was evaluated considering meat samples from two different animal species (beef and pork), each one with its own marbling standard.
