Research on students' use of information and communication technology (ICT) has examined its effects on educational outcomes, well-being, and health (Cotten, 2008, Cox and Marshall, 2007, OECD, 2015b, Spiezia, 2010). In a parallel, yet almost distinct line of research, the antecedents and institutional determinants of ICT use were studied at different levels of educational systems (Bozionelos, 2004, Fraillon et al., 2014, Teo and Noyes, 2011, Van Braak and Kavadias, 2005). These research traditions have revealed findings on the relations between the use of ICT and academic achievement, and have pointed to the importance of students' background and cultural capital for exploiting the available technologies. Most of the studies contributing to these traditions have taken a general view on students' use of ICT by simply examining the relations among the above mentioned constructs for an entire sample or population. This variable-centered approach represents “a synthesis (or averaged estimate) of the relationships observed in every individual from the sample under study, without systematically considering the possibility that these relationships may meaningfully differ in subgroups of participants” (Morin, Morizot, Boudrias, & Madore, 2011, p. 59). Yet, as Tondeur, Sinnaeve, van Houtte, and van Braak (2010) pointed out, the availability of information and communication technology may not be equally exploited, because specific profiles of ICT use may exist depending on students' background characteristics. Along the same lines, Vicente and López, 2006, Chinn and Fairlie, 2010, and Rohatgi and Throndsen (2015) found evidence that, although ICT has been widely made available in many countries, the actual use of ICT depends on the contexts and cultures, in which it takes place, and the specific purposes it is used for. It therefore seems necessary to become more specific in studying ICT use by distinguishing between subgroups of students that represent potentially different user profiles (Cotten, 2008). In fact, taking a more differentiated, person-centered perspective allows researchers to describe how specific groups of students use ICT for different purposes and in different contexts. At the same time it becomes possible to investigate the profile-specific effects on educational outcomes, well-being, and health on the one hand, and the antecedents and institutional determinants of ICT use on the other hand.
As a consequence, the present study seeks to examine whether or not different user profiles of students' ICT use exist. On the basis of a representative, large-scale sample of Norwegian ninth-grade students, a person-centered approach is taken in order to (a) examine the existence of latent user profiles; (b) investigate factors that determine students' profile membership; and (c) estimate the relation between profile membership and performance on a computer and information literacy test.
