Masahiro Mori, a Japanese robotics professor, predicted already in the 1970s that although increasingly humanlike robots would elicit positive affects, robots and other artificial devices that reached a threshold of being almost but not fully humanlike could elicit a profound sense of eeriness (Mori, 1970/2012) (Fig. 1). Based on the shape of this hypothetical evaluative curve, Mori coined his hypothesis as the uncanny valley (UV). The UV hypothesis has been rediscovered during the ongoing millennium (Brenton et al., 2005, Gee et al., 2005, Hanson, 2005, MacDorman, 2005), and it is at the present particularly relevant for computer graphics and animation technologies, which can arguably be used to produce the most realistic humanlike characters of today (e.g., Alexander et al., 2010). Although realistic computer-generated faces and characters are not necessarily interactive; realistic, emotionally expressive, and virtually interactive animated characters can already be found in the cinema. In the present empirical study, we investigate whether semirealistic animated film characters show evidence of the UV hypothesis..Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The characteristic uncanny valley curve between affective evaluations and human-likeness, as predicted by Mori (1970/2012). Some of Mori's original examples have been highlighted on the curve for moving characters.
The UV hypothesis would predict that some animated film characters that are intended to appear realistic elicit negative affective reactions in viewers. Consistently, computer-animated films using state-of-the-art animation techniques, such as Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within (Aida et al., 2001), The Polar Express (Goetzman et al., 2004), and Beowulf (Rapke et al., 2007), have aroused critical reviews in the media. For example, the critics have noted that the characters of Final Fantasy “look so real that it's creepy” (Kempley, 2001), that “watching the humans in The Polar Express is like watching people through a smeary car windscreen” (Savlov, 2004), and that “motion capture [the animation technique used] in Beowulf comes across as an unsatisfying compromise between animation and live action” (Ansen, 2007). These and other similar films have been explicitly considered in the UV context in later film reviews (e.g., Gleiberman, 2011; Hill, 2011; Phillips, 2011; Robinson, 2007; Stevens, 2011) and technologically oriented magazine articles (e.g., Plantec, 2007; Perry, 2014, Weschler, 2002). Such observations from film and technology experts provide anecdotal evidence for the existence of the UV in computer-animated films. Although anecdotal, this association has been repeatedly mentioned in empirical research as well (e.g., Bartneck et al., 2009; Brenton et al., 2005; Burleigh et al., 2013; Chaminade et al., 2007; Kaba, 2013; Looser and Wheatley, 2010; MacDorman et al., 2009; McDonnell et al., 2012; Misselhorn, 2009; Piwek et al., 2014; Pollick, 2010; Saygin et al., 2012; Steckenfinger and Ghazanfar, 2009; Tinwell et al., 2011; Tondu, 2012), which indicates considerable academic interest in such possibility.
Demonstrating that semirealistic animated film characters do elicit negative affective reactions in viewers would strengthen the UV hypothesis, which has to date received inconsistent empirical evidence (for recent reviews, see Kätsyri et al., 2015; Pollick, 2010; Wang et al., 2015). This inconsistency may originate from the lack of consensus on the conceptual and operational definitions of the UV hypothesis – in fact, a characteristic of the original UV formulation is that it is a “broadly applicable guidepost to designers in a variety of domains” (Pollick, 2010, pp. 70–71) rather than a precisely defined experimental hypothesis. We will first consider evidence from studies that have used strictly controlled stimulus continua ranging from fully artificial to fully realistic, such as those generated by image morphing (e.g., Cheetham et al., 2011; MacDorman, 2006; Yamada et al., 2013), computer-generated imagery (CGI) (e.g., Burleigh et al., 2013; MacDorman et al., 2009), and motion manipulation methods (e.g., Piwek et al., 2014; Thompson et al., 2011). Although the earliest image morphing studies provided evidence in favour of the UV hypothesis (Hanson, 2006, MacDorman and Ishiguro, 2006), these findings could also be explained by uncontrolled image morphing artifacts (cf. MacDorman et al., 2009). The majority of recent studies have demonstrated that, contrary to the UV hypothesis, increasing human-likeness elicits increasingly positive evaluations (e.g., Experiment 1 in Burleigh et al., 2013; Cheetham et al., 2014; Looser and Wheatley, 2010; MacDorman et al., 2009; Piwek et al., 2014; Seyama and Nagayama, 2007; Thompson et al., 2011). However, a minority of studies have demonstrated nonlinear changes that are consistent with the UV hypothesis (Experiment 2 in Burleigh et al., 2013; Ferrey et al., 2015; Yamada et al., 2013).
The inconsistency of the above findings could possibly originate from the fact that the UV would manifest itself only under very specific experimental conditions. A careful reading of Mori's original article (Mori, 1970/2012) reveals that he did not explicitly state that all kinds of possible human-likeness manipulations would lead to the UV. One possibility is that the UV is caused by a perceptual mismatch between artificial and realistic features. This suggestion is consistent with Mori's illustrative examples, such as a myoelectric hand that looks but does not feel human, and it has also received support from empirical studies (for a review, see Kätsyri et al., 2015). For example, Seyama and Nagayama (2007) showed that a greater mismatch between the realism of the eyes and the rest of the face elicits more negative evaluations, with the most negative evaluations occurring for fully artificial eyes placed on a fully realistic face or vice versa. The authors also demonstrated that unrealistically large eyes appeared the most eerie on the most realistic faces. MacDorman et al. (2009) demonstrated similar eyes–face mismatch and eye enlargement effects for CGI faces. Mäkäräinen et al. (2014) found that exaggerated facial expressions are acceptable on cartoonish faces but appear increasingly strange on increasingly humanlike faces. Recently, MacDorman and Chattopadhyay (2016) demonstrated that inconsistency between computer animated and real features causes humans and animals, but not objects, to appear eerier and colder. Other studies have demonstrated that individuals show increasing consensus when judging the range of aesthetic facial proportions on increasingly realistic faces (Green et al., 2008, MacDorman et al., 2009).
Although the above findings could be taken to imply that the UV exists and can be caused by either a perceptual mismatch between realistic and artificial features or a heightened sensitivity to deviations from human norms in highly realistic characters, this suggestion is not without problems. First, one should be careful in generalizing results from these relatively few experimental manipulations to all possible kinds of perceptual mismatches. Second, the above explanations cannot exclude the possibility that the UV could also be caused by yet some other explanatory mechanisms. Third, it remains uncertain whether the above experimental results can be generalized to natural stimuli. Rigorously controlled experimental UV studies are by necessity tied to narrow stimulus manipulations; for example, the above studies have focused predominantly on facial feature modifications. Testing whether the UV is caused by a specific stimulus manipulation out of various imaginable possibilities could be said to represent a “bottom up” approach for testing the UV hypothesis. Given that the UV still remains poorly understood, the risk is that the adopted stimulus manipulations are not fully relevant for the phenomenon.
An alternative “top down” approach would be to first test whether the UV phenomenon exists for natural stimuli and then investigate which specific features have caused it. Two recent studies have already provided positive evidence for the UV in images of human, prosthetic, and robot hands (Poliakoff et al., 2013) and images of real-world robot faces (Mathur and Reichling, 2016). Other studies have already provided tentative evidence for the existence of the UV in video game characters. McDonnell et al. (2012) demonstrated that one of their most realistic rendering styles for computer-generated faces elicited low appeal. Schneider and Yang (2007) showed that almost but not fully human video game characters tend to receive low attractiveness ratings. Tinwell et al. (2010) showed that two of their studied video game characters that were not intended to appear eerie nevertheless received lower familiarity ratings than other similar characters. Furthermore, they also reported a negative correlation between audiovisual asynchrony and familiarity. Flach et al. (2012) studied the UV using animated film characters; however, they also included materials from various other sources, and their results were based only on visual inspection of data. Ho and MacDorman (2010) included film excerpts from two semirealistic animated films as a part of their questionnaire development; however, these films were not explicitly compared to other stimuli. To the best of our knowledge, no studies have yet studied the existence of the UV exclusively in animated film characters by comparing such characters to matched cartoonish and human stimuli.
To summarize, animated film characters could be used to test the validity of the UV hypothesis without making strict a priori assumptions about which specific features, mechanisms, or explanations cause the phenomenon. This is important because at the present the evidence for the UV appears to vary depending on the specific methods and assumptions (e.g., perceptual mismatch) adopted in each particular study. Although animated films are by no means the only possible naturalistic stimuli that can be used for testing the UV, they are particularly interesting because their anecdotal connection with the UV has been frequently noted in academia. In the present study, we test whether evaluations of animated film characters do show evidence of the UV. Specifically, we intend to compare cinematic materials extracted from semirealistic animated films to those of matched cartoonish animated films and human-acted films. Our aim is to include a comprehensive set of commercial motion-capture animated film characters into the semirealistic animation category. Motion-capture animation techniques are used to track a real actor's artistic performance and to replicate it on a computer-generated character. We focus specifically on motion-capture animation following the observation that the typically mentioned anecdotal examples of the UV – Final Fantasy (Aida et al., 2001), The Polar Express (Goetzman et al., 2004), and Beowulf (Rapke et al., 2007) in particular (see above for representative citations in academia) – have applied this technique. With cartoonish animations, we refer to conventional computer animations that follow the common animation principle of exaggeration to produce simplified but appealing characters (Lasseter, 1987).
A challenge of using animated film characters as research stimuli is that complete control over all possible confounding factors influencing their evaluations is not possible. Difficulties associated with the heterogeneity of research stimuli in studies with natural stimuli were noted already in the first empirical UV studies (MacDorman, 2006). Some confounds should be expected for film stimuli in particular. Participants’ expertise with animation technologies, previous familiarity with the UV phenomenon, and familiarity with the animated film genre are likely to influence their evaluations. Even more critically, confound factors are also likely to vary at the level of individual stimuli. For example, participants’ previous familiarity with and liking of specific films are likely to influence how they evaluate individual films. Furthermore, the evaluations of specific film characters may be influenced by how appealing or appalling they have been intended to appear. Although absolute experimental control of such confound factors is not possible, their effects could be mitigated by including appropriate confound variables in the analyses. Ideally, confound variables that depend on both films and participants (e.g., whether a specific film has been seen by a specific participant) should be collected from the same participants who do the evaluations.
A necessary condition for demonstrating the existence of the UV in film characters would be that, after participants have been explained the UV hypothesis, they will associate it correctly with the semirealistic animated characters. This prediction can be tested by asking participants to explicitly indicate which characters in their opinion appear eerie in the sense of the UV, after they have been explained the UV hypothesis in detail. Such explicit evaluations can be collected after participants have first rated their immediate impressions of the film characters, so that these immediate evaluations are not confounded by the explicit explanation for the UV hypothesis. This leads to our first hypothesis.H1After participants have been explained the UV hypothesis, they will explicitly select semirealistic animated film characters as eerie more often than cartoonish animated film characters or human actors.
Empirical studies have adopted specific self-report items from Mori's (1970/2012) original Japanese terms bukimi and shin-wakan to study the affective experience of the UV. Bukimi translates quite unequivocally as eeriness; however, shin-wakan does not have an undisputable translation and it has been translated varyingly as familiarity, affinity, warmth, and likability (Bartneck et al., 2009, Ho and MacDorman, 2010). Familiarity would be a particularly problematic item for animated films, given that it is trivially confounded with participants’ previous exposure with specific films and film characters. Most studies have adopted either eeriness (Hanson, 2006, MacDorman et al., 2009, MacDorman and Ishiguro, 2006, Thompson et al., 2011), likability or its synonyms (Ferrey et al., 2015, Looser and Wheatley, 2010, Seyama and Nagayama, 2007), or both eeriness and likability (Burleigh et al., 2013, McDonnell et al., 2012) to study the affective dimension of the UV. Following these previous conventions, we have adopted likability and eeriness to tap into the positive and negative reactions elicited by UV, respectively.
Based on the previous research, we made two opposing predictions. If greater human-likeness elicits greater positive affect, the positivity of evaluations should increase across cartoonish, semirealistic, and human characters. However, if the UV hypothesis holds true, semirealistic animated characters should elicit more negative evaluations than cartoonish and human characters. These alternative hypotheses can be formulated as follows.H2aCartoonish animated film characters will be evaluated as more eerie and less likable than semirealistic animated film characters, which will be evaluated as more eerie and less likable than human actors.H2bSemirealistic animated film characters will be evaluated as more eerie and less likable than cartoonish animated film characters and human actors.
One tempting explanation for the UV is that stimuli falling between clearly artificial and clearly human categories elicit eeriness because they are difficult to categorize. Cheetham et al. (2011) were the first to demonstrate that image morphs between artificial and human faces are indeed perceived categorically. Formally, categorical perception requires demonstrating enhanced perceptual discrimination performance for stimuli that straddle a category boundary than for equally spaced stimuli that reside on the same side of the boundary (Goldstone and Hendrickson, 2010). Studies fulfilling this strict criterion have not yet demonstrated that categorically ambiguous stimuli would elicit negative evaluations (for negative results, see Cheetham et al., 2014; Looser and Wheatley, 2010). However, other studies using bistable images (Ferrey et al., 2015) and images of faces (Burleigh et al., 2013, Ferrey et al., 2015, Yamada et al., 2013) have demonstrated that some intermediate stimuli located between artificial and realistic categories do elicit negative evaluations (however, see also MacDorman and Chattopadhyay, 2016). In the present context, it is possible that semirealistic film characters would appear eerie because they are difficult to categorize as clearly artificial or clearly human. Although it is obviously not possible to test perceptual discrimination performance formally with natural film excerpts, we nevertheless expected that participants’ subjective classification difficulty evaluations would show evidence of heightened difficulty for semirealistic characters. This led to our third hypothesis:H3Semirealistic animated film characters will be subjectively more difficult to categorize as human or nonhuman than cartoonish animated film characters or human actors.
