Cerebral palsy (CP) is one of the most severe disabilities in childhood and makes heavy demands on health, educational, and social services as well as on families and children themselves. Bax et al. (2005) defined CP as ‘a disorder of movement and posture due to a defect or lesion of the immature brain’. Those disorders of posture and movement which are (1) of short duration, (2) due to progressive disease or (3) due solely to mental deficiency are usually excluded from CP. The prevalence of CP is internationally 2.2 cases per 1000 births (Van Naarden Braun et al., 2016). The overall rate for the period from 1980 to 1990 was 2.08 per 1000 live births and there are nearly 17 million people with CP worldwide of all ethnicities and social status (Johnson, 2002).
The work “Surveillance of cerebral palsy in Europe: a collaboration of cerebral palsy surveys and registers” presented a consensus that was reached on a definition of CP, description, and classification in terms of diagnosis, topography and function (severity). Cans (2007) divides the CP into three types: spastic, ataxic and dyskinetic. Spastic CP is the most common form (70-80% of the individuals with CP are affected by spasticity) and is characterized by at least two of these signs: abnormal pattern of posture and/or movement, increased tone, and pathological reflexes. It may be either bilateral or unilateral. Ataxic CP (6%) is characterized by both abnormal pattern of posture and/or movement and loss of orderly muscular coordination; movements are performed with abnormal force, rhythm, and accuracy. Dyskinetic CP (6%) is dominated by both abnormal pattern of posture and/or movement; and involuntary, uncontrolled, recurring, occasionally stereotyped movements (Cans, 2007).
CP can affect different parts of the body. Unilateral and bilateral CP affect one or two sides of the body, respectively. Diplegia refers to an impairment that affects only the lower limbs, and quadriplegia is associated with an impairment in both upper and lower limbs. Manual ability is an issue in at least two-thirds of children with CP and it affects activities such as eating, dressing, writing or playing. Eliasson et al. (2006) presented the Manual Ability Classification System (MACS) to measure those limitations with 5 levels: from “handles objects easily and successfully” (MACS level I) to “does not handle objects and has severely limited ability to perform even simple actions” (MACS V). Severe motor disorders in combination with sensory and cognitive alterations result in great difficulties for some individuals with CP to communicate and interact with their environment.
In the recent years, the use of interactive tools and other apps developed for personal computers (PC), tablets, and smart-phones is spreading. Therapists and caregivers use them to overcome some of the effects of these motor limitations and promote neural plasticity, especially during childhood. Unfortunately, there are still barriers for these individuals to access the computer with standard input devices. This limitations are related to poor manipulation skills.
Computer access is often depicted as an act of pointing to graphical elements on the screen (Balakrishnan, 2004). Any pointing task consists of as an initial phase of ballistic movements followed by a slower homing phase. People with CP usually encounter navigation problems (difficulties moving the cursor during the ballistic phase), targeting errors (difficulties staying on a target in the homing phase), and other issues related to clicking (Hurst et al., 2008).
Many authors have approached the development of alternative interfaces in response to the special needs of people with motor disorders. Those solutions are available in multiple devices (PC, tablets, smartphones) and allow different types of actions: pointing (Tuisku et al., 2014), scanning (Biswas and Langdon, 2013) or scrolling (Zhao et al., 2014). The interface translates voluntary actions, registered as physical gestures (Rempel et al., 2014), muscle activity (Chen and Wang, 2013), gaze and or head tracking (Špakov et al., 2014), voice, etc. or other measurements such as evoked potentials (Schlögl et al., 2009) into input commands. Raya et al. (2012) proposed the ENLAZA interface, an adapted head control for users with severe motor disorders (especially CP) who cannot use traditional hand-held solutions to access the computer. ENLAZA employs the users’ residual motor skills and is robust to their involuntary movements.
Davies et al. (2010a) reviewed over thirty devices and technologies which enabled or enhanced computer access for individuals with CP, including pointing devices (Wu and Chen, 2007) and keyboard modifications (Lin et al., 2008), adapted GUIs (Simpson et al., 2006), filters and facilitation algorithms (Olds et al., 2008) and speech and gesture recognition. While these solutions may enable computer access for this population, few of them had undergone systematic evaluation for CP. As Almanji et al. (2014) argued, the use of assistive technology for computer access encountered barriers that led to the use of typical mice, trackballs or touch screens for practical reasons. Fitts’s law (Fitts, 1954) is one of the paradigms that the HCI community applies to assess usability. In this study, we aim to find the answer to the following questions:

1.Can we confirm that the ENLAZA pointing device, based on head motion, follows Fitts’s law when it is used by people without motor disabilities?2.If the answer to (1) is affirmative, does ENLAZA follow Fitts’s law when it is used by people with CP? We will focus on those with diplegia and quadriplegia and manipulation skills classified as MACS IV and V.
To answer these questions, we will quantify how effectively users with and without CP are able to access the computer by modeling their movement times with Fitts’s law. Even though Fitts’s law describes, by definition, upper limb motor behavior, the works of Jagacinski and Monk (1985), Radwin et al. (1990), and Gump et al. (2002) suggest that the motion of the head during pointing tasks with a direct pointing device is of the same nature. Our first goal is to confirm that hypothesis on users without disabilities. Most of the work related to enabling computer access to individuals with motor disorders focuses in MACS levels I-III. The research directed to individuals with severe motor disorders (MACS IV and V) is scarce. Our second contribution is to assess the performance of the ENLAZA head mouse when it is used by individuals with CP MACS IV and V. While Davies et al. (2014) observed that Fitts’s law cannot be applied in youths with CP, Almanji et al. (2014) specified that there was a correlation between speed and accuracy, but not as strong as in typically developing youths. We expect to find similar differences between users with and without CP in our study. The analysis of data will provide us with information about which profiles of motor impairment are modeled by Fitts’s law in a heterogeneous group of users with CP. This new information can lead to changes in the calibration process or to the development of new control strategies for the interface based on head movement.
