Electronic waste (e-waste) is one of the fastest growing and most challenging solid wastes streams worldwide. The United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) estimated some 42 million tonnes of electronic waste was thrown away worldwide in 2014 alone (Nichols, 2015) In Australia, only about 10 per cent of e-waste is currently recovered and processed. In the United States, less than 20 per cent of e-waste is recycled and large stockpiles of redundant devices are being amassed as technologies advance, for example, some 99 million unused outdated TVs are lying around in American homes and sheds (TakeBack, 2014). Yet, embedded within e-waste are many valuable materials with a positive market value for recovery and resale such as precious metals, including gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and copper; and strategic metals, like rare earth metals and other non-ferrous metals, as well as plastics. Printed circuits boards (PCBs) contain some 10–20% of copper by weight, compared to up to 3% within newly mined ore and some 10 kgs of gold can be extracted from 25 tonnes of used mobile phones. The UNEP's investigation revealed the embedded resources within the e-waste discarded globally in 2014 were worth some US$52 billion (Nichols, 2015).
E-waste, however, also contains a range of hazardous substances and contaminants. Our rapidly growing stockpiles of toxic e-waste and today's limited options for its safe reprocessing mean discarded electronic devices represent a serious global environmental challenge. E-wastes’ hazardous components, such as lead, cadmium, mercury and polybrominated diphenyl ether (PBDEs) may be emitted during end of life processing and pose a threat to human health and the environment. At the same time, processing can, itself, trigger the formation of new toxic compounds, such as dioxins and furans. Conventional recycling methods have a limited capacity to process complex waste streams that, like e-waste, contain a large variety of materials. As such, e-waste represents not only a global crisis of volume and toxicity – but a lost opportunity for the recovery of vast quantities of valuable resources, that would otherwise be sourced from finite natural resources. Safe, cost-effective, and efficient new e-waste recycling processes are urgently needed.
As processors/computing capacity expands into even everyday items, an ever increasing range and number of end of life products can be classified as e-wastes including: consumer/entertainment electronics, such as televisions, DVD players and amplifiers; office information and communications technology, such as computers, telephones and mobile phones, printers and photocopiers; household appliances including fridges, washing machines and microwaves; lighting devices including desk lamps; power tools, such as power drills and sport and leisure equipment, such as fitness machines and remote control cars (Harper, 2006). Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs), which are mainly used to connect and hold various electrical components, are the most important part of electrical items and e-waste. Some 3–5% of all e-waste is made up of PCBs (ABS, 2013) which contain high value metals such as copper, silver, gold, palladium, platinum, and tantalum.
Different approaches in both laboratory and industrial settings have been used to date to recover metals from waste PCBs. These include thermal processes such as pyrolysis (Quan et al., 2010, Mankhand et al., 2012) and chemical processes (Long et al., 2010); which start with dismantling and shredding followed by separation and further chemical treatments (Chiang et al., 2007). However, due to the complexity of e-waste and as PCBs themselves vary considerably in their composition the precise material make-up of the many various PCBs if often unknown. This means precisely controlled process to separate single element from complex e-waste are quite challenging (Boonsawat et al., 2013). Most current methods for materials recovery only can recycle up to 28% of the total weight of the PCBs; the remainder is either sent to the landfill sites or burnt. Besides their complexity, the presence of organic and inorganic hazardous compounds within the composites in PCBs poses particular technical challenges. This means current industrial recycling methods are costly and not entirely environmentally friendly (Li et al., 2004). In developing nations where informal e-waste processing includes the hand dismantling of PCBs and other unsafe practices, large numbers of poor workers and their communities face serious health and environmental risks. The development of safe, cost effective new recycling processes for PCBs is a priority in addressing the global e-waste challenge.
To develop efficient new recycling and resources recovery approaches – and to reduce the negative impacts on PCBs and e-waste on our environment and human health – it is essential that we better understand the nature of these solid wastes. Here we report on our research investigating old computer PCBs and our success in utilizing fast and selective thermal transformations to produce Cu-Sn based alloys from this common waste based on our pervious results (Shokri et al., 2017). The effects of different treatment times and temperatures were investigated to identify the best processing conditions for the transformation of PCBs. In the process, we have also laid the foundations for the development of novel recovery processes for sourcing base metals exclusively from e-waste using high temperature transformations.
1.1. Experimental procedureThe PCB samples chosen for this study were from old computer PCBs, large quantities of which are already in stockpiles designated for landfill. The samples were polymer based boards. As this study focusses on selective transformations of old generation computer PCBs, all components such as capacitors and resistors were taken off the boards prior to sample preparation. In order to gain better characterization results due to the homogeneity of the sample, a pulverizing process was undertaken prior to sample analysis. A cryogenic grinder was used to prepare the 100 μm powder from the sample PCBs before elemental analysis. Ten grams of the powdered samples – containing ∼20% metal and ∼80% non-metallic materials, including polymers, resins, glass and ceramics – were heat treated at different temperatures in a horizontal tube furnace under argon atmosphere with 1 L/min flow rate. Prior to introducing the samples, the furnace was preheated to the selected temperature. Each sample was placed in the cold zone for 10 min to avoid thermal shock and then pushed into the hot zone to react and then pushed back into the cold zone for rapid cooling to avoid oxidation. Output gas from heat treatment of PCBs was analysed using infrared gas analyser. The chemical composition of the samples after heat treatment at different times and temperatures was analysed using Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). The samples were also investigated using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) coupled with Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). After identifying the optimum processing time and temperature for producing Cu-based alloy, bulk samples were heat treated to demonstrate that commercially useful quantities of Cu-Sn based alloys can be readily produced from old computer PCBs. Fig. 1a shows the samples size in bulk and powder form before and after heat treatment.Download : Download high-res image (524KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. PCBs and their ground form used in this study a) before heat treatment b) after heat treatment in powder form c) produced metallic droplet after heat treatment in bulk form.
