1.1. BackgroundThe practice of tool mark comparison has a long history in the criminal justice system [1]. The goal of these examinations is to answer the question of common origin between a mark found at a crime scene (questioned mark) and a mark known to be produced by a suspected tool (reference mark). Such comparisons are a part of the broader field of pattern recognition and comparison which includes fingerprint, shoe print, tire tread, tool marks, and firearms identification. Until recently most of these disciplines have been practiced by conducting visual inspections (with the aid of a comparison microscope for firearms and tool mark examiners), with final determinations of common source being determined by a trained examiner. This practice has come under criticism in the United States, notably in a US National Academies report [2] due to the subjective nature of the examiner conclusions, the lack of an objective measurement of similarity, and the lack of a quantifiable error rate for these comparisons. The approaches to addressing the issues raised by the report [2] generally fall into two categories. The first is to develop measurement systems and computer algorithms that are able to quantify the degree of similarity between tool marks [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. Using these systems and an appropriately selected, representative database of firearms evidence, it is possible to estimate error rates for comparisons and obtain consistent, objective similarity scores. The second approach is to attempt to quantify the ability of trained examiners. The advantage of this approach is that trained examiners are already integrated into the criminal justice system and these studies merely quantify the expected error rates in work that is already being performed. In some instances, examiners use codified language to express similarity in an attempt to achieve consistent results across practitioners [8]. Other approaches utilize standardized data sets to compare examiner’s competency and, in some instances, provide estimates of error rates [9]. The purpose of this study is to apply computer algorithms to the test sets used to understand examiner proficiency and build a connection between the two approaches to address the recommendations of the National Academies for forensic science.1
1.2. Proficiency test setsThe focus of this article is on two firearms examiner proficiency tests which utilize sample sets of fired cartridge cases. Over the years, several proficiency tests exist of this type, each with different test procedures and different methods for ensuring distribution of consistent tests to each participant [10]. The sets of cartridge cases can be produced by the test manufacturer by either multiple firings from known firearms or by replicating a single set of cases many times. The proficiency tests used in this study are from the Collaborative Testing Services firearms examination 526 test which uses many firings from, in this case, three firearms. The test kits are assembled from the firings such that each participant receives the same number of questioned and known reference firings from the same firearms, although each individual test will have some differences based on the consistency of the markings produced by the firearms used to create the test samples. Cartridge cases from both the 2010 (CTS 10-526) and 2015 (CTS 15-526) tests are used. The results from all participants of the test are available online [11]. Both tests include three reference cartridge cases fired from a mock suspect’s firearm and four questioned cartridge cases from the mock scene of the crime. The objective of this test is to determine which, if any, of the questioned cases were fired from the suspect’s firearm. In both instances, the test was constructed so that there was one questioned case which matched the suspect’s firearm, two other questioned cases fired by a second firearm which matched each other, and a final questioned case which was fired from a third firearm. It is important to note that the published results include responses obtained from anyone that took the test which may include individuals who are not fully trained, certified, or otherwise expert examiners. Therefore, these results should not be considered representative of a global error rate for laboratories or examiners performing casework.The first data set, is a single proficiency test from CTS 10-526 containing a set of seven fired 180 grain Federal® American Eagle® .40 S&W FMJ cartridge cases. The set contains three known reference cartridge cases fired from a .40 S&W caliber Smith & Wesson Springfield Armory XD40 handgun and four unknown casings. One unknown is fired from the same XD40 as the known cartridge cases. Two unknown cartridge cases were fired from a .40 S&W caliber Smith & Wesson Springfield Armory XD compact handgun. One unknown cartridge case was fired from a .40 S&W caliber Sig Sauer P226 handgun. Two of the known matching cartridge cases fired from the XD40 will be used as visual examples in the following sections to explain the comparison algorithms. After presenting the details of the algorithm, each pairwise combination of cartridge cases from this data set will be compared to demonstrate the ability of the algorithm to pass a single proficiency test in a manner analogous to how an examiner is tested.The first data set provides a straightforward look at how a comparison algorithm would manage a single proficiency test, but it only allows a very small overall number of comparisons to be made. For a rigorous validation and understanding variability of scores, it is necessary to repeat similar tests many times. In the original proficiency test for firearms examiners, this was achieved by having many individuals take nearly the same test. For the computer algorithm presented here, a similar large dataset was necessary. Numerous samples that went unused by CTS during the administration of the CTS 15-526 proficiency test were used to build this second, larger dataset. The collection contains 44 firings fired by a .40 S&W caliber Ruger P94DC used to create the known samples and the matching, questioned samples. This will be referred to as Firearm 1. There were also firings from the other questioned firearms which will be referred to as Firearm 2 which had 18 firings and Firearm 3 which had 12 firings. The brand and model of these firearms is .40 S&W caliber Ruger P91DC for Firearm 2 and .40 S&W caliber Smith & Wesson SW40VE for Firearm 3. This particular proficiency test was constructed such that each examiner received 3 known firings from Firearm 1, one questioned firing from Firearm 1, two questioned firings from Firearm 2 and one questioned firing from Firearm 3. The ammunition used for all firings was 180 grain Federal® American Eagle® .40 S&W FMJ. Analysis of this large collection of samples will demonstrate the consistency with which the algorithm can pass a common proficiency test as well as provide insight into the variability of firings used in creating the proficiency test.
1.3. 2D Measurements with a comparison microscopeThe traditional method for completing a proficiency test, as it is with evidence in an examination for a criminal case, is to use a comparison microscope to observe two pieces of evidence simultaneously. An optical bridge is used to combine the two microscope paths into the eyepiece for viewing. The operator is able to control the relative position and rotation of the two objects under observation as well as the comparison edge between images, that is, the location where one image transitions to the next. An example of a comparison microscope image is shown in Fig. 1. On the left there is a comparison of a breech face impression and on the right there is a comparison of a firing pin impression. The two images were obtained from the same pair of known source samples from the CTS 10-526 proficiency test. These cartridge case samples were fired from the Smith & Wesson Springfield Armory XD40 handgun described above. The samples are illuminated obliquely using a fluorescent light bar positioned at the top of the images. These magnifications and lighting conditions are indicative of what an examiner might observe while comparing cartridge case evidence.Download : Download high-res image (174KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Comparison microscope images using oblique bar lighting between two known matching cartridge cases. A.) Breech face comparison B.) Firing pin comparison. The transparent blue line separates the image of the first known firing on the left from image of the second known firing on the right. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)The operator of the comparison microscope is then able to adjust the location where the transition from one objective to the other objective occurs. To demonstrate this concept, images of each breech face impression and firing pin impression were captured using a CCD camera integrated into the comparison microscope. Consistent illumination between samples was achieved by using a ring of white light LEDs around the microscope objective. Magnification of 20× was used to capture the breech face impressions and 40× was used to capture the firing pin impressions. The low 20× magnification for the breech face impression is typically used in the initial stages of manual examinations for coarse alignment and was employed here so that the entire image could be captured in a single field of view. The images were converted to grayscale and the breech face impression and firing pin impression were manually cropped. The images were then aligned automatically in position and rotation such that the areal cross correlation function (ACCF) between each image was maximized. The ACCF is the cross correlation function computed over an area as opposed to a 2D profile. The value of the ACCF for a given alignment indicates the similarity over the entire area of one image or topography to another. The ACCF is calculated using Eq. (1) where A and B represent a two dimensional matrix of points (either intensity values or surface heights) with dimensions M × N, i and j are the pixel indices, μ is the mean value of the matrix, and σ is the standard deviation of the matrix.(1)ACCF=1MN∑j=1N∑i=1M[(Aij−μA)⋅(Bij−μB)]σAσBWith the two compared images oriented in the position of greatest similarity as defined by the ACCF, a video can be constructed which shows the transition from one image to another in a similar way that an examiner would align surfaces and compare features across the surface by transitioning from one objective to the other using a comparison microscope. The same cartridge cases from Fig. 1 are shown again in Fig. 2 for breech face impressions and firing pin impression. A video showing the transition is provided in each figure.Download : Download high-res image (568KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. A transition between digitized and processed images of the breech face (left) and firing pin (right) impressions. These are the same two known matching cartridge cases from Fig. 1. (Video available online).
1.4. 3D Measurements with a confocal microscopeThe greyscale images in Fig. 1, Fig. 2 depict the intensity of light reflected off the cartridge case surface. The image obtained will therefore depend on the illumination arrangement and does not directly relate to the actual surface height [12]. To provide consistent measurements that are directly related to the surface topography, it is necessary to utilize a so-called 3D measurement system. That is, a measurement system that is able to determine the height across the entire surface using a SI traceable unit of measure. Several techniques exist to achieve 3D measurements such as: stylus profilometry, interferometry, focus variation, confocal microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy. A review of the various techniques along with advantages and disadvantages of each system is given in [13]. Amongst these techniques is the disk scanning confocal microscope. The advantages of this system are vertical resolution in the range of several nanometers and horizontal resolution of several micrometers which is well suited for measuring features relevant to tool mark examination. The primary disadvantage of confocal microscopy is that the signal can become unreliable for highly sloped surfaces which can limit the surface area collected in the firing pin impression. This was the system chosen to measure the cartridge cases from the proficiency test. Regardless of the measurement system used, topographical surface maps are extremely useful for computer comparison algorithms as the data is collected using a consistent and repeatable unit of measure that is directly related to the features present on the surface.All of the proficiency test cartridge cases were measured using a Nanofocus μSurf confocal microscope. For the breech face impressions, a 10× microscope objective was used with a nominal lateral pixel spacing of 3.1 μm. A total of 9 fields of view were stitched together (250 μm overlap) to generate a surface map of the impression. The firing pin impressions were measured independently using a 20× objective with nominal lateral pixel spacing of 1.6 μm and a single field of view was sufficient to capture the impression. Firing pin and breech face impressions were measured separately since the depth range for each impression varies significantly. In general, there is no need to measure the two impressions simultaneously because the marks originate from two distinct processes during the firing sequence involving two different parts of the firearm. Therefore, the relative orientation of the impression marks is not guaranteed and ultimately they are analyzed independently.After measurement of the samples, the topographical maps of the surfaces were processed by trimming, removing outliers, and filtering to remove the low spatial frequency form and the high spatial frequency noise from the topography map. The Gaussian band pass filter used for the breech face impressions had cutoff wavelengths of 10 μm and 200 μm and the firing pin impressions were filtered using cutoff wavelengths of 1.6 μm and 110 μm. The high pass filter used for the firing pin impressions is a spline filter with modified boundary conditions intended to remove edge effects that occur at the perimeters of a domain [14].With the processed topographical surface maps, it is possible to align the maps in position and rotation such that the ACCF is maximized and show transitions between surface maps that are analogous to Fig. 2. Fig. 3 shows the transition between the surface maps of the breech face and firing pin impressions previously analyzed in Fig. 2. Associated videos are provided in the figure.Download : Download high-res image (562KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. A transition between digitized and processed topographical maps of the surface of the breech face impressions (left) and firing pin impressions (right). These are the same two known matching cartridge cases from Fig. 1. (Video available online).The objective of this research is to draw a connection between the current methods employed by firearms examiners, which are illustrated in Fig. 1, and the analysis that a computer algorithm would apply to the data presented in Fig. 3. While the results do not directly compare the aptitude of examiners to computer algorithms, the use of proficiency tests provides a common ground for validating objective comparison algorithms. The key goal is to demonstrate that the algorithm discussed below is able to consistently reach correct conclusions when given comparisons of known ground truth. The analysis methods will be presented along with visuals that relate features an examiner uses to the regions used in objective similarity calculations which quantify the level of agreement between pieces of evidence. These connections will be useful tool to aid examiners in verifying and explaining their conclusions as well as for understanding and confirming similarity metrics.
