Liver transplantation is the ultimate curative therapy for people suffering from end stage liver disease. With the various advancements in the field of Liver transplantation, the survival rate is increasing day by day and patients depend more on this surgical treatment [1]. For Liver transplantation, getting appropriate donor-recipient match is very difficult. Predicting the survival of patients after Liver transplantation depends upon appropriate donor-recipient matching. Donors as well as recipients have a set of features and these features should be matched with each other. Manual method for doing donor-recipient features matching is a tedious task. In many research problems, the dimensionality of input is excessively large. This can make the process of mining relatively slow. One solution for this is to remove the attributes which are less significant. To find relevant attributes from the huge dataset, various data mining techniques can be employed.
One of the key areas of rule mining is association rule learning which helps to find the relationship between various attributes in a dataset. Association rules provide the co-occurrence of data items as well as the directionality between data items [2]. The association mining result can be used in creating a prediction model for long term survival. The data collected from UNOS consist of 389 clinical and non-clinical attributes. From the whole dataset, Liver transplantation attributes of 256 donor, recipient and transplantation details were extracted. But all of these attributes don't have a role to play in computational prediction. Selecting the relevant attributes of donor-recipient manually for the survival prediction in liver transplantation is not easy. But from any dataset, it is possible to manually filter some attributes of zero help even without any data mining knowledge or techniques. A total of 59 such attributes comprising donor, recipient and transplantation attributes were manually eliminated.
Data mining techniques and association rule mining algorithms play a significant role in mining appropriate donor, recipient and transplantation attributes from the remaining 197 attributes. PCA was carried out for 197 attributes for dimensionality reduction. By ranking the resultant attributes with standard deviation, 27 attributes out of 197 attributes in the United Nations Organ Sharing (UNOS) Liver transplantation dataset were considered as relevant. To mine the relationship between attributes, various association rule mining algorithms like Apriori, Tertius and Treap mining algorithms were used. Results obtained were used as the training set for creating the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Radial Basis Function (RBF) prediction models for survival.
Since the technological advancements resulted in the improved survival rate, liver patients depend upon Liver transplantation in-spite of the costly surgery. To integrate the expected post-transplant prediction into decisions about organ allocation, and to enable knowledgeable decision-making by potential liver patients and their relatives [3], it is required to precisely evaluate the possibility of post-transplant survival based on information that is available before transplantation [3]. Even though there were some efforts earlier to create a model for prediction, it couldn't meet the needed accuracy [3]. The main reason for this was the unsuitable selection of a prediction model. Survival prognosis is a complex nonlinear relationship affected by many interactive factors, especially for a complicated organ transplantation procedure. Artificial Neural Network (ANN)s achieves a better part by escaping local optimum over conventional statistical techniques and logistic regression models. Researchers have surveyed the survival rates at various periods; none of them evaluated the accuracy of models for a long term survival of liver transplantation. With the properly mined and ranked set of attributes of liver transplantation (27 attributes), survival prediction of liver patients in post transplantation was conducted. We proposed two ANN models such as MLP and RBF models for comparing the accuracy of survival of patients after Liver Transplantation. A successful survival prediction model with high accuracy was obtained as the self-learning capability of ANN (Artificial Neural Network) was exploited for model building. For successful survival prediction, follow up information after Liver transplantation is necessary.
To summarize, objectives of the study are:
1.To reduce the dimensionality of data set attributes and validation of attributes.2.To find out significant and essential attributes by ranking.3.Prove the relevancy of ranked attributes by creating a prediction model.4.Perform the comparison of model to prove the survival accuracy.
