A network of more than 100 billion individual neurons forms the human nervous system. These cells are interconnected in systems and they create neural circuits, so the way we see this world, think, learn, remember and control the machinery of our actions are being originated from these neural circuits [1].
It is considered that electrical signals of human brain caused by its neural activity, include valuable information. According to this assumption, lots of experiments have been carried out on human EEG signals by researchers in previous decades. These experiments were performed by covering various techniques of classification and digital signal processing methods. One of the main goals in EEG signal processing is to develop a system for constructing a non-physical communication between human and an external device. Such a device can be a robotic arm, an speller, or a wheel chair [2], [3]. A brain computer interface (BCI) is a system that enables a person to control an external device by using brain's neural activity. The main goal of creating such a system is the handicapped people helping and enabling them to do their daily routines [4]. Fig. 1 shows the block diagram of a BCI system. According to this figure, after signal acquisition, preprocessing methods such as filtering or blind source separation algorithms are employed to reduce the merged artifacts and different types of EEG noises. In the preprocessing step, the SNR of the EEG signals are increased. In the next step, the related features can be extracted to train the classifier. The more the SNR of the EEG signals are enhanced, the more the extracted features are reliable and as a consequence, better classification results will be achieved. When the classification process is completed, the related commands are produced to control a device or complete a task.Event Related Synchronization (ERS) and Event Related Desynchronization (ERD) are two common neurological phenomena which are being used frequently in BCI systems for translating EEG signals. Both phenomena are known as temporary change of power in EEG signals. If this change is the enhancement of power, it is known as ERS and if that’s power decrement, it refers to ERD [5], [6]. ERS and ERD are detectable in beta and mu rhythms respectively and they are not phase-locked but they are time-locked [5], [6]. Both phenomena occur when a person imagine or perform a motor activity. ERS and ERD are computable using Eq. (1) [3].(1)ERS&ERD=P(f,n)−Pref(f)Pref(f)Here, P (f, n) is the signal power in a specific time and frequency of an average power map, and Pref(f) is an average power during some reference time and frequency f.Download : Download high-res image (98KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. BCI systems block diagram.
Knowing about different EEG frequency bands could smooth the path to study, analyze, and detect different neurological phenomena like ERS and ERD. EEG frequency bands according to their frequencies from low to high are mainly categorized in the following order: a) delta (0.5–4 Hz), b) theta (4–8 Hz), c) alpha (8–13 Hz), d) beta (13–30 Hz), e) gamma (refers to the waves which are more than 30 Hz) [3].
1.1. BCI applications and literature reviewBCI has various applications from controlling video games to artificial limbs and robotic arms. Many applications of BCI can be found in [7]. These applications can be categorized in the following fields: a) environmental control, b) locomotion, c) entertainment, and d) multimedia [8].The authors in [8], [9], [10] compare different classifiers and statistical analysis in a BCI system for motor imagery tasks. Spatial smearing caused by volume conduction of different brain layers is an important issue in EEG signals. Yet, various methods have been considered for reducing negative effects of this problem. Most of these methods are based on spatial filtering of the data. For example, authors in [10] represent spatial filtering and independent component analysis (ICA) to separate four classes of motor imagery tasks. These imagery tasks include tongue, foot, and left or right hand movements. They compared different ICA and common spatial filtering algorithms. The best results were reported for infomax algorithm in ICA analysis and laplacian derivations pattern in Common Spatial Pattern (CSP) preprocessing. Since, detection, separation, and localization of EEG source is very difficult. In [11], ‘Bell and Sejnowski' ICA algorithm were employed to completely detect source localization and identification of generated EEG.Automatic detection of left or right hand movement can be very useful in a BCI system. The authors in [4] represented an automatic method to classify left or right hand movements. Relevant EEG channels were separated. Then, these channels filtered with a bandpass filter at the range of 0.5–90 Hz. Filtering raw EEG data is an important step to achieve a clean signal and to get rid of different noise types merged with EEG signals. To remove the line noise, a notch filter of 50 Hz was applied. Then, Automatic artifact removal toolbox of EEGLAB [12] was added and used in two steps of EOG and EMG to correct eye and different muscles artifacts of the EEG signals. Artifact removal steps were carried out by using Blind Source Separation (BSS) algorithm. Extracted features were classified with support vector machine (SVM) and Artificial Neural Network (ANN) classifiers [4].Although different classifiers like Bayesian Linear Discriminant Analysis (BLDA), Fisher Linear Discriminant Analysis (FLDA), SVM, Generalized Anderson's Task linear classifier (GAT) and etc. can be employed in classification problems. In BCI classifications, SVM has yielded a high accuracy and is being widely used in this area of research. In [13], the performance of different classifiers were compared and the SVM and the BLDA classifiers were considered as the best classifiers for EEG signal classifications.It is very useful to classify different types of movements in one limb. For example, different types of hand movements like grasping, opening, or reaching can be classified in a BCI system by using ERD or ERS phenomena [9], [14], [15]. An online method based on adaptive probabilistic neural network was used in [15] to classify hand grasping, this experiment was carried out based on a single trial EEG signal in a time varying environment and the average classification accuracies of 75% to 84.0% were obtained for three different sections and 10 naive subjects.Surface electromyogram (sEMG) is a non-invasive method to acquire neuromuscular activities from the skin surface by using at least 2 bio-potential sensors. Combination of sEMG sensors and muscle activation strategy can be considered as a powerful tool for identifying different finger movements in BCI based systems [16], [17]. The authors in [18] improve the classification of independent finger movements in handicapped people based on source separation and icasso clustering method. In the mentioned research, a new procedure is introduced for detecting different kinds of gestures based on a myometric control. This technique employs independent component analysis and icasso to consider the minimum number of the surface electromyography sensors. By utilizing fewer number of the mentioned sensors, more flexibility and less complexity of the prosthetic devices can be achieved.Understanding different sleep stages is another important application of EEG signals. Applying basic principles of signal processing on human EEG can be useful in studying and detecting sleep problems like insomnia. It can also be useful in reducing driving accidents caused by drowsy driving [19], [20], [21], [22].In [22], for automatic detection of drowsiness, EEG signals were analyzed in three domains of time, frequency, and wavelet. In feature extraction, three features were calculated in time domain. These features were maximum, minimum and standard deviation values of EEG signal. In spectral analysis, 10 features were computed and these features were central frequency, peak frequency, ratio H/L, (RH/L), first and third quartile frequency (Q1F and Q3F), spectral standard deviation, integrated range, maximum frequency, asymmetry coefficient, and kurtosis coefficient. In wavelet domain, features of IEEG1 and ZC2 were extracted from EEG signals by using db23 wavelet transformation. IEEG and ZC features are computable with Eqs. (2) and (3) [22].(2)IEEG=Σk−1N|di[k]|(3)ZC=∑k−1N−1sgn[−di[k−1]di[k]]In above equations, di[k] shows the samples of each EEG epochs and N refers to the total number of these samples. Extracted features were analyzed with Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) algorithm in order to select the most optimal features, then the selected features were applied to an ANN classifier. The accuracy of 87.4% for alertness detection and 83.6% for drowsiness detection was reported.The authors of [23] propose a novel method based on independent component analysis of entropy rate bound minimization (ICA-ERBM) to detect the drowsiness of the drivers. In the mentioned research, the power spectral density of the EEG signals is utilized as a feature extractor, then the classification process is completed with the aid of fuzzy swarm based artificial neural network. In [24], driver fatigue exploration has been done using ICA-ERBM to separate the related EEG sources. Then the feature extraction process has been accomplished by considering autoregressive modeling. In the classification step, Bayesian neural network has been utilized to clarify the drowsiness of the drivers.Since for new BCI applications, the related scalp regions may become undetermined, specifying electrode positions is an important task. In the other hand ignoring unnecessary EEG channels smooth the path for developing ambulatory BCI systems [25], [26]. The authors in [27] propose a novel method in order to detect optimal EEG channels; this method is based on 2 distinctive stages. At the first stage, a computationally greedy algorithm is employed to restrict the related search space. The restriction process is done by proposing an adequate search range. Then in the second stage, estimation of distribution algorithm (EDA) is applied to the specified region in order to detect the optimal EEG channels.Using the optimization algorithms and data mining in different EEG classification problems, the accuracy and the complexity of BCI based systems can be improved. Genetic algorithm is one of the most popular optimization methods in classification issues. In [28], [29], [30], this algorithm was employed to select the most optimal EEG features for different classification purposes.In another interesting research, the authors propose a novel method for classification of 5 distinctive words using EEG signals. The mentioned words were five Spanish words corresponding to their English equivalents words: “up”, “down”, “right”, “left” and “select”. By identifying these words, it can be possible to control a computer cursor, when a user imagines the corresponding mentioned words. In this research, EEG channel selection is followed in two levels by considering an optimization algorithm associated with error rate and the number of selected EEG channels [31].Finding optimal EEG channels in different BCI classifications is a challenging problem. This problem is more considerable when the stimulated areas of the brain are unknown. In this case, finding relevant electrodes may become exhausting. The aim of this research is to address this issue by using IBGSA for finding optimized EEG electrodes for classification. In Section 2, a detailed explanation of used dataset is presented, then the preprocessing methods, feature extraction and classification processes are described at the rest of this section. The obtained results are announced and discussed in section 3. The goals and achievements are discussed in section 4 to make a conclusion.
