Many fields of science and engineering are applying techniques and recent advances in complementary fields. In this interdisciplinary context, researchers and professionals with greater knowledge of problem modeling and High Performance Computing (HPC) are in high demand from companies and research centers. Since 2011, Universitat Autònoma of Barcelona hosts a Master’s degree in Modeling for Science and Engineering to provide these kinds of professionals to those companies and centers.
The Master’s involves an interdisciplinary collaboration among professors from various departments; mainly Physics, Mathematics, and Computer Architecture and Operating Systems. The main objective is to provide the average science graduates with mathematical and computational tools to treat different types of scientific and/or technological problems. It covers a large range of problems, introducing many different approaches and tools. In particular, the students are provided with the basic knowledge to be able to model a physical system involved in some problems, to represent the model mathematically and to solve the problem applying different methods such as differential partial equations, optimization, time series, and related methods. The students learn how to analyze their particular problems and think about them from a computational perspective, i.e. formulating a problem and expressing its solution(s) in a way that a computer can effectively carry out. Finally, they have to think in parallel solutions and learn HPC technology to evaluate and improve the performance of models, applications and simulators. In order to include all these different issues in the Master’s, we define three training pillars: 
•Definition of complex systems•Mathematical representation and resolution of these systems•Computational thinking for parallel systems and performance engineering.
In this master, advanced programming topics such as performance engineering are specifically brought to science background postgraduate students. These skills are traditionally out of a science degree and are not commonly found in master’s studies elsewhere.
Students perceive the extensive and interdisciplinary training offered by the Master’s as a significant asset in their curricula. This is enforced by the presentations that several companies, which apply the introduced techniques and methods in their everyday business processes, make to students as part of the subjects regular activities. In this way, students can be aware of the significant impact of such techniques and methods on the productivity of a specific company. Moreover, most of these companies offer short internships and often hire students from the Master’s. This fact encourages students to enroll in the Master’s and is crucial in its success.
Students enroll from different degrees, such as Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Engineering or Computer Science. The studies in this Master’s have been very successful and are attractive to students from many different countries and with different backgrounds. The number of applications for this Master’s is growing every year, and in the current 2016–2017 course, several student applications were rejected since the maximum number of registered students has been reached. Fig. 1 shows the evolution in the number of enrolled students from year 2011–2012 until the current year 2016–2017. The Master’s started with just 8 students, but it has been growing continuously and now it has more than 30 registered students. Fig. 1 shows a clear indication of the high impact of the studies, perceived from the point of view of the students enrolled every year.Download : Download high-res image (192KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Evolution of the number of students and their background degrees.
Among the students, the most common backgrounds are mathematics and physics; but other backgrounds, such as chemistry, life sciences (biology, biochemistry, biotechnology), mechanical engineering or computing engineering are increasing in number. This heterogeneity in the students background implies a diverse prior knowledge and experience in programming: some of them have some experience with FORTRAN, others have a light knowledge of C, or have some knowledge of programming in Python or other languages. This heterogeneity in the students programming background introduces a crucial point in the teaching objective since it is necessary to establish a common foundational language. Then, we can teach them parallel programming and high performance computing as resources to be applied to different fields.
The main goal is to combine three aspects: 
•Although most students have some knowledge on programming, they usually do not show any significant skills on computational thinking or performance engineering. So, we plan to show them a complete view, from the problem definition, to the performance analysis and tuning.•We want to introduce a complete view of the existing parallel programming paradigms, analyzing the performance aspects involved. We do not focus on a single approach, but we present all the most commonly used approaches.•To make it useful, it is necessary to apply the presented concepts, methods and tools to a set of real cases from different fields of science and engineering.
In this context, we aim to provide good training in parallel programming and a solid experience of efficiency analysis of the implementation of several real applications. For that purpose, the Master’s contains, among others, two subjects, namely, Parallel Programming and Applied Modeling and Simulation. These two subjects provide a base for computational thinking and for developing efficient solutions addressed to complex scientific problems. Moreover, the contents and activities in both of them have been planned using a well-established teaching methodology.
The outstanding academic results obtained in these subjects throughout the Master’s life, as well as their excellent reception among students, have encouraged us to share their structure, contents and successful strategies in this work.
This paper focuses on the description of the training on parallel programming and applied modeling and simulation offered to the students. In order to introduce the main differences of the proposed teaching approach to similar existing systems, Section  2 analyzes the related work. In Section  3, we present the basic teaching methodology applied to the subjects we focused on and highlight relevant concepts on parallel programming shown to the students in order to establish a common framework. Section  4 describes the parallel programming approaches presented to the students and the different activities planned. Then, Section  5 presents some examples of case study applications that are introduced to the students along with proposals for further developments. Section  6 resumes some global academic results. Finally, Section  7 presents the main conclusions of this teaching experience.
