Alzheimer's disease (AD) is often primed by isolated memory dysfunction referred to as Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), followed by progressive decline in general cognitive abilities, altered behavior, loss of functional independence, and eventually death (Grimmer et al., 2009; Lam et al., 2013; Loewenstein et al., 2006). Although AD cannot be stopped or cured, the most effective way to treat AD patients is to slow AD progression in the early stage (Chetelat & Baron, 2003; Filley, 1995; Gauthier, 2005). Therefore, detecting the early onset of AD symptom is critically important for the success of AD treatments in clinical practice. The structural and functional loss involved in AD are known to have dynamically evolving morphological patterns (Duchesne et al., 2008; Jack et al., 2003; Klöppel et al., 2008; Vemuri et al., 2009; Whitwell et al., 2008). These dynamic brain structural changes can be captured by noninvasive longitudinal MR imaging data. Therefore, early AD diagnosis using longitudinal imaging has been documented in previous work with special attention to MCI (Cummings et al., 2007; Ganguli et al., 2010; Ganguli et al., 2004; Johnson et al., 2009; Li et al., 2012; Petersen, 2000; Reisberg et al., 2008; Winblad et al., 2004). MCI entails noticeable and measurable cognitive changes that are not severe enough to interfere with daily life or independent function, and carries an increased risk of developing AD or other type of dementia.
A growing body of research has set focus on attempting to predict if and when MCI patients will convert to AD. For example, tensor-based morphometry (Hua et al., 2011; Hua et al., 2010) is used to identify brain atrophy patterns in 91 AD patients and 189 MCI subjects scanned at baseline, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months. Since the hippocampus is a primary locus of early AD pathologic changes, many studies have investigated structural changes involving the hippocampal region. For example, Lee and colleagues employed a linear regression model to predict MCI conversion using hippocampus surface morphology and several clinical indices (Lee et al., 2015). Examining longitudinal changes in hippocampal volume (Chincarini et al., 2016) and cortical thickness (Li et al., 2012) are other approaches that have been used in an attempt to identify predictor variables of MCI conversion to AD.
A major general limitation of computer-assisted longitudinal AD diagnostic methods is the scanning protocol used with respect to the timing and number of scans obtained. For example, many longitudinal approaches assume the number of time points is equal, albeit implicitly. In clinical practice, however, patients will have a variable number of scans, often fewer than are obtained in longitudinal studies, and typically not done more frequently than annually. Moreover, each subject recruited in the Li and colleagues study (Li et al., 2012) should have at least 5 time-points at 6-month intervals, and should develop AD at least 12 months after the baseline scan. Hence, existing methods typically require a large number of MRI scans in order to be robust. Regarding the time window prior to the onset of AD clinical symptoms, conventional methods can only support predictive modeling over a relatively short time frame, even when a number of longitudinal scans are available. For instance, the imaging classification method used by Li and colleagues (Li et al., 2012) accurately predicted MCI to AD conversion only 6 months before the clinical expression of AD symptoms. Although the short-term prediction result seems promising, signaling conversion to AD only 6 months before the clinical syndrome appears would have limited impact on clinical practice based on convergent evidence that early and continuous treatment confers a therapeutic advantage relative to patients for whom treatment initiation is delayed for disrupted (Gauthier, 2005).
Several works utilizing computer vision have shown promise in early activity detection (Hoai et al., 2011; Hoai and Torre, 2014; Huang et al., 2014). Early activity detection in these works involves first training detectors to specifically recognize any small partial activities from the complete activities. The detection score of those partial activities are then constrained to increase monotonically along with time since those partial activities are conducted continuously. Inspired by the success of early activity detection in computer vision, we propose a long-range AD early detection approach that requires only a few MR scans.
The goal of our approach is to detect AD associated brain changes before the clinical diagnosis of AD. Accordingly, we regard the problem of AD early diagnosis as a binary classification task between MCI converters (MCI-C for short) who convert from MCI to AD and MCI non-converters (MCI-NC for short) who do not progress to AD. We leverage the following facts to achieve long range early diagnosis with only a few longitudinal MR scans: (1) AD progression is irreversible (Filley, 1995), and (2) the disparity of morphological patterns between MCI-C and MCI-NC become more manifest with AD progression (Hua et al., 2011; Thompson et al., 2007). In light of this, we will provide a principled mechanism to achieve this monotonicity in AD early diagnosis, which is not obtained by any existing diagnostic approaches. The assumption of monotonicity on AD conversion score is based on AD progression model in Zhang et al. (2001), which shows that the AD progression begins at a stimulating time point where the brain structure start to changes from normal to abnormal monotonically follows a sigmoid shape curve. Moreover, the study in Zhang et al. (2001) also reveal that the brain structure changes measured by structural MRI is an earlier biomarker than clinical scores test. This finding suggests that longitudinal MRI data are better early AD diagnosis biomarker than clinical score based AD diagnosis. Therefore, we present to study the longitudinal MRI imaging data using a Temporally Structured SVM (TS-SVM) to capture the brain structural changes during AD progression. Our model is trained based on a set of partial MR image sequences at variable intervals, drawn from the complete longitudinal imaging data. Note, partial image sequencing not only augments the set of training samples but also harnesses the inclusion relationship within partial sequences to reflect the inexorably progressive nature of AD by requiring the risk of AD conversion to monotonically increase as AD progresses. Compared with conventional SVM, our TS-SVM has three major improvements to achieve long-range early AD detection with high accuracy:
(1)The classifier is trained to recognize all partial MR image sequences and is therefore not restricted by the number of available MR images or AD progression stage.(2)We require the AD conversion score to monotonically increase within each AD-converting MCI subject as more follow-up images are inspected. Thus, our early diagnosis method can avoid inconsistent prediction results(3)We balance the early prediction accuracy and prediction range of AD conversion. Since the monotonicity makes the risk of future AD conversion more predictable, we have greater confidence to signal the future conversion of AD much earlier than the onset of clinical symptoms. Another benefit is that we can reduce number of MR scans, which is very important for translation to routine clinic practice.(4)We further present a joint feature selection and classification framework in order to select suitable features that are in line with the learned TS-SVM and also improve early detection performance.
In the application stage, we can apply our learned TS-SVM right after the first follow-up scan. Given the longitudinal image sequence of new subjects with arbitrary time points, we sequentially examine the imaging patterns from the baseline scan and signal the AD conversion early as the detection of abnormal change is of high confidence in TS-SVM. Thus, our proposed AD early detection method is not dependent on a specific number of scans. We have evaluated the performance of AD early detection on more than 150 longitudinal subjects from the ADNI dataset. Promising results have been achieved where our method can alarm the conversion of AD 12 months prior to the clinical diagnosis, with 81.75% accuracy, using only two follow-up MR scans. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We present our Temporal Structured-SVM with joint feature selection in Section 2. Then, we present experimental results in Section 3. Finally, we present conclusions in Section 5.
