Preventing unfavorable changes of product quality is a crucial task in food industry. Shrinkage and color are considered the most important organoleptic properties, determining marketability of the product after drying. To avoid unfavorable changes of organoleptic properties, the quality of food must be accurately and rapidly detected using real time computer vision system (CVS). An online CVS can continuously collect information about the shape, size (Campos-Mendiola et al., 2007, Hosseinpour et al., 2011, Yadollahinia and Jahangiri, 2009) and color (Chen and Martynenko, 2013, Hosseinpour et al., 2013, Nadian et al., 2015) of the food product in the process of drying.
Another crucial task in food industry and particularly in drying is to maximize the profitability due to reducing the associated costs. In this regard, reducing energy consumption is the main concern because industrial dryers consume a significant part of the total energy, i.e. 12% on average (Mujumdar, 2014). Generally, the reduction of drying time is a possible avenue to increase the efficiency of operation. Hence, hybrid technologies such as microwave- and infrared-assisted convective drying becoming more popular (Hebbar et al., 2004, Zhang et al., 2006). Although such combined technologies are more efficient than hot-air drying (HAD), the deterioration of organoleptic properties of the end product is of significant concern. The problem is that without careful monitoring the sample temperature may still continue to rise, resulting in overheating or burning (Zhang et al., 2010). Since most foods are heat-sensitive in nature, it is desirable to implement intelligent control system, such as neural networks or fuzzy logic, to preserve product quality.
Fuzzy control systems are applied in nonlinear and probabilistic processes, or for the situations where processes could not be modeled mathematically (Herrera et al., 1998). In addition, the organoleptic characteristics of foods are imprecise attributes with no defined boundaries. However, using linguistic attributes they could be characterized as high, low and medium quality, etc. Considering these inherent characteristics, fuzzy logic control seems to be appropriate approach for foodstuff applications in such as drying (Li et al., 2010). Hence, a fuzzy-machine vision control system (FMCS) application, which combines a CVS to continuously extract visual information of agro-food product under drying and sends this information to a fuzzy control system, can be a suitable alternative to traditional control strategy. Although most of research with CVS has been done in image-based quality monitoring of drying process, to the best of authors’ knowledge, no development is available in regard to using CVS for feedback control of drying process.
Therefore, the research objective was to develop general structure of intelligent control system for hybrid hot air-infrared dryer, using CVS for observation and fuzzy logic for decision making process. It was anticipated that FMCS permits real-time manipulation of process variables within optimal ranges, thereby minimizing the quality loss and energy consumption. To test this hypothesis, a laboratory-scale hybrid hot air- infrared dryer (HID) was constructed and used for kiwifruit drying. Multiple variables, such as moisture ratio (MR), energy (E), shrinkage (Sh) and total color change (ΔE) of kiwifruit slices dried at different temperatures and air velocities were monitored and analyzed in real time. Based on these preliminary experiments, a genetic algorithm was implemented in a Genetic Fuzzy System (GFS) framework with an adaptation and learning capability according to Herrera (2008). The GFS was employed to generate an optimized set of rules to be fed into the following fuzzy control system that was developed to optimize the drying effects. The performance of the control system was tested for kiwifruit drying, reflecting optimum levels of MR, E, SH and ΔE.
