Screw threads probably are among the most important of all machine elements. Threaded pipe joints are commonly used in various industries such as petroleum, transport, and mining [1]. According to the statistics, the threaded connections generally account for 15% of the total mechanical parts in each machinery and equipment. The frequency of using screw thread is so high in the industrial production so that it also plays an important role to do real-time high-precision measurement and to improve the quality of accessories [2].
Due to the basic design of a screw thread, which involves helical geometry, screw thread technology is complex [3]. Methods of measuring threads are as varied as the threads themselves. These methods include coordinate measuring machines (CMM), profile projectors, laser measurements, measuring microscopes, 3-wire units, screw thread micrometers and V-groove micrometers. On the other hand, methods of thread inspection range from lasers to fixed and variable limit gauging.
There are about 30 separate geometrical features and dimensional characteristics in the design and construction of screw threads [4]. The most rigorous standard in the United States inspects 11 major thread characteristics [5]. In addition, recent researches [6], [7] explored the effect of thread dimensional nonconformity on fastener performance and it was reported that dimensional nonconformity of 150% out of tolerance for pitch diameter yielded a 4% reduction in tensile strength. Therefore, the measurement and inspection of screw threads are very important to ensure the required degree of accuracy and conformity [8].
Due to the importance of measuring screw thread features, research in the field of measuring screw thread is still underway. For example, Laczik [9] introduced a derivation of geometrical features of the screw surfaces with the exact mathematical forms. Fujun et al. [10] presented a method, which used optical techniques and image processing techniques to measure the physical dimension of tube thread and give further analysis. Zhang and Zhang [11] introduced an online contact measuring system that can automatically detect large screw threads by using the neotype gauge head of threads. They used spectrum analysis to analyze the dynamic error and to obtain the data of the functional diameter. They reported that the neotype gauge head of thread is capable to get the error and the relative changes of the functional diameter of the screw thread. Tong et al. [12] introduced a system for automatic measurement of screw thread parameter based on the theory of laser measurement. The inspection and estimation of the screw thread contour were done using position sensitive device (PSD) to measure the coordinate data of the screw thread contour and using precise raster to measure the axial displacement of the precision worktable. Gadelmawla [13] developed a non-contact measurement system using a measurescope, personal computer and developed software, for measuring and inspecting most of the common types of screw threads. Kosarev and Sugrobova introduced a method to inspect the quality of the profile of an internal screw thread produced by means of plastic deformation of metal is determined [14].
The current methods of measuring screw threads are either time consuming or expensive. In addition, no single measurement method is available and capable of accurately measuring all screw features while significantly reducing the measurement time. Therefore, the aim of this work is to develop a non contact measuring system, based on the computer vision techniques, for measuring and inspecting the most common features of external screw threads.
