Research on the potentially negative physical and mental health effects of interacting with electronic screens has traditionally focused on television (TV) watching and desktop or laptop computer use (Straker et al., 2015). However, use of new mobile touch screen devices such as smart phones and tablet computers can now be observed in various age groups including very young children. The new user interface for these devices may be particularly suitable for young children who can intuitively interact with the graphical touchscreens (Neumann and Neumann, 2014), find them engaging (Couse and Chen, 2010), and can be independent in playing games and watching videos as early as two years of age (Geist, 2012). In a study of young children (0–4 years of age) from low-income, urban areas in the US, 97 percent had used a mobile device and two-thirds of 4-year olds owned their own tablet computer (Kabali et al., 2015). A study of children in Singapore found that over 60 percent of children from 18 to 24 months used mobile technology daily (Goh et al., 2016). Tablet use among young children is thus becoming widespread and is expected to increase.
The growing use of tablet computers by young children has many potential benefits and risks for children's mental and physical health. For example, research suggests that tablets can be used to accelerate the development of pre-academic skills (Plowman et al., 2012) such as emergent literacy (Neumann and Neumann, 2014). Unfortunately, despite widespread use, little is known on the physical implications of tablet use in children. Previous research on the musculoskeletal effects of screen use in children and adolescents reported that increased time spent TV watching (Balague et al., 1999), using desktop/laptop computer (Hakala et al., 2006, Shan et al., 2013, Straker et al., 2009), and electronic gaming (Straker et al., 2014) were related to pain and discomfort suggesting tablet computer use may also increase health risks. Laboratory studies in adults have found extreme neck and wrist angles during mobile touch screen device use (Pereira et al., 2013, Young et al., 2012, Young et al., 2013), along with higher cervical gravitational demand (Vasavada et al., 2015) and deeper neck flexion (Ning et al., 2015), which are likely to be dependent on task and location of use. Similarly, upper trapezius activity during tablet use has been reported to be affected by contextual factors such as screen size (Kietrys et al., 2015). Limited research has been conducted in younger populations. Epidemiological surveys in adolescents have shown an increased risk of neck pain with greater tablet use (Shan et al., 2013) and tablet related discomfort in the neck, lower back and eyes (Sommerich et al., 2007). Only one previous study, to our knowledge, has examined tablet use in younger children. During tablet use, 5 to 6 year-old children had less neutral spinal postures and higher activity in upper trapezius and cervical erector spine muscles but greater posture variation as compared to desktop computer or pencil and paper use (Straker et al., 2008). However, this study did not utilize the current generation of touchscreen tablets, which are structurally and functionally different.
In addition to musculoskeletal health, tablet use may also influence children's physical activity and sedentary behaviour. Screen use across a number of devices has been shown to typically be a sedentary activity (Straker et al., 2015) and higher screen time has been associated with decreased physical activity in children (Melkevik et al., 2010, Sandercock et al., 2012). Similar to most screens, tablet use may displace more active time such as playing outdoors (Straker et al., 2015) leading to increased sedentary time, however, its mobility could be used to increase movement compared to TV watching. How sedentary or physically active young children are during tablet use is not yet reported.
It is important to understand the physical implications of tablet use in young children, as young children may experience negative effects of tablet use during childhood, and may also experience longer term effects in adulthood. For example, experience of musculoskeletal disorders early in life has an impact on learning and activity participation and quality of life at the time (O'Sullivan et al., 2012), as well as predicting musculoskeletal problems later into adulthood (Hestbaek et al., 2006). Similarly children are establishing habits and practices for lifelong technology use, which may track into adulthood as sedentary behaviours and physical activity track into adulthood (Jones et al., 2013).
Therefore the purpose of this study was to describe the amplitude and variation in head, trunk and arm postures, muscle activity, sedentariness and physical activity of young children while using a tablet computer and to compare these to TV watching and non-screen toy play.
