Transportation agencies routinely collect road condition data as part of their pavement management activities in an effort to maintain pavements in a cost-effective manner. Since pavements tend to deteriorate with time under the influence of repeated traffic loading and environmental variations, the use of accurate condition or health monitoring techniques becomes critical for timely detection of distress development in the pavements. The 2017 American Society of Civil Engineers ASCE) Infrastructure Report Card assigned a ‘D’ grade for United States road infrastructure, given that 1 out of every 5 miles of highway pavement is in poor condition [1]. Efficient condition monitoring strategies can aid engineers in developing appropriate scheduling of pavement maintenance and repair activities leading to significant reduction in pavement life-cycle maintenance costs.
Pavement distress evaluation has come a long way from manual visual surveys to acquiring pavement images using downward-looking high-speed digital camera attached to pavement data collection vehicles moving at highway speed [12], [15]. Currently, many state highway agencies are moving towards pavement condition data collection using the so-called 3-D automated survey systems that can acquire high-resolution images containing more information elevation and intensity) than 2-D images and are capable of achieving 1-mm crack identification [30], [34].
Once the high-resolution digital images of the pavement surfaces are obtained, they are processed through a compression subsystem to achieve size reduction without loss of quality before they are stored. The images are then processed using various algorithms to extract crack features (i.e., orientation, length, density, displacement, location), crack maps, and summary statistics, which are then recorded in the surface distress database and can be linked to a Pavement Management System (PMS). As of 2012, more than 35 state highway agencies in the United States employed semi-automated and automated image-based methods for network-level pavement cracking data collection [32].
In the current state of practice, two software-based approaches to pavement crack detection workflow are common: manual typically developed in-house and used by public agencies at the project level) and semi-automatic typically developed and provided by private vendors at the network level). In the manual approach, the operator takes advantage of the tools built into the crack detection software to better digitize cracks, conduct measurements, and report results Lee and Kim 2005). In the semi-automatic approach, a set of crack detection algorithms are first applied by the software to automatically obtain the cracking information and the incorrect results are then adjusted manually through a series of human interventions [19], [24]. Over the last three decades, a number of studies have focused on improving crack detection algorithms and developing automatic pavement crack detection methods. In fact, the whole field of computer vision based civil infrastructure defect detection is constantly evolving with steady advances being made in sensing technologies, hardware, and software. However, there are still limitations to the existing crack detection methods due to their inability to overcome inherent challenges associated with these pavement images, such as inhomogeneity of cracks, diversity of surface texture (eg., tining), background complexity, presence of non-crack features such as joints, etc.
We propose the use of a pre-trained Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) model with transfer learning for automated pavement crack detection. Deep Learning (DL) has recently been used for road crack detection but since it typically requires large amounts of labeled training data, here we propose the use of pre-trained DCNN with transfer learning for automated pavement distress detection, and demonstrate its advantages. The rest of the paper is divided as follows. A review of state-of-the-art vision-based automated pavement distress detection methods is discussed first under Related Works followed by a brief introduction to the concept of DCNN with transfer learning for cross domain image analysis. The Experimental Study is then presented which includes description of the datasets used, the proposed methodology, the experiments carried out and the results.
