Global energy consumption is increasing each day due to economic and social development. More than half of the global population now lives in cities, and cities account for a large amount of global energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions (Gouldson et al., 2015, International Panel on Climate Change, 2014). Hence, the proportion of urban energy consumption relative to the total energy consumption is extremely high. The increase in urban energy consumption has many causes, such as increased energy demand due to economic, social, life style, and production changes, as well as invisible waste due to inefficient utilization. These factors have created an imbalance between energy supply and demand and environmental pollution, thereby posing a threat to urban environmental management. Therefore, it is necessary to improve urban energy performance to achieve sustainable development and a balanced urban environment in cities (Chen et al., 2014a, Chen et al., 2014b).
Urban energy performance assessments are essential to facilitate performance improvements. The energy performance of a city and the differences in performance among cities can be reflected in a scientific and effective manner (Fabbri et al., 2012). Furthermore, accurate information about urban energy performance can be obtained in a convenient manner using computer-based management technology, thereby helping to facilitate urban development decisions and to establish modern environmental management mode (Chen et al., 2008, Zhou et al., 2015).
Considering the importance of urban energy performance evaluations, many researchers have investigated definitions, evaluation indicators, key factors, evaluation methods, and evaluation systems for energy performance evaluation (Boyd et al., 2008, Boyd and Zhang, 2013, Burdová and Vilčeková, 2012, Chang et al., 2016, Hendro et al., 2013, Herrando et al., 2016, Pagliaro et al., 2015, Ramgolam and Needroo, 2013, Riccardi et al., 2012, Tang et al., 2016, Zhou et al., 2014, Zhou et al., 2016).
The definition of energy performance may vary depending on the object addressed. For example, building energy performance may be based on the ratio of energy consumption to building area (Herrando et al., 2016, Tang et al., 2016); manufacturing enterprise energy performance on comparisons of gross production and energy consumption according to the production process, production characteristics, and product mix (Hendro et al., 2013); industrial energy performance on the degree of energy utilization under the influences of many factors (Zhou et al., 2016); and national energy performance on saving energy and reducing emissions depending on a variety of factors (Chang et al., 2016). Hence, the definition of energy performance can vary greatly according to the object considered but all definitions require measurements of energy input and output. Therefore, in the present study, urban energy performance is defined as the degree of obtaining the optimal output based on the energy input and other inputs from a city under the influences of various factors (Wang et al., 2017b).
Evaluation indicators and key factors are important references for energy performance evaluations, and those used in previous studies are summarized in Table 1. Evaluation indicators mainly consider capital investment, energy consumption, labor, raw materials, national output, regional output, industrial output, and product output. The key factors are related to region, temperature, acreage, population, and other variables. Different objects may require different evaluation indicators and key factors.Table 1. Summary of energy performance evaluation indicators and key factors.StudiesEvaluation indicators and key factorsStudy objectsBurdová and Vilčeková (2012)Energy consumption, temperature, acreage, regionBuilding energy performanceRamgolam and Needroo (2013)Energy consumption, acreage, populationHousehold energy performanceHendro et al. (2013)Energy consumption, production inputs, product quality and characteristics, energy prices, industrial added valueEnterprise energy performanceBoyd and Zhang (2013)Inputs (including capital, labor, and raw materials), location, climate, capacity, energy consumptionIndustrial energy performanceChang et al. (2016)Capital, labor, energy consumption, gross domestic product, countryNational energy performance
Energy performance evaluation methods are always selected to construct evaluation models in an appropriate manner according to the characteristics of the evaluation objects and evaluation requirements, including stochastic frontier analysis based on the energy performance gap (Boyd et al., 2008), data envelopment analysis calculated separately based on efficiency and productivity (Riccardi et al., 2012, Zhou et al., 2014), and the ratio of the economic output to energy consumption (Hendro et al., 2013, Zhou et al., 2016). In order to improve the comprehensive management and sustainable utilization of urban energy, it is necessary to monitor and evaluate urban energy performance using evaluation systems. At the national level, evaluation models and systems have been used widely in many energy-related assessments to improve performance. For example, enterprise energy performance has increased significantly in the United States since the “Energy Star” program was implemented (Boyd et al., 2008). In addition, the global energy architecture performance index, energy-related products, energy performance certification (Pagliaro et al., 2015), and energy-saving trust are energy performance evaluation systems and certification systems with different evaluation objects, which have been adopted in various countries to improve energy performance for countries, enterprises, and products, as well as providing references for developing urban energy performance evaluation systems.
Previous studies of urban energy performance have focused on evaluations of urban energy efficiency and sustainable urban development (Keirstead, 2013). Urban energy efficiency studies focus on analyzing the impacts of diverse variables on urban energy consumption from the input-output perspective (Li et al., 2016), whereas studies of sustainable urban development emphasize analysis of the economy, society, resources, environment and governance of cities from a more comprehensive perspective (Liang et al., 2016).
In summary, previous studies have focused on evaluating the energy performance from country, industry, enterprise, product, building, household, and other perspectives, but only a few have attempted urban energy performance evaluations. Based on the characteristics of cities, the evaluation indicators, key factors, and evaluation models used for evaluating urban energy performance can be studied by combining relevant theory and previous research. In addition, the current energy performance evaluation systems and certification systems were developed for application to the United States and Europe, and they focus on the energy performance of enterprises and products. Few studies have addressed the design and development of urban energy performance systems that are applicable to China. The construction of suitable systems should focus on convenience and applicability in order to deal effectively with information related to urban energy performance.
Therefore, the main objectives of this study can be described as follows. First, based on input-output analysis and “Impact, Population, Affluence, and Technology” (IPAT) theory, a framework of urban energy performance evaluation indicators and key factors was constructed, which provides a foundation for selecting evaluation elements to be used in the urban energy performance system. Second, considering the effects of performance level and random error, the improved stochastic frontier analysis method was used to construct an urban energy performance evaluation and factor analysis model. Based on sample data for China's provincial capitals in 2004–2013, the coefficients of the evaluation indicators and key factors were estimated by the model described previously and then used to compile program files. Third, according to system usage requirements, the structure and functions of the evaluation system were designed rationally. Finally, the urban energy performance evaluation system was developed using Microsoft Visual Studio .NET 2015, which fully realized data management, business processing and information display, and further reduced the complexity of the design patterns.
