Digital museums and digital exhibitions are becoming very important and almost indispensable part of the most of modern and famous institutions with huge archives. The idea is to focus not just on the original artefacts or their parts, but also to revive their usage and functionalities in original conditions in previous centuries by using modern technology. Furthermore, information technology can attract young population and make the content much closer to people worldwide. Recently, among various developing models, a framework entitled “3D Heritage Online Presenter” was described as a powerful tool for creation of high resolution visual content, suitable for web presentations, specifically designed for the representation of the cultural heritage (Potenzianin et al., 2015). Furthermore, DynaMus, a dynamic virtual environment authoring framework is proposed to provide cultural heritage content visualization coupled with educational activities intertwined with VR (Virtual Reality) technologies (Kiourt et al., 2016), whereas a novel VR solution to access of large and complex reality-based 3D model is proposed by Fernández-Palacios et. al (Fernández-Palacios et al., 2016). In this way, museums are trying to maximize spectators’ experience beyond traditional experience that can be gained with physical elements (Choi and Kim, 2017, Robles-Ortega et al., 2012, Barbieri et al., 2017). However, successful modern presentations have to include modelling of the missing or unknown parts of the artefacts, which requires a large investigation process and new algorithms. Such problem is highly complex and recent semi-automatic solutions are based on human-computer approach strategies (Adan et al., 2012). Besides virtual reality, novel presentation can include augmented reality applications, too (Younesa et al., 2017).
This research is done within the project “Computer Simulation and 3-D Modelling of the Original Patents of Nikola Tesla” in cooperation with “Nikola Tesla Museum” in Belgrade, which represents the institution of national importance. Thanks to the long cooperation with the Museum within the project supported by the Ministry of Science of the Republic of Serbian, the authors had the opportunity to work with original blueprints and photographs of Nikola Tesla Long Island Laboratory which are the part of the Museum heritage.
1.1. The project “computer simulation and 3-D modelling of the original patents of Nikola Tesla”The project has started in 2009 and in past eight years a number of professors, students and experts took part in it. Basically, the main purpose of the project is to digitize and visualize the original legacy of the museum, as well as to revive some of the conditions in which Nikola Tesla had researched and invented. In the beginning, first scheduled requirements demanded modelling some of the original patents of Nikola Tesla, stored at the Museum's archives, since further objectives required visualizing devices and adding them functionalities in real time. The first concepts of rendering and visualization of Tesla's patents modeled within the project were presented in 2009 (Vučković, 2009), and the first complete 3D stereoscopic model (Woolfson and Pert, 1999; Hartmann, 2009) and simulation of Tesla radio controlled boat, patented as Method of and Apparatus for Controlling Mechanism of Moving Vessels or Vehicles, no. 613,809, US patent office, was presented in 2011 (Vučković and Stojanović, 2011a, Vučković and Stojanović, 2011b, Vučković, 2011). In the following years, the research was directed to three sub-phases (Vučković, 2015). The special attention was paid to materialization and colorization and a novel method for image colorization based on mixture of manual and automatic colorization method was described on the example of original photographs of Nikola Tesla. The second sub-phase was dedicated to further modelling of patents and as result, a complete procedure of generating 3D models and prototype simulation of three-phase induction engine, which functionality is based on the principle of rotating magnetic field, was presented in 2015 (Vučković, 2015). In the end, the first prototype of the laboratory in Long Island was presented, using dynamic and stereoscopic 3D modelling (Vučković and Stojanović, 2013, Vučković and Spasić, 2016) and as an additional design improvement, semi-automatic materialization based on color histograms was proposed. However, the first complete laboratory model was inconvenient for virtual reality solutions as it was done using Unreal 3 Engine. In this paper, we have made a novel reconstruction using Unreal 4 Engine and we have made VR model appropriate for Samsung VR gears. Besides reconstruction of virtual environments, the project's aims are focused to digitization of machine-typed and hand written Tesla's documents, too (Vuckovic and Arizanovic, 2017; Vuckovic et al., 2018).This paper presents the final step of Long Island laboratory virtualization and it represents the continuity of the reconstruction process. To the authors’ best knowledge, this is the first Virtual Reality model of Wardenclyffe laboratory which had a great importance during the research of Nikola Tesla. For such task, the authors made VR model suitable for Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge device. The walk through the entire laboratory is provided as well as closely looks to the demolished tower. Moreover, spectators could climb on the tower using reconstructed stairs in order to examine the dome on the top. Besides making the first virtual reality model of such an important laboratory, additional contribution of the paper can be seen in improving the modelling pipeline by designing visual scripts for free movements through 3D virtual space without external controllers, by using only one button, which is especially suitable for head mounted devices (HMDs). Moreover, as special achievement improved materialization can be considered, as we have defined a number of new textures using visual scripts, as well as simulation of machines that were remarkable in the industry of the previous decades, such as the original induction engine is.The paper is organized as follows: firstly, some basic information about laboratory as well as sub-phases of the proposed improved designing pipeline are described in details in Section 2. Next, movements, dynamic simulation and steps of developing pipeline are described in Section 3. Each designing stage is covered with a number of corresponding images, whereas stage for materialization is covered with a visual script while free 3D movements are described using a block diagram. Furthermore, project evaluation and comments about exhibitions within the presentations of the “Nikola Tesla Museum” are briefly reported in Section 4. In the end, the explained system and achieved contributions are summed up in the Conclusion section.
