In recent years, there has been an increase in the concern for gastric cancer globally [1]. An inappropriate diet is one of the main causes of complications (e.g., ulcer and inflammation) in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract [2]. In addition, these abnormalities may contribute to the development of gastric cancer [3].
An early diagnosis of tumors is useful for decreasing the mortality rate [4]. For the well-timed detection of tumors, a normal clinical practice is intestinal biopsy (in which tissue samples of the mucosa are collected and analyzed) conducted by an expert to identify if there are any cancerous or abnormal cells present in the tissue samples [5]. In contrast, endoscopy is a less invasive method for screening the GI tract. An endoscope is composed of a flexible tube with a mounted camera, light source, and surgical apparatus [6]. Therefore, an endoscope is also sometimes used for performing GI biopsies [7]. Inspection of the GI tract via an endoscope is an indispensable task for the timely identification of irregularities (e.g., cancer, ulcer, and polyps) in gastric patients. Various improvements have been made in the video endoscopy technology [8]. Chromoendoscopy (CH) is an advancement of video endoscopy [9]. CH facilitates the investigation of mucosal vascular structures by spraying dyes over the mucosal surface. The dyes make the cancerous regions more prominent visually, and several clinical studies have also utilized their benefits. Digital (virtual) CH employs image processing algorithms and uses band-pass filters to render the effect of dye-based (traditional) CH. The advantage of virtual CH over traditional CH is that there is no requirement of spraying colorants. Therefore, there is no necessity for extra cleansing that is otherwise essential before performing further endoscopic procedures [10]. An endoscopic procedure performed for a single patient can consume 45 min to 8 h of time, producing more than 80,000 frames. However, majority of the frames are discarded because of degradation or high-similarity between them. Thus, for a physician it is a rigorous and lengthy process to inspect each frame individually. Moreover, the time required by an endoscopic session also depends on the GI tract target area and skills of the endoscopist [11].
Computer-aided design (CAD) support systems can play an important role in providing a better diagnosis by enhancing the details in the endoscopic videos. CAD can also provide a second opinion to a gastroenterologist on a decision taken based on a manual analysis of the endoscopic frames [12]. Textures are basic visual features for recognizing an object. They are also useful in the examination of the abnormal regions in endoscopic frames. Textures are perceptually homogeneous and have an almost repetitive structure that is a local or global pattern distributed over an entire image [13]. Texture analysis has been an interesting area for researchers owing to its various applications in medical imaging and remote sensing. Abnormalities in the GI tract can be detected through the examination of random pit patterns and vascular structures via texture analysis of the endoscopic frames [14]. Several methods have been developed for texture representation and classification of gastric images such as local binary patterns (LBP) [15] and statistical analysis [16] of the images in the spatial domain. Some techniques are based on the curvelet analysis of the images in the frequency domain. Filters are applied to the images to obtain the texture information [17]. Gabor filters are also used to extract texture features with the least joint two-dimensional-spatial and frequency uncertainty [18]. A filter bank is designed by a combination of filters of varying sizes and orientations. The coefficients of the responses of the filters were used to obtain the texture information in Ref. [19]. Texture features are widely employed in image retrieval applications, image segmentation, image recognition, image registration, and motion tracking applications [20]. The systems presented in Refs. [21] and [14] used the arithmetic mean and standard deviation of the responses of the filters to represent the texture of an endoscopic frame.
In this study, we have proposed a feature extraction method by computing the geometric mean and geometric standard deviation of the responses of the filters to represent the textures of the endoscopic frames. The extracted texture features are then used for the classification of CH images as normal and abnormal. Moreover, feature selection is performed via a genetic algorithm (GA). Subsequently, state-of-the-art classifiers are trained by conducting a 10-cross-validation of the extracted texture features, and the results are also compared.
1.1. ContributionsIn this study, our primary focus is to design features that are robust to various image acquisition settings and can better distinguish between the disease and normal regions in the endoscopic frames. Our main contributions are as follows:–A new method of designing geometric homogeneous textures (GHTs) is proposed for texture feature extraction. This is accomplished by altering the method of capturing the responses of the filters. Basically, second-order statics are modified to generate more robust micro-features.–Moreover, the classification results of the proposed features are compared with homogeneous texture descriptors (features obtained by the arithmetic mean and standard deviation of the responses of the filters as described in Ref. [20]) and LBP features.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: diverse existing CADs and their comparison are given in Section 2, and the proposed technique is described in Section 3. Moreover, along with the experimentation details, the results are discussed in Section 4. Finally, the study is concluded in Section 5.
