For decades, parallel and distributed computing (PDC) has occupied a place as one special topic among many in the computer science curriculum. Increasingly, however, the computer science education community agrees that PDC is a vital core subject area. The recommendation that all computer science majors be exposed to key PDC concepts before graduation was formally put forth in the ACM CS2013 curriculum guidelines  [1].
The primary discussion now is how these concepts should be integrated into existing curricula. This paper focuses on integration into Computer Science I (CS1). While variations exist, CS1 is defined here as an introductory programming course with no prior programming experience expected, taken by a mix of intended majors and non-majors. Standard topics include iteration, selection, arrays, object use, and basic class construction. One benefit of such early integration of PDC is that students will see it as a natural and common part of programming, instead of an advanced and rarely-used concept. The challenge, of course, is that PDC brings many cognitive and technical problems to programming that can be particularly difficult to tackle early in a curriculum. In addition, it can seem difficult to find room for exploration of PDC concepts in CS1 among many other worthy topics.
This article begins with related work in integrating PDC concepts into CS1. It then examines two sections of a CS1 course offered in fall 2013, sharing detailed strategies used in exploring parallelism. A comparative analysis of pre- and post-test results is presented. The analysis concludes with recommendations for the successful integration of parallelism into CS1 based on these contrasting experiences. This first discussion is repeated from  [6].
This article then extends the results of  [6] with data for several additional course sections by multiple instructors from spring 2014–spring 2016. Further conclusions and challenges are discussed, followed by a deeper approach meeting these challenges in a way that reinforces traditional CS1 topics while measurably garnering greater student interest and knowledge of PDC issues. This is done at a level appropriate for CS1 students, in a very short time-frame (about 4 h in class) designed to be highly adoptable by other instructors. While this study is relatively small in size, it provides useful data on these issues, setting the stage for additional work discussed in Section  12.
