The educational context of this work is a Human-Computer Interaction course taught at the Computer Science Engineering degrees of the Universidad Rey Juan Carlos. This subject is focused on software user interfaces. Two different approaches can be used to teach this subject: implementation and design. The former deals with software development libraries from different languages used to produce graphical user interfaces. The later deals with the user centered design (UCD) process. This work is framed in the later approach. Thus, UCD assigns end-user the main role throughout the user interface design process: from the requirement phase, through design and implementation, to the evaluation phase.
Most of the subjects within the computer science scope can be taught using methodologies that mix theoretical sessions and simple practical exercises. Thus, these exercises exemplify the concepts explained during theoretical sessions. Instead of following this classical methodology we use a more active approach based on realistic experiences related to the subject. Instead of simple exercises, these experiences are based on real problems where students have to face the whole development process of a user interface, from requirements to evaluation.
As we have said, UCD assigns a main role to end-users throughout the development process of user interfaces. In order to make these experiences more realistic, our approach also includes the participation of end-users. Usually, the end-user role has been played by other Computer Science (CS) students, even belonging to the same course. This approach is easy to use because teachers do not need to recruit non-CS students. On the other hand it hides an important problem that an interface designer will face in real life, i.e. communication and cooperation with end-users without technical background. Consequently, our approach integrates non-CS students as end-users. These students are enrolled in Infant and Primary Education Degrees. In terms of the UCD, this mixture of participants with different technical background is called a multidisciplinary approach.
Finally, following the realistic approach, these experiences will be faced by CS students as a group work task using a collaborative methodology. Thus, each member of the group will be on charge of different parts of the development process, but sharing the main objective with the rest of the members of the group.
In our opinion, integrating non-CS students as end-users increases the realism of these experiences. Thus, this realistic approach could improve students' motivation towards these experiences and the subject where they are integrated. Both, student's engagement and motivation significantly impact on the learning process. Therefore, the more engaged the student, the more effective the learning. In order to measure the effect of this approach on the students' motivation, we have used a Situational Motivation Scale (EMSI) (Martín-Albo, Núñez, & Navarro, 2009). Finally, in terms of students' motivation, we will compare our approach against two other groups where different approaches have been used.
The rest of the work is structured as follows. Section two reviews related works regarding HCI teaching and the role of motivation in education. The third section describes the educational context together with the design of our realistic approach. Section four details how motivation has been measured and section five explains the experiment that we have conducted to assess our approach. The results of this experiment are detailed in section six and discussed in section seven. Finally, section eight draws the conclusions of this work.
