The number of Personal Computers (PC) used worldwide has grown exponentially in a very short time, from their first appearance to the most modern and sophisticated versions. PCs have become much needed elements for work activities as well as for private use. The useful life of a PC, in line with other electrical and electronic equipment, is relatively short, being on average about 4 years although they may last much longer if carefully maintained and equipped with suitable software consistent with their technical characteristics. Most often, short life is not only due to the actual wear of the components but to the market dynamics, that almost force to a fast replacement of equipment considered “obsolete”, in order to keep pace with technological progress (in many cases we may talk of “planned obsolescence”). This continuous production and replacement of computer equipment involves large flows of energy and materials. Moreover, computers, due to their technical complexity, are subject to a special end-of-life management and fall into the type of waste called WEEE (Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment). Estimates show that global computer e-waste will triple by 2025 (Dwivedy and Mittal, 2010). By 2016, this growth will lead to more computer e-waste generated in developing countries than in developed ones (Namias, 2013, Estrada-Ayub and Kahhat, 2014, Agamuthu et al., 2015, Dwivedy et al., 2015). In spite of existing regulations, very frequently developed countries transfer their e-waste to developing countries where landfilling and unsafe processing are common practices.
Challenges faced by WEEE management are not only consequences of growing quantities of e-waste but also of the complexity of WEEE types; this waste category is one of the most complex waste streams due to both the wide variety of commercial products, from mechanical devices to highly integrated systems (Kang and Schoenung, 2006), and to fast technological innovation trends (Ylä-Mella et al., 2004). As a consequence of WEEE’s complexity, the European Union (EU) has designed a large number of Directives for regulation and management: both in terms of restrictions on the use of hazardous substances in EEE (Electric Electronic Equipment) and promotion of collection and recycling of obsolete equipment (2002/95/EU, 2002/96/EU, respectively). Despite these directives have been transferred and integrated into the legal body of EU countries, only one-third of WEEE in Europe is collected, separated and adequately treated. The EU collects about 33 percent of e-waste destined to environmentally sound treatment processes, while most of the other two-thirds is potentially still going to landfills and to sub-standard treatment sites in Europe or outside, via illegal exports pathways (European Commission/Recast of the WEEE Directive, 2011). This figure means around 3.3 million tons treated out of the 9.5 million tons to be disposed of annually in Europe. Electronic waste making up the remaining 6.2 million tons were either exported (1.5 million tons), recycled under non-compliant conditions (3.15 million tons), scavenged for valuable parts (750,000 tons) or disposed of as residual waste (750,000 tons).1 The United Nations (UN) estimated that around 50 million tons of e-waste are produced each year worldwide, which comprise more than 5% of all municipal solid waste generated in the world (UNEP, 2006). In particular, the total amount of e-waste generated in 2014 was 46.1 million tons, expected to increase to 50 million tons of e-waste in 2018. Out of the 50 million tons generated yearly, it is estimated that 75% to 80% is shipped to Asia and Africa for “recycling” and disposal (Perkins et al., 2014). In particular, China still shows a very poor legislation regarding the collection, treatment, and recycling of e-waste. In most cases, the Chinese guidelines do not specify technical and financial aspects (Chung and Zhang, 2011), although most of the electrical and electronic products, which were developed especially in the eighties and after, have now reached the end of their life cycle (End of Life product). Nevertheless, in China, there are no official data about EEE production and import. Suitable data about WEEE generations are also not available, even if their recycling constitutes an important source of income (Wang et al., 2013).
Moreover, thanks to the rapid development of information technology, hardware and software of the computers are updated very quickly, which translates into a fast WEEE increase in recent years. An important aspect of this typology of waste, considering the context of economic crisis and rising prices of raw materials, is that they are also a valuable “mine” of industrial materials that, if properly exploited, can be re-introduced into the production chains with considerable economic advantages and, above all, accompanied by a decreasing environmental burden. Due to the fast technological development worldwide (not only in Western countries, but also in Asia, and to a smaller extent in Africa and Latin-America), raw materials in support to industrial production are much needed. In China, the internal extraction is no longer sufficient to cover such demand (per capita availability is only 58% of the average world figure, according to the China National Report 2 on Sustainable Development), which makes recycling a very important source of strategic minerals, and WEEE imports a profitable business for China and other countries. Imported electrical and electronic products are destined to reuse in rural areas, where the requested performance is still much lower than in urban areas, while a large part of no-longer reusable equipment is treated to extract components and materials to be reused and resold. Finally, the estimated proportion of WEEE landfilling in China is 8.4% of total waste production, i.e. 307,400 tons per year (Ni et al., 2013).
Therefore, a more efficient use of resources would translate into combined advantages for the environment and economic growth opportunities. WEEE exporting countries are also losing a significant amount of resources, such as rare earth metals, copper and gold, which makes recycling, even more important. One of the biggest obstacles to WEEE recycling is still represented by the lack of consumer awareness about the potential economic and environmental benefits that can be obtained by implementing electronic waste recycling activities, in so leading to a more sustainable society (Tanskanen, 2013). Concerning the efficiency of WEEE recycling, we should not think that all the problems are technical nor that all technical problems have already been solved: there are problems related to political, legislative and economic aspects, as well as to society and culture. A new perception is slowly emerging, in which waste, if appropriately managed, becomes a valuable resource that could ultimately contribute to a more environmentally sustainable society, thus preventing the extraction of virgin materials thanks to reuse or recycling, and replacing fossil energy sources via energy recovery and implementation of renewable energies. This is likely to help reducing both local and global environmental impacts. (Fiorentino et al., 2015)
This study calculates and compares the energy and environmental performance indicators of the production and operation phases of a laptop and a desktop computer. Assumptions are made about the use of virgin materials and fossil-based electricity, to be compared with the use of recycled materials and renewable electricity all over the life cycle of the investigated computers. Environmental costs are assessed by means of eMergy-based and greenhouse gases emission indicators.
