Computer-based learning (CBL) systems are being deployed in many Higher Education Institutions (HEIs), suggesting the development of means that bring learners together, reinforcing creative activities towards intellectual exploration, metacognition and social interaction. In several contexts, CBL is interpreted as blended (b-)learning experiences through the mediation of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), rather than being completely online or Face-to-Face (F2F) (Clouder et al., 2006, Michinov and Michinov, 2008). An important issue in b-learning, when it is situated in CBL environments (CBLEs), is how to manage the two modalities, i.e., F2F and online, to better support collaboration and to create more holistic/integrated learning experiences. The option for a b-learning structure is justified by its flexibility, ease of access, and the possibility of integration of sophisticated and personalized technologies (Johnson, Adams Becker, Estrada, & Freeman, 2015). In this line, Learning Management Systems (LMSs) have become very popular among educators to improve teaching-learning processes, incorporating tools, such as discussion forums, Wikis and other interactive tools that make them especially useful for constructing enriched learning environments (Dias, Diniz, & Hadjileontiadis, 2014). At the same time, several studies have clearly demonstrated the efficacy of computer-oriented concept mapping techniques in supporting the learning process (Bridges et al., 2015, Omar, 2015). In particular, concept-maps (CMs) are flexible cognitive tools that engage students in the learning process, promoting activities that guide students to read, think, organize, relate with prior knowledge, draw, revise, reflect, rebuilt, and communicate (Novak & Cañas, 2006). From this perspective, important research has focused on the micro level of collaborative learning, i.e., single/small groups; however, to support collaborative learning and knowledge building, a more detailed understanding of how small groups of learners construct shared meaning using various tools/systems should be considered. Educators who understand the advantages of b-learning can improve the impact of collaborative (c-) learning within their classrooms. In this way, advances within the field of CBL will depend on better understanding and use of the hybrid of the (b-/c-) educational approaches. The context of this work is placed exactly within this perspective, trying to explore the use of concept mapping activities combined with the LMS use under the b-/c-learning concept, as it becomes evident from the succeeding subsections.
1.1. Computer-based learning environments (CBLEs)CBLEs assist individuals in learning using multiple representations of information for a specific educational purpose (Ifenthaler, 2012). CBLEs frequently confront learners with a number of support devices (also referred as tools) in order to enhance learning, to help learners in their learning and to provide a learning opportunity (Collazo et al., 2015, Garcia-Álvarez et al., 2014). Nowadays, a LMS plays a central role in any online learning environment; in particular, the LMS Moodle is a free, widely used, open-source software that supports online learning based on a social constructionist framework of education (Seluakumaran, Jusof, Ismail, & Husain, 2011). So far, limited efforts have been made to understand the development and use of theory in the particular domain of b-learning research (Drysdale et al., 2013, Graham, 2013). The concept of b-learning is embedded in the idea that learning is not just a one-time episode, but also a continuous/dynamic learning process. Blending different delivery modes/tools can be seen as an imaginative solution in educational contexts, since it has the potential to balance out and optimize the learning development (Dias et al., 2014). However, according to Bates and Sangrà (2011): “Teachers must decide which tools are most likely to suit the particular teaching approach” (pp. 44–46).
1.2. Concept mapping in CBLEsCMs are considered effective as teaching and learning tools that assist the development of conceptual knowledge, allowing visual observation of relationships and connections between multiple areas and pieces of information (Novak & Gowin, 1984). Actually, the ability to recognize connections between different pieces of information or aspects of a problem facilitates problem-based learning (PBL) (Schaal, 2010). The latter assists the development of higher order thinking skills, helping students to become independent, self-directed learners who appropriately respond to situations in a logical and reasonable manner (Savery & Duffy, 1995). According to Novak (2010), a CM is a (hierarchical) network, comprised of concept-terms (nodes) and directed lines, accompanied with phrases, linking pair of nodes (so as two nodes with the linking phrase to constitute a correct logical proposition) that lend to the network a propositional character; at the same time, CMs provide a window into students' mind, reflecting students' knowledge structures. Seen as an instructional tool, CM encourages students to explicitly organize and make public their knowledge. Concept mapping has been described as a technique that can increase student's learning in the traditional classroom (Álvarez-Montero et al., 2015, Novak and Cañas, 2008).Similarly, Clariana and Taricani (2010) have been researching the use of CMs in an online learning environment, including a computer-based approach for scoring the quality of the resultant CMs and their potential as classroom study aids. In general, the CM quality refers to the amount, depth, and breadth of information and the number of connections made among different items included in CMs (Gurupur, Jain, & Rudraraju, 2015). In fact, a relationship between the quality of the CM and the total acquisition of information can be identified. In other words, students that take more time in the construction of their maps and include more detailed information tend to retain more information for longer periods of time (Clariana & Taricani, 2010).
1.3. Self- and collaborative-mode CMsSeveral studies have investigated the use/potential of (online) CMs to supporting processes of self-knowledge management (Conceição et al., 2008, Tergan, 2005, Tergan et al., 2006, Vodovozov and Raud, 2015). Other authors, on the other hand, have investigated that collaborative CMs has the potential of facilitating knowledge construction as a study/collaborative tool (Gao et al., 2013, Koc, 2012, Lee, 2013, Lin et al., 2012, Molinari, in press, Rafaeli and Kent, 2015). Although originally developed to assist individual learners, collaborative use of CMs emphasizes brainstorming among group members, leading to visualization of new ideas and synthesis of unique concepts (Novak, 2010). With regard to the use of CMs for educational purposes, the following examples of research studies based on “individual mapping vs. collaborative mapping” can be considered:•Kwon and Cifuentes (2007) revealed that individually generating CMs on computers is more effective than either independent, unguided study, or collaboratively generating CMs. In addition, students in both individual and collaborative concept mapping groups had positive attitudes toward concept mapping using Inspiration software. Findings indicate that teachers should train their students in computer-based concept mapping and facilitate adoption of concept-mapping as an independent study strategy.•Coutinho (2009), unlike the findings of Kwon and Cifuentes (2007), stated that working in a team to develop a CM is more beneficial than working by oneself; the results have shown that the interaction in teams further helped the group in developing their understanding of the content under study. Moreover, the comparison of the same CMs on a specific theme designed by groups with those designed by individuals shown statistically significant difference. The scores from the collaboratively constructed CMs compared to the ones from each CM indicated statistically significant improvement, showing greater understanding of the content and higher processing of related ideas as students pulled their knowledge together.•Kwon and Cifuentes (2009) reported that constructing/sharing a CM with others requires communication/negotiation processes, guiding learners to growth in their conceptual understanding. Additionally, the collaborative process and the high level of social interaction increased each student's knowledge, which would not have been possible if they would have worked on their own.•Hwang, Shi, and Chu (2011) supported that collaborative CM achieves higher learning results. In particular, in the post-test results, the students who used collaborative online CMs revealed significantly better learning achievement than the students who learned the same materials with other methods. Improved students' attitudes towards science learning, improved confidence in their peers and higher expectations of collaboratively learning were also reported. Moreover, the collaborative work encouraged students' engagement and self-efficacy in learning, as well as their motivation to communicate/collaborate with their peers.
1.4. Study aims and research questionsFrom the aforementioned, it is evident that although the benefits from the collaborative construction of CMs are already identified, no research effort has explored the effect of the concept mapping placed within the b-/c-learning environment, by examining the alterations of the CM characteristics when the LMS use is also considered both in self- and collaborative-mode, which defines that aim of this exploratory study. The analysis axes are based on the structural characteristics of the constructed CM and the analysis of CMs based peers' interaction during the collaborative mode. To this end, the following research questions (RQ) emerge:•RQ1: How shifting from not using to using LMS Moodle affects the quality of CM in self- and collaborative-mode?•RQ2: How shifting from not using to using LMS Moodle affects the CM-based collaboration? and•RQ3: How shifting from self- to collaborative-mode affects the structural characteristics of CM and the LMS Moodle Quality of Interaction (QoI)?The rest of the paper is organized as follows: first, a description of the proposed approach is presented, followed by a description of the proposed metrics. Next, a description of the experimental validation/implementation issues, analysis of the derived results, along with discussion and interpretation of the findings are provided. Then, the overall perspective (limitations and implications) are critically discussed. Finally, conclusions and future work conclude the paper.
