According to India Risk Survey 2012, around 15% of the industrial accidents happen in India and 90% of them are due to human errors and lack of proper maintenance of rolling stock. Here “Rolling Stock” is defined as moving machines with wheels, suspension, baring, etc. available on trains, which are designed for specific purpose. Engineering industry has contributed significantly in the economic growth of India. More than 17 lakh people are employed in this sector. The rate of fatal accidents amongst industrial workers is showing an upward trend. Most of the industrial accidents are caused by
(a)Contact with exposed moving mechanical parts(b)Flying Parts(c)Fire(d)Human Errors
The field of computer vision and its applications had made inroads into every field of engineering and sciences. One such novel application is being formulated in this work for monitoring train rolling stock. The moving and rolling portions of a train are called rolling stock. Rolling examination is vital for passenger trains to identify defects that are generated during movement of trains at high speeds. This process has ensured train safety for many decades now.
Railway safety is one of the primary responsibilities of all the rail operating companies around the globe from the invention of railroads two centuries ago [1]. With the development of computer technology in the recent decades, most of the safety systems in the world have become computer controlled. Two such systems are airways and seaways which have become fully automated by adapting computerization. Railroads are not far behind. In this framework, a number of methods have been proposed to monitor rails and rolling stock using computer vision [2], [3]. Fig. 1 shows the under carriage of a train called as bogie. A rail coach sits on two of these bogies. Fig. 1 shows a model of a bogie called Fabrica Italina de Automobil Torino (FIAT). There are around six models operational in Indian railways. Fig. 2 shows another model called ICF model which is a part of 70% of Indian trains.Download : Download high-res image (246KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Under carriage of a train called as FIAT Bogie and its parts from Indian Railway Manual.Download : Download high-res image (197KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Under carriage of a train called as ICF Bogie and its parts from Indian Railway Manual.
Actually, the train moves on a set of two bogies shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2. Failure of the bogie during transit questions the safety record of the railway organizations. To ensure safety of the train passengers, railways employ a process called rolling stock examination (RSE). Examination involves trained vision and auditory human senses to identify defects through observation of moving train. The train during observation is moving at around 30kmph. The process followed by railway operators in most of the Asian countries is pictured in Fig. 3.Download : Download high-res image (454KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Manned Rolling examination with two personal on either side of the moving train near a railway station.
The results of the examination are a data sheet (office spread sheet) with defects and their intensities at various locations. This information is passed to the following station maintenance staff to attend the problem.
Two personal for monitoring and a third person for noting the defects on either ends of the station make up a total team of 6 personal per train for examination. The following are the drawbacks identified: in the manned process
•Human indulgence – error prone detection.•Personal work load increases at peak hours – bound to make mistakes.•Critical defects attended by maintenance staff in next station.•Weather dependent system.•Commercially a Lossy system.
This paper proposes a novel application of computer vison and machine learning algorithms to rolling stock examination. Fig. 4 shows our team members collecting video database of rolling stock alongside rolling examination team of Indian railways.Download : Download high-res image (479KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. Rolling examination with high speed sports action camera for video database creation.
