Computer vision technology provides a nondestructive and objective method for external quality inspection of agricultural and food products. For examples, the automatic machine vision system was used to calculate size parameters (Brodie et al., 1994) and quality parameters (Wen and Tao, 1999, Miller and Delwiche, 1991, Li et al., 2002, Blasco et al., 2009, Razmjooy et al., 2012). In recent years, more and more machine vision research focus on the skin defect detection of the agriculture product (Yang and Marchant, 1996, Tao, 1996, Leemans et al., 1999, Li et al., 2002, Throop et al., 2005, Kleynen et al., 2005, Qin et al., 2012, Dong et al., 2014, Cubero et al., 2016). Blasco et al. (2007) proposed a region-oriented segmentation algorithm instead of pixel-oriented segmentation algorithm for detecting citrus peel defects and stem-end, but this paper doesn’t provide how to distinguish stem end from defects. Fernando et al. (2010) developed a general unsupervised method for the directly detection of oranges defect in random colour textures based on a Multivariate Image Analysis and Principal Component Analysis strategy. However, the algorithm of this paper is a bit complex for practical application delivery. Li et al. (2013) proposed to use combined lighting transform and ratio image to detect the common surface defects on oranges. However, if gray-level value of some defects is high, such as insect injury, wind scarring, this leads to the loss of image detection. This method involves digital signal processing which brings difficulties to the practical development. Zhang et al. (2014) proposed to use Lambertian model to approximately analyze uneven distribution of lightness and use the annulus area of object to finish lightness correction. However, in the field of view, if the position of on-line moving fruit is not in the center of camera optical axis or the fruit shape is not a perfect spheres, the distribution of lightness in the annulus area of fruit is still uneven so that the lightness correction effect is not good using averaging method.
The success of the algorithms that perform the image analysis is largely dependent on the segmentation procedure. (Gonzalez and Woods, 2013). Segmentation procedure is an important step that affects the performance of further processing stages in computer vision applications (Cesar and Marco Aurelio, 2014).In digital image processing, binarization techniques can be classified into three main categories, global, local and hybrid methods. If the algorithm of segmentation is based on a single threshold which is applied to all pixels of the entire image, the binarization is called global method, e.g. the famous Otsu's method (Otsu, 1979). For orange images with uneven illumination, global methods provide unsatisfactory results when orange images present faint defect characters or inhomogeneous surface. If the algorithm of segmentation is based on each pixel a threshold according to the gray-level of its neighborhood or according to pixels within a given neighborhood, the binarization is called local, e.g. method of Bersen, 1986, Niblack.W, 1986, Sauvola and Pietikainen, 2000, Gatos et al. (2006) and Messaoud et al. (2011). If the algorithm of segmentation combines global and local principles, the binarization is called hybrid method, e.g. method of Kuo et al. (2010).
Many local segmentation techniques have been widely applied to deal with the high variation within historical document images, especially in the case of historical documents that very specialized problems have to be dealt with, such as variation in illumination, dark border, smearing, seeping of ink to the other side of the page, general degradation of the paper due to aging and a unclear bimodal pattern (Kavallieratou, 2008). Fruit growth environment is complex, such as climate impact and insect pests which result in complex and irregular surface defects which is most important looses during post-harvesting. Meanwhile, the sharp feature of oranges and many other fruit is approximately spherical, so segmentation process of defects on fruit is easily disturbed by the object image boundary effect (Tao and Wen, 1999, Zhang et al., 2014). The contrast between sound and defective regions can be used to produce more accurate binarization results, which is more capable of detecting pixels lying around the defect boundary on orange surface using the gray-level image local segmentation technology.
The objective of this paper is to develop a novel local segmentation algorithm to effectively detect the various types of surface defects on orange without additional image lightness correction process. To achieve this objective, the detection approach of surface defects on orange based on a sliding comparison window local segmentation is proposed in this study.
