Lung cancer is one of the main public health issues in developed countries [1], and early detection of solitary pulmonary nodules (SPNs) is an important clinical indication for early-stage lung cancer diagnosis because SPNs have high probabilities to become malignant nodules [2]. SPNs refer to lung tissue abnormalities that are roughly spherical with round opacity and a diameter of up to 30 mm. Currently, nodules are mainly detected by one or multiple expert radiologists inspecting CT images of lungs. Recent research, however, shows that inter-reader variability in the detection of nodules by expert radiologists may exist [4]. In addition, since three-dimensional (3D) image processing and analysis techniques become applicable in thin-section CT [5], [7], a thin-section CT scan includes hundreds of sections and requires considerable time and effort in image interpretation by radiologists. For more than a decade, significant effort has been focused on developing automated systems that detect/recognize suspicious lesions in thoracic CT imagery as well as other types of imagery.
It is therefore an important task to develop Computer Aided Detection (CAD) systems that can aid/enhance radiologist workflow and potentially reduce false negative findings. CAD is a scheme that automatically detects suspicious lesions (i.e. nodule, polyps and masses) in medical images of certain body part, and provides their locations to radiologists. CAD has become one of the major research topics in medical imaging and diagnostic radiology. Generally, a typical CAD systems for cancer detection and diagnosis (i.e.: Breast, Lung, Polyp) cover four stages as depicted in Fig. 1: (a) image preprocessing, (b) image segmentation, (c) feature extraction and selection, and finally (d) classification. The stages of (a) and (b) belong to the initial lesion identification step, and the stages of (c) and (d) belong to the false-positive reduction step. Current CAD schemes for nodule characterization have achieved high sensitivity levels, whereas current schemes for nodule detection appear to report many false positives [3], [8], [9], [10]. It is because detection algorithms have high sensitivity that some non-nodule structures (e.g., blood vessels) are labeled as nodules inevitably in the initial nodule identification step. Since the radiologists must examine each identified object, it is highly desirable to eliminate these false positives (FPs) as much as possible while retaining the true positives (TPs). The false-positive reduction step, or classification step, the aim of which is to learn a system capable of the prediction of the unknown output class of a previously unseen suspicious nodule with a good generalization ability, is a critical part in the lung nodule detection system [21], [23], [22], [19], [51], [33]. However, there are three significant problems in the classification of the potential nodules:Download : Download high-res image (173KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The stage of Lung CAD.
1. Heterogeneous feature subsets: As we know, the variance in the volumes, shapes, and appearances of the suspicious nodule objects is enormous. In order to achieve satisfactory results in nodule candidate classification, multiple heterogeneous feature subsets (FeaSets) are extracted to describe the visual objects. Each representation of feature subset describes different aspects of the visual characteristics of nodule candidates, a joint analysis of these FeaSets can potentially exploit their complementary information and improve the prediction. Thus, how to combine the multiple complementary FeaSets effectively based on different aspects is a critical challenge.
2. High dimensional irrelevant features: For the feature descriptor of nodule data, not all features are equally useful in removing false positives, some of which from the original feature space (input space) are irrelevant to the tasks at hand. It is usually not clear what the best feature descriptor to discriminate the nodule and non-nodule is.
3. Imbalanced data distribution between TPs and FPs: The two classes (nodule and non-nodule) are skewed and have extremely unequal misclassification costs, which is a typical class imbalance problem [11], [29]. The imbalanced data issue usually occurs in computer-aided detection systems since the healthy class is far better represented than the diseased class in the collected data [30], [32], [12]. Class imbalanced data has detrimental effects on the performance of conventional classifiers, since. Typically classifiers attempt to reduce global error rate without taking the data distribution into consideration. As a result, standard classifiers usually tend to be overwhelmed by the majority class and ignore the minority class examples, resulting in poor performance.
In order to solve the issues above, we propose in this paper a multiple kernel framework to accurately classify potential nodule objects. The framework is named Multiple Kernel based feature Fusion and Selection and over-Sampling (MKFSS), which involves three key techniques: MKFF (Multiple Kernel based Feature Fusion), MKFS (Multiple Kernel based Feature Selection) and MKOS (Multiple Kernel based Over-Sampling) to overcome the issues introduced previously. More specifically, our main contributions to the lung CAD research are summarized as follows:
1. Heterogeneous feature fusion and selection from feature set level: Multiple kernel learning methods [[15], [42]] not only learn a optimal linear combination of given base kernels, but also can be used to combine heterogeneous sources of data. In order to effectively fuse and select the heterogeneous FeaSets, we utilize multiple kernel learning with imposing the mixed ℓ2,1 norm constraint on the kernel weights, explicitly incorporating auxiliary information about structures in parameters, so as to exploit complementary heterogeneous FeaSets with different kernels and recognize the contribution of classification of different multiple FeaSets at the same time.
2. Feature selection from individual feature level based on feature weighting: Feature selection is an important preprocessing step in machine learning. Traditional feature selection algorithms work on a single data source only. In order to integrate multiple kernel learning and feature selection, we propose two multi-kernel based feature ranking techniques to select discriminative features according to their predictive powers (scores) in the kernel space induced by MKFF, in order to decrease the size of the feature vectors and improve classification performance.
3. Imbalanced data learning based on over-sampling scheme: To solve the issue of imbalanced nodule data learning, a multi-kernel over-sampling method is proposed to balance the data distribution. The new over-sampling method in the optimal kernel space can generate accurate instances and address the problem of inconsistency which the over-sampling is carried out in the input space while the kernel classifier model is constructed in the kernel space.
All three methods are conducted in the kernel space based on the multiple kernel framework. Fig. 2 shows the schematic flowchart of the proposed MKFSS framework. From the preprocessed CT images, G heterogeneous FeaSets are extracted from the view of intensity, texture, shape and gradient. At first, the heterogeneous FeaSets are fused by multi-kernel learning in the kernel space. Then, feature selection and over-sampling are conducted sequentially based on the combined kernel induced by the proposed multi-kernel learning. Therefore, besides the optimal weight (kernel matrix) of different FeaSets, the optimal data representation (data matrix) with respect to features (columns) and samples (rows) is obtained. At last, a supervised kernel classifier SVM (Support vector machine) with the resulting optimal kernel is finally trained on the new training data to discriminate the true nodules versus false positives. An overview of the proposed classification pipeline including the procedure of training and predicting is illustrated in Fig. 3. To perform a validation with our system, we empirically investigate and compare the proposed method with the state-of-the-art approaches in the multi-source fusion, multiple kernel classification, class imbalance learning and the false positive reduction in lung nodule CAD. The experimental results show the unique properties of the proposed method for overcoming the challenges in the lung nodule CAD and demonstrate the promising effectiveness of this method compared with other competitive learning algorithms.Download : Download high-res image (379KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Flowchart of MKFSS.Download : Download high-res image (582KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. The procedure of training and predicting of MKFSS algorithm.
The structure of the paper is as follows: in Section 2 we review current state-of-the-art techniques for tackling the nodule classification problem. In Section 3 we present the multiple kernel learning. In Section 4, we introduce the proposed method MKFSS. In Section 5, the experimental results on a real datasets are given, which show excellent performance of the proposed method in comparison with other competitive methods. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
