The term “Assistive Technologies” (AT), in the broadest sense, refers to any set of scientific achievements (products, environmental modifications, services and processes) useful to overcome limitations and/or improve function for an individual (Cook and Polgar, 2014). More specifically AT aim at helping persons with disabilities or special educational/rehabilitation needs, to deal within their daily context and to achieve a better quality of life (Lancioni et al., 2012). In general there are two main application contexts in which AT are exploited: 1) the medical application context that tries to reduce (or rehabilitate) physical or cognitive impairments and 2) the social application context that operates on the surrounding environment focusing on social barriers and discriminations (Hersh and Johnson, 2010). In the last decades there has been a tremendous increase in demand for new technological solutions allowing an improvement of the quality of life, e.g., for elderly people or people with different abilities, as well as for people without disease but willing to increase their comfort. Many researchers, working in different fields, have applied their knowledge to build advanced technologies in order to meet the needs of diverse AT’ application contexts (Bishop, 2014, Bourbakis, Papadakis Ktistakis, Tsoukalas, Alamaniotis, 2015, Dakopoulos, Bourbakis, 2010, Jo, Tsun, Theng, Hui, 2014, Lancioni, Singh, 2014, Murphy, Darrah, 2015, Pawluk, Bourbakis, Giudice, Hayward, Heller, 2015, Velázquez, 2010, Vichitvanichphong, Talaei-Khoei, Kerr, Ghapanchi, 2014, Vuong, Chan, Lau, 2015). As a consequence, works that deal (directly or indirectly) with the development of AT have proliferated in the literature and therefore the issue to properly organize them has emerged. This categorization task has been then carried out by grouping the works dealing with the same area of user needs: e.g. dementia (Vuong et al., 2015), visual diseases (Murphy and Darrah, 2015), social orientation deficit (Bishop, 2014), activities of daily living for aged persons (Vichitvanichphong et al., 2014), severe/profound and multiple disabilities (Lancioni and Singh, 2014), physical and cognitive disabilities in children (Jo et al., 2014), smart environments (Velázquez, 2010). This type of categorization could be defined as “user-need oriented” and it is the foundation of all the existent surveys concerning AT: they are very interesting and useful for readers (medics, patients, companies, etc.) who address the problems related to a specific need, hence giving the overview on the state of the art technologies supporting the related function for the individual.
However in this common way of looking at the AT world, each technology is considered as a whole and a deep and critical explanation of the technical knowledge used to build the operative tasks is usually missing. As a consequence, the cross-contextual applicability of most of the underlying techniques and methodologies involved in each specific context is not considered and then the resulting surveys are unlikely to be technically inspiring for functional improvements and to explore new technological frontiers.
To overcome this critical drawback, in this paper a “task oriented” way to categorize the state of the art of the AT works has been introduced: it relies on the split of the final assistive goals into operative tasks that are then used as pointers to the works in literature in which each of them is used as a component.
The potential usefulness of this new way to categorize the state of the art of the AT works can be easily foreshadowed by considering that each technical task can be part of different AT dealing with quite different user’s needs. For example object recognition from visual cues can be part of an assistive device for the indoor navigation for visual impaired persons, or part of an alternative communication interfaces, as well as a module in a social robot platform, and so on. Keeping this observation in mind, it follows that by collecting works dealing with the same task, regardless of the application context, it becomes easier to highlight the straightness and the open critical issues, allowing the reader to identify the research lines to be undertaken for an improvement of the existing assistive technologies.
Unfortunately, as already stated above, in literature there are no papers that use the “task oriented” approach and then this paper tries to partially fill this gap by using a set of cross-application Computer Vision tasks as the pivots to establish a categorization of the AT already used to assist some of the user’s needs (Mental Function, Mobility, Sensory Substitution and Assisted Living) pointed by the World Health Organization. For each task the paper analyzes the Computer Vision algorithms recently involved in the development of AT and finally it tries to catch a glimpse of the possible paths in the short and medium term that could allow a real improvement of the assistive outcomes. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 the most common areas of users’ needs are identified and, for each area, the list of the underlying relevant cross-application AT tasks involving Computer Vision algorithms are pointed-out. In Section 3, for each identified task, the analysis of the leading methods and techniques reported in literature to address it in any assistive context is given. Section 4 considers the assessment of AT considering users, medical, economical and social perspective. A discussion about open challenges is then supplied in Section 5 where a glimpse into the possible emerging new solutions is also given. Finally Section 6 concludes the paper.
