The global outbreak of COVID-19 has had an unprecedented socio-economic impact around the world, severely disrupting the entire global economy (Craven, Mysore, Singhal, Smit, & Wilson, 2020; Reeves, Fæste, Chen, Carlsson-Szlezak, & Whitaker, 2020). With prolonged social distancing policies, city lockdowns, stay-home ordinances, and travel restrictions around the globe, the tourism-hospitality industry, which is exemplified by the lodging sector, has been hit especially hard, with empty rooms and tables, cancelled meetings, and closure of properties (STR, 2020). As the pandemic continues to lead the world into chaos with paralyzing terror and panic, the crisis, however, represents “an opportunity for managers to communicate with stakeholders, display leadership, so as to facilitate the organization's progression through stages of recovery to reduce the negative effect of the crisis” (Williams, Gruber, Sutcliffe, Shepherd, & Zhao, 2017, p. 738).
Given the importance of corporate communication in crisis management (Coombs, 2018; Ritchie, 2004; Su, Stepchenkova, & Kirilenko, 2019), it is prudent to harness a mechanism that can effectively respond to adversity (Williams et al., 2017). The foci of the study rest on understanding the response mechanism as the crisis continues. The study seeks to illustrate an evolutionary process that articulates changes to organizational structures and practices during the process of combating the crisis, by answering the following questions: What are the major themes discussed in the press releases during the crisis? How have these themes changed diachronically? Corpus linguistics was adopted here for data analysis. Press releases from hotel corporations listed in Fortune 500 within the period of January to March 2020 were curated and built into three corpora. Corpus analysis was conducted via Wmatrix and LancsBox.
The contribution of the study lies in its novel approach in assessing the evolution of organizational crisis communication through the lens of computer-supported linguistics (Humphreys & Wang, 2017; Pollach, 2012). As such, the contexts of salient lexical items in a large corpus were used to delineate how crisis-as-process emerged from responses enacted by international hotel conglomerates. We draw upon crisis management (Aliperti et al., 2019; Coombs, 2018; Jiang, Ritchie, & Benckendorff, 2019; Williams et al., 2017) and organizational communication (Kucukusta, Perelygina, & Lam Yates & Orlikowski, 1992; Wan, 2008; Wing, 2019) streams of work to advance prevailing theoretical accounts of organizational crisis communication. By fusing these two streams of work, this study adds new nuances to the tourism management literature pertinent to the evolutionary features in responding to severe adversity. It also sheds new light on situational crisis communication theory (Coombs, 2007; Ham & Kim, 2019) by highlighting the divergent response trajectories at different stages of the outbreak.
1.1. Theoretical background global crisis managementCrisis management is defined as “a set of factors designed to combat crises and to lessen the actual damage inflicted by a crisis” (Coombs, 2007, p. 5). There are two primary bodies of literature pertinent to this domain of inquiry: crisis-as-event and crisis-as-process (Williams et al., 2017). This study draws on the second tradition, which focuses on development of crisis in multiple phases over time (i.e., pre-crisis and during the crisis). The process view of crisis puts further emphasis on “explor [ing] the incubation of crises as well as the evolutionary features of crises” (Williams et al., 2017, p. 736). This evolutionary process often requires an integration of taken-for-granted institutional practices with ad hoc organizational efforts to cope with uncertainties and complexity surrounding these crises (Çakar, 2018; Gurtner, 2016; Pearson & Clair, 1998; Ritchie, 2004).Yet, globalization of international business operations has inconceivable consequences to crisis management. As enterprises expand beyond national and cultural boundaries, there is an urgent need to circumvent major disruptions through “international public discourses on potential crises, ongoing crises and post-crises” (Schwarz, Seeger, & Auer, 2016, p. 34). Despite the importance of the topic, the extant literature on global crisis management remains rather scant, with only a few empirical studies conducted in a truly global arena as Coombs and Laufer (2018) assert. For example, Fainshmidt, Nair, and Mallon (2017) assessed how multinational enterprise's in-crisis performance was associated with the pre-crisis development of asset management capabilities in the context of the global financial crisis of 2008. Leong et al. (2008) explored consumer animosity during the 1997 Asian economic crisis, based on survey data from five affected countries. Other inquires focused on how multinational corporations cope with crises in host countries, including the impact of adaptation on MNCs' sustainable operations (Zhao, Park, & Zhou, 2014) and on the role of geography in foreign subsidiary survival in host countries afflicted by political conflict (Dai, Eden, & Beamish, 2013). Further efforts focused on marketing-related strategy for a crisis coping mechanism, including the role of a spokesperson during the product harm crisis (Laufer, Garrett, & Ning, 2018); media coverage of the same crisis in different countries (Schultz, Kleinnijenhuis, Oegema, Utz, & van Atteveldt, 2012; Su et al., 2019); and the role of culture in crisis communication (Dhanesh & Sriramesh, 2018; Turner, 2020).
1.2. Organizational crisis communicationOrganization communications represent a key conduit in bridging the boundary between internal and external communications in order to create a favorable corporate impression for stakeholders (Kucukusta, Perelygina, & Lam Wing, 2019bib_Kucukusta_et_al_2019; Yates & Orlikowski, 1992). By orchestrating messages issued by an organization, the management seeks to fortify credibility, confidence, and even legitimacy through the eye of the beholders (Çakar, 2018; Riel & Fombrun, 2007). An organization's efforts towards crisis communication are an integral part of crisis management, as they are engaged in “the process of active communication with stakeholders to mitigate impact on affected parties and minimize damage to the organization's image or reputation” (Dhanesh & Sriramesh, 2018, p. 207). This notion resonates closely with Coombs' (2007) situational crisis communication theory to acknowledge the importance of the alignment between crisis response strategy and an organization's responsibility. Based on different situations of a crisis that the organization faces, a corresponding set of coping responses through corporate communications should be enacted in order to reduce its threat (Ham & Kim, 2019).Crisis communication focuses on prevention and reduction of harm. Palttala and Vos’s (2012) process view of crisis communication accentuates the goals of crisis communication including (1) organizational empowerment and citizens behaviors, (2) societal understanding of risks though public participation and debate, and (3) response activities through the media. Yates and Orlikowski (1992) further assert that corporate communication necessitates a structuration process that enacts an organization's norms, rules, and structures. Thus, messages disseminated through the corporate website, press release, and other media for example, are often imbued with meanings and normative values that can help instill confidence of the investors and other stakeholders such as employees and customers (Liu, Pennington-Gray, & Klemmer, 2015; Riel & Fombrun, 2007). These media are an effective avenue for organizations to reframe their crisis management capabilities, to harness public understanding, and to seek further corporate and strategic alliances (Park, Kim, & Choi, 2019; Pearson & Clair, 1998).
