In this modern time of rapidly-paced data, and information, feeds and an ever-growing connection with data usage through constantly-advanced technology, it is therefore being more than an obligation for all DDBS-based organizations/individuals to search for creatively-designed DDBS of highly-appreciated throughputs. Nevertheless, in DDBS, a well-designed system is still considerably demanding task as it is of continuous uncontrollable urge to reach the satisfactory level of DDBS performance. The intended level of DDBS throughputs, however, could be simply achieved through: proposing a proper data fragmentation; presenting precise data allocation, and designing practical algorithm for sites clustering. As a matter of fact, these techniques combined were successfully proven to be super effective in boosting DDBS productivity (Sewisy et al., 2017; Hababeh et al., 2015). Therefore, this work comes with the aim of introducing a newly-designed approach by combining them all into a single efficacious work. Off these techniques, (Abdalla, 2014) is being selected and optimized to be then re-introduced as an optimized fragmentation technique for this work. Additionally, this optimized technique is being finely integrated with proposed sites clustering algorithm and cost model for data allocation. It is worth mentioning that the obtained results confirm emphatically that the proposed (optimized) approach outperforms (Abdalla, 2014) to the great extent, and proves to be a potential progress not just in lessening TC substantially, but also in promoting DDBS performance significantly. To sum up, contributions along with motivations of this work are clearly featured as follows;
1.Objective function of (Abdalla, 2014) had not delved communication costs into distributed query costs which leads to its being inefficient on either mitigating costs of communications, as distributed query being processed, or even evaluating the whole technique. Communication costs, however, is the prime rational for which (Abdalla, 2014) and also present work basically come to find a practical solution capable of minimizing these costs to the most greatest extent. In other words, practically reducing communication costs has been the major concern of present work providing that these costs are being carefully reflected in the intrinsically-amended objective function. Moreover, having communication costs involved within objective function would satisfy: (1) the reflection of actual, or at least near-optimal, reality of Transmission Costs (TC) (Sewisy et al., 2017); (2) the precipitation of accurately evaluating overall DDBS performance as distributed queries processed and maximally verified rate of data locality growth and DDBS throughput as a result.2.On contrary to (Abdalla, 2014), to further minimizing communication costs, present work aims at delicately proposing clustering algorithm for sites as sites clustering has significantly proven to be considerably efficient on lessening communication costs (Sewisy et al., 2017; Hababeh et al., 2015; Abdel Raouf and Badr, 2017).3.Data allocation has widely proven to be super effective factor in DDBS productivity promotion, specifically as it has been done appropriately. So, unlike (Abdalla, 2014), data allocation (including replication over clusters/sites) has neatly been made using precise mathematical model with considering communication costs between both sites and clusters of sites. This model is meant to be applicable in both works while its being completely complied with present work’s concepts including sites grouping.4.In full contrast with (Abdalla, 2014), in which just data replication scenario for data is adopted and data replication was bound to be permanently met, present work seeks to adopt replication when it is just necessary, and non-replication scenario as well for both works which would contribute in avoiding unnecessary replication of demoralizing effects.5.In (Abdalla, 2014), technique’s evaluation was not provided to measure effectiveness of proposed technique as distributed queries under processing. Present work, however, seeks to substantively draw evaluation process for both works while strictly maintaining their circumstances. This evaluation has been expressively conducted with considering the precisely-modified objective function in mind.6.To prove proposed concepts of the present work, many different experiments under varied circumstances have been conducted that an internal and external evaluations are extensively drawn in self-explanatory frame. Both works are being exposed on TC function to measure their quality and grade DDBS performance accordingly.
The rest of this paper is elegantly organized as follows; section (2) profoundly covers earlier works, which are closely relevant to this work. In section (3), technique’s methodology, including architecture, is presented. Site clustering algorithm is stated in section (4). In section (5), the proposed data allocation and replication models are elaborately given. In section (6), pseudo code algorithm is briefly provided. In section (7), experimental results are extensively drawn. Section (8) illustrates works’ evaluation thoroughly, and gives comparative theoretical study. Finally, conclusions and future work directions are included in section 9.
