A success story of introducing courses related to High Performance Computing (HPC) to undergraduate students in an Indian private engineering institution is described in this paper. In India, there are three categories of institutions under government or private management. They are deemed, autonomous and affiliated. Deemed is a university status where the university has control on every activity such as admissions, academics and examinations. The curriculum is designed, examinations are conducted and degrees are awarded by the deemed university itself. Autonomous institutions are those institutions that have academic autonomy but they need to be affiliated to an existing university. The curricula are designed, examinations are conducted and the results are declared by the autonomous institutions and the degrees are given by the university. Affiliated institutions are those that are completely affiliated to an established university. The university designs curriculum, conducts examinations and awards degrees. The affiliated institutions cannot change the syllabus and evaluation methods on their own and are obliged to follow the university norms.
The author belongs to a private autonomous institute, namely, Nitte Mahalinga Adyanthaya Memorial Institute of Technology (NMAMIT) located in a beautiful and serene lush green area in the southern part of the western ghats of India. The institute is located in a village called ‘Nitte’ in karkala taluk in udupi district of Karnataka state in India. Initially, NMAMIT was completely affiliated to an university in Karnataka state, namely, Visvesvaraya Technological University (VTU), Belagavi. After NMAMIT received academic autonomy status in the year 2007, the degrees are being given by VTU, but the curricula design and the evaluations of students are completely done at the institute level. The autonomous status of the institute has given an opportunity to the author to introduce HPC-related subjects to the undergraduate students as explained in the subsequent sections of this paper. The paper discusses the introduction of HPC topics academic year (AY)-wise starting from the AY-2010–11 to AY-2015–16. This paper is an extension of a previously presented work by the author at Edu-HPC-15  [13]. This paper presents the complete HPC courses’ details and student evaluation procedures along with the AY-2015–16 details of HPC education for UG and PG computer science and engineering programs. The following are the main components presented in this paper: 
•Topics covered under the HPC context to the UG students at different semesters along with the credits assigned and evaluation procedures are detailed.•Details of the infrastructure or lab facility created by collaborating with various industries, for the benefit of students and faculty of all the departments, are explained  [22], [6], [1].•AY-wise performance of the students is presented in detail.•A non-credited summer internship program that gave additional inputs to the students is also described, as and when floated.•The HPC introduction for the PG students of academic year 2015–2016 is described.
