Electric field or voltage control (E- or V-control) of magnetic properties in multiferroic materials via magnetoelectric (ME) coupling effect promises to create novel electronic and spintronic devices with lower power consumption, smaller volume, and faster operation, which has attracted much interest in recent years [1], [2], [3], [4]. In multiferroic composite materials consisting of magnetostrictive and piezoelectric phases, the ME effect is mediated by strain that mechanically couples the two constituent phases through elastic interface [5], [6], [7]. Through E- or V-control of the piezoelectric strain, the strain is transferred across the interfaces to the magnetostrictive phase in the composite structure, resulting in E- or V-control of the magnetic properties. One of the novel functional devices enabled by such multiferroic ME materials is voltage tunable inductors (VTIs) [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. As one of the fundamental components of electronic circuits, inductors find extensive applications in power converters, control electronics, communication systems, etc. Tunable inductors are required to tune the electronic circuits. The tunability of conventional magnetic inductors is achieved by mechanically moving magnetic cores in the coils, sliding contacts along the coils, or electrically adjusting DC current in the coils, which, however, are usually bulky, slow, noisy and/or energy inefficient. Multiferroic ME VTIs, on the other hand, achieve the tunability through V-control of magnetic permeability of the ME composite cores. Because the VTIs are solid-state devices without moving components and variable voltage is readily available in the circuits, they are more compact, faster, less noisy, and more power efficient.
The functionality and performance of multiferroic ME VTIs critically depend on the properties of the constituent materials of magnetostrictive and piezoelectric phases, both of which are ferroic in nature (ferromagnetic and ferroelectric, respectively) with their behaviors sensitive to domain structures [13], [14]. The tunable piezoelectric strain of the poled ferroelectric material iscontrolled by applying electric field or voltage, which is transferred to the magnetostrictive material to tune its magnetic permeability. The resulting internal stress as well as the shape of the inductor and the material's inherent magnetic anisotropy have profound effect on the response of magnetic domains, which, in turn, influences the magnetic properties of the inductor materials. In particular, it is the interplay between material anisotropy, shape anisotropy, and stress-induced anisotropy that determines the tunable magnetic permeability.
In this work, VTIs made of ME Metglas/PZT composites are investigated by using theoretical analysis and computer simulation. A theoretical model is developed to analyze the roles of material anisotropy, inductor shape, and stress in the tunability of Metglas inductance. The analysis results are compared with and validated by complementary experiments. To further elucidate the underlying domain-level mechanisms, phase field modeling [15] is employed to simulate domain structures and magnetic permeability of Metglas/PZT composites under varying voltage.
