Women’s underrepresentation in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) is a complex issue. There are large variations in women’s underrepresentation among STEM fields. In 2012, women earned 59% of bachelor’s degrees in biological sciences, 43% in math and statistics, and 41% in physical sciences (National Science Foundation, 2015). In contrast, women’s representation was much lower in technological fields such as computer science (18%) and engineering (19%). This means that many young women have fewer opportunities to contribute to and benefit from careers in computer science and engineering. Although many interconnected factors influence the gender gap in participation, research points to a gender difference in interest that begins early in elementary school (Ceci & Williams, 2010). Theory-based interventions that increase young girls’ interest and self-efficacy in technology-related activities have the potential to reduce the gender gap in participation (Cheryan et al., 2017, Master et al., 2016).
The current study had two aims. First, we examined whether 6-year-old girls and boys have stronger gender stereotypes about computer science and engineering compared with other STEM fields such as math and science. We examined children’s stereotypes about computer science and engineering to address two questions: (a) whether 6-year-olds have stereotypes that boys are better than girls at computer science and engineering (i.e., programming and robotics) and (b) whether 6-year-olds’ gender stereotypes about computer science and engineering are stronger than their gender stereotypes about math and science. We then examined possible consequences and correlates of gender stereotypes by assessing the relation between girls’ stereotypes and their motivation in computer science and engineering.
Second, we examined as the central aim of this study an intervention that targeted girls’ interest and self-efficacy in computer science and engineering in the face of potential negative stereotypes about their abilities. We tested whether providing 6-year-old girls and boys a brief experience in programming robots can affect girls’ immediate interest and self-efficacy in computer science and engineering.
Gender gaps in technology motivationGender gaps in older children and adults exist in both STEM interest and self-efficacy, which are two different but related aspects of motivation (Eccles, 2011, Mantzicopoulos et al., 2008, Weisgram and Bigler, 2006). There are two types of interest that are relevant to this study. Situational interest is interest that is triggered within an immediate experience and may or may not last over time. Individual interest is a persistent inclination to engage with particular activities over time. The gender difference in individual interest begins by early elementary school, with girls reporting less interest in and liking for computers compared with boys (Cooper, 2006, McKenney and Voogt, 2010, Patrick et al., 2009). Self-efficacy refers to confidence in one’s ability to succeed on a specific task (Britner & Pajares, 2006). Girls report less confidence than boys about their science and computing abilities in elementary and middle school (Beghetto, 2007, Mumtaz, 2001).Interests in science and technology are largely established by the end of elementary school (Maltese & Tai, 2010), suggesting the value of intervening at even earlier ages to foster emergence of these interests. It has been theorized that interest can develop from situational interest to individual interest (Hidi & Renninger, 2006). We argue that a first step toward increasing women’s individual interest in computer science and engineering is to trigger young girls’ situational interest in topics such as robotics. Many types of experiences in formal and informal learning environments, such as summer camps and conversations with parents in museums, can help to trigger children’s situational interest in science and technology (Haden, 2010). Efforts by teachers and parents can develop students’ interest from situational to individual, for example, by offering new challenges or opportunities. Once situational interest is triggered with an appropriate task, girls have the opportunity to build this situational interest into a more durable and strong individual interest (Crowley, Barron, Knutson, & Martin, 2015). Without this first step of triggered situational interest, girls may be hesitant to begin to explore this field. Providing new STEM experiences to young girls can also create more opportunities for them to build self-efficacy in computer science and engineering.
Conceptual framework: Sources of gender gaps in motivationWhy are there early gender gaps in motivation to pursue computer science and engineering? In our theoretical model, we posit that two interacting sociocultural factors are particularly important in generating and maintaining the gender gap in technology motivation in young children: (a) cultural stereotypes and (b) gender differences in experiences (see Fig. 1). (See also Eccles, 2011 for a related model; for a review of possible biological factors, see Ceci and Williams, 2010, Halpern et al., 2007.)Download : Download high-res image (154KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Cultural stereotypes and gender differences in early experiences contribute to gender differences in motivation in computer science and engineering. These compound over time to lead to a participation gap in computer science and engineering as boys gain more experience, interest, and self-efficacy than girls in technological fields.How stereotypes contribute to the gender gap in motivation.Girls may be affected by stereotypes about intellectual ability as early as 6 years of age, when they become less likely than boys to assume that someone who is “really, really smart” is their own gender and also start to avoid difficult tasks (Bian, Leslie, & Cimpian, 2017). Do children report gender-related stereotypes about math and science? From the youngest ages so far tested (kindergarten to second grade), North American and European children tend to report either that the genders are equal in ability (Steele, 2003) or that their own-gender group is better at math and science (Galdi et al., 2014, Heyman and Legare, 2004, Kurtz-Costes et al., 2008). (For work on the development of implicit gender stereotypes about STEM and how these relate to explicit measures, see Cvencek et al., 2011, Cvencek et al., 2014.) Explicit stereotypes about math and science appear to emerge later in development. It is not clear from previous research precisely when girls explicitly endorse the stereotype that boys are better than girls at math, with some of the discrepancy in age estimates perhaps due to different methods of measuring stereotypes. Some research indicates that European girls explicitly endorse the stereotype that boys are better at math by fourth grade (Muzzatti & Agnoli, 2007), although Latin American girls seem to attribute less ability in math to girls compared with boys at 6 years of age (del Río & Strasser, 2013). However, other research using different methods suggests that European girls do not explicitly endorse this stereotype until adolescence (Martinot and Désert, 2007, Passolunghi et al., 2014).What about gender stereotypes in STEM fields such as computer science and engineering? No study yet has systematically measured young children’s stereotypes across a variety of STEM fields; that is one of the aims and novel contributions of the current research. This question is of particular relevance because variations in adults’ masculine stereotypes about STEM fields correspond to women’s actual representation in those fields (Cheryan et al., 2017, Leslie et al., 2015). Do girls as young as 6 years differentiate among different STEM fields as adults do? Do they show gender stereotypes favoring boys over girls for the most highly stereotyped fields (programming and robotics)?Gender stereotypes have negative consequences for girls’ performance in STEM, a phenomenon known as “stereotype threat” (Flore and Wicherts, 2015, Régner et al., 2014), and for adults’ motivation in STEM (Thoman, Smith, Brown, Chase, & Lee, 2013). The prevalence of STEM–gender stereotypes may be an important social factor influencing girls’ interest in STEM (Kessels, 2015, Master et al., 2016). Stereotypes about STEM may act as “gatekeepers” and deter girls from pursuing interests in computer science and engineering (Cheryan, Master, & Meltzoff, 2015). If children hold stereotypes that boys are better than girls at computer science and engineering, girls may anticipate doing poorly and be deterred from related activities.How experiences contribute to the gender gap in motivation.Another possible reason why girls may show lower motivation than boys for computer science and engineering is because they have fewer experiences with technology to generate their interest and build self-efficacy (Barker and Aspray, 2006, Martin and Dinella, 2002). As early as elementary school, girls spend less time playing with computer games and technological toys (Cherney & London, 2006) and are less likely to play with spatial and science-related games and toys than boys (Jirout & Newcombe, 2015). By sixth grade, boys spend more time than girls playing with electric toys and fuses outside of school (Jones, Howe, & Rua, 2000). Young boys spend more time interacting with age-appropriate technology activities, which could give them more opportunities to gain self-efficacy (Nugent et al., 2010, Terlecki and Newcombe, 2005).Girls’ insufficient early experience with computer science and engineering may contribute to gender gaps in later participation (Cheryan et al., 2017). States and countries that require both girls and boys to take more STEM coursework have lower gender gaps in STEM participation in college (Charles & Bradley, 2009; see also Federman, 2007). Correlational research with older students shows that stronger math and science curricula are correlated with high school girls’ intentions to major in STEM fields (Legewie & DiPrete, 2014).
Goals of the current researchThe current work investigated three interrelated questions: (a) whether 6-year-old children hold stronger gender stereotypes about computer science and engineering (programming and robotics) compared with math and science, (b) whether girls who believe that boys are better than girls at computer science and engineering report lower motivation for these subjects, and (c) whether girls in a treatment group who experience a child-friendly robot programming activity show higher technology motivation than girls in control groups.We hypothesized that 6-year-old children would hold stereotypes that boys are better at robotics and programming and that these stereotypes would be stronger than stereotypes about math and science. We also predicted that girls’ stereotypes that boys are better at robotics and programming would correlate with lower motivation for these domains. Finally, and most importantly, we predicted that girls who were randomly assigned to the treatment group would report significantly higher motivation than girls in the control groups. We also predicted there would be fewer gender differences in motivation for children in the treatment group than children in the control groups. We did not expect that our specific treatment would influence the cultural stereotypes that children held because it was not designed to do so; rather, we expected that the treatment would result in higher technology interest and self-efficacy for girls in the treatment group compared with the control groups.
