Network data mining and analysis have attracted extensive attention from industry and academia as network data exists in multiple fields and scenarios such as Internet of People (IoP) (Jiang et al., 2019), particularly social networks (Peng et al., 2018, Kong et al., 2019, Li et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2020). However, the high computational complexity, low parallelizability, and inapplicability of machine learning methods to graph data have made these graph analytic tasks profoundly challenging (Cui et al., 2019).
Node clustering, one of the most popular topics in graph analysis, is naturally no exception (Wang et al., 2019). Node clustering as a kind of data clustering task can be treated as an unsupervised learning problem in the machine learning community, whose target is to partition the nodes in the graph into disjoint groups (Pan et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2019, Li and Pi, 2020). Typical applications include group/community discovery in social networks (Wang et al., 2017, Javed et al., 2018).
To solve the challenges mentioned above in graph-related tasks, in recent years, many Network Embedding (NE) methods have been proposed (Li and Pi, 2020), which is inspired by deep learning’s powerful ability of learning latent embedding from data (Lecun et al., 2015). Network embedding aims to learn a mapping from given network data in the original topological space to low-dimensional vector space, while encoding the structural information of the network (Li and Pi, 2020). When the generic node feature vector is learned by NE algorithm, classical clustering algorithms such as K-means and classification methods such as Support Vector Machine (SVM) can be very conveniently employed to conduct the node clustering and node classification tasks (Li and Pi, 2020). For the node clustering task we focus on in this article, there is a noticeable problem that the embedding vectors obtained by most node embedding algorithms including some deep graph clustering approaches (Tian et al., 2014) are not specifically for clustering task. Therefore, it cannot guarantee better performance on the clustering task. In other words, this usually leads to suboptimal performance (Li et al., 2016, Wang et al., 2019).
To overcome this dilemma, a goal of a node clustering-directed learning framework is highly desirable. To the best of our knowledge, at present, few efforts have been made to design clustering-oriented network embedding algorithms in the framework of deep learning, such as the recent work (Wang et al., 2019, Fan et al., 2020). However, the limitations of these methods are that they only focus on the attributed graph clustering based on popular Graph Neural Network (GNN) approaches such as Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) and usually perform poorly on non-attributed graph. These works demonstrate an observation that both the graph structure and node content contain useful information for graph clustering (Wang et al., 2019). It is worth noting that the rich attributed information for each node in the graph is not always available in the real-world scenarios. Thus, for our focused non-attributed graph, the above models will face performance degradation, which is similar to the fact demonstrated on the task of link prediction (Kipf and Welling, 2016).
Motivated by the above observations, we propose a novel node clustering method based on deep neural network, which makes the model learn node embedding and perform node clustering simultaneously. Synthetically speaking, the following contributions are made in this literature.
(1) We propose a novel Deep Node Clustering (DNC) method for non-attributed network in the framework of Deep Learning (DL), which can learn an effective clustering-oriented node embedding.
(2) The method we present first preprocesses the network data to capture the structural information via determining the Positive Point-wise Mutual Information (PPMI). Then, we propose to learn a deep node clustering network composed of deep stacked autoencoder and a clustering layer, which could learn a mapping from the data space to a lower-dimensional feature space in which it iteratively optimizes a clustering objective.
(3) We demonstrate the superiority of our DNC method via comparing with thirteen state-of-the-art node clustering methods on three real-world network datasets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work. Section 3 provides some definitions formally. Section 4 presents the overall framework and the proposed method. Section 5 presents the experiments and results. We discuss our proposed method in Section 6. We draw the conclusion of our study in Section 7.
