Theory, as a way to account for users and their interactions with computers, has a long tradition in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) research (Rogers, 2012). Theoretical foundations serve to supplement our interactional understanding and inform design in various ways. To emphasize their different roles and impacts in HCI, theories can be categorized as descriptive, explanatory, predictive, prescriptive, or generative (Bederson and Schneiderman, 2003). Hence, theorizing can be a way of seeing things from new perspectives and discovering original and interesting features that can inspire design and drive it forward, but it is also indispensable when old theories become outdated due to improvements and novel adaptations of digital technology. Such enhancements lead to new situations and forms of interactions that require new or revised theoretical advancements in order to make sense and to be further developed.
As digital technology continues to develop, enabling the computer to “reach out” (Grudin, 1990), it not only becomes involved in every aspect of the human world, but also begins to encompass animals in different ways. This has created such a “new situation,” demanding that we understand our new animal users and find ways to account for the new set of interactions it makes possible. Animal–Computer Interaction (ACI) is a young and emerging field, with only a small number of explicitly formulated approaches to interaction (i.e. Juhlin and Weilenmann, 2011; Mancini et al., 2012; Aspling and Juhlin, 2015). To a large extent HCI theory is built upon implemented perspectives from other disciplines within the humanities and the social and behavioral sciences. Those theories are most commonly designed with humans and human abilities in mind, and their use is limited to the human realm. Hence, the emergence of animals in the study of user-computer interaction challenges previous accounts of interaction, and evokes new design challenges. In classical HCI, the starting point has been theories deriving from psychology that emphasize cognitive processes in the mind of the human user, but when animals are included such a theoretical starting point becomes more problematic (Juhlin and Weilenmann, 2011). The second wave of HCI research, or “the social turn,” is also challenged by the appearance of animals. Even if we to some extent can communicate with other animals, we do not share a language with them and have difficulty entering their minds and understanding their worldviews. Designing for animals and for human–animal interaction implies a need to understand our new animal users and find ways to account for the growing set of new interactions.
So far, ACI has mostly focused on studying domesticated animals in a restricted set of situations. On the one hand there is research and design focusing on working dogs, where the design agenda is task-driven, supporting the animals in their work of helping humans with tasks such as detecting cancer (Mancini et al., 2015), alerting diabetics to low blood sugar (Robinson et al., 2014), assisting blind people (Melin et al., 2015), and hunting (Juhlin and Weilenmann, 2011). On the other hand, there is research and design concentrating on developing interspecies games (e.g. Tan et al., 2007; Cheok, 2010;), especially between humans and pet cats (e.g. Pons et al., 2014). However, rather like how computing has become ubiquitous, nonhuman animals are omnipresent in the lives of humans, and we interact with them in many different ways (see for example DeMello, 2012). This makes the potential design space for ACI wider than just domesticated animals, as we have previously have pointed out (Aspling and Juhlin, 2015) when linking ACI with urban studies and underlining the possibilities that digital technology offers for re-configuring animals’ city life. Moreover, and perhaps even more importantly, we showed how the ACI design agenda could incorporate design grounded more closely in the animals’ own interests outside the lab. In this case, we did so by looking at what gets their attention in an ordinary, natural, everyday setting, rather than focusing on their interests in a pre-constructed design scenario such as solving specific tasks or taking part in interspecies games. Moreover, the most common interactional forms within ACI are direct, where the interconnected actions are performed synchronously with a clear connection between cause and effect. Furthermore, by focusing on two individual entities, such as an animal and a computer system, ACI is most typically structured around dyadic interaction.
We suggest that in order to “excite the imagination” (McGrath, 2009, p. 2533) an important task for ACI is to ground future design in theories of interaction, as a complement to creative attempts to use new technology. Previous ACI researchers have either diminished the relevance of the area per se (Mankoff et al., 2005), or have justified their research from an animal rights position and expect their work to be misunderstood and ridiculed (Lee et al., 2006). More recent research includes using ethnomethodology to understand manifest computer-mediated interactions between people and animals (Juhlin and Weilenmann, 2011), or experimental and participatory design approaches that study effects of various design interventions (e.g., Mancini et al., 2015; Robinson et al., 2014). Although this emerging research does account for interaction, both approaches require paying close attention to embodied details in empirically available direct interaction. Hence, they seem appropriate when accounting for interactions that are direct and dyadic. Furthermore, both of them can involve animals in design, either by presenting a design prototype for the animals to react to in a lab setting, hence making them part of the design work (e.g. Mancini et al., 2015; Robinson et al., 2014), or by carefully examining the animals’ doings and possible intentions in ordinary and naturally occurring situations in their daily lives as a basis for design (Aspling and Juhlin, 2015). However, these approaches seem inappropriate for the empirical case and use of technology presented in this article. It points towards an alternate and underexplored type of interaction that is more diffuse and less directly observable, and that therefore risks remaining unseen.
We present an ethnographic study of the use of mobile proximity sensor cameras within ordinary wild boar hunting, with the aim of broadening our interactional understanding and expanding the design opportunities for ACI. Our empirical case emphasizes the use of new digital technology in a naturalistic setting “in the wild,” and involving both humans and, in this case, wild animals in the form of boars. It focuses on how these two species interact in this new and rather high-tech landscape. The practice of hunting, one of the oldest forms of human-animal interaction is becoming increasingly dependent on digital technology such as GPS-trackers (Juhlin and Weilenmann, 2013) and mobile proximity sensor cameras. The latter add a visual dimension to the hunt and promote a form of interaction that is not as direct as the pre-existing ACI interaction forms. Instead it is diffuse, scattered over time and space, lacks the co-presence of the actors, and is consequently not directly visible to an external observer such as a researcher. Further, it illustrates interaction that is indirect, in terms of being prolonged in time and space, and non-dyadic in terms of encompassing a complex and heterogeneous setting including the environment and several other nonhuman and human actors. Faced by such relations, we are interested in finding ways to account for technically mediated interactions with wild animals, and to conceptualize such interactions.
Central aspects of Actor-Network Theory (ANT) are potentially relevant. Its way of including nonhumans in social analysis has been influential in other disciplines influenced by posthumanist thought, such as animal geography (see for example Buller, 2015). It is also interested in understanding the mechanisms of power and in including artifacts in such analyses (Latour, 1988a, Latour, 1991). ANT is used to explore what this means in terms of interaction and to contribute theoretical and methodological insights to the growing field of ACI. It reveals concrete programs of action that include the role of artifacts. It does so by understanding interaction as a struggle for power between different diffuse actor-networks consisting of intermingled humans and non-humans (e.g. Latour, 1988a, Latour, 1991). Additionally, ANT illustrates the role of technology in making them associated with each other in networks.
In our case of hunting and proximity sensor cameras, ANT exposes interactions between hunter and boar that are game-like insofar as the participants are engaged in a conflicting set of programs of action and strategies where technology plays a crucial role. With the help of ANT and the notion of program and anti-program (Latour, 1991) and Latour's (1988a) updated analysis of Machiavelli's (1513/1966) understanding of the mechanisms and organization of power, we show how interaction can be understood as comprising “strategies.” Not unlike Goffman's (1971) use of the notion of strategic interaction to account for “the calculative, game-like aspects of mutual dealings” (Goffman, 1971), this perspective emphasizes that individuals rationally calculate every action, move, and circumstance. Rather than worrying about how they or others are perceived, the participants in the game-like interaction described in this paper are involved in a game of life and death. This requires us to consider a wider arrangement of interactions, consisting of a combination of different interconnected moves and scenarios. For example the hunters engage in procedural and strategic thinking to successfully stage animal-computer interaction by luring the boars into the range of the proximity sensor that triggers the camera, and the boars engage in strategic thinking in order to eat the food provided by the hunters while avoiding being killed.
This paper is structured as follows. In the next section we review previous conceptualizations of interaction within ACI. After that we present relevant aspects of ANT and Goffman's notion of strategic interaction. We then explain the method and setting of the study as well as the technology used by the hunters. This is followed by the findings and analysis where the boars’ and hunters’ activities and strategies in this new landscape are presented in two separate sections. At the end, we discuss the findings more explicitly in the light of strategic interaction and ANT, and how these theoretical foundations can be generative for design. We also highlight the role of theory in stimulating the imagination.
