Studies of performance monitoring necessarily involve the performance of a task, and performance of a task, where performance is measured, invariably involves movement of the body (in order to register a response), even if only a single finger. Even without experimentally-delivered feedback the subject will at a minimum have proprioceptive and tactile feedback, and likely also visual (e.g. seeing one’s own finger press a button) and auditory feedback, and any one of these could be used to infer which response was given and/or how well the task was performed.
In studies of perception of weak or ambiguous stimuli, on the other hand, it is possible to ask subjects, “how sure are you of what you just saw/heard/felt?”. This kind of “second-order” judgement can be made independently of and prior to any feedback, and presumably requires internal evaluation of the quality of the neuronal evidence, also referred to as metacognition (Fleming et al., 2012, Metcalfe, 1996, Metcalfe and Greene, 2007, Miele et al., 2011, Smith et al., 2003, Yeung and Summerfield, 2012). Previous research has looked at metacognition of somatosensory perception (Hilgenstock, Weiss, & Witte, 2014) and attention (Kerr et al., 2013, Whitmarsh et al., 2014), but not motor imagery, and not in the context of brain-computer interface (BCI) control.
Theorists have raised the distinction between decisional and post-decisional loci of metacognition in the context of an evidence-accumulation framework (Yeung & Summerfield, 2012). The primary task involves accumulation of sensory evidence up to a threshold, which, when reached, gives way to an overt response. In decisional-locus models, the very same information encoded by the neuronal decision variable (DV) is used to make both the first-order response and the second-order (metacognitive) judgement. Post-decisional locus models hold that processing of stimulus information continues even after the decision threshold is reached, leading potentially to changes-of-mind (Kaufman, Churchland, Ryu, & Shenoy, 2015) and, importantly, contributing to retrospective judgements of decision confidence (Murphy, Robertson, Harty, & O’Connell, 2015).
While it has been argued that performance monitoring and metacognition are governed by common principles, previous authors have suggested that a distinction be drawn between the two, and in particular the metacognition of agency (Haggard and Tsakiris, 2009, Metcalfe and Greene, 2007, Miele et al., 2011, Synofzik et al., 2008). Importantly, confidence judgements are thought to rely on neural processing in the lateral and medial prefrontal cortex (PFC) and possibly in areas of the parietal cortex as well (Kiani & Shadlen, 2009), whereas error monitoring has been reliably linked to activity in the anterior-cingulate cortex (ACC) (Dehaene, Posner, & Tucker, 1994). With these details in mind it is instructive to distinguish between two kinds of self monitoring:
(1) Monitoring of one’s own bodily movements or bodily state. For example, one estimates one’s own reaction time by monitoring the delay between stimulus onset and proprioceptive signals from the responding hand. (2) Monitoring of one’s own brain activity, without relying on any signals from the body. For example estimating the quality of sensory evidence by directly probing neural activity in the relevant areas of sensory cortex. We set out to ask whether the latter kind of self monitoring, which is possible for sensory-evoked processes (metacognition for perception), is also possible for neural activity that is endogenously and voluntarily generated (performance monitoring for BCI action).
We posed this question using a motor-imagery-based (MI-based) brain-computer interface (BCI), with which subjects could voluntarily perform an action (moving a cursor on a computer screen) without any movement of the body and in the absence of any movement-related somatosensory feedback. Importantly, cursor-movement feedback was only visible to subjects during a pre-experiment practice session. No on-line visual feedback was given during the actual BCI experiment, during which the true final position of the cursor was only revealed to the subject at the end of each trial, after s/he had estimated where s/he thought the cursor had ended up after 6 s of BCI control.
Results show that during the first half of the experiment (minimum 120 trials) subjects based their assessments on the prior probability of the end position of the cursor on previous trials. However, during the second half of the experiment subjects’ judgements moved significantly closer to the actual end position of the cursor, and away from the prior. This suggests not only that subjects can monitor performance of a task performed without movement, but also that this capacity can be learned. We conclude that internal monitoring is possible, not only for sensory-evoked neural activity (Fleming et al., 2012, Fleming et al., 2010, Kiani and Shadlen, 2009, Pleskac and Busemeyer, 2010, Yeung and Summerfield, 2012), but also for voluntarily generated patterns of brain activity used in BCI control.
