Ionic liquids (ILs) are defined as salts with melting points below 100 °C. Due to their unique properties such as negligible vapor pressure, high thermal and chemical stabilities, wide liquid-state range, and high solvent capacity (Brennecke and Maginn, 2001, Earle et al., 2006), ILs are more and more considered for separation processes to replace traditional solvents. A main advantage of ILs is that they can be tuned for favored properties in a task-specific separation application by rationally combining the cation, anion, and functional groups among a huge diversity. Therefore, ILs are often referred to as designer solvents (Freemantle, 1998). However, the large space of potential IL candidates as many as 1018 (Earle and Seddon, 2000) makes it very difficult to design a proper IL based on experiments.
Over the last few decades, the technique known as computer-aided molecular design (CAMD) has been successfully employed in designing organic solvents for a variety of separation and reaction processes (Folić et al., 2007, Giovanoglou et al., 2003, Wang and Achenie, 2002, Tian et al., 2010, Zhang et al., 2012, Zhou et al., 2014, Zhou et al., 2015). In principle, this approach can be appropriately applied for the design of ILs as well. Roughton et al. (2012) utilized a methodology and tool set from CAMD for the simultaneous design of ionic liquid entrainer and azeotropic separation processes. Karunanithi and Mehrkesh (2013) structured a computer-aided ionic liquid design (CAILD) framework to identify ILs with desirable properties. Peng et al. (2017) developed a CAILD methodology based on group contribution method and COSMO-SAC model.
A typical CAMD methodology generally integrates predictive models and optimization algorithms to engineer molecular structures with desired properties. Up to now, several predictive thermodynamic models have been developed to describe the phase equilibria of systems with known molecules structures (Lei et al., 2008). Among them, the UNIFAC and COSMO-based models can be applied to evaluate mixtures with ILs. Lei et al., 2009, Lei et al., 2012, Wang et al., 2008 extended group parameters of UNIFAC to IL-containing systems and yielded satisfactory results for a quantity of cases. However, the current available UNIFAC parameter matrix is still inadequate to describe the huge diversity of ILs. Meanwhile, COSMO-based models like COSMO-RS (Klamt et al., 2010, Klamt, 2011) and COSMO-SAC (Lin and Sandler, 2002, Wang et al., 2007, Xiong et al., 2014) are statistical thermodynamic models, which allow rapid a priori predictions of thermodynamic properties and have been utilized for various mixtures (Ferreira et al., 2012, Lee and Lin, 2015). Compared to UNIFAC, COSMO-based models are able to cover more kinds of ILs with less limitation of experimental data, which makes them more suitable to be used for CAILD.
The CAILD task is commonly formulated as a mixed integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) optimization problem (Karunanithi and Mehrkesh, 2013, Ng et al., 2015). Due to the strong non-linearity in calculating activity coefficients, a powerful optimization algorithm is strongly needed. Stochastic methods such as genetic algorithms (GA) and simulated annealing (SA) have a high possibility in finding the global optimum thus are widely used for solving complex CAMD problems.
The GA repeatedly modifies a population of individual solutions. Over successive generations, the population “evolves” toward an optimal solution. It has been used for molecular design of various purposes (Van Dyk and Nieuwoudt, 2000, Xu and Diwekar, 2005, Zhou et al., 2016). As a parallel and global search technique, GA is more likely to obtain a global solution, but its performance may deteriorate as it approaches the desired global extreme (Zacharias et al., 1998). The SA methodology draws its analogy from the annealing process of solids and is widely regarded as an efficient method for optimization (Marcoulaki and Kokossis, 2000). With a stochastic relaxation technique, the SA possesses a probabilistic hill-climbing pattern with high accuracy, which can be a complementary approach for GA. Therefore, the combination of GA and SA tends to yield better solutions for the design problem of ILs than either single GA or SA does.
In the first part of this work, a method has been successfully developed to predict the σ-profiles and cavity volumes (VCOSMO) of ILs. In this part, a CAILD procedure based on the mixed simulated annealing-genetic algorithm (MSAGA) is developed to design the IL structure with optimal separation performance. The CAILD procedure is validated by two case studies, i.e., extraction of benzene from cyclohexane and deep desulfurization from gasoline.
