In 1964, MIT professor Harold Edgerton produced the now-iconic Bullet Through Apple photograph (see Fig. 1, left). His work represented an unprecedented effort to photograph events too fast to be captured with traditional techniques. He invented a new stroboscopic flash light (which he termed the stroboscope), which would shine for about 10 microseconds: bright enough, and short enough, to effectively freeze the world and capture ultrafast events such as the bullet bursting through the apple, a splash of a drop of milk, or the flapping wings of a hummingbird. Almost fifty years later, inspired by these images, the technique known as femto-photography (Velten et al., 2013) was introduced; it took Edgerton’s vision to a whole new level, by allowing to capture movies of light in motion, as it traversed a macroscopic scene (Fig. 1, right).
This fifty-year span provides a clear example of the progress in ultrafast imaging. Many techniques have appeared in the last few years, some inspired by femto-photography, others following completely different approaches. They share the common goal of trying to make visible the invisible: Whether it is due to the speed of the event being captured, to the presence of scattering media, to the lack of photons, or to an occluding object, ultrafast imaging aims to leverage the wealth of information usually lost during the capture-time temporal integration. This has revolutionized the fields of imaging and scene understanding, opening up new possibilities, but also discovering new challenges.
In this paper, we provide an in-depth overview of the most significant works in this domain. We concern ourselves mostly with works in the areas of computer graphics and computer vision; as such, we deal only with visible light and infrared. For other techniques that make use of different wavelengths (such as microwaves, or techniques operating in the terahertz domain), we refer the reader to other excellent sources such as the recent survey by Satat et al. (2016). Similarly, another recent survey (Bhandari and Raskar, 2016) offers an overview of the field from a signal-processing perspective. From our graphics and vision view, we adopt the commonly used term transient imaging, referring to imaging techniques fast enough to capture transient information of light transport, as opposed to traditional techniques that capture steady-state information (such as regular images).
We have structured our work as follows: First, we introduce capture techniques in Section 2, separating techniques that directly obtain transient information (such as the previously mentioned femto-photography, or the recent interferometry-based works), from techniques that reconstruct that information from a sparse set of measurements, usually sacrificing temporal resolution (such as recent approaches based on time-of-flight (ToF) cameras). In Section 3 we proceed to discuss works whose main goal is to analyze transient light transport, both in the primary and frequency domains. We additionally discuss techniques involving spatio-temporal coding and modulation. In Section 4 we offer a cross section of existing techniques from an application’s point of view. Again with a focus on graphics and vision, we subdivide this section in geometry reconstruction, motion estimation, and material estimation; a common problem in most of the applications discussed is the multipath interference (MPI) problem, which is tackled from many different angles. With the establishment of transient imaging, the simulation of time-resolved light transport is becoming an increasingly important tool, which we cover in Section 5. Last, Section 6 offers some final conclusions and discussions.
Download : Download high-res image (532KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Left: In 1964, Harold Edgerton captured the iconic Bullet Through Apple image (© MIT Museum). The bullet traveled at about 850 m/s, which translated into an exposure of approximately 4–10 millionth of a second. Right: Almost 50 years later, the femto-photography technique was introduced (Velten et al., 2013), capable of capturing light in motion, with an effective exposure time of one trillionth of a second. The large split image is a composite of the three complete frames shown in the insets.The complete videos of this and other scenes can be downloaded from http://giga.cps.unizar.es/~ajarabo/pubs/femtoSIG2013/.
