Molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) are synthetic macromolecule materials with specific molecular recognition sites for particular analytes. With complementary conformations to some kind of templates, MIP is capable of specifically recognizing a target molecule or its structural analogues. MIPs are applied to a wide range of fields, including, but not limited to, chromatographic separation [1], [2], sensor [3], [4], mimic enzyme catalysis [5] and drug delivery [6], etc. The synthetic process of MIPs can be divided into three main steps. Firstly, complexation, a complex is formed by monomers interacting with functional groups of template molecule in the solvent medium. Secondly, the complex and cross-linking agents are polymerized in the presence of an initiator, and a highly cross-linked polymeric substance is formed. Thirdly, the template molecule is eluted from the polymeric substance, which leaves a cavity complementary to the template molecule in terms of shape, size and position [7], [8]. The prepared MIP can selectively rebind the template molecule again, so that it can be applied to detection, separation or extraction of the template molecule or its structural analogues.
Theoretical calculations are significantly predictive tools to save time and reduce reagent consumption during the selection of the best composition for preparation of MIPs. Recently, computer-aided design has become a regular procedure which reduces more cost than experiments do. The performance of MIPs can be optimized by monomer screening, solvent choosing and cross-linker selecting. Compared with previously described methods, density functional theory (DFT) is a generally preferred method in theoretical and computational chemistry for MIPs design [9]. A large number of published literatures show that DFT is a precise and efficient algorithm to calculate hydrogen bond energy [10], [11]. The value of binding energy (ΔE) is a guideline for the selection of proper monomer. In general, the bigger the value of ΔE, the stronger the interaction between template and monomer. So a larger value of ΔE means that the monomer is more beneficial to the preparation of highly selective MIPs. Gomez-Pineda [12] theoretically studied interactions between flavonol and different monomers, and the reported data was confirmed by 13C NMR.
Atrazine(ATZ), 2-chloro-4-ethylamino-6-isopropylamino-1,3,5-triazine, is one of the most widely used triazine herbicide in the cultivation of crops [13]. Previous studies show that ATZ has a serious effect on human's immune system [14], reproductive system [15], central nervous system [16] and endocrine system [17]. Simultaneously, ATZ contaminates groundwater and soil. Hence, it is required to detect the trace level of atrazine residue in the environment and crops. The detection methods for atrazine are GC, GC-MS, HPLC, HPLC-MS [18] and so on. Recently, it is common to apply MIPs to the sample pretreatment before detecting trace level of pesticide residues. The efficiency of MIPs by bulk polymerization synthesis strongly depends on the extent of cross linker to generate rigid hollows [19]. Meanwhile, some MIPs synthesized by other aggregation methods, such as precipitation polymerization [20], have small particle size, the adsorption efficiency of the MIPs depends on the interaction between template and monomers and solvent properties. In this paper, to select the best monomer type and ratio of monomer to template for the preparation of MIPs, an attempt was made to simulate the interactions between the monomer and atrazine template. Additionally, the solvent type was optimized in order to provide successful imprinting. Overall, the study provides a preparation condition for the atrazine-MIP and an effective reference for the screening of components in other imprinting systems quickly. The computer-aided design of atrazine-MIP has not yet been reported.
