Communication is essential for human life. However, for people suffering from paralytic diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), muscular dystrophy, and spinal cord injury, it is difficult to speak or to move. As these individuals cannot use the ordinary communication tools that healthy individuals use, it is difficult to understand their intention. Thus, BCI is an attractive communication tool which does not involve body movements.
Different methods using event-related potential (ERP) have been developed by various researchers for brain–computer interface (BCI) implementation. For a review, see reference [1]. ERP has the advantage that the subject does not require training and the features can be detected with little load on the subject. The oddball paradigm is often used to induce ERP [2]. In the oddball paradigm, two kinds of stimuli that can be discriminated are applied to the subject randomly. If the subject pays attention to low frequency stimuli, a positive potential can be detected about 300 ms after a low frequency stimuli (P300).
For ERP-based BCI, visual information is frequently used as the stimulus which causes P300 [3]. This is, however, not possible in the case of visually impaired individuals. Moreover, audiovisual information is a precious resource for the physically impaired; a communication device that does not require audiovisual processing would allow them to reserve their visual and auditory senses for other activities. BCIs using auditory stimulation have also been reported [4], [5], [6], but these methods obstruct the subject's auditory function during the operation.
In the present study, we focus on tactile sensation instead of visual and auditory sensations. Even if the patient has a severe disability in the motor function of the body, the tactile function may be used for BCI implementation without disturbing their main audiovisual functions.
In brain functional research, somatosensory evoked potential (SEP) using electrical or mechanical stimuli has been investigated to analyze tactile information processing [7], [8]. We analyzed the SEP evoked by mechanical tactile stimuli and confirmed that the strength, position, and pattern of tactile stimuli were discriminated using the SEP [9], [10].
In previous studies, tactile modality was used as a BCI feedback channel to the subject [11], [12]. Brouwer and van Erp proposed a navigation BCI using vibro-tactile stimuli applied around the waist [13]. However, the sensitivity threshold and the spatial resolution of the torso were lower than those of the hands [14]. BCI based on steady-state SEP has also been proposed [15]. In this method, two kinds of continuous tactile stimuli with different frequencies are simultaneously applied to the index fingers of both hands. A tactile speller was introduced as an ERP-based BCI for communication [16]. The tactile stimulus was applied to the fingertips and the letters of the alphabet were allocated to different fingers. This required the subject to hold the stimulation device. A multi-signature BCI was also developed using both transient and steady-state SEP [17]. Severens et al. developed a stimulation device that can be attached to the fingers and compared tactile BCI with visual BCI [18].
We use a piezo-actuator (KGS Corp.) as a tactile stimulator [19]. This actuator is commercially available as a braille display for visual impaired and it is safe for every users. It can generate quantitative stepwise tactile stimuli instead of vibro-tactile stimuli. It has not been used in this kind of human experiments. In our study, several patterns of mechanical tactile stimulation were applied to the left and/or right fingers. Human experiments based on the oddball-like paradigm were carried out in which the subject was instructed to pay attention to rare target stimuli while avoiding other frequent non-target stimuli. As a reaction task, the subject was asked to count the number of target stimuli. Suitable presentation methods of tactile stimuli such as the patterns, number of choices, and the stimulus interval were investigated for BCI classification. Electrode arrangement, feature extraction, and classification were also examined.
