Ionic liquids (ILs) are molten salts which remain in liquid state around the ambient temperature (Rogers and Seddon, 2003). In recent years, ILs have attracted considerable attention in various separation processes due to their unique properties such as non-volatility, high thermal stability, and wide liquid range (Brennecke and Maginn, 2001, Earle and Seddon, 2000, Freemantle, 1998, Huddleston and Rogers, 1998; Dong and Zhang, 2012; Zhou et al., 2012, Chau et al., 2013). More importantly, ILs also offer potential to tune their physical and chemical properties by tailoring their structures. Due to this tunable character, ILs can be designed to offer favorable properties and thus ensure an effective and economical separation process.
So far, for specific separation processes, traditional methodologies towards IL screening or design mainly rely on experiments and experience. However, these approaches are very time-consuming, expensive, and even impracticable to obtain the best solvent candidate considering the limitless cation-anion combinations (Earle and Seddon, 2000). In this regard, in silico methods, which employ computational approaches to make fast predictions, are highly desired in discovering IL structures with novel properties.
UNIFAC (Lohmann and Gmehling, 2001, Skold-Jørgensen et al., 1979) and COSMO-based models (Klamt et al., 1998, Lin and Sandler, 2002) are two typical approaches for predicting thermodynamic properties of various types of systems. The UNIFAC model can be used to predict activity coefficients (γ) for a variety of compounds at any concentration and has been incorporated into the Computer-Aided Molecular Design (CAMD) programs for conventional solvents (Gani and Brignole, 1983, Gani et al., 1991). In recent years, UNIFAC was investigated for ionic liquid systems (Lei et al., 2009) and successfully used for Computer-Aided Ionic Liquid Design (CAILD) (Lei et al., 2014a, Karunanithi and Mehrkesh, 2013, Paduszyński and Domańska, 2013, Santiago and Aznar, 2011, Wang et al., 2008). When using this model to predict activity coefficients, it requires certain group interaction parameters that are normally regressed from experimental data. This character limits the applicability of the model to those ILs previously investigated by experiment.
COSMO-based thermodynamic models such as COSMO-RS (COSMO for Real Solvent) proposed by Klamt et al. (1998) and COSMO-SAC (COSMO Segment Activity Coefficient) by Lin and Sandler (2002) are novel and efficient tools with a few universal parameters. In most cases, COSMO-based models can provide reliable qualitative and satisfactory quantitative predictions on the activity coefficients for IL-containing solutions merely based on unimolecular quantum mechanical (QM) calculations (Yang et al., 2010, Lee and Lin, 2015, Ferreira et al., 2012). A qualitative prediction on the influence of structural variations of ILs on their properties is important and sufficient for a preliminary selection or design of ILs (Lei et al., 2008). Therefore, COSMO-based models have a high potential to be used as a CAILD tool (Peng et al., 2017).
Surface charge density profiles (σ-profiles) and cavity volumes (VCOSMO) of molecules, which are usually derived from QM calculations, are requisite inputs for COSMO-based models. It is worth noting that in a typical COSMO-based prediction procedure, the QM calculation represents the most computationally expensive step. To avoid this drawback, Mu et al., 2007, Mu et al., 2009 developed a group contribution method for the prediction of σ-profiles and VCOSMO. In their method, σ-profile and VCOSMO of a molecule are determined as the sum of the contributions of all involved groups whereas the group contributions are obtained beforehand by multi-linear regression based on a database of numerous σ-profiles and VCOSMO. Despite the effectiveness, this method has some limitations for ILs. Firstly, the simple scheme of group additivity is unable to describe molecules with π-electron system and electronic-inductive effects from N and O atoms, which exist widely in IL structures. Secondly, the influence of adjacent groups on the target group is fixed, which consequently makes the method restricted in distinguishing between structural isomers such as 2-methylbutyraldehyde and 3-methylbutyraldehyde.
In order to efficiently and accurately predict the σ-profiles and VCOSMO of IL candidates for the CAILD program, a modified group contribution methodology, i.e. the COSMO-GC-IL method is presented in this work. One of the biggest advantages of the COSMO-GC-IL method is that due to the inclusion of group connectivity information, the method provides a higher level of molecular representation compared to the conventional group contribution method. This character makes the method in principle more accurate for predicting molecular σ-profiles and importantly, it can well distinguish between structural isomers. The reliability and efficiency of the method are demonstrated by checking the accuracy of activity coefficient and liquid-liquid equilibrium predictions.
