Palm oil is one of the major edible oils across the world and is a source of lipids. Nearly 90% of palm oil produced in the world, is further converted into food products such as cooking oil, industrial and confectionery fats, breakfast cereals and supplements/vitamins. The remaining 10% is used to produce oleo chemical products (Akanda et al., 2012). According to Grand View Research (2015), palm oil had gained a global market demand of 74.01 million tons in 2014 and expected to reach 128.20 million tons by 2022.
In oil palm plantations, the fresh fruit brunches (FFB) are first harvested from the palm oil tree and sent to palm oil mill (POM) to extract crude palm oil (CPO) and crude palm kernel oil (CPKO) from mesocarp and kernel respectively (Avalos and Carmen Limón, 2014). At the same time, palm pressed fibre (PPF)is generated as a by-product. In the current industrial practise, PPF is burned as fuel to generate steam and power to support the operation of the palm oil mill. According to Choo et al. (1996), about 5–6% of residual oil is retained in PPF after the extraction process. In addition, the residual oil retained in PPF is rich in carotenoids, vitamin E and sterols (Netscher, 2000). Carotenoids are commercially used in food industry as natural colorants as it plays a vital role in cellular regulatory system as antioxidant agents. Vitamin E such as tocopherols and tocotrienols are used in food industries because of their antioxidant properties and antitumor activity (Lau et al., 2008). Based on Ng et al. (2004), the amount of carotenoids in PPF is significantly higher than that in CPO, which is around 5000 ppm and 600 ppm respectively. Furthermore, the amount of vitamin E in PPF (4000 ppm) is also higher than CPO (1200 ppm). Therefore, it can be seen that the residual oil in PPF has the potential to be recovered as a higher quality food product than CPO produced from palm oil mill. Therefore, it is important to retain the carotenoids and vitamin E during the extraction process. In the current practice, solvent extraction is used to recover the residual oil from PPF. Hexane cold extraction is considered as the most suitable and established technology to recover the residual oil (John and Randall, 2014). This is because of the high oil recovery and less maintenance requirements in comparison with other technologies. However, there are a number of drawbacks for using hexane as a solvent for this application. For example, hexane is a highly flammable solvent. Therefore, there is a need to install additional layers of protection in the plant and leads to higher cost of operation. In addition, hexane cold extraction has caused high degradation of carotenoids in extracted oil. Since the boiling point of hexane is high, the bioactivity of carotenoid could be destroyed during the solvent recovery. Moreover, in the hexane cold extraction, there is potential residual of hexane retained in the extracted oil. Therefore, the extracted oil cannot be used for human consumption as hexane has a number of adverse effects on human health up on chronic exposure and it is not suitable to be used for extracting edible oils.
Due to the above mentioned limitations of hexane cold extraction for recovering higher grade residual oil, alternative solvents should be identified. According to Engler et al. (1983), an ideal solvent for edible oil extraction might not exist, but a better solvent than hexane can be identified. For instance, the alternative solvent should be highly selective towards triglycerides, carotenoids, vitamin A while leaving the unwanted components such as free fatty acids (FFA) in the PPF. In addition, the solvent should be easily recoverable at low temperature. The solvent should be non-toxic to human, animal, aquatic life and environment. In the conventional process, the residual oil is separated from solvent via distillation after the extraction process. The high temperature in the distillation leads to degradation in carotene bioactivity. Thus, the boiling point of the solvent should be one of the important selection parameters. Furthermore, extracted oil is commonly used in the applications of food industry. For the solvent to meet the specifications of health, safety and environmental impacts, the performance indices for these impacts must be developed and considered during design.
Note that the identification of an alternate solvent for the oil extraction from PPF depends on the physical properties of the promising solvent, ability to selectively dissolve palm oil, ability to recover without degrading the carotenoids and the safety and health aspects. Based on the recent developments in quantifying safety and health aspects of solvents (Hassim and Hurme, 2010, Hassim et al., 2013), it is possible to use physical properties to form safety and health indexes. Therefore, in this work, Computer-Aided Molecular Design (CAMD) methods have been used to design the promising alternate solvents. Via CAMD techniques, the molecular structures that meet the customer requirements can be identified based on the pre-defined property targets. In this design, a number of property targets are considered simultaneously. Therefore, a multi objective optimisation based CAMD approach is developed to ensure that a good compromise between the target objectives have been achieved.
Note also that many safety and health indexes depend on physical properties which are unknown until the molecular design is completed. Therefore, there is a need to develop a systematic methodology to estimate safety and health indexes during the design stage itself. Moreover, the development of alternate solvents for extracting oil from PPF requires the simultaneous optimization of physical properties along with safety and health indexes since the extracted palm oil is used in food industries. Therefore, a good balance between these classes of properties must be achieved by the ideal solvent. Moreover, it is noted that all multi-objective optimisation problems involve subjectivity in decision making. To reduce its impact in the selection, it is recommended to compare the solutions obtained from different approaches before finalising the solution. As most of the current CAMD algorithms focus on the design of solvents for chemical industries, the proposed approach can be used as a sample for the design of solvents for food industries.
1.1. Computer-Aided Molecular Design (CAMD)CAMD techniques are important for chemical product design for their ability in estimating and designing molecules with a set of predefined product properties (Harper and Gani, 2000). In general, the property of the molecule is estimated based on property prediction models and structural descriptors (Gani and Pistikopoulos, 2002). Examples of the common structural descriptors to quantify molecular structure include chemical bonds and molecular geometry (Randić et al., 1994). At present, most of the CAMD techniques utilise property prediction models based on group contribution methods (GCM) to generate molecules with the specified set of product properties. By utilising molecular groups as structural descriptors, GCMs estimate the property of the molecule by summing up the contributions from the molecular building groups (Ambrose, 1978). In addition to GCMs, topological indices (TIs) can be utilised in property prediction models. According to Trinajstić (1992), TIs are molecular descriptors calculated based on principles of chemical graph theory. This method captures molecular information such as types of atoms and bonds, total number of atoms and bonding between the atoms.Over the last decades, CAMD techniques have emerged as powerful tools to identify molecules for specific applications (Samudra and Sahinidis, 2013). Various CAMD techniques have been developed, and their applications include the design of different types of chemical products such as polymers, refrigerants, solvents, additives, pharmaceutical products as well as ionic liquids (ILs) (Ng et al., 2015a). Siddhaye et al. (2000) utilised different TIs to design pharmaceutical products by formulating a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model. Sundaram et al. (2001) presented a CAMD framework for the design of high-performance fuel additives that minimise the intake-valve deposit in automobiles. Karunanithi et al. (2006) developed a novel methodology in designing and selecting solvents and anti-solvents for solution crystallisation. Chemmangattuvalappil et al. (2010) developed an algorithm that utilises GCM coupled with TI on common property platform for molecular design. Papadopoulos et al. (2010) presented an approach which utilises CAMD and process optimisation techniques for the generation of optimum organic Rankine cycle working fluid in terms of economic, operating, safety and environmental indicators. Karunanithi and Mehrkesh (2013) developed a computer aided ionic liquid (IL) design framework to design the optimum structure for IL via genetic algorithm and problem decomposition approach. Papadopoulos et al. (2014) presented an approach for the screening and selection of post combustion carbon dioxide capture solvents. In the presented approach, the optimal capture solvents are selected based on the performance criteria of several thermodynamics, reactivity and sustainability properties. Pavurala and Achenie (2014) introduced a CAMD approach for generating molecular structures of polymer candidates which have the potential to be effective polymer carriers in drug delivery. In a newer development, Zhang et al. (2015) presented a generic mathematical programming formulation for CAMD problems which are formulated as mixed integer linear/non-linear program (MILP/MINLP). Recently, a novel CAMD methodology to design an optimal solvent for the extraction of acetic acid from waste process stream has been developed by Gebreslassie and Diwekar (2015) by coupling CAMD techniques with ant colony optimisation (EACO) algorithm. The applications of the presented formulation are shown by solving the polymer, solvent and surfactant design problems.
1.2. Multi-objective optimisationFor the design of alternative solvent for oil extraction, property optimality, safety and health impacts have to be taken into account. It is to be noted that most of the current CAMD techniques focus on optimising a single objective or property of the product. As more than one design objective is considered to design the alternative solvent, this has to be solved as multi-objective chemical product design problem. The classic approach for tackling this type of problem would be using weighted sum method. This method converts multiple individual objectives into an aggregated scalar objective function by assigning a weighting factor to each of the individual objective function (Fishburn, 1967). However, in the design of alternate solvents, it is not possible to define the fixed weight ages because the target attributes belongs to different classes. Therefore, the importance of each design objective in designing an optimal chemical product is normally fuzzy or uncertain. Fuzzy optimisation approach can then be utilised to solve multi-objective problem under fuzzy environment.Fuzzy set theory is first introduced by Zadeh (1965) to solve optimal decision-making problems. Zimmermann (1978) then extended the application of fuzzy set theory into mathematical programming for problems which involve multiple objectives. In fuzzy optimisation approaches, trade-off between different design objectives can be introduced by writing the objectives as fuzzy membership functions. Hence, an optimal compromised solution can be obtained by attaining near optimality for all the objectives. Fuzzy optimisation approaches has been extended and applied for a number of different applications. Among the different fuzzy optimisation approaches, max–min aggregation approach (Zimmermann, 1978) and two-phase approach (Guu and Wu, 1999) are the most widely utilised fuzzy optimisation techniques. Tan et al. (2009) utilised max–min aggregation approach in developing a fuzzy optimisation approach to determine optimal bioenergy system configuration. Aviso et al. (2011) designed an eco-industrial resource conservation networks while considering individual fuzzy goals of participating plants in the presence of incomplete information by using two-phase fuzzy optimisation approach. Kasivisvanathan et al. (2012) adapted fuzzy optimisation approach to retrofit a palm oil mill into a sustainable biorefinery which fulfils the conflicting objectives of economic performance and environmental impact. Lu et al. (2012) proposed a two-phase fuzzy programming approach in solving municipal solid waste management problem. Ng et al. (2014) utilised max–min aggregation approach and two-phase approach in developing a multi-objective optimisation-based approach for optimal chemical product design. Recently, Andiappan et al. (2015) applied max–min aggregation approach in the synthesis of sustainable integrated biorefinery with consideration of economic performance, incremental environmental burden and energy assessment. In this work, both max–min aggregation and two-phase approaches are adapted in the design of solvent for palm pressed fibre oil extraction. Different fuzzy optimisation approaches are used to simultaneously address and optimise the design objectives in identifying the optimal alternative solvent for oil extraction. Since the design of solvents for oil extraction involves the consideration of attributes of different classes, it is important to compare the solutions obtained based on different priorities.
