Potentially harmful elements (PHE) fall within the USFDA (2016) definition of any chemical or chemical compound that causes or has the potential to cause direct or indirect harm. The geochemistry of PHE controls their partitioning in the environment, their mobility, transport and ultimately their fate. In the case of PHE in soils, a variety of sequential chemical extraction procedures have been used to determine PHE partitioning in bulk soil samples in order to assess potential mobility. Such methods selectively remove specific constituents from unconsolidated samples (such as soils) for the purpose of determining the fractions to which the PHE of interest are bound (Young et al., 2005). Sequential extraction methods can be extremely complicated (see, e.g., Bacon and Davidson, 2008), and may fail to address questions pertinent to human health risk assessment. Not all forms of ingested PHE are solubilized in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract with obvious human health consequences. Due to the potential for adverse health outcomes associated with the ingestion (inadvertent or otherwise) of contaminated soil, considerable attention has focused on measuring the bioavailability, or more specifically the in vitro bioaccessibility, of PHE (e.g. Cai et al., 2016, Li et al., 2014, Lorenzi et al., 2012, Okorie et al., 2011, Smith et al., 2011). Oral bioaccessibility protocols seek to model the extraction of PHE during the passage of material through the human GI system and numerous studies have reported that the mineralogical form/solid phase partitioning of the contaminant has a large influence on its bioaccessibility (Cox et al., 2013, Palumbo-Roe et al., 2013, Pelfrêne et al., 2012; Reis et al., 2014, Walraven et al., 2015, Wragg and Cave, 2012). Furthermore, a number of studies have indicated a complex range of percentage bioaccessibility data across contaminated sites (e.g. Farmer et al., 2011, Okorie et al., 2011, Roussel et al., 2010). This poses questions for regulators and risk managers when assessing contaminated land in terms of the reliability of bioaccessibility data and how to best interpret, and apply, such data. Interpretation of in vitro bioaccessibility data from the analysis of bulk soil samples can be enhanced by an examination of how element constituents are bound at the individual particle (IP) level. Electron microscopy based methods that can capture the variety of element associations in particles in soils by analyzing thousands of particles will provide insights into the solid phase speciation that controls bulk in vitro bioaccessibility.
To test this hypothesis, here we report the results of an investigation into contaminated soils from the city of Mitrovica, which is located in the Republic of Kosovo. Since historic times this area has been associated with mining, smelting and processing metal ores. Mitrovica is a small city (approximately 70,000 inhabitants) located in the District of Mitrovica, in northern Kosovo. Prior to the Kosovan War of 1998–1999, when various industrial enterprises stopped, several diverse metal-production operations were active. Metal ores were smelted at Zvecan, north of Mitrovica (Fig. 1), with waste stored in the Zharkov Potok tailings pond and smelter slag disposed of at Gornje Polje waste dumps (also on the northern boundary of Mitrovica). In addition, industrial residues from a former chemical plant (located in south east Mitrovica) where Zn electrolysis, and Pb battery manufacture took place, are present over approximately 30 ha of land on the banks of the Sitnica River that runs through Mitrovica (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (547KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Study area showing the sampling locations, and locations of past metallurgical industries and the deposits of metallurgical waste (after Boisa et al., 2013).
Population exposure to PHE contaminated environmental media is of potential concern in this region. Previous work has demonstrated the potential public health problems associated with the intake of soil-bound PHE present at various locations in this area (Boisa et al., 2013). Physiologically-based in vitro analyses (Boisa et al., 2013, Boisa et al., 2014) showed that metal bioaccessibility in exposure media from the area was highly variable, and potentially could reach dangerously high levels of availability. This was clearly an issue during the Kosovan War, when the displacement of predominantly Roma and Ashkali populations from the Roma Mahalla neighborhood in south Mitrovica led to resettlement in locations that had not only high soil PHE levels, but also high PHE bioaccessibility levels. Relocation to the Osterode internally displaced peoples (IDP) camp (a former French barracks) and the Cesmin Lug IDP camp, both of which are within 300 m of the Gorne Polje tailings dump, and immediately downwind of the Zvecan smelter (Fig. 1), provided an ideal opportunity for a public health calamity. Conceived originally as a temporary relocation, the camps were home for internally displaced families for almost 10 years. Elevated soil Pb levels here are of obvious concern given the adverse systemic health effects of Pb, and according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention no safe blood lead level (the biomarker for exposure) in children has been identified. Evidence for behavioral and cognition deficits resulting from low level Pb exposure is mounting (Budtz-Jørgensen et al., 2013, Chandramouli et al., 2009, Grandjean, 2010, Jakubowski, 2011, Lanphear et al., 2005). A number of studies have also identified an association between early lead exposure and increased incidence of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Aguiar et al., 2010, Nigg and Nikolas, 2008, Nigg et al., 2010), and other behavioral problems (Chen et al., 2007, Roy et al., 2009).
As part of this investigation into contaminated soils from Mitrovica, samples from the smelter waste site (from Gornje Polje), the tailing site (from Zharkov Potok), and topsoil samples (1–10 cm depth) from Bosniak Mahalla, Roma Mahalla and the IDP camp at Cesmin Lug were analyzed (Fig. 1). Investigation of the PHE associations (with a particular focus on Pb) at the IP level, proceeded in two stages using electron microscopy based methods. In the first, the objective was to determine whether the Pb-bearing particles differed significantly between sampling locations. The second objective was to assess how bioaccessible the particle bound Pb was at each location. To accomplish the first objective, computer controlled scanning electron microscopy (CCSEM), that combines scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and automated image analysis software was used to collect IP composition data on a statistically significant numbers of particles from each sample. This analytical technique has been widely used to characterize particulate matter in a range of environmental media. For example, this approach has been used to evaluate long range transport of desert dusts (Coz et al., 2009, Reid et al., 2003), particle movement in urbanized desert areas (Wagner and Casuccio, 2014), the nature of urban aerosols (Ault et al., 2012, Kumar et al., 2012, Lagudu et al., 2011, Moffet et al., 2008), the content of indoor aerosols (Conner et al., 2001), and the metal-bearing particle content of soils (Johnson and Hunt, 1991, Kennedy et al., 2002). As CCSEM-EDS facilitates source identification it has the potential to support targeted interventions, or targeted remediation. The second objective was attained through a process of chemical extraction at the IP level. Lead particle solubility was investigated by Differential IP Analysis (DIPA). DIPA initially involved, in the first instance, the collection of IP information (elemental and morphological) in the SEM from particles as originally sampled. Then, upon removal from the SEM the particles of interest were immersed in situ on the SEM mount in a simulated gastric fluid for a specified time. After returning the sample to the SEM particles previously analyzed were relocated and analyzed a second time to determine what differential changes may have occurred. DIPA has been used successfully in previous studies to gather information on the extent to which the different individual particles, or particle components, are more, or less, soluble than others (see e.g., Donner et al., 2012, Hunt and Johnson, 1996, Hunt and Johnson, 2010).
Lead-isotope ratio data for each sample was also collected to provide potentially supportive evidence for Pb-source separation. It has been shown that sources of Pb-contamination can, under certain circumstances, be identified based on differences in Pb-isotope ratios (e.g., Duzgoren-Aydin and Weiss, 2008, Gulson, 2008, Rabinowitz, 1995). The stable Pb-isotope content of Pb-ores differ from each other (largely as a function of the age of the ore deposit), so if different sources of Pb are isotopically different (originating from different ores), and the contributing sources are limited in number, Pb-isotope source differentiation is possible.
