Cerebral palsy (CP) describes a group of permanent disorders of movement and posture causing activity limitations, which are attributed to non-progressive disturbances that occurred in the developing fetal or infant brain (Rosenbaum, Paneth, Leviton, Goldstein, & Bax 2007). There are different motor types and distributions of CP such as unilateral and bilateral, spastic, dyskinetic and ataxic (Rosenbaum et al., 2007). The motor disorders of CP are often accompanied by disturbances of sensation, perception, cognition, communication, behavior, epilepsy, and secondary musculoskeletal problems (Rosenbaum et al., 2007, Richards and Malouin, 2013).
Such problems may cause difficulties in the coordination of muscles, leading to loss of function and independence in most daily activities. For this reason many individuals with CP require a variety of rehabilitation programs to improve their functional abilities (Compagnone et al., 2014, Kim et al., 2014; Monteiro et al., 2014). Professionals working with individuals with CP require an understanding of motor control and learning to optimize rehabilitation programs. There is a paucity of studies on motor learning in individuals with CP. Better understanding of the specifics of motor learning of individuals with CP can help in attending to their learning needs and in maximizing learning efficiency (Hung & Gordon, 2013).
Considering motor learning in CP, Hung and Gordon (2013) investigated the learning of 21 children with unilateral CP (4–10 years) and compared them with 21 age-matched typically developing (TD) children using a simple bimanual task. They verified that both groups demonstrated the ability to learn the bimanual task, however their rate of improvement and learning pattern differed. The children with unilateral CP were slower and they improved 10% less than TD children.
Similarly, Burtner, Leinwand, Sullivan, Goh and Kantak (2014) analyzed motor learning in 19 children with hemiparesis and 20 TD children in a discrete and coordinated upper limb movement using a lightweight lever. In this study, the effect of different relative feedback frequencies during skill acquisition was investigated. Although the results demonstrated greater accuracy in TD children compared to children with CP, children with CP used feedback in a similar manner as TD children when learning a new skill. Monteiro et al. (2014) used motor learning knowledge to examine whether performance improvements in the virtual environment generalize to the natural environment. To examine this, they included 64 individuals, of which 32 were individuals with CP and 32 were TD individuals. The results showed that individuals with CP improved their performance similarly to their TD peers. There was however no transfer of learning between the virtual and natural environment in both groups. In another study, Robert, Guberek, Sveistrup and Levin (2013) evaluated 16 children with spastic hemiparesis during a motor learning reach-to-grasp task and the motor improvements in children with CP could be retained 3 months after the intervention and transferred to a similar task.
One factor that is very important for the motor learning process is the amount of practice, since it is described as a variable essential to promote behavior changes in order to improve practice (Hornby et al., 2011). In this context, Vieluf, Godde, Reuter, Temprado, and Voelcker-Rehage (2015) evaluated 34 adults in a hand task with visual feedback to assess force, coordination, and time of movement. The authors stated that 30 trials of a specific hand task were enough to enhance coordination, force and decrease the movement time. Monteiro et al. (2014) and Duff and Gordon (2003), using motor learning protocols, verified that individuals with CP were able to retain and transfer internal representations of anticipatory control with less number of errors after 20–30 attempts of a manual task. Taken together, the literature on motor learning in individuals with CP shows that individuals with CP are able to learn new motor skills and retain these skills over time, even with a limited number of attempts of a specific task.
Beyond the studies on motor learning in CP, the ability to learn and retain sequences of tasks is crucial in everyday life and this matter has not been studied to a great extent. Hence, an issue in motor learning that needs to be studied is the ability to learn and retain sequences with different possibilities of practice (with consistency or variability) in persons with CP. Consistency is necessary to achieve motor skill outcomes reliably whereas variability is fundamental for coping with environmental instability (Pinheiro, Marques, Tani & Corrêa, 2015).
Pinheiro et al. (2015) investigated the importance of consistency and variability for the acquisition and performance of motor skills that generate the need to adapt the actions of body segments to external events of the environment in individuals with typical development. They concluded that a minimum amount of variability in perceptive and motor task demands, varying separately during practice, was enough to provide the needed flexibility for adaptation in the motor skill. Memory processes and mainly implicit or incidental learning could be a key functional prerequisite for predicting the effectiveness of rehabilitation programs (Gagliardi, Tavano, Turconi, Pozzoli & Borgatti, 2011).
In this context, the action of tasks influences the individual’s learning process and the individual’s opportunity to develop strategies for action, as action requires interpretation and creativity but is not always explicit or even conscious (Larsson, Miller, Liljedahl & Gard, 2012). Thus, one option for rehabilitation is to organize motor learning using consistency (e.g., constant and blocked task) or variability (e.g., random task). According to Porter and Magill (2010), using random tasks reduces performance during training but enhances retention and transfer compared to blocked schedules. This phenomenon is known as the contextual interference (CI) effect.
Duff and Gordon (2003) analyzed the CI effect in individuals with CP to examine whether they have anticipatory control of fingertip forces during the lift of familiar objects and what type of practice (blocked or random) best enhances the retention of anticipatory control during the lift of novel objects. They evaluated 18 children with hemiplegia (7–14 years) and 18 age-matched TD children. Blocked practice resulted in greater differentiation of the force rates between objects during acquisition than did random practice. Both practice schedules resulted in similar retention. In addition, it was described that these children can form and retain internal representations of novel objects for anticipatory control, irrespective of the type of practice schedule employed.
The present study aimed to add to the knowledge base regarding motor learning considering the knowledge from CI, using spatial memory ability during a computer task. McCarthy, Evans and Hodges (1996) and Kessels, Postma, Kappelle and Haan (2000) explain that spatial memory is the ability to code, store, and retrieve information about the spatial arrangement to learn a route or path between two points. Since there is evidence for global anatomic involvement of brain structures affecting white matter as well as grey matter in CP it is possible that the neuroanatomical pathways involved in sequence-learning memory systems are also impaired (Cleeremans, Destrebecqz & Boyer, 1998; Gagliardi et al., 2011).
To examine the CI effect on a motor learning task that involved spatial memory, we had CP and TD individuals practicing a maze task that differed in practice schedule. The maze consisted of a task of notion and spatial memory in which the individual used the arrow keys on the computer (up, down, left and right) to direct a trajectory from a start and end point, as used by Malheiros et al. (2016) and Possebom et al. (2016) in which the dependent variable was considered the total time to finish the maze path (i.e. movement time).
In the group with the consistency task (constant practice), participants performed the acquisition phase repeating the same maze several times. When using the variability task (random practice – more CI), the participants performed the acquisition phase with different mazes. We were particularly interested in discovering which type of practice would show better movement time, not only in the acquisition phase, but also considering retention and transfer testing. Based upon the deliberations above, we hypothesized that the benefits from learning in constant practice would result in better performance in acquisition and retention, but that random practice would present increased benefit in transfer for both groups.
