Breast cancer is a disease that is caused by malignant cells in the breast tissues [1]. According to American National Cancer Institute, the incidence rate of female breast cancer was 124.8 per 100,000 women per year from 2008 to 2012. In 2015, it is estimated that there were 231,840 new breast cancer cases and about 40,290 people died from this disease. In the U.S., female breast cancer is responsible for 14% of all new cancer cases [2], indicating that female breast cancer is the most common cancer. The mortality rate from breast cancer is also the highest among women [3]. Breast cancer pathogenesis remains unknown, and there is no effective way to prevent this disease [4]. However, early detection and diagnosis of breast cancer can help to significantly reduce the mortality rate. Thus, much research has been performed on the early detection of malignant masses. Modern imaging techniques including ultrasound, mammography, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been widely used for the early detection and diagnosis of breast cancer [5]. Among these techniques, MRI is well-known for its superiority in prognosis, diagnostic accuracy, staging, and preoperative planning [6], [7]. It was also shown that MRI has better sensitivity than mammography and MRI diagnostic results are only minimally influenced by breast density [8]. Therefore, MRI is considered to be an important tool in breast cancer clinical diagnosis [5].
The goal of Computer-Aided Detection and Diagnosis (CAD) is to achieve a high diagnostic sensitivity for breast cancer and to maintain a low the false positive classification (FPC) rate [5]. In this process, Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CADx) is regarded as a key technique to reduce the FPC rate [9].
An important task of CADx is to make an accurate mass classification and decide whether a region of interest (ROI) is malignant. Enough high-quality features that characterize malignant masses are needed for training the classification model and for class prediction [10]. Thus, many features, such as morphological features, texture features, and frequencial features, have been extracted and used widely in many studies [11], [12], [13], [14]. However, some extracted features may be redundant and irrelevant to the classification task. In addition, too many input features may increase the computational complexity and cause the curse of dimensionality, thereby significantly diminishing the diagnostic accuracy. Thus, feature selection plays a crucial role in improving CADx system performance. Genomic algorithm (GA) [15] and support vector machine-based recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE) [9] have been adopted in the feature selection process for CADx systems.
In addition to acquiring representative features of breast masses, it is also important to build and train a robust classifier. According to our knowledge, most popular classifiers are designed under the assumption that the data set used for training is balanced, which means that the number of samples in the majority class is similar to that in the minority. However, this prerequisite is difficult to achieve in CADx. There are usually much fewer images with malignant masses than those without masses or with only benign masses [16]. This may reduce the diagnostic sensitivity, and malignant masses are likely to be wrongly classified as being normal. Consequently, it is necessary to alleviate the influence caused by data imbalance. Ensemble learning algorithms such as Ensemble of Under-sampled SVM (EUS-SVM) [17] and RUSBoost [18] have been shown to perform well in breast cancer CAD [16] and other medical classification systems [19].
In this paper, we propose a MRI CADx system focusing on diagnosis of malignant breast masses, based on feature selection and ensemble learning. First, morphological, texture, and Gabor features were extracted to characterize breast cancer masses. We then used the Relief algorithm [20] to find the optimal feature subset for the classifier training. These features were then fed to a novel ensemble learning framework based on the combination of EUS and the subspace technique. The experimental results indicate that our proposal outperforms the other state-of-the-art methods in diagnostic sensitivity, but the FPC rate increases slightly.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
1.The dimensionality of the features we use is larger than most state-of-the-art methods. Various features including morphological, Gabor, and several types of texture features were extracted to comprehensively characterize breast masses.2.We selected the optimal feature subset from the original feature set using Relief, based on their type, which helps reduce the redundant and irrelevant features and takes the physical meaning of features into consideration.3.We propose a novel ensemble learning framework based on the combination of EUS, subspace, and Adaboost, which helps to alleviate the data imbalance problem and improves the overall classification accuracy of the CADx system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes our methodology in detail; Section 3 introduces our data set, the experimental setup, and our performance evaluation metrics; Section 4 presents the experimental results and demonstrates the effectiveness of each individual component of our proposal; Section 5 discusses the reason for our system's superiority; and Section 6 includes concluding remarks (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (105KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. This is a diagram of CAD scheme. The lower part below the dashed line shows the components of CADe, and the upper part above the dashed line shows the components of CADx.
