Memory deficit is one of the primary effects of intellectual disability, and highly impacts daily life (Henry & MacLean, 2002). Among the different causes of intellectual disability, fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is considered the most relevant by incidence in the United States and Western Europe (Abel & Sokol, 1987). Such a syndrome is the combination of morphological, neurological, and intellectual impairments, and its etiology is related to alcohol consumption during pregnancy (Thackray & Tifft, 2001). Exposure of the fetus to alcohol during the first weeks of gestation affects brain cell replication and migration, resulting in brain malformation (Clarren & Smith, 1978). The clinical picture of patients with FAS includes problems in executive functions, working memory, cognitive skills, and verbal fluency, resulting into a general learning deficit accompanied by attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Barnett et al., 2001, Green et al., 2009).
Deficits in executive functions and working memory are mainly associated with malformations of the frontal lobe of the brain (Riley, McGee, & Sowell, 2004). These impairments impinge on academic performance and often result in scarce autonomy in daily life (Alloway, 2006, Burgess and Streissguth, 1992). Prenatal alcohol exposure has been shown to also cause defects in other brain areas, such as the hippocampus (Barnes & Walker, 1981), which is considered to host a type of long-term memory important for orientation and spatial navigation (Breathnach, 1980, Olton et al., 1979). Related intellectual impairments have been identified in pre-clinical studies on animal models (Gianoulakis, 1990) via the Morris maze task (Morris, 1981).
A range of possibilities to train people in cognitive recovery has been explored over the years (Kodituwakku & Kodituwakku, 2011). Training strategies based on rehearsal (Jaeggi et al., 2008, Loomes et al., 2008) have shown a positive effect not only on working memory (Alloway, 2007, Dennett et al., 2012), but also on long-term memory capabilities (Jaeggi et al., 2008). In addition, computer-based gaming systems have been proposed as viable training strategies for visual working memory insufficiency (Alloway et al., 2013, Bartle et al., 2010, Klingberg et al., 2002, Smith et al., 2013), which is a specific, yet common, impairment in FAS patients.
In this context, virtual versions of the Morris maze task have been designed for training and testing human spatial memory (Rose, Brooks, & Rizzo, 2005). The virtual reality environment could be an exact representation of a Morris maze tank (Jacobs et al., 1997, Reid et al., 1995, Skelton et al., 2006), or a representation of a more familiar and stimulating environment for human subjects (Maguire et al., 1998, Rose et al., 1999). For example, in Rose et al. (1999), a virtual environment reproducing a bungalow with different rooms to be explored was used to test spatial memory in patients with brain injury. Results in Rose et al. (1999) confirm that patients present reduced spatial memory capabilities and highlight the positive effect of active navigation in the test. Specifically, patients were found to be more successful in the location of spatial layouts encountered during the trip through the rooms when taking an active role in exploring the environment through a computer interface.
Here, we demonstrate a novel system for intellectual rehabilitation, which leverages untapped motivational aspects associated with computer-based citizen science. Citizen science refers to participation of volunteers in research projects led by professional scientists (Dickinson et al., 2010, Silvertown, 2009). This form of crowd science has been recently gaining traction as a way to collect and analyze large datasets where analysis by technical experts or dedicated computer programs is practically and economically unfeasible (Haklay, 2013). A wide range of motivational drivers influences the contribution of volunteers to citizen science projects, including individual interest in the subject of the project and excitement that they experience in contributing to research (Cappa et al., 2016, Nov et al., 2014, Raddick et al., 2010, Rotman et al., 2012). We recently demonstrated (Cappa et al., 2013, Laut et al., 2015, Palermo et al., 2017) that the field of rehabilitation can benefit from the motivational incentives afforded by citizen science, whereby citizen science activities can be effectively integrated in a computer-mediated physical rehabilitation. Specifically, subjects undergoing rehabilitation treatments in which their physical activity contributes to a citizen science project or, simply, some form of science learning show improved adherence to rehabilitation regimens and a better performance in motor tasks (Laut et al., 2015).
The outcomes of this study are envisaged for future use on FAS patients and is designed around a successful environmental citizen science project (Brooklyn Atlantis: brooklynatlantis.com). The project is aimed at monitoring the pollution level of a Superfund site, the Gowanus canal in Brooklyn, NY, by uploading pictures and water quality data collected by an aquatic robot periodically deployed in the body of water. These data are then assigned to volunteers for classification from their homes through the internet. We expect that the possibility of virtually navigating the canal and locating specific objects could constitute a valid training activity for both visuo-spatial working memory and long-term memory. In addition, we hypothesize that the interest in this highly technological, yet tangible, project together with gamification instances (Burgers et al., 2015, Laut et al., 2017) could compensate for the lack in attention associated with the syndrome and enhance the effectiveness of the rehabilitation activity.
The reduced capability of FAS patients to concentrate on an intellectual task could lead to the failure of training programs (Rizzo et al., 2000). A relatively new approach to cope with the lack of attention during intellectual training is the introduction of bio-feedback. Such a methodology integrates different sensors that can measure the subject's level of engagement, such as Galvanic skin responses (Moore and Dua, 2004, Swangnetr and Kaber, 2013) or electroencephalography (EEG) signals (Breslow et al., 2014, Butnik, 2005, Zhang et al., 2015), to create an acoustic or visual feedback (Kropotov et al., 2001), or adjust game difficulty (Mandryk et al., 2013). The result is a patient-specific rehabilitation system that adapts itself based on real-time measurement of the subject's engagement.
Based on these promising results, we integrate our new system with an off-the-shelf device for bio-feedback, which enables real-time data processing of the user EEG signals, the Emotiv EPOC headset (Emotiv, 2015). Among other functionalities, such as facial expression recognition and trainable thought recognition (Al-Hudhud, 2014), the device is able to run embedded algorithms for user emotion estimation, so-called “affective” state (VandenBos, 2007). From EEG signals acquired on the scalp, the headset extracts a combination of features to provide a real-time assessment of a set of affective variables named as: “Long term Excitement”, “Short term Excitement”, “Meditation”, “Frustration”, and “Engagement” (Mihajlovic, Grundlehner, Vullers, & Penders, 2015), otherwise obtainable via more complex EEG-based laboratory setups (Kim, Kim, Oh, & Kim, 2013). While the quality of the raw voltage data acquired by the EPOC has been deemed acceptable for non-clinical applications (Duvinage et al., 2013), no validation of the affective variables estimation has been performed thus far (Shelton et al., 2013, Sourina and Liu, 2014, Wang et al., 2010).
The objective of this study is threefold. We first verify the feasibility of memory training through a citizen science activity on a group of healthy adult subjects. In particular, this effort seeks to assess if a spatial memory task, in the form of a virtual Morris maze in a citizen science context, is perceived by the participants as engaging and interesting. Second, this study explores whether spatial memory performance in participants can be enhanced through active navigation of the environment using the EPOC headset. Finally, this effort evaluates the possibility of integrating the estimation of the subjects' affective state through the EPOC headset toward future applications in bio-feedback.
