Essentially, the emerging Cyber–Physical Systems (CPS) are feedback control systems based on pervasive sensing [1]. Thus, CPS embody a vision of physical devices (sensors, actuators and sensor-enable mobile devices) performing feedback control loops, where devices provide and receive information from a control system which executes a certain application. In general, it assumes physical devices are seamless integrated into daily living objects, making up the called embedded systems or embedded devices.
The presence of feedback loops supported by a pervasive sensing infrastructure is the common characteristic to all proposals on CPS. From this common core, and depending on the considered technological domain, CPS may be focused on very different issues such as improving the integration level in embedded devices, building real-time applications or providing customized services in the context of the Internet of Things (IoT). Then, around each vision, authors have identified different lines in CPS research, have proposed specific architectures and have described particular solutions addressing the concrete problems of CPS in their area.
Furthermore, very recently (final months of 2013), the main standards organizations (such as the International Organization for Standardization – ISO – and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute -ETSI-) have created public working groups in order to become CPS into a standard technology. The pioneer in these efforts was the National Institute of Standards and Technology -NIST-, which proposed in its first conclusions (published in September 2015) [2] a horizontal architecture for CPS including all previous proposals. As a result, very different works can be found under the name of Cyber–Physical systems.
Moreover, CPS are currently maturing from its origin as research paradigm to a variety of commercial products [3], [4]. CPS have many potential applications from smart infrastructure (grid, water, gas, etc.) and smart health care to smart manufacturing and smart transportation, where pervasive sensing is indispensable [5]. These applications have an important potential to benefic companies, societies and, in general, human lives.
Due to the relevance of CPS, different review papers about this topic have appeared in the literature during the last ten years. However, because of the extended use (and certain abuse) of the paradigm “Cyber–Physical Systems” nowadays, it is necessary a new effort to collect and organize the proposed contributions, considering the special circumstances that surrounds the term (lack of agreement about its definition, confusion with similar concepts and previous terms, the interest of the technological researchers on adjusting their ideas to this new paradigm, etc.). In fact, some of previous review works [6], [7] propose or defend a particular definition of CPS which is employed as a framework to select the contributions to be referred. As a consequence, they offer a partial vision of this new paradigm. On the other hand, different review works about special topics related to CPS have been reported: self-adaptation [8], security [9], modeling [7], etc. These papers use to be exhaustive and very useful, but they do not offer a global context (it would be interesting, for example, to know if all reviewed contributions understood CPS in the same way or if all authors envision the same type of systems). A third group of surveys [10], [11] is focused on future challenges and current trends (or similar issues). The objective of these papers, nevertheless, is not to offer a review about the state-of-the-art but to detect tendencies and problems to be solved. Finally, a great number of survey works [5], [12], [13], [14], [15] indicates the existence of different definitions and visions for CPS, and sometimes even the different defended architectures are analyzed, but, due to the enormous number of different proposals and the difficulties to classify them, reviewed works are usually organized depending on the application scenario (vehicular systems, medical environments, etc.), mixing works based on different concepts of CPS (which, as we are seeing, even include different elements and components). Therefore, in this paper a new comprehensive review of Cyber–Physical Systems is provided, considering all proposed definitions and visions. Reviewed works include not only which are directly referred as belonging to CPS, but also proposals about topics whose relation with CPS is not clear (Machine-to-Machine, Wireless Sensor Networks…) and other works which fit the different requirements to be considered as CPS. A first explanation of the global context is provided, identifying the elements which may compose CPS and proposing a classification for contributions related to CPS based on the ideas of the Eindhoven Institute for Research on ICT (so proposals inspired by a common definition of CPS are presented together). Finally, as a novelty, not only research works are reviewed but also standardization initiates, which (possibly) will determine the future of CPS.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the main components of CPS, their features and their relation with the different technological domains. Most important aspects on CPS, which are going to be reviewed from different approaches, are also presented here. Section 3 reviews CPS as defined in control theory, and analyzes the state-of-the-art on the main research challenges. Section 4 presents CPS as understood in computer sciences. Section 5 is focused on communication engineering and its proposals, works, and solutions on CPS. Finally, Section 6 presents the vision of the standards organizations on CPS, as well as the published preliminary conclusions. Finally, Section 7 presents the main future challenges in CPS research and Section 8 concludes the paper.
