Technological development is increasingly incorporated in our everyday lives. An exponent from this current reality consists of robots, which can be used for multiple purposes, such as entertainment, home and industry support (Basoeki, Libera, Menegatti, & Moro, 2013). Robotics has also attracted the interest of many teachers, practitioners and researchers as an alternative to support learning in different subjects. As robots are flexible, they have enabled educators to propose from simple models considered for schools1 to sophisticated ones for tertiary education2 (Frangou et al., 2008, Johnson, 2003, Ruzzenente et al., 2012). In this scenario, they have been considered as a complementary tool to improve students’ motivation and abstract concepts understanding, for example (Behrens et al., 2010, Bertacchini et al., 2010, McGill, 2012, Sakata Junior & Olguin, 2011).
Several robots applications in education are mainly concerned with supporting the teaching of subjects directly related to the Robotics field, such as robot programming and construction (Mitnik, Nussbaum & Soto, 2008). However, exploring a wider range of possible applications of flexible robots has the potential to engage young people with a wider range of interests, as illustrated with experiences in subjects related to music and art (Resnick, 1991, Rusk et al., 2008).
There is already some empirical evidence suggesting the effectiveness of Educational Robotics (ER) as a complementary tool for learning, as highlighted by a previous Systematic Literature Review (SLR) (Benitti, 2012). The SLR process is a good choice for this purpose, as it provides a rigorous and replicable method to review the evidence relevant to a particular research question (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). Moreover, empirical evidence is important to strengthen the link between practice and theories that defend the potential of activities with technological artifacts to improve classroom teaching (Papert, 1993).
However, as the previous SLR focuses on experiences in schools, one can find it difficult to obtain an up-to-date panorama of ER evidences in tertiary institutions, in which robots could also be used as complementary tools for research or outreach activities (Mead, Thomas, & Weinberg, 2012). Although a few (non systematic) literature reviews recently conducted minimize this problem, they either consider different educational levels (Alimisis, 2013, Gaudiello and Zibetti, 2013, Mubin et al., 2013, Patino et al., 2014) or concentrate on specific topics regarding universities (Ruzzenente et al., 2012).
To the best of our knowledge, previous ER reviews regarding tertiary institutions have not focused on practical experiences grounded in learning theories, such as constructivism (Strommen & Lincoln, 1992) and project-based learning (Blumenfeld et al., 1991). Taking this issue into account, it could be useful to motivate more practitioners to find new ER applications supported by a theoretical basis.
The main contribution of this paper is to systematically review relevant educational robotics experiences with theoretical support on tertiary education. Designing and conducting this systematic literature review allows us to:
(a)find potential benefits from using robotics as an educational tool in tertiary institutions;(b)summarize the empirical evidence on educational robotics application, grounded in learning theories, on tertiary education;(c)suggest future research directions regarding the educational use of robots based on the reviewed literature.
