For a business organization, there are a plethora of reasons why it should file for patents for its products and services. In this highly competitive market, organizations are fighting to establish their hegemony in the market, make their product stand out and extract maximal profit from it. In order to achieve this, patenting their products seems the most appropriate choice.
Some of the benefits that patents provide an organization are exclusive rights over products, higher return on investments, opportunity to licence or sell the invention, etc. Among these, the two most compelling reasons are strong market position and the first-mover advantage for the organization [1]. For instance, if two organizations are planning to launch a similar product in the market, the organization successful in launching it first will draw the highest proportion of the user base while the companies following it would be left with the remaining market share.
Through these exclusive rights, companies are able to prevent others from commercially using their patented invention, thereby reducing the competition. The patent portfolio is a collection of all the applications filed for patents by an organization. This includes both the applications that have been granted as well as those that have been rejected for patents. Patent portfolios play an extremely important role in determining the technological strength of an organization. Business partners, investors, and shareholders may perceive patent portfolios as a demonstration of the specialization and high level of expertise within a company [1].
Due to such immense importance of patents, it is necessary to invest in intelligent decision making. Patents are the most feasible approach for analysing the breadth and depth of research and development within a company as the patent data provides insight to its competences [2]. The breadth corresponds to the diversity of patents in an organization while the depth corresponds to the number of patents in a particular domain. These two metrics are essential for patent portfolio analysis.
Aristodemou et al. [3] define Intellectual Property Analysis as the data science of analysing large amount of intellectual property information, to discover relationships, trends and patterns in the data for decision making. In recent times, the methodologies adopted for this analysis are shifting from the traditional approaches (as described in [4], [5]) to approaches employing statistical learning algorithms. The primary reason for this is the ability of these algorithms to leverage huge amounts of data and mine insights from them. The ability to manipulate this data quickly and efficiently and further identifying patterns to generate the most optimal solution is something that has only become possible due to the use of these algorithms. Traditional methods have relied on manual searching and very lengthy decision-making processes. This delay in decision-making can often lead to a company losing out on opportunities to capture a large market share by not having the first mover advantage. With the latest developments in the database management systems, information storage, searching and retrieval has become more efficient and, therefore, it is of utmost importance that our data processing and analysis tools also develop at the same pace to fully leverage this information. There are several gaps in the analysis stage of patent data and our paper aims to fulfil one such gap. When applying for patents, time is of the essence because of the advantages discussed above which the first mover can reap. Knowing exactly how much time your application will take to get approved is a very valuable tool in this domain. While there have been machine learning approaches to determining whether a patent application has been approved or not, we go a step further to quantify the time required for an application to get approved. We explore the variables which affect the duration of application approval through the means of correlation analysis. With the knowledge of when an application will get approved and what factors affect its approval, companies can make smarter decisions regarding their patent rights. This tool when added to the decision making processes of the companies will lead to strategies that put a firm at the top of the market. This is due to the fact that firms will be able to amend their applications in a way which will lead to faster approval and faster delivery to the desired market. This will also be an insightful study which can be applied in the process of automating patent application system for faster patent approvals as soon as we are able to replicate the current patent approval system with very high accuracy. This work will become the foundation of the studies in that direction. Additionally, this paper also acts as a comparative study between different machine learning models to conclude which machine learning model works best on Indian Patent data. After studying the result in Table 4, Table 5, the readers can understand that there are some models which do not perform well with this data while some models perform extremely well with the data in hand. Hence, this paper lays the groundwork for smarter patent applications from both academic and industrial perspectives.
