Since the beginning of tele-technology (e.g. telecommunication) and tele-aided systems (e.g. telemedicine), the uses of tele-information have been limited to several well-understood physical electrical and electromagnetic devices, such as mobile phone, bluetooth instruments, infrared and network devices, and communications satellites. However, in the past decade the potential of novel technologies has become increasingly obvious, and all kinds of concepts and applications are in the process of development (Biocca and Levy, 2013, Hsu, 2015a, Hsu, 2015b). Currently, headsets, glasses, and other virtual-reality (VR) instruments are the most popular new input devices for VR applications. Although commercial applications of brain–computer interface (BCI) works are still limited and problematic, the researchers presently involved in VR have recognized that the measurement and interaction of telemedicine/telecommunication data in VR environments using electroencephalographic (EEG) analysis methods is significantly important (Laver et al., 2012).
VR is essentially the use of a technology, which creates the illusion of presences in an environment that isn’t really there (Glantz et al., 1996, Sherman and Craig, 2002). It usually works by providing various senses of human beings with images and/or sound to cheat the brains into experiencing something virtual. The illusion is often achieved by means of the presence of interactivity between the virtual world and humans. Undoubtedly, it is a quite complicated process to construct such virtual worlds by present technologies. In the developments of aviation and medicine, VR had been used to train pilots and surgeons to learn their respective professions in a highly realistic manner without paying for any risks (Gallagher et al., 2013). Accordingly, in combination with telemedicine and telecommunication, the BCI scheme applied to VR environments is a novel concept, which can substantially improve the usefulness and practicality in the applications of telemedicine, telecare, and telecommunication.
