Binding of various ligands with cyclodextrins may lead to the formation of inclusion complexes and larger self-assembled structures [1]. Using chromophore moiety as a ligand in these systems, it is possible to create fluorescent sensors [2] and enhance excitation transfer for the light-harvesting in organic photovoltaics [3]. Optical properties of the chromophore crucially depend on the arrangement of the neighboring molecules. Unlike in solution, inside the cyclodextrin cavity chromophore is affected by the rigid, non-polar and anisotropic environment [4]. Several factors contributes to this effect. The most important are shielding from the quenchers [5] and steric restrictions preventing conformational changes, especially cis-trans isomerization in the excited state [6]. Another essential factor is the decrease of the fluctuations of the electrostatic field acting on the charge distribution of the chromophore [7]. The reduced energy dispersion can hinder non-radiative processes, promoting excitation transport. Owing to this, the use of inclusion complexes of cyclodextrins appears to be a promising technology in nanophotonics.
In the present work we use molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate the non-uniform electrostatic field acting on the phosphorescent probe (naphthalene molecule) in various matrices formed by the β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) and the ligand (adamantane). We use energy shift and non-uniform broadening of the 0–0 transition as a measure of the field intensity. Computer simulations are aimed to show what parts of heterogeneous matrix mainly contribute to the electrostatic field and how the field depends on the position of the naphthalene relative to other components. We consider several types of β-CD–based matrices: (1) inclusion complexes of different stoichiometry, (2) co-crystals of β-CD and adamantane of different morphology, (3) a model of the disordered aggregate. The chemical composition and the structure of these systems are inspired by the experimental studies performed in our laboratory [8], [9], [10], so the present research has an additional goal: to compare calculated and measured values of the line broadening and to suggest the structure of the aggregates containing naphthalene, which remained unresolved until now.
