The rapid development of the Internet technologies and advent of social media sites have led to the unprecedented delivery of online content. News media (e.g. Yahoo News, Google News, Huffington Post, CNN News, etc.) and social media (e.g., Flickr, Twitter, Facebook, etc.) are widely used as powerful medium to attract and connect people during events, such as natural disasters, extreme weather, emergency events, diseases, protests, demonstrations, politics, etc. On these platforms, journalists cover the progress of events and amateur social media users express their views, generating a tremendous amount of multimedia content. These data are publicly available and updated dynamically, which bolsters the opportunity for researchers and companies to analyze such data, with the goal of understanding public opinion, tracking what’s significant and trending, etc.
The seminal work on event discovery can be traced back to the 1990s. For example, [1] focused on discovering events from online news reports written by journalists on news media. Recently, the popularity of social media (e.g., Twiiter [2], and Flickr [3]) attracts researchers to revisit the event discovery task, as the data are contributed by amateur users. In reality, both journalists and amateur users may witness the happening of an event, resulting in publishing reports on news media and sharing posts on social media. Furthermore, the two-domain data related to the same events (e.g., the samples in Fig. 1) can be quite different in terms of descriptions, reporting stages of events, and viewpoints, etc. Textual news reports are carefully edited by journalists, and usually describe events more completely and officially. In contrast, Flickr image posts are impromptu shared by amateur users from personal views, and usually are incomplete, low in quality, but more timely. However, the aforementioned works focus on either news media or social media alone. As different data domains can complement in discovering and describing events, it is natural for us to exploit multi-domain data jointly. For clarity, we denote the task as Multi-domain Enhanced Event Discovery (MEED).Download : Download high-res image (682KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Data samples about “2014 Hong Kong protests” from news media and social media.
In the context of MEED, there are several challenges to be addressed. Firstly, the heterogeneity of the multi-domain data makes it difficult to exploit the data directly. For instance, news media data mostly are textual reports with various feature modalities, such as reporting time, title, location, and textual content. Flickr-like social media data are image posts with different feature modalities, such as taken-time, title, location, tags, textual description, and visual content, etc. Secondly, the data variations of multi-domain data make it hard to measure the relations among the data samples. Even two news reports or two Flickr image posts on the same event are difficult to identify, suffering from different opinions of the news reports, and varying viewpoints, resolutions, illumination conditions, changing backgrounds, different taken-times or tagging words of Flickr image posts. Thirdly, unlike the image-text pairs in scenarios like cross-modal retrieval, the multi-domain data describing events are unpaired and weakly aligned.
In this paper, we propose an in-domain and cross-domain Laplacian regularization (ICLR) model, with an aim to jointly learn data representations for both news reports from news media domain and images shared on Flickr-like social media domain. As shown in Fig. 2, the multi-domain data with various feature modalities are aligned by using domain-specific dictionaries in the stage of data preparation. Furthermore, the proposed ICLR achieves effective subspaces for the two-domain data by incorporating the property of in-domain and cross-domain label consistency jointly. Mathematically, the property of label consistency can be modelled by using Laplacian regularization terms, based on which ICLR learns similar data representations for in-domain and cross-domain data samples related to the same events. Finally, real-world events can be identified by using the nearest neighbor strategy in the new subspaces.Download : Download high-res image (1005KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Overview of the framework. Given the data collection consisting of image posts from social media and articles from news media, a seed set consisting of labelled data samples is used as domain-specific dictionaries to align the data modalities into unified vector forms. Furthermore, the dictionary bases are updated by the aligned data vectors, which will be used jointly with the in-domain and cross-domain label consistency regularization terms by ICLR to learn a subspace for the domain-specific data. Given the archived data representation, existing or new real-world events can be recognized by using classification and clustering strategies.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
- We advocate the problem of multi-domain enhanced event discovery (MEED) by making full use of the multi-domain and multi-modality data. MEED has great potential for increasing knowledge discovery in multi-domain applications.- We propose an in-domain and cross-domain Laplacian regularization (ICLR) model for multi-domain data representation learning. The proposed ICLR is formulated as an optimization problem and achieves effective subspaces for both textual reports on news media and image posts on social media.- We have collected a real-world dataset for research on multi-domain event analysis, upon which the event discovery results obtained by the proposed ICLR outperform several state-of-the-art approaches. The dataset has been released on GitHub.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work is reviewed. Section 3 introduces the formulation of the MEED problem. The in-domain and cross-domain Laplacian regularization (ICLR) model is presented in Section 4. In Section 5, we analyze extensive experimental results. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 6.
