One of the most impressive achievement of the nature is the information processing architecture of natural brain in the context of body and environments within it operates by using resources very efficiently (Duro, Bellas, & Becerra Permury, 2014).
The brain is a hierarchical architecture having on the basis the neurons connected as neural networks, all together defining a complex computational system. A holistic view of the brain includes same hierarchy and heterarchy between structural and functional modules.
Mind is a process running on the brain structural neuronal circuitry mainly controlled by the synaptic connections, neurotransmitters and hormones. The mind is a closed loop process that senses, perceives, understands, thinks, plans and acts in response to stimuli of the world the person lives in Albus and Meystel (2001).
There is not yet defined a scientific theory of mind, however the recent progress done in functional neuroimaging procedures (e.g. fMRI) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) software models allows a faster development of mind understanding. Thus any architecture model aiming to define, support an engineering methodology in order to explain, test mind activities is important.
The paper brings together four advanced initiatives of mind functions understanding and replication from a computer science perspective (this is detailed by the Section “State of the art”). The second goal, a hybrid architecture based on multiagent system and real-time control units organized like multiresolution layers is proposed as generic framework for neurocognitive domains research (described in Section “Multiresolution agent based architecture”).
The main benefit of the proposal is the sharing of the knowledge and processing units of the various specialized modules which by cooperation solve complex problems. The framework easily allows extension with new modules without a redesign of the system; new solvers in new problem matters are added, new connections are made, new knowledge appears driving the future processes optimization. This idea tries to mimic the way the networks of brain regions are activated in concurrent patterns; the environment stimulus is received as a pattern and activates a specific network. A brain region can be part of more than one network (Onu et al., 2015, Waytz and Mason, 2013). The framework defines a graph of agents as brain regions; such groups of agents create specific networks based on the tasks defined within a problem domain solution.
