Up to 15% of couples worldwide are affected by infertility [1]. In the evaluation of the male factor, the first step consists of a semen analysis according to standard criteria [2] that sets the basis for possible medical treatment of the couple [3]. The morphology of the sperm cells is useful to illustrate the potential fertility of a sample [3] and to make a decision about infertility treatment [4].
Sperm morphology reflects different kinds of anomalies in human semen samples. Depending on the anomalies, abnormal sperm cells generally have a lower fertilizing potential and may also have abnormal DNA [2]. The categories of defects include head, neck and mid-piece, tail defects, as well as excess residual cytoplasm (see Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (317KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Human sperm abnormalities. Image reproduced exactly as appears in [2], showing schematic drawings of some abnormal forms of human sperm.
As a result of morphological semen analysis, all the sperm cells in the semen sample are classified as normal or abnormal [5]. Many studies have demonstrated the close relationship between fertility and morphologically normal sperm [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. The morphology is considered a clinical tool dedicated to the fertility prognosis and serves as a way of making decisions regarding the options of assisted reproduction technologies [4]. In addition to a rigorous application of existing guidelines and respect to high laboratory standards [11], emphasis on identifying the categories of abnormal sperm heads, and morphological patterns of sperm heads may have significant clinical utility when deciding on an infertility treatment. For example, tapered heads may be due to stress caused by a male urogenital tract infection [12]. There is also clinical significance regarding the shape of sperm heads, and each class is associated with different genetic and environmental factors that impact clinical decisions pertaining to an infertility treatment [12]. A complete analysis of normal and abnormal sperm cells therefore turns out to be critical.
The inherent lack of objectivity in the evaluation of human sperm morphology, the difficulty in standardizing, implementing and controlling manual methods, and the high degree of variation within and between laboratories and technicians have fueled the computer-assisted sperm morphology assessment [13]. Despite decades of research on computer-assisted morphological sperm analysis [14], [15], [3], [16], [17], there are still no standard ways of comparing the results achieved with different methods. The results of sperm morphology assessment methods are usually evaluated according to how well they correlate with expert-generated classifications, though it seems that each research group has its own dataset of images, staining protocol, and evaluation metrics. Until today, no publications existed that present results of test comparing approaches using the same data.
A ground-truth represents the absolute truth for a certain application. For instance, in cancer detection from medical images, a suspicious region is malignant or benign. The absolute truth (whether there is cancer or not) can be obtained from biopsies and an appropriate staining. These biopsy results constitute the ground-truth for those medical images [18]. Unfortunately, for morphological analysis of sperm cells, it is impossible to count with a ground-truth because of the subjectivity of the task [19]. A valid alternative consists of asking many experts in the field for their opinion about specific cases to generate a gold-standard [20].
In this paper, we introduce and describe the SCIAN Gold-standard for Morphological Sperm Analysis (SCIAN-MorphoSpermGS), a dataset of sperm head images with expert-classification labels. The dataset contains 1854 sperm head images obtained from six semen smears and classified by three Chilean referent domain experts according to World Health Organization (WHO) criteria [2], in one of the following classes: normal, tapered, pyriform, small and amorphous. This gold-standard is aimed for use in evaluating and comparing not only known techniques, but also future improvements to present approaches for classification of human sperm heads for semen analysis. This is a very significant contribution to the scientific community, because at present there is no public gold-standard for human sperm head classification, so the few existing methods cannot be properly evaluated and compared. To show the usability of the proposed gold-standard, we conducted experiments to define a five-class classification base-line.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review the research work in the area, justifying the need for a gold-standard for classification of human sperm heads. Section 3 is devoted to describing in detail the staining method, the features of the equipment we used to capture the images and specific details about image sources, as well as the description and analysis of our proposed gold-standard. In Section 4 we briefly discuss the common shape-based descriptors and supervised classification techniques used for the construction of the classification base-line, and we present the results of applying those descriptors and classifiers to the SCIAN-MorphoSpermGS. The summary and conclusions can be found in Section 5.
