School belonging is a construct that has held the interest of researchers for several decades. Definitions of this construct primarily relate to the degree to which students feel that they identify with school or belong at school (Finn, 1989), or “the extent to which students feel personally accepted, respected, included, and encouraged by others in the school social environment” (Goodenow, 1993, as cited in Moallem, 2013, p. 3). Some terms that have been used synonymously with school belonging include school climate, school attachment, school identity, school bonding, school involvement, school connectedness, emotional engagement, or positive orientation toward school (Gillen-O’Neel and Fuligni, 2013; Whitlock, 2006). Prior research has shown that students in early adolescence show decreases in school belonging (Eccles et al., 1993), and that this decline continues through the secondary school experience (Anderman, 2002; Ding and Hall, 2007). Other research, however (e.g., Meeus and Dekovic, 1995), has suggested that school belonging does not decline in later adolescence, and may even show slight increases. Gender differences in school belonging also have been observed. Gillen-O’Neel and Fuligni’s longitudinal study of U.S. high school students found that boys’ sense of school belonging tended to remain stable, while girls’ sense of school belonging—which initially was higher than that of boys—tended to decline.
Although school belonging has been demonstrated to be related to academic, social, and personal attitudes; participation and engagement; academic achievement, and basic psychological mechanisms essential to student success (Finn, 1989; Osterman, 2000; Sasson, 2019; Voelkl, 1997), other studies are mixed in their findings regarding the specific relationship of school belonging to academic success, with some studies (e.g., Anderman, 2002; Walton and Cohen, 2007) showing a positive relationship, and other studies (e.g., Dotterer et al., 2007; Liu and Lu, 2011) showing no relationship. Among American students, Singh et al. (2010) found ethnic differences in the relationship between school belonging and school achievement as measured by self-reported grades, with African American high school students showing a positive association, but European American students showing no such association. Korpershoek et al. (2019) in their meta-analysis of 82 correlational studies, found that school belonging had a small positive effect on student achievement (student grades and standardized test scores), while it negatively predicted school absence and dropout rates. Importantly, Korpershoek et al. found moderately strong positive associations between school belonging and self-concept and self-efficacy.
In high school, achievement in mathematics is particularly critical for students, as mathematics skills are essential for success both at the post-secondary educational level (Norris, 2012) and in the workplace (Hoyles et al., 2010). Achievement in mathematics is influenced by a variety of factors, including those related to the individual, culture, family, and school (Can et al., 2017). Although a direct relationship has not definitively been established between attitudes towards mathematics and mathematics achievement (see meta-analysis by Ma and Kishor, 1997), attitude towards mathematics retains importance as a key construct to cultivate in students and foster their continued engagement with the subject.
Although school belonging has been tied to a number of other attitudinal and achievement constructs, an important link that remains unexplored concerns its relationship to attitudes toward mathematics, particularly among students in upper high school grade levels enrolled in advanced mathematics courses. The present study uses a large, multinational student data to assess (1) how students’ sense of school belonging predicts attitude toward advanced mathematics, and (2) how student gender moderates the relationship between school belonging and attitudes towards advanced mathematics as measured by two TIMSS scales—Students Like Learning Advanced Mathematics and Students Value Advanced Mathematics. To address these purposes, the following research questions (RQs) were addressed:
•RQ1: To what extent is student sense of school belonging related to two measures of attitude towards advanced mathematics—Students Like Learning Advanced Mathematics and Students Value Advanced Mathematics?•RQ2: To what extent does student gender moderate the relationship between school belonging and (1) Students Like Learning Advanced Mathematics and Students Value Advanced Mathematics?
