1.1. BackgroundIn recent years, the CAD/CAM technique has gained wide application in the area of dental restoration [1], [2], [3], [4]. Compared with the traditional hand-made method, the dental CAD /CAM not only tremendously improves the quality of the restoration but also reduces the production period significantly and meets personalized customization requirements [5], [6].Occasionally, inlays are referred to indirect fillings or partial crowns, which can fill the partially destroyed teeth and restore the occlusal function. The designed 3D inlay model should coincide with the existing individual anatomy of the patient not only reflecting the inherent morphological features of the tooth but also matching well with the residual tooth and opposite chewing jaw [7], [8], [9]. The major challenging associated with inlay modeling is the method used to reconstruct the functional correct morphology of the missing occlusal surface. However, given the complexity of the occlusal surface and the randomness of the distribution of the missing region, it is arduous to recover the occlusal surface by exclusively relying on residual tooth morphology. Typically, a reasonable approach involves selecting an appropriate template tooth model from a tooth database [10]. Then, through deforming operations, the missing occlusal surface can be acquired from the deformed template tooth, and an initial approximation shape of the inlay restoration can be obtained [11]. Therefore, the morphology of the inlay model is largely dependent on the reliability of the deformation algorithms, which should be robust and effective such that the dental technician actually benefits from better results and time saving.
1.2. Related workTo achieve inlay modeling, several methods were presented in the literature. Most focused on designing the surface deformation algorithm to reconstruct the missing occlusal surface. Free form deformation (FFD) was first introduced through deforming a cuboid space in which the tooth surface was embedded [12]. This method produced numerous interactive operations for complex tooth surfaces, and it was difficult to control the deformation precision. Adolph and Gurke proposed geometrically deformable models to recover the tooth surface [13]. This method first adopts a low-resolution mesh of the template tooth based on an energy-driven deformation. Then, mesh refinement is gradually implemented. Based on this type of deformation, the algorithm can achieve attractive results in many cases but fails to cover the full range of possible clinical situations. In [14], Steinbrecher and Gerth presented a method based on the iterative Laplacian surface-editing technique to reconstruct the missing teeth surface. After the deformation, the template tooth would adapt to the residual tooth to generate the occlusal surface. This method has been successfully integrated into a commercial exoCAD dental system. However, the method combines mask image and ray collision steps for template tooth surface segmentation, which increases the complexity of template tooth segmentation. Additionally, the method did not take into account the cavity contour constraint at the final merging stage of inlay restoration, so a potential boundary intersection might exist between the inner surface and outer surface of the 3D inlay model. Zheng et al. adopted a 3D morphing technique to design the missing inlay or crown occlusal surface [15]. By establishing pairs of feature points to construct a spatial mapping relation between the template tooth and the residual tooth, a radial basis function was used to achieve the tooth surface deformation. This approach can automatically implement surface deformation with less user intervention. However, it does not consider the inherent morphological features near the tooth surface boundary, resulting in a serrated structure in the final inlay restoration. Additionally, this method is applicable to only molars.In addition to the methods that focus on employing the template tooth to achieve occlusal surface reconstruction, another method involves the introduction of a biogenetic tooth into inlay modeling. Blanz et al. [16] and Mehl et al. [17], [18] proposed a biogenetic model for tooth surface reconstruction without using standard tooth databases. A mathematical model extrapolated from natural tooth morphologies was deployed to generate patient-specific occlusal surfaces on the basis of residual tooth tissue. This approach automatically analyzes the features of the reference tooth compared with those of an average tooth of the same type. The outcome is a patient-specific tooth morphology and occlusal surface design, which matches the patient's other teeth in terms of appearance and function. This feature significantly simplified the design of functional occlusal surfaces. However, a large set of sample teeth should be collected and statistically analyzed to calculate the average tooth, which requires complex theories and considerable computation.In view of the abovementioned research, the following three key problems should be considered during the modeling of inlays.(1)The entire process of inlay modeling should be concise and efficient. The main design stage should implement as automatically as possible in clinical applications with less user intervention.(2)The reconstructed occlusal surface should recover the missing morphological features to the greatest extent possible.(3)The deformation algorithm does not merely ensure adequate precision and computational efficiency but also suits all types of inlays.Our approach to solving these problems was motivated by recent work in dental CAD; hence, we propose a dual-factor constrained deformation algorithm that is capable of fitting a template tooth closely to the residual tooth. The complete deforming process is almost fully automatic, and corresponding tooth occlusal features and position restriction are fully considered in the proposed algorithm. Thus, no additional local adjustment is needed for the deformed surface. Consequently, the morphological characteristics of the inlay occlusal surface are well retained. Compared with previous work, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:(1)We propose an entire framework for modeling inlays that involves cavity contour extraction, tooth positioning, tooth surface segmentation and occlusal surface deformation, which cover almost all important modeling steps for the digital design of inlays.(2)In contrast to previous template tooth surface segmentation methods introduced in dental CAD, we provide a semi-automatic template tooth positioning method for tooth surface segmentation that is more efficient than traditional interactive manipulation.(3)Compared with current methods for occlusal surface reconstruction, we introduce a dual-factor constrained deformation strategy by defining a segmentation constraint and cavity contour constraint. This strategy is subsequently robust and efficient in clinical application, thus providing an adaptive and robust modeling tool for high-quality occlusal surface reconstruction.
1.3. OverviewAfter introducing the related research in the computer-aided design of inlays, the technical process and its description are briefly detailed in Section 2. Section 3 introduces a dual-factor constrained deformation method for modeling inlay restoration, to establish a benchmark of template tooth deformation, a cavity contour extraction method combined with a heuristic search strategy is proposed. This section also offers the objects and method of tooth region segmentation, including residual tooth segmentation and template tooth segmentation. Besides, Section 3 provides a detailed introduction to the dual-factor constrained deformation algorithm, including the method for defining the segmentation constraint and cavity contour constraint and the approach for building the correspondence map. Then, an enclosing inlay surface can be modeled by merging the occlusal surface and inner surface. Section 4 provides several case study results of inlay modeling. The conclusions are summarized in Section 5, and several directions of future work are also presented.
