Due to their very attractive physical properties, such as negligible vapor pressure, high thermal, chemical stability and wide liquid-phase range, ionic liquids (ILs) are widely considered as a novel solvent in separation processes (Berthod et al., 2008, Zhang et al., 2014). In addition, as a designer solvent, its physical and chemical properties can be tailored by judicious selection of cations, anions, and substituents. However, there exists a large library of ILs, which causes challenges to find proper ILs for a specific separation problem (McLeese et al., 2010). Traditional practice for IL solvent screening is guided by trial and error approaches, which are time and labor intensive, and strongly dependent on the experience and experiments. Very often, such screened ILs are not optimal as the experimental study is not realistic to reach all possible ILs.
In order to design proper ILs for a specific separation problem from theory, a reliable thermodynamic prediction model is crucial. So far, various approaches for calculating activity coefficients for IL-containing systems have been developed, e.g., classical models NRTL and UNIFAC (Alonso et al., 2007, Lei et al., 2012, Lei et al., 2009) and models based on statistical associating fluid theory PC-SAFT (Paduszyński and Domańska, 2012). Besides, as a quantum mechanics based predictive approach, the COSMO-based models such as COSMO-RS (Klamt, 1995) and COSMO-SAC (Lin and Sandler, 2002; Wang et al., 2007) have been proven to be powerful tools for calculating thermodynamic properties.
In computer-aided ionic liquid design (CAILD) for separation processes, the UNIFAC model has already been used (Karunanithi and Mehrkesh, 2013; Roughton et al., 2012). As the interaction parameters between the functional groups of ILs in the UNIFAC model are regressed from experimental data and many of them are always missing, the CAILD method based on the UNIFAC model is nowadays restricted to the limited subsets of anions and cations.
On the contrary, COSMO-SAC is a predictive model based on quantum mechanics calculation, and thus does not suffer from the problem of missing binary parameters. It has been successfully used to screen IL solvents with desired properties in a large search space (Lee and Lin, 2015). In this method, ILs are always defined as an ion pair, rather than individual functional descriptors used in group contribution (GC) method, which makes it hard to be directly integrated into the CAILD framework. Moreover, when using the COSMO-SAC model to predict thermodynamic properties, a ready COSMO database containing all molecular information is required, which means new compound not included in its database cannot be designed by this method. Therefore, an approach taking the advantage of COSMO-SAC model and providing fast and reliable generation of σ-profiles and cavity volumes (VCOSMO) of general compounds for solvent design is strongly needed. For this purpose, Mu et al. (2009) developed a group contribution based theory named GC-COSMO. However ILs are not included and applicable.
In this work, an extended GC-COSMO method is presented to predict the σ-profile and VCOSMO of ILs, which are further used for COSMO-SAC calculation. The approach is then incorporated into a CAILD framework structured by multi-scale simulations of physical properties of compound, thermodynamics of system, performance of process, constraints and optimization of design problems. The optimal IL solvent is acquired by solving a mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) problem with a deterministic algorithm. Two separation tasks of benzene–cyclohexane extraction and post-combustion carbon dioxide (CO2) capture are tested as example.
