Over the years engineers continuously strive to improve the efficiency of constructions concerning safety, economy and recently sustainability during service life. Among others, the progress in building engineering is achieved through formulation of new design and assessment procedures with respect to structural, energy and environmental performance that usually require increased computing power. This has in turn resulted in two major paths of innovation: enhanced design algorithms and assessment methodologies on one hand and more powerful computer technologies on the other.
Development in analysis and design of structures has been invariantly associated with the formulation of more computationally expensive problems, since engineers can always formulate a problem that will provide a better solution, but requires more than the available computing power. Computational mechanics has played a key role in this process. Exploitation of the ever-increasing computing power requires the development of numerical techniques and tools, which has eventually allowed the simulation of complex multiphysics phenomena using in-depth approaches that have not been possible to be applied until today. Advanced computational methods for designing safe and economic structures have benefited from multidisciplinary approaches between computational mechanics and other fields. Actually, the next generation of computational tools and algorithms could have a profound impact and lead to groundbreaking developments in engineering practice. Driven by the dictum of the pioneer of the finite element method John Argyris “The computer shapes the theory” [1], structural engineering limitations imposed by large-scale computations can be dealt with. In modern times, civil engineers have to solve problems that are very demanding in computational power and runtime thus conventional methods fail to give a good approach. Today, due to the evolution of science, these conventional methods have been replaced by new computational tools that are cheaper, faster and their aim is to find the “best” through a range of safe options. This represents a major change of direction made in recent decades not only in the field of civil engineering but also in many other scientific domains.
Since 1970 structural optimization has been the subject of intensive research and several approaches for optimal design of structures have been advocated [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Topology optimization is a characterization of design optimization formulations that allow for predicting of structural system’s layout. In principle the result of a topology optimization procedure is also optimal with respect to sizing optimization. Topology optimization can be considered as a companion discipline providing the user with design alternatives that may be processed directly or might further be refined implementing size and/or shape optimization methods. The basis of the layout design concept was developed by Michell [7] in the early 1900s and was dealt with the design of “thin” framed structural systems according to plastic limit criteria. Recently, software applications have made structural optimization accessible to professional engineers, decision-makers and students outside the corresponding research communities [8].
Construction industry has a major impact on the environment that people spend most of their life. Therefore, it is important that the outcome of architectural intuition performs well and complies with the design demands. Aesthetic and conceptual design represent processes of high complexity, that intend to satisfy design goals comprising of strict, engineering constraints, together with less strict, cognitive and perceptual ones. Due to the complexity of the architectural design process, architect’s intuition alone is often insufficient to ensure proper outcomes. Computational design optimization methods can assist in confidently achieving at high-performing architectural design solutions, as well as provide valuable inspiration during the design task. In this study three key points are examined, in the first one manufacturability constraints and issues related to conceptual design are integrated into the optimum layout design of moment resisting frames (MRFs). In the second one an automatic procedure is developed that translates the outcome of topology optimization images into computer-aided design (CAD) files. Finally, computational methods are presented aiming to reduce the computational effort required for solving such problems.
