Computer Science (CS) students must understand parallel and distributed computing (PDC) concepts to be effective computer scientists in the workforce, as reflected in the ACM Computer Science Curriculum guidelines  [16]. The CS education community has been creating and distributing educational modules to support educators that wish to incorporate parallel computing concepts into their curriculum. Concurrently, the increased availability of multicore processors in student machines and “Budget Beowulfs”  [2] has nearly eliminated the barrier to access PCEs.1
However, there still exists a significant barrier to entry for learning how to become productive in a PCE due to often unfamiliar and complex system software, programming interfaces, and tools. For example, users must navigate the system via a terminal, deal with complex compilation and execution procedures, negotiate resource allocation via batch submission systems, and utilize parallel programming libraries—a process that may be new and intimidating to students and educators. The process of overcoming these hurdles distracts from learning parallel computing concepts, and can often intimidate students (and educators), discouraging them from using the PCE. It is important for students exploring curriculum modules to access PCEs that are architecturally different and more capable than their personal machines to understand the relationship between system architecture and parallel computation. The question becomes: how can we lower the barrier to entry for exploring PDC concepts on a variety of PCEs while still providing a path for students to learn how to be productive on the PCE directly?
Traditionally, a bottom-up approach is taken, where students are introduced to the tools, concepts, and environments for parallel and distributed computing. The OnRamp project takes a top-down approach in which a web-based learning environment coaches users through the exploration of parallel applications, gradually exposing more details about the underlying PCE and parallel application code. This approach allows students to gain an intuitive sense of parallel and distributed computing concepts through launching parallel applications on PCEs from day one.
OnRamp is designed to be a general purpose web portal for supporting the exploration of PDC concepts and PCEs. The portal is not specific to any one programming language, parallel computing library, application, or PCE. This critical design point allows for maximal flexibility in how and where educators can use it with students in the CS curriculum, for computational science teaching and research, or even for K-12 outreach.
