Nowadays, we live in a world surrounded by data-driven web applications. The internet we know is built upon databases and data services. The role of a Data Scientist has never been so important, making possible the creation of data products, which acquire their value from the data itself and create more data as a result (Loukides, 2010), with even more increased value.
Data Science attracted a lot of attention during the last years (Fig. 1). Press (2013) argues that Data Science emerges as the coupling of Statistics and Computer Science. In fact, if we take a closer look at the most common related search in Trends (2017), we will find the term Computer Science. Besides, in 2009, Hal Varian, Chief Economist at Google, said that “the sexy job in the next ten years will be statisticians”, referring the relevance to understand data, to process it, to extract value from it, to visualize it and to communicate results. Consequently, it seems reasonable to assume that the knowledge base expected from a Data Scientist goes beyond the skills of a computer scientist (Cleveland, 2001), or a statistician (Cleveland, 2001, Warden, 2016), or even the coupling between these two.Download : Download high-res image (100KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Data Science’s popularity in Google Trends. Retrieved from (Trends, 2017).
The term Data Scientist as a professional profile brings us to 2008, when D.J. Patil and Jeff Hammerbacher met to share experiences about the development of the data and analytics groups at Facebook and LinkedIn, namely when they discussed what to call the people on their teams, since the respective organizations rapidly grew up (Davenport and Patil, 2012, Patil, 2011, Press, 2013). The Data Scientist profile was then established to designate someone who works on data applications that immediately and massively impact organizations (Patil, 2011), understanding how to find answers to relevant business questions, and exploring a voluminous and diverse set of data through a scientific way of doing things (Davenport & Patil, 2012).
However, when D.J. Patil and Jeff Hammerbacher met to share experiences, the term Data Scientist was not an immediate choice. Patil (2011) states: “Business Analyst seemed too limiting… Data Analyst was a contender, but we felt that title might limit what people could do… Research scientist was a reasonable job title used by companies… However, we felt that most research scientists worked on projects that were futuristic and abstract…”. The Data Science Association (DSA, 2016) also distinguishes Data Science from Business Analytics by defining the latter as “the practice of iterative, methodical exploration of an organization’s data with emphasis on statistical analysis”, instead of the inquisitive nature of Data Science. In order to conclude the discussion Data Scientist vs Data Analyst, it becomes easier to distinguish these two professional profiles if we look at the Data Scientist role as an evolution of the Data Analyst role (IBM, 2016), regarding the ability to have a strong business acumen and communicate findings in order to surpass business challenges, namely the ones whose solution brings the most value to the organization. According to (IBM, 2016), another factor that sets these two profiles apart is the data sources, since Data Scientists tend to explore multiple disparate sources, instead of one single source. The Data Scientists have an inquisitive nature, they ask questions, in search for understanding the meaning of that data.
As previously mentioned, the knowledge base expected from a Data Scientist exceeds the one of a Computer Scientist or the one of a Statistician, it may even exceed the knowledge base that results from the combination of both profiles. Therefore, in this work, we assume that the Data Scientist profile adequately fits under the Information Systems umbrella. We do not intend to claim that the Data Scientist profile is more suitable to Information Systems than to Computer Science, Statistics, or any other field, like Experimental Physics or Systems Biology, as Davenport and Patil (2012) also identified. We simply assume that the knowledge base and skills set needed in a Data Scientist are present in the Information Systems field and we aim to understand if (and how) the Data Scientist profile is represented in the e-CF and SFIA frameworks. We made our assumption based on two relevant aspects:
1. In the framework of Bacon and Fitzgerald (2001) for the field of Information Systems, it can be observed that this field concerns automation and leveraging of “information for knowledge work, customer satisfaction and business performance” (nature of data, information and knowledge; human-computer interface; information relevance, value and cost; data quality; organizational learning…) through the use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), such as software, databases, data warehouses, among others concepts, which are key elements in the knowledge base and skills set of a Data Scientist, as shown in the literature and discussed later in this document;
The education map made available by the Association for Information Systems (AIS) (AIS, 2016) illustrates Data Science as an emerging main concept among 514 programs of 336 institutions. (AIS, 2016) also highlights other closely related topics, such as big data, predictive analytics, data mining, distributed systems, databases, programming and decision support systems, for example.
Regarding the ICT competences/skills frameworks analyzed in this paper, e-CF (e-CF, 2016) is described as a reference of competences required and applied at the ICT workplace, while SFIA (SFIA, 2016) is aimed towards organizational design and talent management in Information Technology (IT). Despite the disparity in terminology (ICT vs IT), these frameworks aim to standardize competences in a broad field with a relatively ambiguous use of terms. Consequently, to test the hypothesis that the Data Scientist profile is adequately represented in these frameworks, the following method was used: among the scientific community, academic formations, job opportunities, professional associations and certifications in Data Science, we gathered the knowledge base (what a Data Scientist must know about) and the skills set (what a Data Scientist is able to do). Then, a conceptual model was proposed and we look into this knowledge base and skills set in e-CF and SFIA to evaluate if the profile is adequately represented.
Summarizing, the goal of this paper is the proposal of a conceptual model for the Data Scientist profile based on the analysis of information from the scientific community, academic formations, job opportunities, professional associations and certifications in Data Science, proposing the knowledge base (what a Data Scientist must know about) and the skills set (what a Data Scientist is able to do). This model can foster future research in this topic, and can help practitioners in recruitment campaigns for new Data Scientists or in the planning of new formations/certifications for current workers. Furthermore, this paper also aims to evaluate if e-CF and SFIA also take into consideration the Data Scientist profile as a representative profile within the ICT field of study and practice. We use the knowledge base and skills set identified in the conceptual model to evaluate if the Data Scientist profile is adequately represented in these frameworks.
This document is structured as follows: Section 2 describes related work; Section 3 summarizes the main knowledge base and skills set related to several academic programs, job opportunities, professional organizations and certifications in Data Science; Section 4 presents the proposed conceptual model; Section 5 discusses the representativeness of the Data Scientist profile in e-CF and SFIA; section 6 concludes with some remarks about the undertaken work.
