We live in a society where computing technology has become ubiquitous and interacting with computers no longer means using keyboard and mouse. Embedded in the fabric of our cities, workplaces, homes, vehicles, clothes and even bodies, ‘smart’ technologies now allow us to relate to the world around us, one another and even ourselves in unprecedented ways (Nakashima et al., 2010, Xia et al., 2012). These achievements have been driven by what interaction designers call user-centred design in computing systems, which has shaped the field of Interaction Design (ID) (Preece et al., 2015).
Although ID as a discipline has so far focussed on humans as technology users, humans are not the only species to engage with interactive systems. Being directly or indirectly involved in every aspect of human life and inhabiting increasingly technologised environments, nonhuman animals (referred to as animals hereforth) too interact with technology, such as touch-screen operant chambers, robotic milking systems, or wearable telemetric devices. However, historically the development of animal technology has mostly been driven by disciplines other than Interaction Design and efforts to systematically develop user-centred approaches to the design of interactive technology for animals are still relatively very recent.
Consistent with this state of affairs, currently the involvement of animals in the development of technology intended for them still falls under the ethical frameworks that regulate their use according to national and international legislation (e.g. European Directive, 2010/63/EU). Within these frameworks animals are essentially viewed as research instruments, unable to understand and consent to procedures that may harm them, rather than research participants and design contributors with their own interests. The aim of current frameworks is to minimise any negative impact of the research on the welfare of the individual animals involved (typically through the implementation of the principles of replacement, reduction and refinement (Russell et al., 1959); however, this minimisation is subordinated to specific scientific interests and to the integrity of the procedures required to serve those interests, provided that the interests in question are deemed of sufficient societal significance. This approach is essentially different from that taken by ethical frameworks regulating the involvement of humans in research, including within ID (Association for Computing Machinery, 1992), where the interests of the individual participant are prioritised over the interests of science and society. In other words, while ethics protocols that regulate research aiming to develop technology for humans are essentially user-and participant-centred, to date there is no legally established user- and participant-centred ethics protocol to regulate the involvement of animals in research aiming to develop technology intended for them.
In ID, user-centred means that an interactive technology is designed ‘around’ its intended users in order to best support them in their activities and daily lives. Here the term user is adopted in a broader sense and denotes anyone who interacts with a system, an interactor as referred to by North (North, 2016), whether the interaction is active and intentional (Robinson et al., 2014), active and unintentional (Mancini et al., 2015), passive and intentional (Cheok et al., 2011) or passive and unintentional (Mancini et al., 2012). The established view in ID (Preece et al., 2015) is that, in order to best support users, interactive technology needs to be informed by their characteristics, as well as the characteristics of the activities for which it is used, or which it enables, and the environment in which said activities take place. It also needs to afford good usability (e.g., it should be safe to use, it should be easy to learn how to use, it should help users to perform a task efficiently) and user-experience (e.g., it should be motivating and stimulating to use). To achieve this, requirements about what a technology should do, and how, need to be elicited from those who have a stake in its development (primarily those who will use it), in order to inform alternative designs, which then need to be prototyped and evaluated, through an iterative process of incremental improvement. To this effect, ID researchers have long recognised the importance of involving prospective users in the design process and, since the advent of the Participatory Design movement (Schuler and Namioka, 1993), an increasing range of methodological approaches aiming to support user involvement have been developed or adopted in ID, allowing users to take the role of active research collaborators and design contributors.
If Animal–Computer Interaction (ACI) aims to expand the boundaries of Interaction Design by developing a user-centred approach to the design of technology intended for animals (Mancini, 2013, Mancini, 2011; Resner, 2001), then arguably ACI׳s ethical approach to research needs to be consistent with this fundamental aim, placing animals - as individuals and technology users, legitimate stakeholders and design contributors – and their interests at the centre of the design process. Such an ethical perspective is not only desirable on the grounds that animals have intrinsic value, as acknowledged by international legislation such as the European Constitution (TEFU) and Directive on the use of animals in research (European Directive, 2010); an animal-centred ethical perspective is a methodological requirement (Ritvo and Allison, 2014) the fulfilment of which is necessary to foster the conditions for animal-centred design.
This paper is composed of two parts. Part 1 introduces ACI and the requirements that its proposed aims place on its research outcomes, processes and ethics. Having considered frameworks currently regulating the involvement of animals in research, the paper then makes the case that ACI׳s user-centred and participant-centred approach to interaction design and research requires a new, animal-centred framework. The paper discusses the relation of such a framework to current principles of best practice in animal research, highlighting its benefits for research participants, researchers and ACI as a discipline. Part 1 concludes by discussing the role of ACI research and ethics in the real world and the space it opens for animals as co-designers of shared futures. Part 2 then articulates a series of practical principles grounded in the proposed animal-centred framework.
PART 1
