Information-Centric Networking (ICN) represents a class of future network architectures mainly driven by content-centered communication among decoupled senders and receivers over the Internet [1], [2]. The integration of ICN will empower the Future Internet architectures, especially in edge cloud computing (ECC) environments [3]. The ECC systems extend the computational, networking, and storage capabilities of cloud computing (CC) systems to the edge of the Internet via edge servers [4]. Edge servers reside at one-hop wireless distances from mobile devices, which include smartphones, wearable devices, Internet of Things (IoT), and wireless sensor networks, among many others [5]. The provision of edge servers close to mobile devices reduces makespan in ECC applications [6]. Besides, mobile devices consume minimum battery power because the sensed data is immediately transferred to the edge servers for further processing [7]. Despite the reduced makespan and energy efficiency, the ECC communication model is Internet-dependent and always requires a live Internet connection to communicate data between edge servers and cloud data centers [8]. The data communication between far-edge mobile devices and edge servers is performed using multiple communication protocols and interfaces such as Wi-Fi, Wi-Fi direct, Zigbee, BLE, 4G/5G, MQTT, and AMQP, to name a few [9].
The vision of ECC is still unclear, but some supporting architectures are emerging. Such architectures introduce different topological settings as well as different notations [10], [11]. In academia, edge servers are called cloudlets, which provide virtual cloud resources on the edge of a communication network [12]. In industry, Cisco defined ECC as Fog Computing, whereby gateway devices such as routers, switches, and network access points work as edge servers [8]. Similarly, Microsoft introduced micro-data centers as edge servers based on single servers, racks of servers, or content delivery networks with additional computational capabilities [13]. Intel envisions ECC whereby gateway devices are used as edge servers that filter and analyze the data streams before transferring in cloud data centers [14]. The ETSI deemed ECC as a standard architecture for the provision of remote cloud services in edge servers to enable communication through RANs over 3G/4G/5G data connections [15].
Mobile edge cloud computing (MECC) Systems extend the cloud services on the edge of the Internet through mobile and immobile edge servers that reside at one-hop wireless distances from mobile devices [16], [17]. The MECC systems enable distributed mobile data stream mining (MDSM) applications, as defined later in Section 3, by extending CC services in edge servers as well as applications that are partitioned at multiple levels [18]. The MECC based MDSM applications span over far-edge mobile devices, edge servers, and traditional CC infrastructures [17]. Conventional immobile edge servers improve the battery lifetime of mobile devices and minimize makespan in mobile applications. However, persistent connectivity through the Internet is required for mobile to edge and edge to cloud communication. Therefore the envisioned MECC architecture utilizes nearer mobile devices as edge servers and conventional CC systems for the provision of cloud services. The MECC architecture enables the mobile to edge communication using local communication channels such as Bluetooth, BLE, Wi-Fi, and Wi-Fi direct. Although the availability of mobile devices is an issue however the nearer mobile devices can be opportunistically used as mobile edge servers. The MECC architecture operates at three layers for (1) local execution, whereby mobile/IoT devices, namely Far-edge devices, are primarily used as application execution platforms, (2) collaborative execution, whereby the nearby mobile devices, namely mobile edge servers, are used as secondary level platforms for application execution, and (3) remote execution, whereby at tertiary level, the CC servers execute applications.
Opportunities: The MECC systems provide scalable computing infrastructure which can help in the deployment of highly distributed MDSM applications [19] wherein Far-edge mobile devices in MECC systems perform single-site and multiple-site computation offloading [20]. Also, the unlimited computational and storage support from conventional CC systems enables us to deploy and dedicate heterogeneous resources for edge servers [21]. The edge servers can further utilize the acquired resources for seamless application execution. Edge servers also perform the resource-intensive computations to prolong battery life and minimize makespan in mobile devices [22]. Furthermore, the MDSM applications are geographically distributed to minimize the load-balancing efforts in infrastructure-based CC systems [23].
Challenges: The MDSM applications need to address several issues in MECC systems. The mobility and resource constraints in far-edge mobile devices enforce in location-aware predictive offloading of data streams and application components to minimize the makespan which emerges due to live virtual machines migrations and application state saving/resumption operations [24], [25]. The high dependency of far-edge mobile devices on the availability of Internet connections may cause data loss as MDSM applications operate online i.e. application components are executed as in-memory operations. The efficient management of raw and transient data streams helps in improving overall knowledge quality in MDSM applications [26].
This work is the extended version of our previous novel works presented in [16], [26], and the proposed execution models were deployed and tested on our own MECC architecture which was previously presented in [27]. However, the main contributions of this article are as follows:

•We present a novel integrated application architecture for device-centric streaming data analytics using MECC systems. The proposed application architecture provides a generic component-based template to separate the application level and platform level logic whereby the execution control of program components was deployed at the platform level.•We present the adaptive execution model to execute high-complexity low intensive data streams in MECC systems. The proposed model enables adaptive switching of stream execution processes considering the computational complexity, execution requirements, and resource availability in far-edge devices, edge servers, and CC servers.•We present a real use-case application for activity detection to test the proposed execution model. We collected the real datasets from 15 users in the University of Malaya and thoroughly tested activity detection applications in multiple settings.
The rest of the article is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the state of the art on MDSM applications in MECC environments. Section 3 presents the preliminary discussion on MDSM application components and their essential properties. Section 4 elaborates on the working of the adaptive execution model. The empirical performance evaluation of proposed execution models with real use-case application is presented in Section 5. Finally, the article is concluded in Section 6.
