Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) continues to be a hot topic for today's commercial activities (Arora, 2013, Baker and Kiymaz, 2011). M&A obtains valuable resources, immediate access to products, and/or distribution channels, and, thus, it is functioned as an external source of innovation (Heeley et al., 2006). Since more and more M&A deals are taking place in high-tech and science-based sectors, technology-driven mergers and acquisitions (Tech M&A) has received increasing attention in recent years (He and Wang, 2014, Lin, 2012, Stahl, 2010). Tech M&A usually realizes values through a combination of technological assets (Jones et al., 2001), such as research and development (R&D) skills, experienced personnel, and specific technologies (Inkpen et al., 2002, Lehto and Lehtoranta, 2004). In this situation, technological variables start to occupy a larger proportion for considerations in M&A strategies, and would even be equal to financial and managerial variables, the leading factors of M&A in the past years (Wei et al., 2009).
Although the volume of M&A deals is steadily increasing, its failure rate is also very high — normally between 70% and 90% (Christensen et al., 2011). The selection of appropriate target companies to well-match the strategic purpose of M&A has become a core phase of M&A (Kengelbach, 2011). In terms of the technological perspective, we summarize several issues that trouble M&A decision makers heavily as follows: 1) which technology is our target, which aspects of technical potentials are we looking for, and which company could be the acquired candidates (Park et al., 2013, Yurov et al., 2013); and 2) how to evaluate these candidates and select a suitable target for a successful M&A on technical integration (Yu et al., 2015).
Technical intelligence has always been applied for strategic decision making in high technology environments (Daim et al., 2011) to assess the fit between a technology and a firm's strategy (Walsh and Linton, 2011). Such intelligence would hold great capability to aid Tech M&A-oriented strategic management and decision making. Patent is considered as one of the most important science, technology, and innovation (ST&I) data for technical intelligence. New knowledge, technological capabilities, companies, and inventors reflect in patents as meaningful ST&I markers (Porter and Cunningham, 2004), and patent analysis is applied to help identify these markers for diverse ST&I needs, e.g. Tech M&A. For example, patent number, patent citation, inventor, and international patent classification (IPC) are employed as technological indicators to profile potential target candidates (Yang et al., 2014), and quite a few semantic approaches, e.g. co-word analysis and subject–action–object (SAO)-based analysis, are widely used to help investigate the concrete technological concepts of patents and the interactions among such concepts (Zhang et al., 2014b). Those efforts make great sense to explore the technology relatedness between different companies (Park et al., 2013).
In spite of a number of studies that have devoted efforts to engage patent analysis and text mining techniques to promote M&A target selection activities, real-world M&A needs are not as simple as what we imagine, where different acquiring companies have quite different situations, e.g., strategy, market position, and government policy (Brueller et al., 2014), and we could never use these quantitative approaches to take the place of expert knowledge and related decision-making actions. Therefore, how to further amplify the roles of patent analysis and text mining techniques and combine them with expert knowledge to explore meaningful technical intelligence to facilitate the M&A needs is still crucial. As an example, Tech M&A would hold interests on the target technologies, which are not only important from technological aspects but also promising for acquirers' long-term strategies. In this context, existing studies only pursued to set up comprehensive indexes to calculate technology relatedness and rank target technologies in a designed queue (Hussinger, 2010, Yang et al., 2014), but ignored to think about those numeric values with real-world M&A strategies, e.g. possibility and opportunities of post-M&A technological synergy, and combine them with necessary expert knowledge.
To address the above concerns, this paper attempts to propose a methodology, based on patent analysis and text mining techniques, to extract technical intelligence to identify Tech M&A target technologies and evaluate the possibility of technological synergy between relevant target companies to facilitate M&A target selection. We apply a term clumping process and a trend analysis together with policy and market information to profile present R&D status and capture future development signals and trends in order to grasp significant domain-based technologies. Furthermore, a comparison between an acquirer and leading players is used to identify significant technologies and sub-technologies for specific strategy-oriented Tech M&A activities. Finally, aiming to recommend appropriate M&A target companies, we set up an index-based system to evaluate target candidates from both firms-side perspective and target firm-side perspective and differentially weigh for specific M&A situations. A case study in China's computer numerical control machine tools (CNCMT) industry – China's key technological field with high technical barriers and difficulties for a new competitor to enter – is used to demonstrate the feasibility of our methodology. We specifically select an emerging Chinese CNCMT company — Estun Automation (ESTUN) as a given acquiring company to engage all the considerations that would happen in a real M&A decision-making process into our empirical analysis, and the results would be utilized by the company for real Tech M&A activities.
The main contributions of this paper include: 1) an adaptive analytic method for Tech M&A target selection, which combines both quantitative and qualitative methodologies; 2) focusing on specific M&A strategies, a text mining-based approach is applied to analyze both technical terms and IPCs to help identify significant technological components; and 3) an evaluation index is built up to investigate and measure the relationships between target firms and an acquirer, and target firms themselves, where both technical and strategic aspects are involved.
In next section, we review the literatures on Tech M&A and related patent analysis techniques. We detail the research design and methods in the Methodology section. The Empirical study section offers a case study of the CNCMT field in China to demonstrate the feasibility of our method. Finally, we discuss insights gained from our method and the case study, and address concerns on limitations and future studies.
