The emergence of a network data transmission technology has become the source of a number of issues related to security of information resources connected through the Internet. According to the statistics given in the Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT) the level of computer threats each year remains high [55]. Fig. 1 shows the indicators that reflect the number of security incidents registered in the United States and which reports were provided by organizations of critical infrastructures. The majority of security incidents covers different classes of network attacks, namely DoS attacks, network scanning, SQL injections, etc. Among them organizations are presented in the field of banking, energy, telecommunication, dams, transportation, critical manufacturing, healthcare, etc. Computer network attacks affect both large business enterprises and public sector organizations and end users. Today every device connected to the computer network has a number of vulnerabilities and weaknesses in the implementation of the algorithms and software which are laid in their operation. In addition publicly available information allows even inexperienced users, that have access to a network space, to make the network attacks of various types.Download : Download high-res image (81KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. ICS incidents reported (in thousands).
It is yet worth noting a number of other reasons which affect the network security. During a continuous development of information and network technologies attacker skills and instruments are improved, which are fundamental factors leading to security breaches. Moreover the association of individual computers in local area networks creates an additional number of problems associated with ensuring their security. Therefore the task of detection and prevention of network attacks based on new tools and techniques is an actual area of scientific research.
To solve the problems of network attack detection different approaches realizing signature based techniques, computational intelligence methods, for example, neural networks, immune systems, neuro-fuzzy classifiers, support vector machines (SVM), etc. and their combination can be used.
In the paper the problem of network attack detection is solved by a hybrid approach, the novelty of which is in combining the traditional signature based detection model and several additional models – a statically trained feed-forward neural networks, neuro-fuzzy classifiers, SVM and dynamically trained immune detectors which are indicators of the multi-level and adaptive network attack detection.
The use of neural networks, neuro-fuzzy classifiers and support vector machines assumes that the nature of the intrusive actions over time remains constant and predictable. While applying immune detectors, we take into account the dynamic component of attacker's behavior: in the detection mode the classifiers continue to be trained on new features of detected attacks. In order to accelerate the training, testing and launching of the detectors it is proposed to use a technique that implements the principal component analysis.
Thus, the goal of the paper is to develop and evaluate a hybrid approach to detect network attacks based on a multi-level integration of traditional (signature based) mechanisms and computational intelligence detection models, including the development of an intrusion detection tool based on this approach and performing a set of experiments.
The paper is based on the article [8] which has been significantly expanded by the realization and evaluation of different hybridization mechanisms. This paper discusses several hybridization schemes combining intelligent classifiers, namely (1) a simple voting technique, (2) an improved stacking algorithm, (3) a technique using the referee (arbiter) based on the dynamic areas of competence and (4) a classification tree with neural networks as nodes. The main contribution of the paper is in the theoretical and practical aspects of the applicability of the proposed combination schemes.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of related works which consider network attack detection approaches using artificial neural networks, immune systems, neuro-fuzzy systems, SVM and their combination. Section 3 outlines the proposed neural network model. The immune approach is discussed in section 4. Sections 5 and 6 describe general concepts related to the neuro-fuzzy classifiers and support vector machines. The realization of the principal component analysis is presented in section 7. Section 8 provides a general hybridization scheme and used methods of classifier combination. Section 9 contains the description of the computational experiments. In conclusion the performed results are summarized, and the further research tasks are suggested.
