Collaborative learning situations involve knowledge building when they encourage students to think and reason by confronting their ideas and points of view, formulating arguments, and receiving constructive criticism (Dillenbourg et al., 1995; Miyake, 1986; Webb et al., 1995). However, productive collaborative learning requires interaction processes that sustain the co-elaboration of meaning and the knowledge to construct shared representations of the problem to be solved (Baker, 2015; Barron, 2003; Dillenbourg, 1999; Roschelle & Teasley, 1995). Grounding (Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark & Schaefer, 1989) is the specific process by which learners attain and maintain mutual understanding in dialogue. By this process, learners establish a joint-problem space, namely a shared conceptual structure that develops within interactions (Teasley & Roschelle, 1993).
The present study concerns learning situations within which two groups of students living in different cultural and geographical areas (Guadeloupe and Québec) yet speaking the same language (French, of different dialectal varieties) collaborate via videoconferences for several weeks. The two groups investigate the same object of study (in one case, Geothermal Energy and in another, Traditional Folktales) in their contexts and collaborate with the other context on a given common problem (installation of a data centre in one of the two geothermal regions and writing a shared tale). By the term “context” here we mean the experiential world within which students acquire knowledge and develop competencies. Context refers to both the cultural background and the physical situation that influence interpretation and representation of a given object to be studied (Brown et al., 1989). This implies recognising the situated and embedded nature of learning (Lave, 1988), and that students are shaped by the context in which their education occurs. In our learning scenario, whilst the two groups have a common object of study in their respective contexts, the meaning of this is quite different in each case, because of specific geological, climatic, economic environments, and different regional heritages (Geertz, 1973; Schwartz, 2014). The common task, given its different meanings in the two different cultural, geographical areas, is designed to be favourable to the emergence of the students' awareness regarding this contrast between the two contexts (Bourdeau et al., 2015; Forissier et al., 2014; Forissier et al., 2017). The originality of such a learning situation is threefold: (i) the learning scenario is designed in order to put contextual knowledge in play in interaction; (ii) the collaborative learning scenario can lead to various degrees of misunderstanding if the students fail to grasp the gap between the two contexts; (iii) the scenario concerns the transfer and the co-construction of knowledge between students on the basis of confronting the two contexts.
Several studies in the field of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning1 (CSCL) recognise that intercultural collaborative learning offers the opportunity to share knowledge forged in situated contexts (e.g., cultural customs, ecological systems, astronomical and geographical phenomena) and gain better understanding (e.g., Anakwe & Christensen, 1999; Levin & Cohen, 1985; Popov et al., 2019; Uzuner, 2009; Vatrapu, 2008; Zhang, 2013). These studies broadly refer to the Individualist–Collectivist (I–C) dimension of Hofstede's (1997) model of national culture to describe differences in culturally-based group work processes. The model helps to describe the extent to which a culture shapes a person's dependence on the self or the group, and therefore the learner's attitude towards common goals. However, here, we are interested in the emergence and evolution of contextual knowledge in interaction; and the way by which the confrontation in dialogue of alternative contexts (e.g., differences in cultural heritages and ecological phenomena) may be constructive and productive (Barron, 2003; Cohen, 1994), and may open the mind of students to other cultural, geographical contexts (Wegerif et al., 2019).
The aim of this exploratory study is therefore to analyse the students' interactive processes across two cultural, geographical contexts as they co-elaborate knowledge and attempt to establish “what has been said has been mutually understood” (Clark & Brennan, 1991), in order to perform the common task. We define understanding as giving significance to a given object and analysing the relations of the given object to other aspects of the world (Lave, 1997). We recognise learning as an active process of acquisition of knowledge, through experiences and practices (Lave, 1988), and through social interactions (Stahl, 2005). This means that interaction, whether technology-mediated or not, constitutes a context itself, in which knowledge is discussed and develops, through culturally-related communication skills, as well as on the basis of prior representations and meanings. In this study, we focus on the latter point. We mobilise the interactions paradigm in collaborative learning research, including the concept of co-elaboration of knowledge in dialogue processes (Dillenbourg et al., 1995; Schwarz & Baker, 2017). This field of research particularly focuses on high-level cognitive processes involved in peer interaction such as elaborating, justifying, arguing, reasoning, and understanding each other (Baker, 2015; King, 2002). Our research question is: what are the interactive processes by which students in different contexts (cultural backgrounds and geographical situations) co-elaborate shared meanings and knowledge with respect to school-based problems? We also discuss the potential education value of our situations of study.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we provide a review of the literature on the co-elaboration of knowledge in collaborative learning and intercultural collaborative learning, including grounding process. We argue for our choice of the term context rather than that of culture and we describe our empirical study. In Section 3, we present the two experimentations that we implemented using a case study approach, and our qualitative method of interaction analysis. Our results are presented in Section 4, which examines two interaction sequences involving explicit grounding processes, which differ in terms of duration, educational levels, knowledge demands, and organisation of the groups. In Section 5, we discuss how the mutual understanding on the gap between contexts can be supported. Finally, in Section 6, we conclude with implications for the design of cross-cultural learning situations that are favourable to the development of students' knowledge.
