The past few decades have seen a rise in demand for seafood that has been farmed based on certified organic standards, notably in European countries. According to the Codex Alimentarius Commission (2011), organic aquaculture refers to the processes and practices of ecological production management systems that promote biological cycles, biodiversity and biological activity. Technically, organic agriculture primarily aims at optimizing the health and productivity of interdependent communities of soil life, plants, animals and people (Prein et al., 2012). As a result, when most consumers see the organic label, they think of a superior product compared to conventionally raised varieties, from an environmental, health, and animal welfare perspective. In Europe, the leading product in organic aquaculture is Atlantic salmon, followed by the Mediterranean species seabass and seabream, freshwater salmonids, and carp (Szeremeta et al., 2010). Marine Harvest Ireland (2015), the world’s leading seafood company, claimed that there are three main differences between organic salmon and regular salmon. First of all, the organic salmon are nourished with a diet containing only organic approved natural ingredients from sustainable sources and all ingredients are free from genetically modified organisms. Secondly, organic farmed salmon are reared in large pens that allow them to follow their natural shoaling behavior. Thirdly, the organic production sites are continuously flushed with clean water, avoiding any build-up of parasites or pollutants. Due to the natural and healthy environment and low population density, organic salmon are well recognized as having good muscle tone and body shape, which makes organically farmed salmon a superior product with higher price. However, since there was little distinction in appearance, texture or flavor between the two varieties of the farm-raised, it is not reliable to depend on human vision detection, especially not suitable in the fish industry when tons of products are involved during a short period. The truth is that nowadays organic salmon control is so inadequate and so naively based on confidence. Hence, the growth of the organic salmon market introduces a potential risk for fraud that could have devastating effects on consumer confidence. Therefore there is a need for common techniques such as cooling (Hu and Sun, Nov 2000, Sun and Hu, Jan 2003, Mc Donald and Sun, May 2001, Wang and Sun, Nov 2002a, Wang and Sun, Nov 2002b, Sun and Wang, Nov 2000, Sun, Mar 1997, Sun and Brosnan, Sep 1999, Zheng and Sun, Dec 2004, Wang and Sun, Feb 2004), freezing (Kiani et al., 2011) and drying (Cui et al., Feb 2008, Sun and Woods, Jan 1994) to maintain the quality as salmon is highly perishable, it is also necessary to develop online inspection tools for quality assurance, which could also be very useful for stopping fraud in the existing organizations.
Several studies have been carried out to investigate the distinction between wild and cultured fish (Molkentin et al., 2015). With salmonids, compositional and isotopic parameters were normally applied, such as differentiators derived from the measurements of fatty acids (Martinez et al., 2009), stable isotopes (Schröder and De Leaniz, 2011), carotenoids (Turujman et al., 1996), and 13C-NMR patterns (Aursand et al., 2009). Nevertheless, the differentiation between organic and conventional salmon is less thoroughly investigated. Hence, appropriate techniques for the rapid, non-contact, automatic and accurate identification of organically farmed salmon are required to protect the consumer from wrongly labelled products in the fish industry.
Computer vision system (CVS) has been widely used for such tasks as defects detection (Cubero et al., 2016), shape classification (Du and Sun, Jan 2005, Cubero et al., 2011), quality grading and variety classification (Jackman et al., 2009, Garrido-Novell et al., 2012). Currently, it has been reported to assign color (Quevedo et al., 2010, Wu and Sun, Jan 2013b), estimate firmness (Quevedo and Aguilera, 2010), measure fat content (Stien et al., 2007), detect melanin spots (Mathiassen et al., 2007) and fish bone (Mery et al., 2011) in salmon. Since normal CVS operates at visible wavelengths, it is not able to assess the internal quality attributes which are not detectable in the visible range (Wu et al., 2012). Therefore, hyperspectral imaging (HSI) has been proposed as a versatile and promising analytical tool in food quality control (Kamruzzaman et al., 2012, Elmasry et al., 2012, Feng and Sun, 2012, Wu and Sun, Jul 2013a, Feng and Sun, May 15, 2013, Feng et al., May 15 2013, Kamruzzaman et al., Nov 1 2013, ElMasry et al., Jul 2013, Barbin et al., May 15 2013, Lorente et al., 2012). By integrating both imaging technique and spectroscopy into one system, HSI provides physical and chemical characteristics together with spatial information (Kamruzzaman et al., 2015). Recently, HSI technique has gained a wide recognition as an effective and valuable method for grading and classification of pork (Barbin et al., 2012), discrimination of lamb muscles (Kamruzzaman et al., 2011) and categorization and authentication of red meat (Kamruzzaman et al., 2012). However, to the best of our knowledge, no research endeavours have been reported for differentiation between conventionally and organically farmed salmon using neither computer vision nor hyperspectral imaging technique.
Partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) is a popular chemometric technique for supervised classification of the spectra and it is increasingly-used in hyperspectral data analysis for classification and discrimination problems (Chevallier et al., 2006). Machine learning methods, including artificial neural networks (ANN), support vector machine (SVM) and random forests (RF), have also been applied in the multivariate analysis. Among them, RF is a novel and powerful statistical classifier that is well established in other disciplines but is relatively unknown in food research. Random forests, a tree-based ensemble classifier, has been shown effective when applied to classification of hyperspectral data (Lawrence et al., 2006). As the name suggests, RF classifier first generates many classification trees and then combines the predictions to yield more accurate classification result (Cutler et al., 2007). The algorithm begins with the selection of a great number of bootstrap samples from the dataset. Generally, approximately 63% of the original observations would occur at least once in a typical bootstrap sample. Those not occurred in a bootstrap sample are called out-of-bag (OOB) observations (Cutler et al., 2007). A classification tree is fit to each bootstrap sample with only a few of randomly selected variables available for the binary partitioning at each node. The trees are fully grown and each can be utilized to predict the OOB observations. The predicted class is computed by majority vote of the OOB predictions, with ties split randomly. Accuracies and error rates are calculated for each observation, and then averaged over all observations. Since the OOB observations are not used in the fitting of the trees, the OOB estimates are essentially cross-validated accuracy estimates. Meanwhile, SVM has been successfully used for near infrared classification tasks, such as material identification (Langeron et al., 2007) and food discrimination (Chen et al., 2007). This technique aims at finding the optimal separation surface between classes based on the identification of support vectors that are the most representative training samples of the side of the class (Mercier and Lennon, 2003). When the training data are not linearly separable, a kernel method is applied to simulate a non-linear projection of the data in a higher dimension space, where the classes are linearly separable. One of the major features of SVM models is the fact that good generalization performance can be obtained even with a relatively small dataset (Vapnik, 2013).
Therefore, the goal of this study is to investigate the suitability of using CVS and HSI systems in the visible and short-wave near infrared range (400–1000 nm) and the long-wave near infrared range (897–1753 nm) for authentication of organic salmon in fresh and chill-stored conditions. Compared to the previous research using HSI, this work has some novelties. First of all, this research includes the comparison between CVS and HSI. Since CVS is much cheaper than HSI, it is advantageous for food industry to choose CVS if similar performances were obtained by CVS and HSI. Though RF is a popular machine learning algorithm, it is rare to be used for hyperspectral imaging. Therefore, it is innovative to investigate the potential of RF to deal with hyperspectral data. Additionally, extended mixture model (EMM) filter, which is an advanced multivariate filtering technique, is adopted to help simplify the end model and improve the robustness. The successful outcome of this study would be very advantageous to assure consumers and buyers of authentic organic salmon fillets. The specific objectives of this study are to (1) assess and compare the potential of CVS and HSI techniques based on full wavelength ranges of 400–1000 nm (Spectral Set I) and 897–1753 nm (Spectral Set II) to discriminate tested samples using three classification algorithms: PLS-DA, SVM and RF; (2) identify optimum wavelengths carrying most important information to classify between fresh organic, fresh conventional, chill-stored organic and chill-stored conventional salmon samples; and (3) evaluate the performance of the simplified discrimination models.
