Chemical products are ubiquitous in modern society, and there are increasingly more applications for specialty chemicals and customized formulations. With this growing trend, it is more important than ever to intelligently design new chemical products. One promising approach to chemical product design is in utilizing various semi-empirical chemical property models in conjunction with numerical optimization techniques. This class of optimization problems has come to be known as computer-aided molecular design (CAMD) and has witnessed great success in the literature, especially as applied to the design of a single molecular species. However, the extension of these methodologies to the design of mixtures and composite chemical products remains challenging. These multi-component design problems, identified herein as computer-aided mixture design (CAMxD) problems, concern optimizing some performance function by designing a mixture of compounds, determining both optimal molecular structures for every unknown component and mole fractions for every species in the mixture.
One distinguishing feature of CAMxD problems is that they simultaneously consider many different types of compounds and must be able to predict relevant mixture (typically solution-phase) properties. Given the complex nature of many mixture properties, it is often necessary to incorporate mixture thermodynamics equations directly into CAMxD problems. To this end, a very large number of CAMxD approaches have applied the UNIFAC (Fredenslund et al., 1975) method to calculating solubilities, phase equilibrium, partition coefficients, and various other properties. For example, early work from Gani and Brignole (1983) proposed the use of the UNIFAC method as a way to calculate activity coefficients in the design of an extraction solvent. Odele and Macchietto (1993) also applied UNIFAC to calculate mixture thermodynamics in a few solvent design problems. Many other approaches facilitated the use of UNIFAC in the context of molecular and mixture design, including multi-stage optimization strategies (Naser and Fournier, 1991) and decomposition approaches (Gani and Fredenslund, 1993, Klein et al., 1992, Conte et al., 2012, Conte et al., 2011). Furthermore, the applications have been numerous, ranging from integrated design of compounds and processes (Papadopoulos and Linke, 2006) to calculating phase equilibria in designing crystallization solvents (Karunanithi et al., 2006) to designing solvents and solvent blends to reduce the environmental impact of industrial processes (Buxton et al., 1999, Pistikopoulos and Stefanis, 1998). The solution strategies to UNIFAC-based molecular and mixture design are sometimes heuristical. For example, Ourique and Telles (1998) used simulated annealing to reduce the complexity of the problem so as to best apply UNIFAC. Other approaches (Benavides et al., 2015, Van Dyk and Nieuwoudt, 2000) have also combined heuristic optimization techniques with UNIFAC to reduce the difficulty of searching through a large feasible region. This list of works is by no means exhaustive and is only intended to provide some idea of the diversity of applications of UNIFAC in the CAMxD literature.
More recently, there has been growing interest in using the SAFT equation of state (Chapman et al., 1989) to solve CAMD/CAMxD problems. For example, Pereira et al. (2011) addressed the design of separations solvents using SAFT. Lampe et al. (2014) used SAFT to solve fluid selection and process optimization problems to design an organic Rankine cycle, and Lampe et al. (2015) utilized group contribution methods to better incorporate CAMD methodologies into these problems. SAFT is quickly becoming a useable model in a CAMD/CAMxD context due to the development of group contribution methods like SAFT-γ (Lymperiadis et al., 2007), application to the prediction of mixture properties (Papaioannou et al., 2011), and the use of the group contribution models in various design problems (Burger et al., 2015).
UNIFAC and SAFT-γ are natural choices for CAMD/CAMxD as they use group contribution methods, and groups often represent the design space of these problems. Furthermore, both these methods have been demonstrated to be accurate and useful in a molecular and mixture design context. However, one significant issue with both is that they rely on binary interaction parameters for every pair of groups in solution. Estimating these parameters requires large data sets of thermodynamic properties, and such data sets often lack enough chemical diversity to make robust parameter estimates for many types of molecular structures. Consequently, many of these binary interaction parameters are simply not available. In this way, the design space of any CAMxD problem using UNIFAC or SAFT-γ is inherently limited to the chemical space represented by the available binary interaction parameters. An alternative way of estimating the thermodynamics of mixtures is through using one of several post-processing methods for the COSMO solvation model (Klamt and Schüürmann, 1993), a relative of continuum solvation models used in quantum chemistry calculations. COSMO-RS (Klamt, 1995) and COSMO-SAC (Lin and Sandler, 2002) are two of these post-processing methods that are continuing to gain popularity. What distinguishes COSMO-RS and -SAC and makes them particularly attractive in a CAMxD context is that they do not involve binary interaction parameters. Using only molecular volumes and composition-independent charge density distributions called sigma profiles, COSMO-RS and -SAC are able to make accurate mixture thermodynamics estimates. In a CAMxD context, COSMO-based thermodynamics enable a much larger search space in that we are free to consider any molecular species so long as we can estimate its sigma profile and molecular volume.
A COSMO-based mixture design approach incorporates accurate ab initio quantum chemical information for any species that is fixed in the mixture (i.e., not in the design space). This means that this COSMO-based approach can be applied to thermodynamics calculations for non-standard species like transition states, radicals, and ionic liquids. Other methods cannot capture the complexities present in these systems as they are often parameterized for neutral, singlet ground state structures. This ability to incorporate quantum chemical information greatly expands the classes of problems that can be addressed by CAMxD.
In this work, we propose the use of group contribution methods to estimate sigma profiles and molecular volumes. This enables the use of numerous established mixture and molecular design strategies. Furthermore, we solve the CAMxD problem by (1) decomposition into constituent molecular design and mole fraction problems and (2) projection of the design variables on a lower-dimensional space, namely that of the sigma moments (analogous to statistical moments of the sigma profiles) of each compound in solution. We probe the search space defined by the sigma moments with derivative-free optimization algorithms, which enable an efficient search through our design variables without the computational burden of calculating mixture thermodynamics for a large number of solutions.
In the next section, we provide an introduction to the COSMO solvation model and the COSMO-RS and COSMO-SAC post-processing steps. Furthermore, we provide more detail for sigma profiles and sigma moments. In Section 3, we discuss our group contribution models for estimating sigma profiles, sigma moments, and molecular volumes. Then, in Section 4, we integrate COSMO-based thermodynamics into the CAMxD problem. In Section 5, we investigate two case studies: a separation solvent design problem and a reaction rates optimization problem. Finally, in Section 6, we provide a summary of the work and draw conclusions about COSMO-based thermodynamics as applied to mixture design problems.
