The rapid growth of the WWW has opened avenues to infinite information, which makes locating selective documents challenging. The solution to resolve such problems is to employ information retrieval techniques. Automatic text summarization is a text-mining tool that extracts essential sentences for maximum coverage of all the concepts of a document. It reduces the time consumed in document reading without losing the general issues for users' comprehension. With document summary available at their disposal, users can easily decide its relevance to their interests and acquire desired documents with much less mental tribulation. The three common approaches employed in automatic summary extraction are the statistical approach, the linguistic approach and the hybrid approach. Statistics-based approach is based on keywords, title, cue words, and position (Keyword, Probability, etc.), which derives weights of key terms and determines the importance of the sentence by the total weight it contains (Ganapathiraju et al, 2002, Gupta, Lehal, 2010), whereas the linguistic approach identifies relationship of terms in the document through part-of-speech tagging, grammar analysis, thesaurus usage, and extraction of meaningful sentences. Linguistic approach also adopts simple statistical computation (e.g. term-frequency, inverse-document-frequency (TFIDF) weighting scheme) to filter terms. Statistical approach may be efficient in computation but linguistic approach looks into term semantics, which may yield better summary results (Gregory and McCoy, 2000). Hybrid approach combines both statistics based and linguistic based methods (Raje et al., 2009).
Researchers have proposed a number of Text summarization methods for natural language sentences (Batcha, Zaki, 2010, dAcierno et al, 2012, Erkan, Radev, 2004, Gregory, McCoy, 2000, Hovy, 2005, Lafe, 1997, Sankar, Shobha, 2009, Uddin, Khan, 2007).
This paper proposes how algorithm ATSSC (Automatic Text Summarization using Soft Computing) creates a summary of entered text document in seven steps mentioned as follows:
1.First, it takes the text document and identifies for whom or for what the document is all about. We can call it as a theme of the document i.e. title of that document.2.Pronominal references are resolved for improvement of the results in the proposed approach because in some cases, middle order sentences can have references (like it, they, her, him etc.).3.Text-Clustering is done in the text document as the text document may contain subtopics.4.Parser verifies the syntactical errors in the sentences and tries to remove tag based ambiguity from the sentences.5.The procedure of sentence reduction is done through semantic similarity of sentence score, title characteristics score and n-gram co-occurrence statistics score of sentences in the paragraph.6.The procedure of sentence combination is done through SVO (Subject, Verb, and Object) rules/human summarization rules for sentences. Before applying SVO rules, the sentences are represented semantically in First Order Logic (FOL) form and tag based training is applied to them.7.Finally, Summary is generated according to required percentage.
The main objectives of this work were
a)To produce a decent quality summary.b)To produce a summary at least for technical text document.c)The compression ratio was not our primary concern.d)Reduction should be accomplished cleverly.e)Sentence grammar should be maintained accurately.
The novelty of this paper is as follows: It uses its own title identification mechanism using web, semantic word and sentence similarity mechanism, semantic representation using chunker and word disambiguation through parser mechanism to find the summary of a text document.
This paper is further organized as follows: Section 2 represents classification of Text summarization systems. Section 3 describes the proposed system architecture and separate procedures involved in it. Section 4 contributes to experimental results for DUC-2007 dataset and our dataset using ROUGE toolkit and their comparison with other methods. Section 5 provides a parametric analysis of the proposed approach and subjective analysis of generated summaries. The paper ends with section 6 presenting the conclusion and future scope.
