Plants have to adapt to environmental changes such as e.g. extreme temperatures, drought, and high salinity.
To accomplish the protection of its cells, higher plants developed the late embryogenesis abundant proteins like the dehydrins (Hong-Bo et al., 2005). Dehydrins have manifolds of functions during drought conditions or other circumstances with high ion concentrations. They have been reported to bind to phospholipids, reduce reactive oxygen species by complexing Cu2+-ions, bind other ions and water, complex Ca2+-ions after phosphorylation, protect enzymes, interact with the cytoskeletons and bind DNA using Zn2+-ions as cofactor (HARA, 2010).
In order to fulfill all these different functions, the protein has to be very flexible to interact with other involved proteins, DNA segments, phospholipids and ions. This is achieved by a lack of higher order protein structures (HOS). This concept is wide-spread likewise in other organisms e.g. in the human heat shock protein β-6 and the Alzheimer’s disease associated tau protein. This type of proteins, also known as intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), do form HOS in presence of a functional binding partner (Ithuralde et al., 2016, Hara et al., 2011). Furthermore, the structure in aqueous solution for many of these proteins is still not solved and the binding sites have mostly not been described yet.
This work focuses on the KS-type dehydrin AtHIRD11 (Uniprot identifier: Q9SLJ2) originally derived from Arabidopsis thaliana. The main purpose was to characterize metal ion binding sites and use information from literature and own mobility-shift affinity capillary electrophoresis (ACE) data to create a model which describes the known facts for an AtHIRD11-Cu2+-complex, such as the change in structural rigidity by metal ions. For this reason a dual approach has been performed. During the experimental approach the binding behavior of AtHIRD11 towards the metal ions Ca2+, Mg2+, Ba2+, Sr2+, Mn2+, Au3+, Ni2+, SeO32− and Zn2+ was investigated. On the other hand, a theoretical attempt was made to compute a Cu2+-complex in order to visualize the findings and support the interpretation of new experimental results.
