Differences in major choice play an important role in racial and gender wage gaps among college-educated workers. Female and minority students are less likely than their male, non-minority counterparts to graduate with the highest-paying science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) degrees (Beede, Julian, Langdon, McKittrick, Khan, & Doms, Griffith, 2010). Consequently, they earn significantly less as full-time workers four years after graduation (Cataldi, Siegel, Shepherd, & Cooney, 2014). This pattern holds even at the most elite four-year institutions which enroll the most accomplished female and minority students.1
Though this under-representation may be due to differences in occupational preferences, evidence also suggests that obstacles at the undergraduate level, in particular, a lack of effective mentoring, stereotype threats, and unique curricular needs may also contribute (Kahn, Ginther, 2017, National Academies). Consequently, the National Academies in its 2011 report, “Expanding Underrepresented Minority Participation,” recommends revamping introductory courses, fostering formal and informal mentoring relationships between students and faculty, and building a critical mass of student peers. Institutions have begun implementing programs aligning with these recommendations, but little rigorous research exists testing whether they effectively achieve their objectives of improving the academic success of women and minorities in STEM fields.2
In this paper, I evaluate the impact of a freshman learning community called the Experimental Study Group (ESG) which operates at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), a highly-selective, STEM-focused institution. ESG aims to make the transition to MIT easier, especially for freshman who come from non-elite high schools and/or traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM. ESG features small classes and teaching methods that differ from mainstream versions of introductory subjects. Students co-enroll in courses and take advantage of dedicated study-spaces to foster peer networks. Finally, students are intentionally mentored by both MIT upperclassmen and ESG faculty. In this way, ESG combines a policy-relevant bundle of treatments designed to address obstacles to academic success at the undergraduate level.
Each year demand for ESG exceeds program capacity, so a lottery is conducted to determine which students may enroll. I exploit the lottery based admissions system to estimate the causal impact of ESG participation. Because a student’s lottery number is not the only factor that determines enrollment, I adopt an instrumental variables (IV) approach where lottery offers instrument for enrollment. As long as lottery numbers are random, causally affect enrollment, and affect academic achievement only through enrollment in ESG, this approach delivers unbiased treatment effects corresponding to a local average treatment effect (Angrist & Pischke, 2009).
This work contributes to the literature on interventions for increasing persistence among at-risk populations in post-secondary education. It advances the literature in a few key ways. First, this study generates well-identified estimates of program impacts. Previous evaluations of programs to support minorities in STEM have been hindered by a lack of randomization. For instance, the well-known evaluation of the Myerhoff Scholars Program, an intervention at the University of Maryland - Baltimore County, directly compares outcomes for African American participants to those who declined to participate. This “declined” sample looks different along observable characteristics, so the estimates may be biased (Maton, Hrabowski, & Schmitt, 2000). Within the set of studies investigating learning communities generally, there is one well-identified randomized controlled trial. However, this RCT took place at six community colleges (Visher, Weiss, Weissman, Rudd, & Washington, 2012). Not only do women and underrepresented minorities form majorities in the student populations at these institutions, but the learning communities also lacked features which may be particularly important in a STEM-context such as intentional mentoring. By contrast, this study generates causal estimates of program impacts for students at a four-year, STEM-focused institution where women and minorities are underrepresented in the student population.
In this paper, I both investigate effects of ESG participation on students generally as well as treatment effect heterogeneity by gender, race, and low-income status.3 I find no statistically significant effects of ESG participation for the average ESG applicant, though the confidence intervals are wide. By contrast, I detect larger, statistically significant effects for female students. The point estimates for academic impacts on minority and low-income students are also large, but the estimates are noisier and thus not statistically significant at conventional levels. I also find that ESG significantly increases the probability that underrepresented minority students will major in mathematics, electrical engineering, or computer science, the highest-paying majors at MIT as measured by senior-year salary offers. There is no statistically detectable impact on major choices for all students or the other subgroups of students (female or low-income students), though the imprecision of the estimates makes it impossible to rule out effects that would represent meaningful increases.
To provide suggestive evidence on what mechanisms may be driving the treatment effects for female students, I analyze undergraduate enrolled student surveys and assess whether the high proportion of female instructors for ESG courses can potentially explain the academic effects for female students. I find that female students earn higher grades when their courses are taught by female instructors at MIT. The female instructor-female student complementary effects are larger in introductory courses than in more advanced courses. Moreover, the complementary effects are larger among ESG applicants than students generally. However, the effects are not large enough to fully explain the positive academic effects of ESG participation for female students. Features of ESG other than majority female instructors likely drive the academic gains.
The next section describes the Experimental Study Group, the student-level data I analyze, and the sample of interest. Section 3 presents evidence on the academic effects of participation in the Experimental Study Group with a focus on treatment effect heterogeneity. Section 4 reports estimates of the effects on major choice. Section 5 investigates possible mechanisms underlying the results, and Section 6 concludes.
