Websites such as Amazon.com allows users to search for products in both thematic categories (e.g. Valentine's Day Gifts) as well as according to taxonomic categories (e.g. Electronics). With thousands upon thousands of items to choose from on sites like this, categorization might play an important role in reducing the effects of “choice overload”. Numerous studies have looked at the effects of reducing the overall number of choices available (Chernev, 2003, Dar-Nimrod et al., 2009, Inbar et al., 2011, Iyengar and Lepper, 2000, Scheibehenne et al., 2009), but few have looked at situations in which one cannot reduce the amount of choice options in a set (Mogilner, Rudnick, & Iyengar, 2008).
While little research has looked at choice overload when number of options cannot be reduced, there has been work showing the role of categorization in product assortments. Poynor and Diehl (2007) found that categorizing assortments thematically rather than taxonomically created a greater perception of similarity between products within the assortment. Lamberton and Diehl (2013) looked at the effects of benefit-based assortments (e.g. a rental car company highlighting differences of their cars through “prestige” or “adrenaline”) versus attribute-based assortments (e.g. a rental car company highlighting differences as SUVs, sedans, etc.) on consumer perceptions, and found that benefit-based assortments led to greater perceptions of assortment similarity. They also suggested that future research should test whether these categorization effects on perceived similarity could affect choice overload. Building on this, we explore the effects of thematic versus taxonomic categorization on a very large assortment of classes, tested in the naturalistic computer environment of a university course catalog system. We expected to find that thematic categorization would make the classes seem more similar to one another (Poynor & Diehl, 2007). When options seem similar to one another, it may make it more difficult to discriminate between options, and thus may increase choice overload. Additionally, we expect that the difficulty in discriminating between options could lead to users spending more time in our online environment before making a choice.
Within this paper, we first review pertinent literature on choice overload, and then define the difference between taxonomic and thematic categorization. Following this, we clarify our hypotheses on the effects of these categorizations on choice overload in the online computer course catalog environment, as well as the role of familiarity in choice environments. Finally, we discuss our findings and suggest some implications that website owners should take into consideration when utilizing thematic categorization for their online choice environments.
