The dissolving capacity of the supercritical (SC) carbon dioxide in respect to polar organic compounds and the problem of its regulation by temperature and pressure changes as well as by adding a variety of polar cosolvents has been studied intensively in the scientific literature for several decades. This research area causes much interest primarily by the active development of SC fluid technologies, and therefore much of the research has an applied character. Choice of objects has been caused by the same reasons: as a rule, they are biologically active compounds, for which methods of synthesis, purification and separation in supercritical fluid have been developed.
The research of solubility of methylparaben (MP) and propylparaben (PP) in the SC CO2 is the subject of several publications [1], [2], [3], [4]. They contain experimental data on the solubility in pure carbon dioxide at T = 308–348 K and P = 12.2–35.5 MPa for MP and T = 308–328 K and P = 8–23 MPa for PP. The solubility of PP in the presence of polar and nonpolar cosolvents (0.035 mol fraction): cyclohexane and acetone at T = 308 K has been also reported [4]. As an example, we have built its dependence on the pressure in Fig. 1. There we present a corresponding change of cosolvent induced solubility enhancement (CISE) that is the ratio of the solubility of the substance in the modified SC carbon dioxide Y(mod.) to its solubility in pure SC carbon dioxide Y(pure) [5]. As you can see, at P = 8 MPa effect of both cosolvents is nearly the same, but differences arise with increasing pressure: the P ≥ 11 MPa acetone increases PP solubility several times higher than cyclohexane. Thus the effect of cosolvent is manifested ambiguously: if P = 8 MPa solubility of PP in acetone-modified SC CO2 increases only 1.3 times as much as compared with the pure fluid while at P = 23 MPa the solubility growth is 5.2 times as much, and at P = 17 MPa it is 10.6 times as much. For comparison, the greatest increase in solubility of PP in cyclohexane-modified SC CO2 is observed at P = 11 MPa, and it is only 2.3 times as much.Download : Download high-res image (166KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Change of PP solubility in a pure and modified SC CO2 (cosolvent concentration of 0.035 mol fraction) depending on the pressure at a constant temperature of 308 K according to the experimental data [4].a) Solubility Y: 1 – in acetone-modified SC CO2, 2 – in cyclohexane-modified SC CO2, 3 – in pure SC CO2.b) CISE = Y(mod.)/Y(pure): 1 – in acetone-modified SC CO2, 2 – in cyclohexane-modified SC CO2.
Thus, the experimental data presented in the literature revealed that the use of the polar cosolvent capable of forming hydrogen bonds (HBs) with a solute will be productive to increase the solubility of parabens in SC CO2. As numerous studies showed this feature is typical for the majority of heterofunctional organic compounds [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. The study of probability and the molecular mechanism of formation of HBs in computer simulation allows to evaluate qualitatively the efficiency of the various cosolvents to increase the solubility of various compounds in the SC CO2 at different parameters of the state at the level of correlation dependences [12], [13], [14]. Also, a method of predictive quantitative evaluation of solubility increase on the basis of parameter CISE calculation from free energies of solvation of the substance in pure and modified SC fluid obtained in computer simulation was proposed in the literature [15], [16].
As it was shown in our previous study [17], solvation of MP and PP in methanol-modified SC CO2 occurs through the formation of HBs with methanol by H1 hydroxyl hydrogen and carbonyl oxygen O2 (the atoms legends are shown in Fig. 2). Acetone is able to form HB with parabens only as hydroxyl hydrogen acceptor, and therefore only one molecule of acetone may be involved in the formation of hydrogen-bonded solvated complex. Based on this, we assumed that the methanol solvates parabens molecules more actively, and therefore, by its use as a cosolvent it will be possible to expect more increase in the solubility of MP and PP, than by acetone use.Download : Download high-res image (132KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Molecules MP and PP. Designations of individual atoms.
The present work is devoted to the study of features of MP and PP solvation in methanol-modified and acetone-modified SC CO2 using the method of classical molecular dynamics (MD). The effect of temperature and density of the fluid, as well as a cosolvent concentration is studied. Six thermodynamic states are considered on the interval of density ρ=0.507 − 0.851 g/cm3 at a constant temperature of 328 K and on a range of temperature T = 318 − 348 K at densities corresponding to the constant experimental pressure of 30 MPa (Table 1); the concentrations of cosolvents are 0.03 and 0.06 mol fraction. By analyzing the change in the probability, the mechanism of formation and stability of solvated complexes depending on the state parameters and cosolvent concentration, we can understand the degree to which these factors determine the increase in solubility of parabens in the presence of cosolvents under different conditions. The free energy of solvation is obtained for certain thermodynamic conditions (these calculations are very wasteful of time, and it compelled us to limit the number of simulated systems). CISE is calculated from them using a method of [15], [16]. Estimation of enhance of MP and PP solubility with methanol and acetone as cosolvents in two concentrations (experimental data for these SC fluid systems are absent in the literature at present) is performed using this method.Table 1. The thermodynamic state parameters of the simulated systems: temperature, density, pressure corresponding to them (according to the experimental phase diagram of carbon dioxide).Thermodynamic stateT, Kρ, g/cm3P, MPaA3280.50712B3280.77221C3180.89130D3280.85130E3380.81030F3480.76730
