Daily, many Italians children-students live a strong technological gap among different education instances: on the one hand, they are attending schools technologically still to the '80 years, on the other hand, they can rely on hyper-technological domestic-family environments where videogames, smartphones, internet are always available. A technological imbalance recently increased by the introduction of tablet-pc, touch interaction and their countless “educational” applications suitable for very young children (2–6 years).
In Italy, the ministerial Digital School program is causing that interactive whiteboards (IWB) are timidly appearing in the schools, but their spread is still marginal and their technology, meanwhile, has been made obsolete by modern touch technologies. Most of the tools used in the nursery and primary schools is not based on ICT. In kindergarten (3–5 years) the use of materials involving manipulative interaction is predominant, as well as in the early grades of primary school (6–10 years) in which the first key learnings are based on the acquisition of cognitive skills through the refinement of natural sensorimotor abilities. For example, in the learning of writing, the child uses his motor skills to go from the design to the writing with a real workout that allows him to reach a fine hand-eye coordination and to automate the movements required to write in a fluent and accurate way. Even the numerical skills learning through the use of hands and manipulation of ancient instruments like the abacus or the rules that represent visually and physically the abstract concept of quantity. In the school, all these learnings take place under the supervision of the teacher that stimulates, directs and corrects these important steps in the basic training. On the contrary, in the domestic environment the presence of technology is increasingly pervasive: we expect that the penetration of tablet technology, for example, in Italy will increase from 15% to 28% by 2016 (source eMarketer), while European countries such as UK, Germany, France and Spain provide most important estimates about it. The International Data Corporation (IDC) updated to December 2015 underlined that the world market for tablets reached 211 million units.
The huge spread and the commercial success of educational apps for both iOS and Android (the most popular operating systems) well evidenced the potentiality of tablets in the learning for the age range that starts from two years. These new technologies and contents cognitively stimulate the children, but, and this is a significant criticality, they entertain the little ones often alone and without the participation and supervision of an adult audience.
Thus, the technology gap results in a pedagogical clash among different educational instances and this is the “space” addressed by our research initiative whose objective is the construction of innovative teaching and learning environments for children between 3 and 6 years of age (kindergarten and first year of primary school).
The Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research (MIUR) gives to this nursery school the task of promoting the development of identity, autonomy and competence of children and starting them to the citizenship. In the National Guidelines for the 20121 Curriculum, this is the answer to their right to education and care, in line with the principles of cultural and institutional pluralism established by our Constitution, by the Convention on the Rights of the Child and by various addressing documents of the European Union.
Our research initiative directs its attention to 3–6 years old boys and girls with the aim of updating the teaching and learning psycho-pedagogical models in this segment of education.
To confirm the strategic importance of training in the range 3–6 years the 2012 OECD report “Education at a Glance” 2 underlines Italy above the average among industrialized countries for investment in pre-primary and primary education. According to the results of this research, the kindergarten is one of the strengths of the Italian system, with one of the higher levels of frequency in the OECD area: 97% for 4 years children.
