According to the American Lung Association, lung diseases are among the most common medical disorders in the world. While death rates due to lung diseases are currently on the rise, death rates due to other leading causes of death such as cancer, stroke and heart disease are declining. Among these diseases, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is expected to become the third leading cause of death by 2020 (American Lung Association, 2008). Rising mortality rate of lung diseases has attracted the attention of many researchers to improve present diagnosis and treatment techniques. Quantitative medical tests, including various medical imaging modalities which contain massive amount of data, have emerged as effective tools for improved medical diagnosis. Such data can be processed and analyzed through carefully designed expert system frameworks to offer reliable diagnosis. An example of diagnostic data that can be used within such framework pertains to lung diseases. As the main function of the lung is gas exchange through respiration, some researchers explored analysis of the lung air volume and its variations for Pulmonary Function Testing (PFT) (Flesch, Dine, 2012, Ruppel, 2012). Another area of interest in lung image segmentation is developing techniques that are capable of providing quantitative spatial information of airspace and tissue regions within the lung. Such information is highly invaluable in some applications such as structural analysis of lesions. Low intensity gradient of lung images makes it very difficult for radiologist to manually analyze the images. Moreover, manual procedures are time-consuming and are not quite repeatable which may lead to inter-expert and intra-expert differences in interpretations of the imges. As such, research efforts have led to the development of computer-assisted methods which involve the analysis of lung respiratory image sequences in both inhalation and exhalation phases as an integral part of many techniques of lung disease diagnosis and treatment assessment (Al-Mayah, Moseley, Velec, Brock, 2011, Castillo, Castillo, Fuentes, 2013, Hersh, Washko, Estépar, 2013, McClelland, Hawkes, Schaeffter, King, 2013, Sadeghi Naini, Pierce, Lee, Patel, Samani, 2011, Tolouee, Moghaddam, Forouzanfar, 2011, Yamashiro, Matsuoka, Bartholmai, 2010, Zaporozhan, Ley, Eberhardt, 2005). Estimation of the respiratory system dynamic characteristics such as air volume variations (Castillo, Castillo, Fuentes, 2013, Hersh, Washko, Estépar, 2013, Yamashiro, Matsuoka, Bartholmai, 2010, Zaporozhan, Ley, Eberhardt, 2005) and tissue deformation (Al-Mayah, Moseley, Velec, Brock, 2011, McClelland, Hawkes, Schaeffter, King, 2013, Sadeghi Naini, Pierce, Lee, Patel, Samani, 2011, Tolouee, Moghaddam, Forouzanfar, 2011) are often considered as two major goals of analysis of the lung Computed Tomography (CT) image-sequence which is the primary modality of lung imaging. For this purpose, CT Image segmentation can be used effectively, especially for patients who are not fit for other diagnostic tests, leading to invaluable diagnostic information (Flesch, Dine, 2012, Ruppel, 2012). Threshold-based segmentation methods are widely used for lung air volume estimation from CT images. Other segmentation techniques such as level set method (Malladi, Sethian, & Vemuri, 1995) or deformable models (Kass, Witkin, & Terzopoulos, 1988) have not been routinely used for lung air volume estimation because of lack of sufficient CT image gradient and the highly complex geometry of the alveoli and small airways. The accuracy achieved by threshold-based segmentation is highly dependent on the accuracy of threshold values. To find these values, image density distribution statistical data such as image histogram is usually utilized. Maximum peak separation of the histogram is commonly used to obtain a coarse image segmentation followed by a fine tuning step to achieve a more accurate segmentation.
Gamsu, Shames, McMahon, and Greenspan (1975) used posteroanterior and lateral X-ray images of the chest to estimate Total Lung Capacity (TLC) and Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 second (FEV1). They segmented the lung manually and then computed FEV1 through a set of distance measurements. A rule-based system was proposed by Armato, Giger, and MacMahon (1998) for automatic segmentation of the aerated lung regions in posteroanterior chest X-ray images using global and local thresholding followed by contour smoothing. In Kauczor, Heussel, and Fischer (1998), an automatic threshold-based method was proposed for the whole lung segmentation from helical CT image sequence acquired in end inhalation and end exhalation phases where they used various segmentation thresholds they obtained empirically to estimate different lung volumes. A few years later, the same group used threshold values they obtained experimentally in order to estimate the volume of ventilated airspace of the lung from corresponding 3He MRI (Kauczor, Markstaller, & Puderbach, 2001). To improve accuracy, they manually removed image artifacts and obtained volumes of both tissue and airspace based on an empirically obtained airspace-to-tissue ratio of 0.82. Furthermore, Hu, Hoffman, and Reinhardt (2001) presented a practical lung tissue segmentation algorithms for 3D CT images which benefited from empirical threshold values as initial guesses followed by an optimization procedure to segment the whole region of left and right lungs. More recently Fleming, Conway, and Majoral (2014) attempted to improve the airspace-to-tissue ratio estimation for clinical applications. However, high dependence on empirical parameters in conjunction with the lack of spatial separation of airspace and tissue regions within the lung in such methods have left room for developing more accurate methods for lung air volume estimation. For example, Goris, Zhu, and Blankenberg (2003) used improved experimental threshold values for quantifying air trapping in high-resolution CT image sequences of cystic fibrosis patients acquired over respiration cycle. Also, Zaporozhan, Ley, and Gast (2004) utilized experimental lower and upper thresholds in order to segment CT and MRI images to estimate ventilated split-lung volumes in patients after single-lung transplantation. As stated earlier, in clinical applications various problems pertaining to imaging parameters such as spatial resolution can be encountered. With such variations, it is evident that using empirical threshold values leads to only limited air volume estimation accuracy as such values are valid with only a certain range of parameters corresponding to image data sets used to obtain the empirical values. The main drawback of most empirical approaches proposed for lung segmentation is their lack of versatility to obtain customized upper and lower segmentation thresholds for various clinical application. Moreover, most of these methods segment the whole lung region including both tissue and airspace. While some researchers estimated the lung air volume using the whole lung volume by employing another empirical correction coefficients, such coefficients suffer from the same deficiencies, consequently introducing more errors in the lung air volume estimation.
Sadeghi Naini, Lee, Patel, and Samani (2011) proposed an effective algorithm for lung air segmentation which has proven effective through ex vivo experiments. While effective, this algorithm suffers from a shortcoming of not accounting for the CT image partial volume effect. While this may not be a major issue with high resolution CT images, its impact on the accuracy of lung air estimation with low resolution CT images usually encountered in the clinic is significant. As such, this work was motivated by addressing this issue towards developing a reliable expert system for fully automatic and effective diagnosis of lung diseases such as COPD. For this purpose, the proposed method incorporates a novel framework we developed using morphometric principles for accurate estimation of lung air. The method is founded on a novel image analysis framework which utilizes all CT image frames acquired during respiration to segment the image. The proposed segmentation method is a thresholding method which involves an optimization algorithm to calculate the optimal image threshold values. The cost function to be minimized in this algorithm involves the lung CT image sequence information over the respiration cycle in conjunction with air and tissue physical properties. An important feature in the proposed technique is that it accounts for the partial volume effect using a theoretical framework founded on morphometric principles. The optimization based thresholding segmentation technique finds image voxels of lung tissue with air content while the latter determines the air volume within each voxel. Summing up the air volume of all lung voxels yields an accurate estimation of the lung air volume. The technique was validated by both ex vivo and in vivo experiments. The former was conducted using ”breath-hold” CT image sequence of ex vivo porcine lung where the amount of inhaled air was recorded in each respiration phase while the latter was conducted on 8 pairs of human lung images including inhalation and exhalation phases acquired from the COPDCgene study database (Regan, Hokanson, & Murphy, 2010). Especially with accounting for partial volume effect, the results demonstrate a very favorable capability of estimating lung air volume and its variations over respiration cycle. Accurate lung air volumes estimated using the proposed technique can be used to compute lung’s air volume variations throughout the respiration cycle. These variations data can be combined with a deformable image registration technique to develop a reliable framework for lung ventilation map computation. Such maps provide invaluable data pertaining to pulmonary function assessment, and it can be incorporated into a medical expert system designed for effective COPD diagnosis and its stage determination.
