Fossil fuels and carbon rich energy sources are used in generating most of the electricity consumed in manufacturing at the power stations, and as such result in CO2 emissions (Jeswiet and Kara, 2008). The International Energy Agency (IEA, 2016) reported that the total global electricity demand for 2014 was 1706 million tonnes of oil equivalent (mtoe) (19,840.78 terawatt hour (TWh)), of which 42.5% was attributable to the industrial sector. Also, in the year 2014, 93 TWh (26%) of electrical energy consumption in the United Kingdom (UK) was attributable to the industrial sector, of which about 17.74 TWh (19%) of electricity was consumed by the engineering sub-sector of the industry (DUKES, 2015).
1.1. Energy demand modelling in mechanical machining processesThe energy demand in mechanical machining could be minimised by understanding how energy is distributed in machine tools. This could be achieved through the modelling of energy demand, taking into account that the total energy consumed in a mechanical machining process is dominated by the energy consumed by the auxiliary and peripheral components, while the energy required for the actual material removal process is small (Vijayaraghavan and Dornfeld, 2010).Some researchers developed models for estimating the total electrical energy demand of machine tools during their use phase. Gutowski et al. (2006) proposed a fundamental model for estimating the energy consumption in mechanical machining processes. This study showed that the energy required for the actual material removal process was small when compared with the total energy available for machine tool use. Rajemi et al. (2010) proposed an energy demand model for a turning process which incorporates the tool life and satisfies the minimum energy footprint requirement of a machining process. Kara and Li (2011) presented an empirical model for predicting the energy required to remove a unit volume of a material. This model was validated by undertaking cutting tests on a number of turning (Colchester Tornado A50, Mori Seiki NL2000MC/500, IKEGAI AX 20, Mori Seiki SL-15, Nakamura TMC-15) and milling (Fadal VMC 4020, Mori Seiki Dura Vertical 5100, DMU 60P) machine tools, with a 90% accuracy in predicting the specific energy consumption of the processes. However, this model only considered the energy demand at tool tip and ignored the constant and variable energy demand of the machine tool. Hu et al. (2012) utilised an online energy efficiency monitoring approach to model the energy consumption of a machining process by developing an architecture for the online energy monitoring system (OEEM system).Also, the energy demand of machining toolpaths could be modelled based on the energy states of the machine tool (i.e. the baseline, ready or idle, and the cutting states). For example, Balogun and Mativenga (2013) proposed a new machining state called the ready state in which the drives and spindle movement bring the tool and workpiece to the correct, about to cut position, including operations such as tool change, rapid positioning and spindle rotation at defined speeds etc. Jia et al. (2013) presented an analytical model which integrates the different machining states with the energy requirements of basic motions of the CNC machine tools. In their study, the power demand of the feed axes was assumed constant and was not explicitly modelled. Building on Jia et al.’s (2013) work on Therbligs, Lv et al. (2014) proposed an improved methodology for estimating energy demand of machine tools. Therblig is defined as a group of motions necessary for machine tool operations such as standby operations, lighting, spindle rotation, tool selection/tool changing, cutting, x-, y-, z-axes feeds and cutting fluid spraying. This study, though an addition to machining science, did not explicitly model the Therblig feed axes energy demand to include weights of the feed axes and materials placed on machine table. Edem and Mativenga (2016b) proposed a new model for estimating the electrical energy demand of machine tool feed axes which incorporates the weights of feed axes and weights of the materials placed on the machine table, the feed force, and the table feedrate. The newly proposed model was validated on milling CNC toolpaths.Additionally, specific energy could be used to model the electrical energy demand of machining toolpaths. The specific energy is defined as the total energy normalised by the volume of material removed, and is also used as a measure of machining efficiency (Draganescu et al., 2003, Diaz et al., 2011, Li and Kara, 2011). Nevertheless, these specific energy models do not comprehensively determine the total energy demand during the machining operations. Hence, there is need to develop a better and robust energy model for machining energy.Other approaches of modelling the electrical energy demand of machining toolpaths could be by disintegrating the direct electrical energy consumed by the machine tool into energy consuming units such as spindle, feed axes, coolant pump, tool change system, as well as components that consume constant energy.. The sum of each component’s energy consumption is used to evaluate the total energy demand. This approach is found in studies presented in (He et al., 2011, Calvanese et al., 2013, Aramcharoen and Mativenga, 2014), and is in line with the model proposed in this study as it effectively relates NC codes to the energy consuming units of the machine tool. This way, the influence of interpolations on energy intensity of machine tool would be effectively characterised.
1.2. NC-codes energy modelling in mechanical machiningNumerical control (NC) is the process of controlling the motion of machine tool components by directly inputting coded commands in the form of letters and numbers into the system. NC codes consist of G, M, S, and F-codes which control the functional performance of NC machines. The main energy consumers in machine tools consist of the auxiliary units (i.e. fans, unloaded servo motors, light, computers, air pumps, coolant pumps, lubricating pumps etc.); spindle; feed axes (i.e. x-axis, y-axis, z-axis); and the tool change system (Balogun and Mativenga, 2013). These components are all related to the NC codes through the machine tool controller. Thus, the prediction of energy demand in machining could be simplified by relating the energy consuming components with NC codes. This is critical for determining the influence of NC codes and the effects of interpolations (i.e. linear and circular) on the power and electrical energy required during mechanical machining.Several researchers evaluated the energy demand of machine tools based on CNC codes. A summary of energy consumption models developed based on CNC codes in literature is presented in Table 1.Table 1. Summary of energy consumption models for toolpaths based on CNC codes.AuthorsEnergy modelRemarks/LimitationsAvram and Xirouchakis (2011)(1)Etotal=EaS+Erun+EaY+EdY+EsY+Ecutwhere EaS is energy in J for acceleration of the spindle at constant speed, Erun is the energy in J required to overcome mechanical losses, EaY is energy J for acceleration of the feed axis, EdY is energy in J for deceleration of the feed drive, EsY is the energy in J required at constant speed of the feed axis, Ecut is the energy demand in J for cutting process.Modelled energy demand of feed axes and spindle based on toolpaths; weights moved by the axes were not considered in their feed axes energy model; NC codes were not used to implement the softwareHe et al. (2011)(2)E=Espindle+Efeed+Etool+Ecoolant+Efixwhere Espindle is the energy required for cutting and for spindle run in J, Efeed is the energy consumption in J of the feed axes,Etool is the energy in J required for tool change, Ecoolant is the energy consumption in J of the coolant, Efix is the energy consumption in J of the servo motor and the fan systemProvides insight into modelling of energy demand based on NC codes; Circular interpolation was not considered, Weights moved by the feed drive were not considered;Kong et al. (2011)(3)E=Econst+Erun−time−transient+Erun−time−steady+Ecutwhere E is the total energy demand of the machine tool in J,Econst is the energy consumed without cutting in J,Erun−time−transient is the energy in J required by the axis drives and spindle to accelerate or decelerate to reach the required speed, Erun−time−steady is the energy in J consumed by the feed drive at constant speed and Ecut is the energy in J required for the material removal process.Developed a web-based and application programming interface (APT) process analysis software; feed axes power model did not incorporate weights of the machine feed axes, workpiece and machine vice; energy intensity of toolpath interpolations were not consideredAramcharoen and Mativenga (2014)(4)E=Ebasic+Etool+Espindle+Ecutting+Efeed+Ecoolantwhere Ebasic is the energy required by auxiliary and peripheral units in J, Etool is the energy consumed at tool change in J,Espindle is the energy required by the spindle in J,Ecutting is the energy for material removal in J, Efeed is the energy consumed by the feed drives in J, Ecoolant is the energy required by the coolant pump motor in J.Analytically modelled the electrical energy demand based on NC codes. Feed axes energy demand model did not capture weights of the feed axes, workpiece and machine vice; circular interpolation was not considered; energy intensity of toolpath interpolations was not considered; Energy demand software was not developed.Guo et al. (2015)(5)ETOT=ERTM+EMRM+EPTMwhere ETOT is the total energy for manufacturing a product (J), ERTM is the energy required for rapid traversing (J), EMRM is the energy required for cutting (J), EPTM is the energy required for process transition mode (J)Used NC codes to model and simulate the energy demand of machining processes; feed axes energy demand model did not highlight the importance of weights moved by feed drive; energy intensity of toolpaths was not considered.Pavanaskar (2014), Pavanaskar and McMains (2015)(6a)Emachine=∑Eblock=Econst+Evariable(6b)Eblock=(Ptare)·t+(Pcoolant_pump)·t+(Pmoving_axes)·t+(Pcutting_force)·twhere Emachine is the energy consumed by a CNC machine (J), Econst is the energy consumed by auxiliary components (i.e. lights, computer) in J, Evariable is the energy consumed at variable rate by operations including material removal, table movements, spindle rotation; Ptare is the constant power of the machine (W); Pcoolant_pump is the coolant pump power (W); Pmoving_axes is the power required for spindle, table, axes movements and spindle rotation (W); Pcutting_force is the power for removing material (W), t is the processing time in secondsDeveloped web-based energy demand software based on NC codes; the importance of weights in their feed axes model and energy demand software was not highlighted; energy intensity of toolpaths was not considered.Balogun et al. (2016)(7)Etot=Pb(tb+tr+tc)+Prtr+Ptcttc[INT(tcT)+1]+Pairtair+(mN+C+Pcool+kv)tcwhere Etot is the total energy demand (J), Pb and Pr are the basic and ready-state power required by the machine tool (W). Ptc,Pair and Pcool are power demand for tool change, air cutting, and coolant respectively (W). tb,tr,ttc,tair and T represent setup time, ready time, tool change time, air cutting time, and tool life (s) respectively, and mN+C is the spindle-speed characteristic model in W.Developed e-smart software based on NC codes. Feed axis energy demand was not modelled to include weights moved by the feed drive; Circular interpolation was not considered; e-smart software did not consider the weights moved by the feed drive; energy intensity of toolpath interpolations were not consideredFurthermore, Narita et al. (2006) proposed an NC code based software for predicting the environmental impact (CO2 emissions) of a machining operation due to the electrical energy consumption of machine tools, cutting tool use, coolant use, and lubricant use. Diaz et al. (2010) proposed a web-based energy consumption model for estimating the energy requirements of machine tools based on the correlation between the energy demand and the processing time. Vijayaraghavan and Dornfeld (2010) proposed a software-based approach for the automation of energy demand prediction at all levels in order to investigate the energy consumption of machine tools and their effect on the overall life cycle and power demand of the machine tool. The software utilises ‘Complex event processing (CEP)’ which handle data reasoning and information processing. The manufacturing technology connect (MT Connect) interface was used to link data from the machine tool and/or other manufacturing equipment to the ‘event cloud’ for information processing and strategic decision making. However, energy consuming components were not related to NC codes.The reviewed studies have shown that several researchers proposed energy consumption models and developed software for predicting the total electrical energy demand of a machining process based on NC codes. However, some limitations exist. For example, the weights moved by the feed drive (i.e. weights of the feed axes, machine vice, and workpiece) were not incorporated in their feed axes energy models for the analytical/software prediction of the total electrical energy required in machining a part. Also, most of these studies ignored the influence of toolpath interpolations (i.e. G01, G02, and G03) on the total electrical energy demand of machine tools. Additionally, most researchers focused on linear toolpaths while circular interpolation was relatively unexplored. It is therefore important to incorporate the weights of materials moved by the feed drive in the proposed analytical energy consumption model and software to improve the prediction of total electrical energy demand in mechanical machining. It is also critical to investigate the energy demand of NC codes based on the type of interpolations in order to select the most efficient machining strategy in terms of reduced energy intensity.
1.3. Research aim and motivationThe aim of this study is to develop the scientific base and logic for calculating the energy consumption of a CNC toolpath taking the NC code as input. To achieve this, a previously developed feed axes energy demand model (which includes the weights of feed axes, machine vice, and workpiece) by the authors was incorporated into other energy consumption models. A new rationale for mapping the equations to CNC codes was developed and validated on components. This knowledge was used to develop NC code based software for energy demand prediction.
