As wearable sensors are becoming increasingly popular and accessible to a broader public, the collection of frequent physiological data is becoming easier than ever. This raises new possibilities for defining computerized models that monitor the physiological values of patients with the purpose of extracting new information for both the patients and their caregivers. In these models, clinical guidelines [20], [19] play an important role in decision support for caregivers [2]. In addition to describing clinical assessments, they also include recommendations to help caregivers perform timely interventions and which can result in improved health outcomes [7]. However, these guidelines are written on the basis of scientific evidence and, by definition, they do not include personal context such as medical history or physiological parameters, nor they are aimed at the patients themselves. They also have the limitation that only few guidelines address comorbidities [18]. This means that the cumulative impact of treatment recommendations is still unclear, particularly for patients with several conditions [13].
The automated version of evidence-based clinical guidelines it is also known as Computer Interpretable Guidelines or CIGs. CIGs encapsulate medical knowledge into rules which allow to implement decision-support systems that monitor and intervene at the right time [15]. One of the frequent challenges that we face when transforming clinical-guidelines into CIGs is how to define an underlying system that is expressive enough to capture the medical expertise and that is modular towards changes and updates in clinical practice. When patients use devices to continuously collect timely ordered data, the time and the order of events becomes an important component which should be modeled in the underlying system.
To overcome the above-mentioned issues, COMPOSE proposes a patient-centred framework for interpreting continuous temporal data. COMPOSE stands for Coordinating Multiple Patient centred clinical guidelines for the MetabOlic SyndromE and it extends the Event Calculus [27] approach with temporal patterns that facilitate the expression of CIGs and the reasoning with the frequent temporal data. In addition to the temporal patterns, we define a model for representing and executing different CIGs and the algorithms for combining the outcomes into consistent advice that is based on the patient's profile. The extended temporal calculus is then used to automate several clinical guidelines that relate to the Metabolic Syndrome. Physiological signals and attributes (such as heart rate, activity, glucose levels and breathing) are collected using wearable sensors. These data are used to generate alerts based on clinical guidelines and to score the health and fitness level of the patient. In order to evaluate the results, we compare the generated scores with the gold standard. The novelty of this work stands in extending the Event Calculus with a set of temporal patterns and in using this model to define a distributed architecture that integrates CIG as an independent component of a distributed system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we introduce the related works. In Section 3 we present our experimental setup including the motivating scenario and the used dataset for this paper. In Section 4 we describe the original event calculus and explain our extended version with temporal patterns. In Section 5 we show how we practically use these patterns to represent CIGs that are related to the Metabolic Syndrome and how we interpret the physiological values that are collected by sensors. In Section 6 we describe the implementation and the evaluation of our solution. Finally, in Section 7 we summarize the work and define future directions for this project.
