In the field of complex networks, the networks containing both positive and negative links are called signed networks [1]. Positive links in signed networks denote the positive relationships, such as “friend”, “trust”, “like”, “support” and “cooperative” relationships. On the contrary, negative links denote the negative relationships, such as “enemy”, “distrust”, “dislike”, “oppose” and “hostile” relationships. Signed networks are ubiquitous in the real-world, such as social networks containing trust and distrust relationships, protein interaction networks containing activation and inhibition relationships and international relationship networks containing cooperation and hostility relationships. In addition to these naturally formed signed networks, we can also artificially construct signed networks from interactions among data objects by using specific algorithms. For example, In [2], Hassan et al. applied linguistic analysis techniques to identify attitudes (support or oppose) from online discussion texts and then built a debater signed network. In [3], Maniu et al. inferred a trust signed network by aggregating various user interactions on Wikipedia content. In [4], Hoang et al. computed the cosine similarities of all pairs of documents and then constructed a document signed network by treating the similarities as the weights of the corresponding links.
Due to the diversity, popularity and availability of signed networks, signed networks analysis and mining has drawn more and more attention and community detection (a.k.a. node clustering) is one of the important research topics. Community detection in signed networks is motivated by the famous structure balance theory in social science. Structure balance theory was originally proposed by Heider [5], and later was extended by Cartwright and Harary [6]. This theory states that a structurally balanced signed network is partitionable and can be separated into k communities (clusters), such that links within communities are positive and links between communities are negative. Unfortunately, real-world signed networks are often imbalanced [7], so it is hard to satisfy such a strict criterion for community detection in signed networks. Therefore, in practice we often follow a relatively loose criterion. Namely, community detection in signed networks is to find k communities so that most positive links lie in communities and most negative links lie between communities. This criterion makes community detection in real-world signed networks more operable.
Community detection is of great importance to understanding the structural and functional properties of signed networks. In addition, it also has high application value, e.g., recommending products to user groups in signed social networks [8], detecting protein complexes from signed protein–protein interaction networks [9] and finding alliances from international relationship networks [10]. Although methods for community detection in unsigned networks (or the networks with only positive links) have been extensively studied, but they cannot be simply applied in signed networks due to the existence of negative links. Actually, the definitions of community in unsigned and signed networks are substantially different. In unsigned networks, community is defined as a group of nodes which have dense links within groups and sparse links between groups, whereas for signed networks, communities are defined not only by the density of links but also by the signs of links. Therefore, detect communities in signed networks is more challenging.
Recently, community detection in signed networks has received increasing attention, and meanwhile some related methods have been proposed. Although all these methods have achieved improved performance in some cases, they still suffer from the following problems.

•Most of them detect communities by directly using the link topology of signed networks. However, this type of information (often represented as a binary adjacency matrix) is usually very sparse, noisy and even incomplete, and hence is insufficient to identify high-quality communities.•They mainly aim to uncover non-overlapping communities where every node is assigned to only one community. However, overlapping communities where a node is allowed to belong to multiple communities are common in real-world signed networks. For example, in a debater signed network, one user can participate in more than one group, even if these groups have different opinions. Therefore, in order to learn the community patterns of signed networks adequately, it is necessary to develop the method for overlapping community detection.
Aiming at addressing the aforementioned problems, we propose a similarity preserving overlapping community detection (SPOCD) method for signed networks and our main work is summarized as follows:

•Based on the available link topology, we first devise an effective node similarity measure to extract node similarity information from the network, and then further obtain the geometric structure information by constructing the corresponding p-nearest neighbors (p-NN) graph. The fusion of these two sources of information is selected as a good alternative to the link topology information when used for community detection.•To detect overlapping communities effectively, we specially design a graph regularized binary semi-nonnegative matrix factorization (GRBSNMF) model. This model not only can well incorporate node similarity information and geometric structure information of the network to improve the performance, but also can obtain the binary community indicator matrix, which is very convenient for identifying overlapping communities directly. Besides, an effective learning algorithm with guaranteed convergence is proposed to optimize the GRBSNMF model.•To evaluate the performance of our method, we conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world signed networks. The results demonstrate the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we firstly give a brief review of related work. Then the proposed method SPOCD is detailed in Section 3. In Section 4, we report extensive experimental results that demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Finally, the conclusion and future work of this paper are given in Section 5.
