Computer-Aided Molecular Design (CAMD) methods play an important role in process and product design (Ng et al., 2015). In particular, a key for economic and ecologic performance in chemical processes is the identification of solvents (Hostrup et al., 1999). Suitable solvents can significantly enhance product purification, e.g., entertainers that facilitate separation of azeotropic product mixtures (Kossack et al., 2008), or improve the efficiency of extraction processes (Marcoulaki and Kokossis, 2000) and reduce environmental impacts (Capello et al., 2007). In addition, solvent selection plays a key role in stabilizing transition states of chemical products, thus, increasing desired reaction rates (Struebing et al., 2013).
In CAMD, solvent and molecular design in general builds upon property prediction methods to identify molecules with desired target properties (Harper and Gani, 2000). Detailed models for property prediction are often needed to capture complex interaction of the designed molecules with solvents (Sheldon et al., 2006). Overall, the success of CAMD methods strongly relies on the underlying property method (Adjiman et al., 2014).
Commonly, property prediction in CAMD is based on group contribution (GC) methods (e.g., UNIFAC, Gmehling et al., 2002). GC methods assume the additivity of functional group interactions (Gmehling, 2009) and therefore simplify the underlying thermodynamic picture. In general, the accuracy of GC methods decreases for molecules with more than one strongly interacting functional group (Delidovich et al., 2014). In addition, first-order GC methods cannot distinguish all kinds of isomers and poor results are obtained for the solubility of very hydrophobic compounds, such as alkanes, alkenes, or cycloalkanes in water (Gmehling et al., 2015). GC methods further require primary experiments for parametrization, which is especially problematic for new classes of compounds; examples are missing UNIFAC group interaction parameters for solvent design in extractive distillation (Chen et al., 2005) or lack of data for the design of ionic liquids (IL) (Song et al., 2015).
In recent years, CAMD approaches have been established based on the SAFT-type equations of state providing a stronger thermodynamic picture (Bardow et al., 2010, Pereira et al., 2011). However, the design of novel molecules is still based on first-order group contribution methods (Lampe et al., 2015, Burger et al., 2015).
The limitations of GC methods can be overcome by quantum mechanics (QM)-based calculations, which provide accurate predictions without the need of experimental parametrization (Struebing et al., 2013, Sheldon et al., 2006). However, QM calculations are usually computationally demanding. A well-balanced compromise between accuracy and computation efficiency has been achieved by the thermodynamic model COSMO-RS (Klamt et al., 2001). Here, computationally expensive QM COSMO calculations are performed only once for each pure component to calculate screening charge densities (so called σ-surfaces); based on the pure component σ-surfaces, statistical thermodynamics methods are used for fast computation of mixture properties. Thereby, COSMO-RS is applicable to all systems that can be calculated by quantum mechanics (Eckert and Klamt, 2002). In particular, COSMO-RS can predict properties of novel molecules and is therefore becoming increasingly popular in diverse areas of chemical engineering (Klamt et al., 2010).
Recently, COSMO-RS has been successfully applied to solvent selection in a vast number of applications. Commonly, COMSO-RS is employed for property prediction in solvent selection, e.g., the prediction of concentration-dependent partitioning equilibrium (Spies et al., 2008) or solubility calculation (Lapkin et al., 2010). Similarly, COSMO-RS is used in the screening of tailor-made ionic liquids (Garcia-Chavez et al., 2012) or pharmaceutical components (Ferro et al., 2012), as well as in process design for compounds without existing database entries (Ferro et al., 2015). Frequently, large databases of known σ-surfaces are screened for solubility prediction (e.g., Blumenthal et al., 2016). Similar approaches are clustering techniques that create clusters of solvents based on COSMO-RS prediction to identify desired properties, e.g., benign environmental properties (Moity et al., 2012). However, database screenings are limited to components existing in databases and thus to known molecules. To overcome these limitations, molecular modifications (e.g., functional group addition or chain length variation) have been explored using heuristics with COSMO-RS-assisted experiments (Burghoff et al., 2008). To go beyond the limitation of pre-stored database molecules and heuristic molecule modifications, Zhou et al. used semi-empirical σ-surface-based descriptors combined with a GC method for designing new compounds in chemical reactions (Zhou et al., 2014), as well as in reaction/separation systems (Zhou et al., 2015).
To exploit the full potential of property prediction with COSMO-RS, we introduce COSMO-CAMD, a framework for optimization-based solvent design with COSMO-RS. COSMO-CAMD integrates full COSMO-RS calculations into the molecular design procedure. Preliminary results of this work have been presented in a conference paper (Scheffczyk et al., 2016). In this present work, the full framework is presented and applied to two case studies for solvent design in liquid–liquid extraction. The first case study is the extraction of phenol from water, which illustrates the basic application of COSMO-CAMD. In the second case study, the extraction of hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) from water is considered to show the application of the framework to a larger molecular design space. Both case studies focus on the extraction of valuable components from water. The presented framework, however, is generic in nature and not restricted to the extraction of water. The choice of this example is due to its practical importance and the availability of recent benchmark data from the literature.
