Over the past century, several stressors have been placed on the emerald shiner population (Notropis atherinoides) in the Niagara River ecosystem including damming, habitat modifications, and the introduction of non-native species (Coordinating Committee on Great Lakes Basic Hydraulic and Hydrologic Data, 1998). At the head of the Niagara River, extensive human alterations have occurred over the past two centuries. Several notable alterations include the expansion and armoring of Union Island, construction of the Peace Bridge and International Railways bridges, implementation of the Broderick Park seawall by 1949, expansion and armoring of Nicholls Marine between 1949 and 2004, and consistent dredging and river sweeping to maintain the navigability of the river (see Fig. 1 for the locations of the aforementioned features) (Coordinating Committee on Great Lakes Basic Hydraulic and Hydrologic Data, 1998). The impact of these alterations on the footprint of the Niagara River channel can be clearly seen in the historical navigation maps maintained by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. These alterations have increased water velocities along the shorelines used by emerald shiners to move between the river and Lake Erie placing, yet, another stressor on this small minnow species (Coordinating Committee on Great Lakes Basic Hydraulic and Hydrologic Data, 1998). In fact, Poff and Zimmerman (2009) found that there is an increased risk of ecological change with increasing alteration of hydrodynamic conditions of water bodies. The physical modifications to the Niagara River have effectively channelized the river, nearly eliminating the presence of natural roughness elements that would disrupt the flow and produce valuable hydraulic cover for aquatic organisms (Coordinating Committee on Great Lakes Basic Hydraulic and Hydrologic Data, 1998, Kleinschmidt Associates and Riversedge Associates, 2005, Mudroch and Williams, 1989). Hamm and Hannes (2012) field observations found large congregations of emerald shiners within slackwater areas of the shoreline in which the emerald shiners appear to have trouble navigating upstream. The hydrodynamic conditions of the river, between the Peace Bridge and International Railroad Bridge (Fig. 1), have the potential to restrict fish movement between the Niagara River and Lake Erie. The natural movement habits of the emerald shiner are not fully understood, as of yet; however, emerald shiners have been observed to attempt to move upstream along the shorelines of the Niagara River.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Google Earth image (Google, 2013) of the head of the Niagara river. The flow direction is from south to north (bottom to top). Locations identified in this Figure include; (1) Buffalo water level gauge, (2) Fort Erie water level gauge, (3) Peace Bridge water level gauge, (4) Buffalo, NY, U.S.A.(5) Fort Erie, Ontario, Canada, (6) Extent of the hydrodynamic model domain, (7) International Railway Bridge, (8) Frenchman’s Creek water level gauge, (9) Grand Island, NY, U.S.A. (10) Peace Bridge, (11) Canadian vertical seawall, (12) Bird Island Pier, (13) Nicholls Marine, (14) Broderick Park, (15) Broderick Park vertical bulkhead shoreline recess, and (16) Unity Island.
In the past 20 years, numerical modeling has gained traction as a useful compliment to ecological studies, allowing investigators to simulate numerous hydraulic variables of ecological importance. In fact, studies such as Rodríguez et al. (2006) and Grantham (2013) have shown that hydrodynamic modeling techniques can be used to predict passage success of migratory fish. Generally, studies utilizing numerical modeling techniques for ecological purposes have been contained to small spatial scales in order to simulate hydraulic variables on scales ecologically relevant to the species of interest (Crowder and Diplas, 2000). The extension of ecologically oriented numerical techniques to a large spatial scale is feasible, especially when the results are not directly tied to the design of fish passage structures. Large scale hydrodynamic modeling, when coupled with small-scale, highly targeted, and ecologically relevant field measurements, allows for the evaluation of fish passage in large ecological systems such as the Niagara River, ultimately making it possible to identify potential barriers across a wide range of hydrodynamic conditions.
Hydrodynamic barriers to fish passage can take many forms, with common examples including dams, culverts, and other hydraulic control structures (Jones et al., 1974, Zheng et al., 2009). While barriers may not be identical in the manner in which they limit fish passage, they are similar in that they reduce or limit upstream fish passage rates. For instance, some barriers, like dams, create physical impediments to passage, while others, like culverts, create hydraulic or behavioral deterrents (Jones et al., 1974, Zheng et al., 2009). If a fish is unable to jump over a dam or traverse large water velocities (as is assumed in human modified rivers such as the Niagara River) natural patterns of movement can be interrupted, negatively impacting the fish population (Castro-Santos and Haro, 2010). The extent, location, and function of a barrier in limiting fish passage are products of many variables related to the fish species of interest and the surrounding environment. The variable that is recognized as the most important when evaluating performance at barriers is fish swimming capacity. Swimming capacity has long been a design parameter in fishway construction and evaluations (Castro-Santos et al., 2009), and has been extensively studied (Beamish, 1979, Brett, 1964, Hammer, 1995).
The swimming capacity of a fish can be described in terms of its performance in three main swimming modes: sustained, prolonged, and burst (Beamish, 1979, Hammer, 1995). Brett (1964) showed that swimming performance could be approximated by swim-fatigue curves, which allow the prolonged and burst swimming modes of a given fish to be quantified with mathematical relationships. Empirical relationships based on Brett’s (1964) work have been used to approximate passage success and facilitate the design of fishways and other hydraulic control structures by identifying the flow velocities required to allow successful entrance and passage of fish (Peake et al., 1997). According to the distinction of swimming modes outlined in Brett (1964) and reviewed in Beamish (1979), when oncoming flow speeds allow emerald shiners to swim within their sustainable swimming mode, their upstream progress will be unimpeded because they can sustain these speeds for very long times (>200 min). However, when oncoming flow velocities force emerald shiners to swim in either prolonged or burst modes, their upstream progress is jeopardized by fatigue. Jones et al. (1974) and Young (2001) published an average critical swim speed values for emerald shiners of 0.59 m s−1 for a 10 min test increment, and 0.61 m s−1 for a 5 min test increment, respectively, and these values are assumed to be most closely related to a prolonged swim speed for emerald shiners. A burst swim speed for emerald shiners was calculated by Leavy and Bonner (2009) as an absolute swimming speed of 0.81 m s−1 for shiners tested over a fatigue time of 10 s. Finally, unpublished swim tests were conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Research and Development Center in Vicksburg, Mississippi, U.S.A giving a sustained swim speed for emerald shiners of 0.4 m s−1; water velocity magnitudes above this value are likely to fatigue the fish. The methods of Peake et al. (1997) and the critical swim speed of 0.4 m s−1 were used in this study in order to conservatively estimate the location and nature of barriers to emerald shiner passage at the head of the Niagara River. It is recognized that there are many biological (size, sex, species, etc.) and environmental (water temperature, dissolved oxygen concentration, light levels, predation pressure, etc.) factors that can alter the sustained, prolonged, and burst swimming speeds achieved by any fish (Beamish, 1979, Hammer, 1995), and thus may influence their theoretical performance at hydraulic barriers. However, it is important to determine the existence of potential barriers in order to assess the impact of problematic areas to fish passage.
The impacts of water velocity stressors on the emerald shiner population in the Lake Erie and Niagara River ecosystem are of concern because it is a vital species in the region from both an ecological and economic standpoint. Although, without pre-industrialization field fish surveys of the region, it is impossible to determine the full impact of water velocity stressors on the emerald shiner populations. However, it has been established that the emerald shiner is a key prey species in the Lake Erie − Niagara River food web as they are one of the predominant forage fish species in the eastern basin of Lake Erie (Lake Erie Forage Task Group, 2012). Emerald shiners are known to be a major food source for the New York State threatened common tern (Sterna hirundo), an avian species that exploits the habitat available in the Niagara River ecosystem for various life processes. In addition, the Niagara River flyway is an internationally designated Important Bird Area (IBA) (in the same category for conservation purposes as the Everglades and the Galapagos Islands) supporting the largest and most diverse concentration of gulls in the world (Bird Life International, 2016). Economically, the emerald shiner is valuable as a commercially and recreationally harvested bait fish for bass, muskellunge, and other sportfish that attract anglers and other outdoor enthusiasts to the region.
The objective of this study was to use a combination of computational fluid dynamics shallow-water model simulations, least-cost path approximations, field measurements, and published and unpublished data about the swimming capability of emerald shiners to develop informed, scientific examinations of hydrodynamic barriers to fish passage in large scale, human-modified rivers. The system used in this study is the upstream passage of emerald shiners from the Niagara River to eastern Lake Erie. Specific to the Niagara River, our main goal is to quantify the horizontal velocity profiles present in the river for a range of typical flow conditions to identify locations that may be potential barriers to fish passage. The results from this study will not only help improve our understanding of emerald shiner movement in the upper Niagara River but will also provide a framework for future studies in other river systems.
