The implementation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) in public organizations has become a key objective in political agendas and governmental strategic programs (Gil-García & Pardo, 2005) as a central part of the process of modernizing the public administration (Chan & Chow, 2007). This process of modernisation and reform, broadly termed e-Government, has also enabled greater information accessibility and transparency (Jaeger & Bertot, 2010), improved public service delivery (Lindgren & Jansson, 2013), and produced greater interaction and citizens' participation in public administration (Zheng, Schachter, & Holzer, 2014).
The use of ICTs has been proved to be helpful for society to improve democratic models (Harder and Jordan, 2013, Puron-Cid, 2014), increasing trust in governments (Armstrong, 2011, Michener and Bersch, 2013) and improving citizen participation in public affairs (Harrison and Sayogo, 2014, Medaglia, 2012, Rodríguez Bolívar, 2015a). Also, it has helped governments to introduce electronic administration in public services (Girish et al., 2014, Lindgren and Jansson, 2013), increasing organizational flexibility and agility to respond in a dynamic environment (Holgersson & Karlsson, 2014).
Nonetheless, previous studies (Alcaide Muñoz et al., 2014, Grönlund, 2004, Rodríguez Bolívar et al., 2016) have highlighted that the e-Government is a multi-disciplinary field of knowledge being analysed from different approaches. These studies have attempted to analyse the limitations of prior research in the e-Government field and the development of this research topic, offering a critical evaluation of e-Government research (Alcaide Muñoz and Rodríguez Bolívar, 2015, Andersen and Henriksen, 2005, Bélanger and Carter, 2012, Heeks and Bailur, 2007, Sannarnes et al., 2006) and using for this purpose bibliometric and scientometric methodologies with different approaches (Akkaya et al., 2010, Joseph, 2013, Snead and Wright, 2014).
However, performance analysis has not been performed in order to measure, quantitatively and qualitatively, the contribution of e-Government and the impact of the specific research themes on the field of knowledge, with the intention of understanding the dynamics over different years in the evolution of e-Government research and detecting the most prominent, productive, and highest-impact subfields. Rapidly thereafter, the desire to map the science landscape, graph the boundaries of knowledge domains, and understand the structural dynamics of the science phenomena has become a focus area for research (Archambeault, Bidian, & Evans, 2016).
Accurately forecasting the trajectories of scientific domains and technologies is essential to the investment strategies of public administrations to operate in the area of science and technology nowadays and in the future and, by this way, in their model of reforms. In this regard, a key question is (Van Raan, 2014): are there specific patterns hidden in the mass of published knowledge in e-Government at a meta-level, and if so, how can these patterns be interpreted? Here, science mapping provides a novel perspective to reveal the scientific frontiers and dynamic structure with visualization methods (Garfield, 1994).
Nonetheless, up to now, there are no studies in the e-Government research field which use performance analysis and science mapping in order to deal directly with sets of terms shared by documents, mapping the literature directly from the interaction of key terms. These tools could allow us to examine the evolution of the e-Government research topic and a longitudinal study based on an inclusion index could be used to detect conceptual nexuses between research themes in different periods (Cobo et al., 2011a, Cobo et al., 2011b).
Therefore, the aim of this article is to present a general approach to analysing the thematic evolution of the e-Government research field. This approach combines performance analysis of science mapping for detecting and visualizing conceptual subdomains, using a methodology originally performed by Cobo et al., 2011a, Cobo et al., 2011b. This approach allows us to quantify and visualize the thematic evolution of the e-Government research topic. Based on this knowledge, this paper contributes to previous studies on e-Government (Alcaide Muñoz and Rodríguez Bolívar, 2015, Andersen and Henriksen, 2005, Grönlund, 2004, Hofman et al., 2012, Joseph, 2013, Rodríguez Bolívar et al., 2016, Scholl and Dwivedi, 2014) in the use of the bibliometric and meta-analysis techniques.
To achieve the aim of this paper, we will perform a co-word analysis with a longitudinal framework which produces strategic diagrams in order to categorize the detected themes. Results show a graphical and dynamic vision of the e-Government field, identifying new topics that have appeared and others that have disappeared, gaps, and research areas for future study.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief overview of the utility of systematic literature reviews (bibliometric and scientometric studies), science mapping, and longitudinal studies. Section 3 details the methodological approach used to analyse the evolution of the e-Government research field. In Section 5, we analyse the results. Finally, conclusions and discussions are shown.
