Earth surface and subsurface fractures represented by lineaments play essential role in natural resources exploration and susceptibility hazard mapping of earthquakes/landslides (e.g., Rowland and Sibson, 2004; Masoud and Koike, 2006). Properties of lineaments such as extent, density, intersection, and orientation have proven major indicators of zones of high permeability and/or low pressure that may act as pathways for fluid- and gas-related resource migration. Lineaments may represent faults that control basin development and the distribution of reservoirs (Warner, 1997). Regional lineaments are commonly interpreted as surface expressions of geologic weak zones at tectonic boundaries of basins and plates, as well as of faults and rock fractures (e.g., Oakey, 1994; Fichler et al., 1999; Kudo et al., 2004; Milbury et al., 2007; Austin and Blenkinsop, 2008).
Large-scale characterization of geologic structures and tectonics has been supported by recent advances in computer hardware and spatial analysis techniques (e.g., Masoud and Koike, 2011a, Masoud and Koike, 2011b). A number of algorithms have been developed for automatic or semi-automatic detection of lineaments related to geologic structures (see Ramli et al. (2010) for a review). Recent advances in the automated techniques enable detection of changes in lineament patterns (Soto-Pinto et al., 2013). The semi-automatic techniques have proven capabilities for mapping tectonic lineaments similar to photointerpretation (Vaz et al., 2012), characterizing geologic lineaments by a 3D approach using DTM curvature values (Bonetto et al., 2015), and mapping large-scale geologic structures and calculating their dip angles and directions from analysis of photogrammetric data acquired by Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (Vasuki et al., 2014).
Many methods of automatic and semi-automatic extraction of lineaments from grid data such as satellite images and digital elevation models (DEMs) are mostly based on edge-detection techniques using spatial and morphological filters (e.g., Süzen and Toprak, 1998; Tripathi et al., 2000; Soto-Pinto et al., 2013). Frequency and connectivity of the lineaments are strongly affected by the scale of the source grid data and detection parameters when filters are applied (Argialas and Mavrantza, 2004). Therefore, plausible representation of tectonically significant lineaments relevant to faults and long rock fractures cannot be realized. It is indispensable then to develop an automated technique that can enhance the frequency and connectivity of detected lineaments so that resultant lineament maps resemble actual fault maps.
Additionally, selection of suitable data sources for autodetection of tectonically significant lineaments is important. Satellite images representing reflectance and backscattering characteristics of the earth surface in response to electromagnetic waves at various wavelengths are generally used for lineament extraction. However, artificial linear features unrelated to fractures, such as boundaries of land use and land cover, also tend to be detected in satellite images. Precise DEM data can be used to avoid such misdetection. Results can be made more effective by the combined use of grid data from multiple sources that encompass wide compositional variations of subsurface geophysical attributes (e.g., gravity and magnetic) and depth variation represented by topography, especially when integrated at various scales. This can improve understanding of the relationship between tectonic trends and anomalies that develop at varying depths and geological discontinuities (Masoud and Koike, 2011a, Masoud and Koike, 2011b).
Although automated or semi-automated software for efficient detection and analysis of linear features are indispensable, most are presently commercial and need subjective setting of detection parameters. Reproducibility of features with optimal accuracy is largely not achievable. Development of freely accessible software for automated mapping of linear features is therefore essential.
Based on the above background, publicly available software is needed that can implement automatic lineament detection, analyses, and visualization within a user-friendly interface, using multiple sources of grid data. Toward this, we developed Visual Basic software LINDA (LINeament Detection and Analysis), which is exclusively menu-driven and customized for operation on PCs. The general terms “segment”, “lineament”, and “linear feature” are used in LINDA to indicate one line, a group of collinear segments, and topographic feature that includes both segment and lineament, respectively. Software with the same acronym (LINDA: Linear-feature Network Detection and Analysis) was developed by Wang (1993) to mainly detect roads, stream networks, and boundaries of features from remotely sensed data; this is not related to our LINDA software. Our LINDA software has several options, namely, enhancing, detecting, and grouping segments into one lineament, calculation of strike and dip, estimation of fault type, point density mapping, and visualization of lineaments and their geometry. These functions are more comprehensive and advanced than those of preceding and few open software of lineament analysis such as Raghavan et al. (1995), Abarca (2006), and Šilhavý et al. (2016). Results of applying LINDA to a dataset of DEM and LANDSAT ETM+ imagery in the North and South Eastern Desert of Egypt are presented for demonstrating the software performance and effectiveness of multi-shaded DEM. Although LINDA is essentially an integration of the authors’ published methods, it has new function to discriminate linear features from dykes and valleys as below-mentioned. In addition, this study reveals suitability of DEM and satellite imagery for lineament analysis and detailed characterization of fracture system.
