Our cities and environments are revolutionized by the current information and communication (ICT) technologies including wireless sensing and the Internet of Things (IoT) that enable interconnecting smart objects via machine-to-machine communication protocols as well as through the Internet, advanced machine learning (ML) and knowledge mining approaches, pervasive and mobile computing, and high performance computing (HPC). All of these technologies make our cities and premises smarter, with augmented capacities through cyber–physical systems in which machines and humans interact and act on the environment [1], [2], [3]. One of the fundamental services needed in many smart city applications is that of automatic human behavior analysis. Human behavior in cities is a complex process on both spatial and temporal dimensions, which is governed by semantic actions, and latent factors [4], [5], [6]. Human behavior depends on many factors such as intention, need, belief, and environmental aspects. For example, when standing at a red traffic light, people can wait or walk depending on whether there is a car approaching, a police car, or they are looking at their mobile phone when walking. Several areas of smart city applications have been studied in recent years, which is contributing not only to the sophistication of citizens’ daily services and quality of life, but also in the development of the economy. Moreover, many social aspects of mankind can be analyzed through the understanding and modeling of human behavior [7], [8]. A smarter city provides urban planners with tools to exploit various sources of information about human behaviors to aid in the allocation of land, water, transportation, and many others [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. This work is inline with the current efforts to use cutting edge information and communication technologies (ICT) to realize a real smart city, in which we study the modeling of human behaviors by exploring pedestrian data in a smart city environment [14].
1.1. MotivationThis research is inline with the ongoing efforts to use cutting edge ICTs for providing advanced smart city applications, and its aim is to improve modeling human behavior for different smart city applications. The existing smart city systems uses human behavior to enhance smart agents. A human behavior knowledge base can be collected from different sources using sensorial data, and Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, social media tools such as Twitter, Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, etc, which enable different representations, including texts, images, videos, time series, and trajectories.Our goal in this paper is to design a new framework of modeling human behavior, which integrates data mining and deep learning models to understand and analyze human behavior better. The strategy used in this work is based on collective abnormal human behaviors. The smart agents might also interact with the current human behavior knowledge base for decision making. For instance, if a transportation agent detects a grouping of anomalous trajectory of people in some given circumstance, (e.g., low number of Bikes for a given day), then the agent could interact with the human behavior knowledge base to make an informative decision on whether the observation is a real outlier or just related to a particular behavior of people in a certain circumstance. In the healthcare domain for example, there is a high correlation between human activities such as biking in a city and smart healthcare activities. Understanding collective human health behavior helps the smart healthcare agents to improve and predict healthcare activities.
1.2. ContributionsThis paper studies collective abnormal human behaviors in a smart city environment and proposes a new model for collective abnormal human behavioral data. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:•We formally define the collective abnormal human behaviors problem by considering the individual abnormal human behavioral data as potential candidates. We introduce a new concept of density of a collection of abnormal human behaviors. A collection of abnormal human behavioral data is thus defined as a set of individual abnormal human behaviors that are highly correlated, i.e., with a high number of shared locations.•We propose solutions based on data mining, and deep learning to accurately identify the collective abnormal human behaviors data. Data mining based solutions explore the nearest neighbors, the density computation, and the feature selection in deriving anomalies from human behavioral data. In addition, two improvements based on ensemble learning, and GPU computing are shown to boost the performance of these solutions in terms of both runtime, and accuracy of the returned anomalies. The deep learning based solution applies a convolution neural network to learn and extract relevant features, and then retrieve anomalies from human behavior data.•We evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms using different real human-behavioral databases. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that explores collective abnormal human behavior, and there is no relevant candidate in the literature to compare with. We therefore compare the proposed solutions with general anomaly detection solutions (see Section 2 for an overview). The results of our experiments demonstrate that our algorithms outperform the baseline algorithms. Moreover, they also show the effectiveness of the deep learning solution over the data mining based solutions.
