The prevalence of obesity among youth and adult populations has dramatically increased over the past decades (Ogden, Carroll, Kit, & Flegal, 2014). Although a causal link has not yet been established (Livingstone & Pourshahidi, 2014), an increase in food portion sizes has been associated with this increased prevalence of overweight (Young & Nestle, 2012). As 92% of self-served food is eaten (Wansink & Johnson, 2015), understanding the mechanisms behind portion selection could help to promote nutritionally responsible consumption.
Several factors that may impact portion selection were classified into three categories by English, Lasschuijt, and Keller (2015): the food environment (e.g., package size, plate size, social influences), food-related characteristics (e.g., food shape, palatability, energy density) and individual characteristics (e.g., oral eating behavior, weight status, age).
In addition to these characteristics, some consumer beliefs about the foods have also been shown to impact portion size choice. First, the higher the satiation the food is expected to deliver, the lower the self-selected portion size (Brunstrom and Rogers, 2009, Brunstrom and Shakeshaft, 2009). Expected satiation for food is thought to result from associative learning between the food's sensory properties, mainly the visual cues, and the remembered satiation after eating (Brunstrom, 2007, Higgs, 2008). Expected liking was also shown to be a predictor of portion size (Brogden & Almiron-Roig, 2010). Finally, foods expected to be healthy tend to be selected in larger portions (Faulkner et al., 2014), presumably because those foods are assumed by consumers to be lower in energy density and hence could be eaten in larger quantities (Wansink & Chandon, 2006). Besides, it has been shown in a series of four experiments that US participants believed that unhealthy foods are tastier leading to reduced expected tastiness for foods perceived to be healthier (Raghunathan, Naylor, & Hoyer, 2006). A recent review discussing the ambivalence attitude toward healthfulness and hedonic-related food choices suggests that individuals considering dietary longer-term health consequences can better resist palatable food cues when making food choices (Higgs, 2016).
The impact of expected satiation, expected liking and perceived healthfulness on self-selected portion size has never been studied conjointly within a single product category. In this context, the objective of this work was to assess the relative contribution of expected satiation of perceived healthfulness and expected tastiness to self-selected portion size within a range of commercial frozen pizzas. We chose this product category to test our hypothesis because it is of interest from a public health perspective to understand portion size motivational drivers for one of the most popular meals available worldwide (Masset, Vlassopoulos, & Lehmann, 2016).
