With the advent of the Anthropocene the world is experiencing a period of rapid environmental change linked to human development (Corlett, 2015), such as habitat change, pollution, and climate change, which may affect ecosystem services gained from wildlife (Roy et al., 2015). Current rates of extinction are about 1000 times the background rate of extinction (Pimm et al., 2014). Monitoring biodiversity hotspots with high levels of diversity, as well as larger coldspots that are home to rare species (Kareiva and Marvier, 2003, Mouillot et al., 2013, Marchese, 2015) is therefore of increasing importance for informing conservation management (Sutherland et al., 2015).
There are too few professional ecologists to deal with the scale of environmental challenges. The development of citizen science has dramatically increased the extent and efficiency of data collection for studies in ecology and conservation (Dickinson et al., 2012, Pocock et al., 2015). Despite considerable differences in countries and cultures Danielsen et al. (2014a) found that community members and scientists produced similar results for the status of and trends in species and natural resources. Promoting community-based citizen science could therefore significantly enrich monitoring within global environmental conventions and enhanced decision making at all levels of resource management (Danielsen et al., 2014b).
However, global biodiversity conservation is seriously challenged by gaps in the geographical coverage of existing information. Wealth, language, geographical location and security each play an important role in explaining spatial variations in data availability. (Amano and Sutherland, 2013). Yet locally based monitoring is particularly relevant in developing countries, where it can lead to rapid decisions to solve the key threats affecting natural resources, and empower local communities to better manage their resources to improve local livelihoods (Danielsen et al., 2008, Danielsen et al., 2014c).
Large mammal fauna in Africa and Asia is being decimated by illegal hunting and loss of habitat. In the future trackers can play a critical role in preventing poaching of endangered species such as rhino, elephant and tigers.
The case studies discussed in this paper will demonstrate the value of employing trackers using smartphones in large-scale, long-term monitoring of ecosystems for conservation management, especially in areas in the developing world where there are gaps in the geographical coverage. In particular, trackers can be of great value for monitoring rare and endangered species.
