Cluster analysis is the formal study to group objects according to measured or perceived intrinsic characteristics or similarity, and is able to discover the natural grouping(s) of a set of patterns, points, or objects [1]. It is widely believed that clustering is an essential key for big data, due to its ability to classify data automatically. Extensive clustering algorithms have been proposed based on different ideas and principles over the past 50 years, such as DBSCAN [2], kmeans, meanshift, APCluster, spectral clustering, DPeak [3], [4], fuzzy clustering [5] etc, which are all widely used in many real applications [6], [7], [35], [36].
Density-based clustering is one of the most popular paradigms in this community, its goal is to identify dense regions with arbitrary shape, which can be measured by the density of a given point. An identified cluster is usually a region with high density, while outliers are regions with low densities. There are many algorithms of this kind, such as DBSCAN, DPeak, mean shift, etc, and DBSCAN is the most famous one.
However, DBSCAN doesn’t work well for large scale data, due to its high complexities O(n2), then many researches have tried to improve its performance, such as Fast DBSCAN [8], ρ-approximate DBSCAN [9], AnyDBC [10] and NQDBSCAN [11], etc. By dividing the data space into grid cells with side length ϵ/2, Fast DBSCAN only works in 2-dimensional space. ρ-approximate DBSCAN uses the Bichromatic Closest Pair (BCP) problem for finding density-connected grid cells, which significantly extends the work of Fast DBSCAN, and runs in surprisingly O(n) expected time in low dimension. However, due to that the number of cells increases exponentially w.r.t the dimensionality, its performance significantly decreases in high dimensional space. NQDBSCAN accelerates DBSCAN by using local neighborhood searching technique instead of performing range query globally, it runs in about O(nlog (n)), and outperforms ρ-approximate DBSCAN in high dimensional space. But it is necessary to calculate densities for most data points (except some noises) one by one, which limits its performance.
In order to tame these drawbacks mentioned above, BLOCK technique, which has better efficiency than grid, is invented. Based on it an approximate DBSCAN with high accuracy, namely BLOCK-DBSCAN, is proposed with two versions (L2 and L∞), which greatly improves the performance of NQDBSCAN and ρ-approximate DBSCAN. where L2 version can work well for relatively high dimensional data, and L∞ version is suitable for large scale data of high dimension.
The main contributions of this paper are: (1) Two strategies are proposed to speedup DBSCAN, one is to apply cover tree to compute densities, and the other is to use ϵ2-norm ball to identify Inner Core Blocks within which all points are core points, which has higher efficiency than grid technique. (2) A fast approximate algorithm is also proposed to retrieve the minimum distance between two inner core blocks, which is applied in predicting whether two inner core blocks are density-reachable from each other or not with considerable precision and high efficiency.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: (1) Section 2 introduces related work to DBSCAN and Nearest Neighbor Query. (2) Section 3 presents the basic notations and revisits DBSCAN, ρ-approximate DBSCAN and NQDBSCAN. (3) Section 4 addresses the proposed method, BLOCK-DBSCAN, in detail, including basic ideas, schema and algorithms. (4) Section 5 shows experiments and makes comparisons with ρ-approximate DBSCAN, NQDBSCAN and AnyDBC on some data sets. (5) Section 6 gives the final conclusion.
