Urban mining, a term increasingly used by authorities and scholars, refers to the recovery of secondary resources from the waste generated within urban environments (Page, 2014). The World Bank estimates every one of the world's three billion or so urban dwellers generates, on average, 1.2 kg of solid waste a day, double that generated per capita a decade ago (Hoornweg and Bhada-Tata, 2012). Current upward trends suggest this will almost double again by 2025 (The World Bank, 2012). Urban mining is, increasingly, becoming an important focus of the resource industry as environmental concerns over the negative impacts of extractive industries, the depletion of finite natural resources and the emissions and contaminants associated with landfills coincide with a growing recognition of the value of the resources embedded within waste stock piles (Simoni et al., 2015). Urban mines are rich sources of different materials and elements in their pure and processed forms. These includes solid, liquid and gaseous wastes; both biodegradable and non-biodegradable (Page, 2014). Most of the world's environmental management agencies have now adopted the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA)’s urban waste classifications; construction and demolition material, municipal solid waste, tires, and electronics (E-waste) waste streams (Page, 2014).
Electronic waste (e-waste) is one of the world's fastest growing and most complex waste challenges (Victoria State Government, 2015). With high consumer demand, increasingly short production cycles and the early obsolescence of products in both affluent and developing country markets, the global electronics industry generated some US$2.15 trillion in 2012 (Custer Consulting Group, 2016). This translates to some 30–50 Mt a year of obsolete equipment worldwide, much of which is destined for landfill. Discarded electronic devices represent a growing a crisis of both quantity and toxicity – if improperly handled e-waste can pose serious health and environmental risks – but, at the same time, e-waste is a significant potential opportunity for the recovery of tens of millions of tonnes of valuable metals and other resources (Hyder Consulting, 2009). The UNEP recently calculated that the resources embedded in 2014's e-waste alone were worth some US$52B (Nichols, 2015).
The current barriers to realising the safe, economically viable recycling of e-waste include its complexity as e-waste is a technically challenging mix of metals, plastics, ceramics, and hazardous components. The generation of harmful emissions during processing is another big barrier for recycling of e-waste (Baldé et al., 2015).
Conventional industrial recycling processes currently recover a small proportion of mainly precious metals such as Gold (Au), Silver (Ag), Platinum (Pt), Palladium (Pd) and semi-precious metals, like Cu, Nickel (Ni), Aluminium (Al), Zinc (Zn), Pb, Sn, leaving vast amounts of residual waste, including toxic components (Mankhand et al., 2012) Currently, such industrial scale e-waste recycling uses mechanical processes such as crushing, grinding, density and magnetic separation (Laishou et al., 2010); or chemical and hydrometallurgical approaches for extracting Cu or precious metals (Quan et al., 2010, Mankhand et al., 2012); requiring large scale, energy-intensive operations and the transport of e-waste over long distances. Much e-waste is shipped to developing countries where cheaper informal processing exposes poor communities to serious risk (Lundgren, 2012). Dismantling e-waste by hand, the open burning of printed circuit boards (PCBs), plastic chipping and melting, the burning of wires to recover Cu, acid and cyanide salt leaching and inadequate metallurgical treatments are all used; releasing dust particles, fumes and ashes loaded with heavy metals and flame retardants, resulting in toxic pollutants such as dioxins, furans and lead contaminating soil, ground water and the atmosphere (Monika and Kishore, 2010).
Effective means of recovering metals from e-waste present new opportunities for downstream industries to generate value-added materials. A favourable comparison between the metallic content of PCBs and the concentration of various metals in natural ores highlights the incentive to recycle electronic waste (Namias, 2013). E-waste is, for example, between 10 and 20% Cu, compared to up to a 3% concentration of Cu in virgin Cu ore. Recovering metallic elements from e-waste, rather than mining, would significantly reduce energy usage and cut greenhouse gases emissions, while alleviating the environmental burdens of e-waste stock piles. A comparison of the energy required to recycle metals compared to their extraction from their virgin ores, highlights substantial energy savings of 95% for Al, 85% for Cu, 60% for steel, 75% for Zn and 90% for Ni (Cui and Forssberg, 2003).
Current practices for recovering metals from e-waste focus on the use of e-waste as an input in conventional ore processing; by first converting the pure elements found in e-waste to oxide or sulphite form and, then, again producing the pure form of the elements. Recently, the high temperature processing of e-waste has attracted considerable attention. In pyro-metallurgy, crushed e-waste is introduced into a molten bath in which the plastic degrades as a source of energy and the refractories are removed in the form of slag. This slag is then further processed to recover base or precious metals like Cu, Ag, Au and Pt (Cayumil et al., 2014). Alternatively hydrometallurgy processing can be used that (Mankhand et al., 2012) is more predictable and controllable, but the presence of chlorides in e-waste is still potentially hazardous. Hydrometallurgy processing is also very costly in terms of recovering waste liquids and making new solutions.
Currently, the dominant industrial e-waste recycling methods are Noranda process and the Umicore process (Khaliq et al., 2014). In Noranda's operations the temperature used is 1250 °C under air atmosphere enhanced with up to 39% oxygen. Up to 14% e-waste is treated along with Cu concentrates and the outputs, Iron (Fe), Pb, and Zn are distributed in the slag, while the Cu matte produced in the smelting stage is then purified in conversion, refining and electro-refining steps (Cui and Forssberg, 2003). Umicore's operating temperature is 1200 °C under oxygen-enriched air atmosphere with feedstock up to 10% of e-waste. Precious metals and Cu remain in the metallic phase, while Pb and other metals become concentrated in the slag. Cu is then purified in a leaching – electrowinning plant (Schluep et al., 2009).
One of the major environmental concerns in the processing or recycling of e-waste through thermal processing is the formation of toxic compounds such as dioxins. The presence of metals such as Pb and Sn complicates this risk. Previous research has shown that dioxin formation temperature lies between 300 °C and 800 °C (Emmanuel, 2009). In this study 900 °C was chosen for the thermal transformation of e-waste.
This study aims to characterise samples of out-dated PCB for their metallic content and to investigate the direct transformation of this toxic e-waste into value-added Cu-Sn nanoparticles via selective thermal transformations. The transformation mechanism has been investigated by analyzing the samples after heat treatment at different temperatures. The Cu-Sn nanoparticles are produced through ‘thermal micronizing’ in a reducing atmosphere generated due to the degradation of the plastics present in the PCBs.
