The number of connected users through Social Networks (SN) is increasing every day  [1]. The different possibilities that the SN offers, the volume of data available and its variety have made SNs an essential tool for every-day working and social relationships for hundred of millions of users. One of the basic features that any SN provides is to allow users to group, organize and classify their connections into different groups, or “circles”, depending on some characteristics available in the user profiles (professional skills, education, hobbies, etc.). Nevertheless, this classification is time consuming due to several factors: on the one hand, the increasing number of connections to classify; on the other hand, because SNs like Facebook, Twitter or Google+ needs from a manual classification of connected users (usually the user is responsible to label their own information).
Although this paper is focused on the identification of groups, or “circles”, of users in SNs (i.e. the identification of different network groups), this problem has been widely studied in other application domains. For example, it has been applied to proteins, which aims to discover the functional modules of interacting proteins [2]. Other application domains, closer to the identification to user groups or communities in SNs, is related to the identification of scientific disciplines using co-authorships networks  [3], or the identification of European citizens communities that shares their votes in the annual Eurovision Song Contest  [4].
Previous works face the problem of identifying network communities, whose aim is to group a set of nodes (users) into a set of clusters. In this type of problems there are two different kinds of data that can be used to perform the clustering task. The first one is the information available in the different nodes. In the co-authorships network problem, the information of the nodes is the researcher’s publication list; in the proteins problem, each node contains information about the properties of the protein; and finally in the Eurovision Song Festival problem, each node represents a country and the information of each node is the country vote history. The second type of data that can be used is the information that can be extracted from the network and the connections among the different objects. In the SN problems, this data represent the relationships between users, whereas in the rest of problem authors collaborate, proteins interacts and countries vote each other.
Several research areas have applied their methods and algorithms to look for feasible solutions in community finding and social circles algorithms, some of the most popular, and representative, are:

•Graph-based computing, Graph-partitioning and graph theory, are characterized by detecting the different communities based on the information extracted from the network structure [5], [6]. Using this approach, a set of nodes are a good cluster if the sub-graph composed by the selected nodes is dense (i.e. the sub-graph is highly connected) and there are few connections to the rest of nodes of the network  [7]. Some popular algorithms to perform this task are: edge betweenness [8] based on the number of the shortest path between all the nodes, spectral optimization of modularity  [9] that defines a modularity measure based on the Laplacian matrix, and random walk  [10] that defines the cluster compositions taking into account the high density of the edges inside each cluster.•From Machine Learning there is a wide number of approaches based on Supervised and Unsupervised methods that have been applied for community detection. The main difference between both approaches is related to the existence of a labeled dataset to perform training task (Supervised methods), or not (Unsupervised methods). This work will be focused on Unsupervised methods, and more specifically on Clustering  [11]. The goal of any clustering method is to group the input datasets in different clusters, in such a way elements belonging to the same cluster are similar, whereas elements belonging to distinct clusters, are as different as possible. Examples of clustering algorithms are the well-known K-means algorithm  [12], Gaussian mixture models [13], or density-based algorithm like DBSCAN [14].•Computational Intelligence (CI)  [15] can be defined as a set of bio-inspired research areas focused on the study of adaptive mechanisms to enable, or facilitate, intelligent behavior in complex and changing environments. This research area is composed by Fuzzy Systems  [16], Evolutionary Computation [17], Artificial Neural Networks  [18], Artificial Immune Systems  [19] and Swarm Intelligence [20]. From the plethora of algorithms that compose the CI research field, well known approaches for identifying communities are based on Supervised Methods, like Support Vector Machines (SVM)  [21], [22], Artificial Neural Networks (ANN)  [23], [24], or boosting algorithms  [25]. All these approaches need a labeled dataset to perform a training procedure by which the algorithm adjusted some of its parameters.
This paper presents a new bio-inspired method, based on Ant-Colony Optimization (ACO) algorithms, that has been designed to find and analyze these circles on social groups extracted from the SNs. Given any user in a network, the new method is able to automatically determine the different users that compose his/her group or circles of interest. This algorithm has been applied to Ego Networks where the node centering the network (called “Ego”) represents the user being studied, and the rest of nodes to whom this ego is directly connected (usually called “alters”) represent the friends, or other social-based connections (as family, colleagues, followers, etc.) of the corresponding ego. Although the concept of ego is more general and can represent persons, groups, organizations, or whole societies, this work will be focused only in individuals to later analyze the influence that the different users, or organizations, exert on their friends or followers.
The main difference with other existing approaches that can be found in the literature and the proposed ACO-based algorithms is related to the different sources of data that are used to perform the clustering task. In any community finding problem there are two different sources of data: one of them is the information stored in the nodes of the network, this information represents the user profiles of the SN. The other source of information is related to the connection among nodes and the structure of the network. The most extended approach in the literature uses the information extracted from the network topology to perform the clustering task, but in this work the proposed ACO-based algorithms use the profile information and the structural information of the network.
This paper is structured as follows, Section  2 shows some relevant works related to the main research areas considered in our approach. Section  3 provides a complete description of the proposed method for clustering Ego networks based on Ant Colony Optimization algorithms. Section  4 describes the datasets used and the experimental evaluation carried out using our approach. Finally, Section  5 shows the main conclusions and future lines of this work.
