Identity is a collection of the individual characteristics of a person, and is different for each person, while identification is the process of recognition of these properties. One of the primary aspects of identification is gender; through gender determination, the search spectrum can be reduced. Moreover, performing identification is often difficult following certain situations such as traffic accidents or fire-related disasters. Durable teeth can be an important source for identification.
Several studies of the identification of an individual from teeth have been conducted in the medicine and dentistry research field. Hasanreisoğlu et al. conducted a study of Turkish people, which reported that men have larger dimensions of maxillary central incisor and canine than women [1]. Zirahei et al. stated that maxillary canines are statistically significant in gender determination [2]. There are studies showing that measurements from mandibular canines are an important tool in gender determination [3], [4]. In the studies conducted by Parekh et al., these authors stated that the maxillary arch width and maxillary canine teeth can show gender dimorphism [5]. The fact that men have statistically deeper and wider dental arches than women had already been presented in many studies [6], [7], [8].
In the study carried out by Al-Khatib et al. using 3D imaging, they found that gender difference was statistically significant in dental arch size [9]. In the study conducted by Horvart using 3D data, it was shown that maxillary anterior teeth had gender-based differences [10]. Shin, in his study, performed gender analysis from maxillary tooth plasters using principal component analysis and the K-nearest neighbour algorithm [11]. In our study [12], a system is suggested that can automatically determine gender from 2D tooth plaster images taken in a controlled environment.
In this paper, automatic gender determination was carried out using local DCT and the RF algorithm for 3D digital maxillary tooth plaster models. Our study contributes to the literature in the following ways:

•Automatic dental arch segmentation was carried out using 3D digital maxillary tooth plaster models; related features were automatically obtained and gender determination was performed.•A system was devised that could adapt itself to other populations in a rapid and straightforward manner.•A multi-disciplinary study was realised that involved computer science, medicine and dentistry.
This paper is organised as follows: the techniques of ICP, DCT and RF used in the study are explained in Section 2. Section 3 covers the steps involved in aligning the 3D models, segmentation and transforming them into depth images within the proposed system for gender determination from tooth models. Section 4 describes the data set used and the experimental results. Section 5 discusses the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed system with reference to the literature. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6.
