Radiation is defined as the propagation or transmission of energy through space or matter in the form of waves or particles. Depending on its energy, it is classified as ionizing and non-ionizing radiation. Compared to non-ionizing radiation, ionizing radiation has more energy that can ionize atoms of the interacting matter. Radiation-shielding is a method to protect the material or human body placed around radiation source. The protection from ionizing radiation depends on the selected material as well as parameters such as the distance of the material from the radiation source and the time the material remains in the radiation. By absorbing the energy of the radiation, shielded materials reduce the harmful effect of ionizing radiation to a level safe for human.
Radiation-shielding studies play an important role in many research fields such as atomic and nuclear physics, space programs, agriculture, medicine, etc. Due to its high density, high number of atoms, high stability level, ease of production, high degree of flexibility in application, lead is one of the most excellent materials that can prevent radiation (A guide to the use of lea, 1001). However, lead is not recommended to use in radiation shielding studies because of its disadvantageous such as toxicity, weak mechanical strength and inflexibility. For these reasons, non-toxic materials equivalent to lead are required to be used in radiation protection studies.
Several materials such as concrete (Kharita et al., 2011; Akkurt et al., 2006; Akkurt et al., 2010; Han et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2014; Singh et al., 2015a), some polymers, alloys and some glasses (Mann et al., 2015; Singh et al., 2014, 2015b; Mirji and Lobo, 2017; Agar et al., 2019; Singh and Badiger, 2014; Tellili et al., 2017; Kaewkhao et al., 2008; Kaewjang et al., 2014; Tijani et al., 2018) have previously been studied to shield ionizing radiation. Considering its cost, ease of use and flexibility to allow the construction to be carried out as desired, concrete is considered to be the most advantageous material for areas with very large volumes (Kharita et al., 2008; El-Khayatt, 2010). However, as concrete is a heavy material, more light weight and equivalent materials are needed especially in the field of technology. Composite materials formed by using various materials and fillers are recently being very popular in radiation-shielding studies. Because polymer materials have flexibility, chemical stability, low cost, volume reduction after use, they are quite useful for radiation shielding.
As it is known, concretes and lead blocks are generally used in radiation shielding. However, it is possible that concretes will be damaged in an earthquake and it is known that lead is harmful to human health. Therefore, the aim of this study is to create an alternative material instead of ordinary materials used in ionizing radiation shielding such as concrete and lead blocks. In this study, a new composite material was prepared by using unsaturated polyester resin as matrix element consisting of Li2WO4 as filler. In total, four different samples filled with 5%, 10%, 15% and 20% Li2W04 concentration were prepared and the prepared samples were tested. The results showed that the new material would be very useful especially in the fields where radiation protection was required.
