This paper uses the following definition of feature selection for model training. The full M dimensional space RM, where M is the number of datasets, is replaced by a set of features FN with N ≤ M. The aim of the feature selection is to estimate the smallest subset of F relevant for a given criterion. The use of a smaller set of features decreases the calculation time for modeling, and reduces the influence of uncertain features on the model, to name only two advantages.
The selection of training parameters (features) for a machine learning approach is often based on domain expertise. The expert decides which features shall be included in the training and which shall not. The quality and quantity of the available features influence whether or not the modeler can select data using a statistical approach, for example to remove correlated data. Here correlation analysis, including PCA (Brumelis et al., 2000) or nonlinear PCA (Vo and Durlofsky, 2016), is used.
Behind this statistical analysis are methods which use supervised or unsupervised approaches. An elaborate method has been demonstrated in Golay and Kanevsk (2016), which is able to detect linear as well as nonlinear dependencies in the dataset. A large set of training methods including feature selection methods is described in Pedregosa et al. (2011). An other interesting stepwise method to remove variables based on an AIC is described in Zeng et al. (2016). A feature selection method based on sensitivity analysis is described in Specka et al. (2011). In contradiction to all of the established methods we want to introduce a method which uses a genetic optimization procedure to find an approximated optimal solution for the NP hard problem of feature selection. The key idea is to use the score of a machine learning approach to control the optimization. This means that the optimization method can be applied for different types of machine learning.
To model the influence of selected weather data on the habitat quality of (invasive) mosquitoes, Kerkow et al. (2017) applied a machine learning approach. In this investigation, researchers used correlation analysis to select the features used; this minimized the number of features by removing dependent features. Nevertheless, a correlation between weather data is always given. For example, it can be assumed that the mean temperature in January is correlated with the mean temperature in February. On the other hand, there should be little correlation between the temperature in January and in August. It is obvious that monthly data and seasonal data which includes that month are correlated, but the use of both datasets enables additional information to be gained. A warm spring is not the same as a warm March. This means that the weather data itself is not sufficient without taking into account its impact on the species to be modeled.
We asked different expert's to make a selection of modeling dependencies (features). The answers differed depending on each experts focus. One expert emphasized the weather during mosquitoes reproductive period in the summer; another expert emphasized the importance of survival during the cold period of the year. On the other hand, according to Wikipedia, data science is “an interdisciplinary field about processes and systems to extract knowledge or insights from data in various forms.”1 Data science can be applied in a variety of fields with the aim of finding patterns and structures in large datasets which can then be interpreted as new knowledge. For example, Nair et al. (2016) show how topology can be used to model socioecological systems. A multi-indicator system is analyzed in Wei et al. (2015), and a dynamic Bayesian non-negative matrix factorization approach is used in Wang et al. (2016) to estimate an optimal solution in an NP hard problem. Another approach by Qi et al. (2016) combines a deep learning method with sample programming using a support vector machine (SVM), which is similar to the method presented in this paper. Other books that cover data science such as Grus (2015) and VanderPlas (2016) supplement the literature presented here. All this leads to the question of whether an automated procedure based on approaches using data science can be developed to find relationships between mosquito distribution and weather data which might explain the mosquito distribution. This paper therefore focuses on the following research questions:
•Can a data science approach determine an appropriate set of features for training?•Can the automatically selected set outperform data selection by experts?•Can the automated selection procedure benefit from domain expertise in terms of speed or accuracy?•Can the automated selection generate new knowledge for biologists?•What are the limitations of a data science approach?
The aim of this paper is to introduce a data science approach to automating features selection on the basis of a genetic algorithm implemented using a computer cluster.
