In this article we propose several approaches for automatic annotation of natural science spreadsheets using a combination of structural properties of the tables and external vocabularies.
Scientists from domains other than computer science typically use spreadsheets to store and manipulate data collected during research (Chen and Cafarella, 2013, Maguire et al., 2013). This is especially true for scientists from the domain of natural science, e.g. biology, medical science and physics (Wolstencroft et al., 2011, Rijgersberg et al., 2011, Rayner et al., 2006, McDonald et al., 2012). While designing their spreadsheets they inevitably make choices with respect to the entities and processes to be included, and the way in which these are organized in tables. The domain model of the scientists is implicitly reflected in the content and structure of the spreadsheet tables. Domain scientists may give a textual explanation about their ideas and choices in their publications, but the actual domain model remains hidden. As this domain model is essential to understand the meaning and context of the spreadsheet data, it is currently hard to unambiguously interpret these data for people other than the original developers. The overall objective of our research is to explore new ways to make the underlying domain model of scientific spreadsheet data explicit.
An important cause of the limited semantic specification of scientific spreadsheet data is the free format of spreadsheets, which gives researchers a great deal of freedom in how they enter and manipulate their data. Moreover, domain scientists create their spreadsheets for their own use to analyze new problems and improve domain understanding (Segal and Morris, 2008). They may therefore be less interested in how the data is understood by peers who want to reuse or review such data. Semantic markup tools like RightField (Wolstencroft et al., 2011), OntoMaton (Maguire et al., 2013), and spreadsheet based formats like MAGE-Tab (Rayner et al., 2006) and ISA-Tab (Sansone et al., 2012) may be used to develop templates for domain scientists to enter their data. These templates encourage standardization of spreadsheet data and as such facilitate interpretation and reuse. But setting up these templates requires time and technical knowledge, and the freedom for domain scientists to enter their data is constrained. We argue that automatic annotation of scientific spreadsheet data with concepts from the underlying domain model could facilitate the interpretation, evaluation and reuse of scientific spreadsheets.
This paper extends previous work (De Vos et al., 2012) by proposing a set of approaches for automatic annotation of spreadsheet tables. Basic assumption in these approaches is that the underlying domain knowledge can be represented as the collection of concepts in a set of spreadsheet tables, and how these are related to each other. We propose to extract these concepts and interrelations by iteratively combining information on the structural properties, and information on the content of scientific spreadsheet tables. The information on the structure is expressed as heuristics and rules on table layout, and grammar rules on quantities and units of measure. The content information consists of two external vocabularies, i.e., one vocabulary related to the scientific domain of the spreadsheets and one vocabulary on units of measure, quantities and related concepts.
The focus of this paper is on spreadsheets that are used in natural science; scientists working in the domain of natural science are hereafter referred to as domain scientists. Natural science spreadsheets often represent laboratory or field measurements, and typically consist of numerical data, quantities and units of measure (Assem et al., 2010), and information on the associated objects and events. As such, these spreadsheets typically possess structural properties that pose a challenge for automatic interpretation and annotation. These properties are (1) the presence of blocks within a table, (2) the presence of units of measure, (3) the presence of quantities, (4) the presence of different type of blocks, in terms of content position, and role in the table, and (5) the grouping of similar domain concepts. For each of these properties we suggest an annotation approach, that may help to overcome the challenges. In a case study with a set of existing natural science spreadsheets, we evaluate each approach by comparing the annotation results with a baseline based on purely lexical matching.
In this paper we make the following contributions: (i) we provide the algorithms, and heuristics that are used in our approaches (Section Appendix A) for automatic semantic annotation of spreadsheet tables, (ii) in our case study experiment (Section 4) we prove that including information on structural properties of spreadsheet tables results in higher precision and recall of annotation of individual terms (5.1 Annotation of unit terms: approach 2, 5.2 Annotation of quantity terms: approach 3, 5.3 Block typology) and (iii) we show that the semantic characterization of blocks (Section 3.5) is an essential first step in the identification of relations between cells in a table (Section 5.3).
