Homophily [17], [35], [37], [44] represents the tendency of individuals who are similar on some traits to connect (become friends, follow each other, communicate etc.) in a social network. Social influence (peer pressure) is the inverse tendency of becoming similar on some traits or adopting certain behavior from your social contacts. Both, homophily, and social influence result in assortative mixing in the network. Assortative mixing or social correlation means that neighbors exhibit a higher similarity compared to random users in the network. Assortative mixing is repeatedly confirmed in social network analysis literature [3], [5], [11], [20], [70]. A question remains, to what extent is the observed assortative mixing a result of an underlying homophily that shapes the formation of the network or of the social influence taking place in an already formed network [37]. In addition to individuals connecting to similar individuals, link dissolution over time among non-similar individuals is another suggested mechanism relating to homophily. Yet another factor that could cause assortative mixing is a common external influence. Moreover, a combination of these factors is often at play. For instance, an external factor might have a non-homogeneous adoption in the network because friends have a higher common latent propensity for it and adopt it to a larger extent than non-friends. Distinguishing between these factors as the causes of assortative mixing has been a challenge, and proven not even possible from observational data [68].
Extensive research is conducted in sociology on homophily in social networks (see the seminal review by McPherson et al. [44]). The classical paper [35] from the middle of the 20th century introduced two basic levels of homophily: status and value homophily. Status homophily relates to any formal or perceived status among individuals. It includes some of the most important social dimensions, such as race, ethnicity, sex, age, education, occupation and religion. Value homophily relates to our internal states that might shape the future behavior; for example: abilities (intelligence), aspirations, and attitudes (political orientation), regardless of the differences in status.
The picture on homophily is additionally complicated because not all social links are equal. In his famous Strength of Weak Ties (SWT) theory, Granovetter [28] discussed the differences between strong links and weak links. He defined strong links through a combination of time, intimacy, emotional intensity and reciprocity. Granovetter also argued that users connected with a strong link are more likely to be similar. Weak links correspond to acquaintances with whom there is usually less interaction. However, those are the bridging links that introduce the node to novel and potentially useful information. Another similar theory introduces the advantageous network position of bridging nodes using the concept of structural holes [13]. Burt [13] argues that the nodes positioned between different network groups are more familiar with alternative ideas and behaviors compared to the nodes embedded in dense clusters. He developed a measure of structural holes corresponding to the advantageous social position that is named Burt’s index after him. Described network position can be a more implicit cause of homophily. Research finding exist that holding a same position inside an organization will induce larger homophily between individuals than it would be the case if the links were random [42].
1.1. Background and motivationWith online social networks (OSNs) becoming widely used, researchers are nowadays gaining access to data that were previously unimaginable in sociology. High numbers of OSN users and their active engagement create large-scale datasets of social interactions. This in turn has lead to a wave of new research tackling introduced and many other sociological phenomena within OSNs [22], [80]. Such research lies in between sociology, on one side, and computer science required for processing and analyzing large-scale datasets, on another. Hence a new research field termed computational social science emerged [36]. Our study is situated within this field. We study introduced tendencies of status and value homophily, their interplay with links of different strength and through time in the context of a particular OSN, Twitter.Depending on the purpose of OSN, connections among its users describe a different relationship. In most of the studies on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram or Flickr, for instance, connections are taken to represent friendship, acquaintanceship or followership. Such links are binary (connected or not) and one time (once formed and persist). Some other binary and one time relationships are citations (bloggers) or professional cooperation (LinkedIn). However, almost all OSNs provide additional layers of interactions that enable to assign other types of links to the users. For instance, users can send messages, write wall posts, they can mention each other or in some networks endorse or give rating. Such interactions enable to assign strength and temporal dimension to the links. In our study on Twitter data we analyze underlying communication via direct messages as the basis for forming links. This makes our study different from a number of previous studies in which assigned links are binary and one time. Xiang et al. [76] developed a connection strength indicator based on interaction activity and argued how it offers more information compared to binary links. While not developing a sophisticated model as Xiang et al. [76], we also consider the links between users based on their interaction frequency (number of mentions) instead of binary links. The frequency and times of interaction add a temporal dimension: links in our network can be persisting, or they can form, decommission and form again during the dataset time-frame.Fig. 1 presents the general framework of our study. As depicted, we operate on empirical datasets (from Twitter and Wikipedia), while basing our research questions on existing sociological theories. Communication network that we analyze is built from Twitter mentions. A natural method to asses homophily in communication is through semantic aspects of it, hence we talk about semantic homophily. We define semantic homophily as the degree of assortative mixing on semantic aspects in communication. We build a semantic database from a Wikipedia dataset according to the Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) [25] algorithm. This semantic database and the IBM Alchemy API [2] enable to assess semantic aspects of tweets. Through these semantic aspects, in turn, we measure semantic homophily.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. General framework of our study. In addition to the evidence found for some existing sociological theories in the empirical Twitter data, we also find evidence pointing to some hypotheses. However, such hypotheses remain open questions as they should be evaluated and confirmed in several other datasets before any general conclusions about semantic homophily in communication are reached.In the following section, we summarize the terminology used in this study.
1.2. TerminologyCommunication network is based on Twitter mentions, representing computer-mediated online communication [73]. The network nodes correspond to Twitter users, and the directed links to the tweets in which they mention each other. The tweet content is also included. Our network is a subtype of previously introduced interaction networks [74]. The links in our network are not only formed once (one time), but they require an active engagement over time. They are also not binary, but have strength based on the number of mentions. When a user A follows a user B it simply states some type of potential interest in what B has to say. Depending on their time zones and on the number of other users that A is following, she might not even get to see any of B’s tweets. In the case of our communication network we can clearly point to an interaction and information diffusion (when the user A mentions the user B), instead of simply speculating about it when using the friendship/follower network. Communication generally refers to exchanging of information. We recognize the potential of Twitter mentions to carry two different forms of information exchange. In the first form, the source is directly addressing the receiver. In the second form, there is a sort of authority attribution where the source comments to the rest of the Twitter users about the receiver (this could be a critique as well).Communication intensity (CI) denotes the weight on the links i.e., the number of mentions between a pair of users. CI is also taken as an indicator of link strength after SWT theory [28].Assortative mixing or social correlation represents higher similarity on certain traits between neighbors compared to random users in a network. In other words, it is preferential attachment of individuals who are similar on some traits. Given a network, assortative mixing can be measured through several assortativity coefficients (see Methods 7.1).Semantic homophily is assortative mixing on semantic aspects of communication. We point out that in many related studies, the term homophily is used with the meaning of assortative mixing as we introduced it here. A possible reason is the described indistinguishability of homophily with social influence. We also use the term semantic homophily, while a more precise term would be semantic assortative mixing. However, we select to talk about semantic homophily in order to be consistent with the related studies and also since we do not focus on distinguishing between homophily and social influence. In order to measure semantic homophily, we tackle several semantic aspects of communication discussed in the following.Semantic relatedness (SR) represents similarity and relatedness of topics in two texts. SR is a more general metric compared to semantic similarity [30] since in addition to similarity, it includes also any other relation between the terms, such as antonymes (opposite terms) [38] and meronymes (a term is a part of or member of the other) [48]. For instance, the term airplane is similar to the term spacecraft. The same term is related to car, train or wing, but not similar to them. SR between texts is quantified by a value ranging from 0 (not related at all) to 1 (maximally related).Sentiment of a text receives a value ranging from −1 (negative) to 1 (positive).Entities represent concrete topics discussed in a text, such as: people, companies, organizations, cities and geographic features.Concepts represent abstract ideas in a text. For example, if an article mentions CERN and the Higgs boson, it will have Large Hadron Collider as a concept even if the term is not mentioned explicitly in the page [2].Communication propensity (cp^) is a function of some network property measuring the extent to which the observed communication and its intensity diverge from what would be expected in a uniformly random setting with respect to that property. We investigate communication propensity with respect to SR threshold (formula in Section 4.1).Social capital [12], [59] represents actual and potential resources that are linked to the ego’s social network and relationships. Hence, in similarity to the socio-semantic networks [65], we define social capital in our communication network as the total number of contacts (degree in the unweighted network) or the total strength of contacts (degree in the weighted network). Moreover, in both cases we can separate popularity (indegree) and activity (outdegree). Another way we use to access social capital is in terms of network position measured with Burt’s index [13] (see Methods 7.2).Semantic capital denotes the amount of diversity in a text with respect to the above introduced semantic attributes, similarly as in [65].Relative status of two users represents the difference of their respective status ranks. It can be defined for both social and semantic capital. Relative status is termed achieved status in some studies [69].User status inconsistency [39], [62] is a relative difference between her ranks among all users on social and semantic capital. Status inconsistent individuals tend to be highly ranked on some aspects and lowly ranked on others.Link status inconsistency measures total user status inconsistency of the communicating users (we give a formal definition in Section 4.4).
1.3. ContributionsThe focus of our work is on semantic homophily. While several other studies have tackled some aspects of semantic homophily, as we discuss in the related work, to the best of our knowledge this is the first study aiming towards a comprehensive picture on the role of semantic homophily in communication. We offer an in-depth and detailed investigation of semantic homophily: from quantification and qualitative assessment to its temporal evolution. Below we summarize our findings in the context of the framework in Fig. 1:–Quantification of homophily–We confirm that semantic relatedness of tweet contents is a homophilous trait for communication. Using communication propensity, we measure the extent of the homophily. Additionally, there are differences between strong and weak links. While similarity increases the probability of forming strong links, the weak links are almost equally likely across user pairs with different similarities. Hence we confirm a specific aspect of the SWT[28]in communication for semantic homophily.–Granovetter’s theory also suggests that, with similarity, the link strength between already connected users is higher [28]. We confirm that the intensity of communication as a proxy for the link strength correlates with user pair similarity. However, we do not establish any causal relationship. Moreover, the correlation is rather moderate leaving space for many other factors that affect the strength of the links in addition to semantic similarity that we measured.–We formulate several forms of social and semantic capital [12] and measure respective status and value homophily levels [35] in communication. Forms of social capital are operationalized through network position based on degree, strength of connections and Burt’s index [13]. Forms of semantic capital are defined through sentiment and the diversity of the user tweets with respect to entities and concepts.–Social status homophily is manifested in assortative degree mixing in the network (degree assortativity) [51]. We calculate different degree assortativity coefficients (undirected and directed, unweighted and weighted) and show that Twitter mention network is not assortative for some of them when we consider also the weak links. However, as we shift the focus towards strong links, the network becomes strongly assortative on all the degree assortativity coefficients. These results exhibit high social status homophily in communication, particularly for strong contacts. In this way we also reveal important differences between communication network captured by mentions on Twitter and previously analyzed follower type of network.–The interplay between social and semantic capitals reveals that popularity and activity correlate positively with semantic diversity, and negatively with sentiment. On the other hand, social capital measured through Burt’s index shows no correlation with either of the forms of semantic capital.In other words, the advantageous position in the communication network is not due to any semantic superiority of the users.–Finally, we operationalize sociological concept of status inconsistency [62] in the Twitter network and show that link inconsistency correlates with its strength, i.e., communication intensity.–Temporal evolution–Building on several previous studies [17], [78] that investigated homophily during link formation, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate its change also during link decommission. Our results reveal the role of status and value homophily during link formation and decommission.–Firstly, as reported in the previous studies, we also detect an increase in user semantic relatedness (value level homophily) prior to link formation. Then we also observe a drop in similarity between users once they become connected.–We go a step further, by separating persisting from the less stable links, to exhibit that it is due to the later that the average similarity drops. However, for the pairs who actively persist communication, the similarity stays high also after their link formation.–In relation to status level homophily, we find that pairs who start communicating and have similar social status are more likely to persist compared to pairs who start with a larger difference in status.–Respectively, the pairs who eventually cease communication are not characterized by semantic differences (value heterophily), but by status differences (status heterophily).This is evidence in support of sociological theories that links with dissimilar individuals are more expensive and difficult to maintain [10], [24]. However, we find this evidence mainly for the status level similarity.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related research literature. In Section 3 we describe the two datasets (from Twitter and Wikipedia), as well as the framework for analysis consisting of a communication (Section 3.1) and semantic (Section 3.2) layer. Quantification of different forms of homophily is presented in Section 4: the relationship between semantic relatedness and communication is reported in Section 4.1, social status homophily in Section 4.2 and semantic status and value homophily in Section 4.3. Insights on the relationship between different forms of capital are given in Section 4.4, insights on relative status in Section 4.5 and on status inconsistency in Section 4.6. Temporal aspects of semantic homophily, including link formation, dissolution and persisting interactions, are discussed in Section 5. The article concludes with a discussion and remarks on future research in Section 6.
