This guide should understand that the need to use muscle power is suitable for working and designing equipment. Human muscle strength is an important indicator of human ability, but knowledge of these benefits alone may not be sufficient to correct "ergonomic" problems in the workplace. If the work situation needs to be evaluated, it may be corrected to alleviate musculoskeletal problems. If the task requires maximum strength designed not to alleviate fatigue, it is often based on effort, activity and equipment.
Most professional activities are carried out through human intervention. In this case, each son's ability to perform mechanical work is to exert muscle strength. For example, a stronger individual can lift a heavier weight than his weaker colleague's ability to determining. Human strengths' requirements to complete physical activities are still disregarded to improve automation—the nature of recruiting muscle strength for many tasks and work tasks. When operating in narrow and opposing networks, for-stance defines space materials, transfers patients to and from their beds, or performs maintenance activities.
Figure 1 shows a few of the "big data in medical care," electronic medical records, medical imaging, genome sequencing, the payer of record, medicine research, such as wearable and medical equipment, the accumulation of wealth of health data from multiple sources the points. Three characteristics have been distinguished from the conventional electronic medical and public health data for decision-making. This is the power of a very large capacity; it moves at high speed through the large digital universe healthcare industry; it is highly variable in structure and properties because it is obtained from several sources.Download : Download high-res image (254KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure. 1. Big Data Health Based on Wireless Sensors [21].
As reported in the above research, data collection is the first step in building a large data structure. Among the many available data sources, wireless sensors receive a lot of attention to environmental monitoring research. Wireless sensors display and record Physical conditions in human health and the environment, and sensor data consists of a large number of sensor devices collected in so-called sink nodes. Wireless sensors help measure environmental conditions: temperature, noise, pollution, humidity, air, etc.
However, a single node that provides sensor data for human health and a limited capacity of narrow wireless links cause problems (compared to typical networks). However, data aggregation and network processing effects are beneficial to big data systems. Therefore, it is necessary to overcome the shortcomings of wireless sensors that analyze the link between wireless sensors and big data systems and improve system performance research.
