When studying the organisation of systems of cities, research can build on many different types of empirical data: the circulation of people, goods, capital or information. Among these elements, information has a particular place in the research tradition on urban systems because it plays a crucial role in organising the complex patterns of networks and flows connecting cities. The tradition to focus on information started with early research by the pioneers of the system of cities literature analysing the content of local newspapers (Pred, 1973, Pred, 1977; Zipf, 1946a) and is still active today because of the availability of new data sources on human communications through mobile devices and social media (Grauwin et al., 2017; Krings, Calabrese, Ratti, & Blondel, 2009; Stephens & Poorthuis, 2015).
Because information is a prerequisite to any other kind of exchanges, mapping its patterns helps to understand the organisation of the system of cities itself. This idea has been corroborated recently by researchers working on the development of the postal road network in France between the 17th and 19th century (Bretagnolle & Franc, 2017). They have shown that the development of an integrated communication network was concomitant with the development of the city-system at the national scale and the take-off in urbanisation rate. Having longitudinal data is very important in order to understand cities because the roots of their growth or decline are often situated far in the past. Inertia and initial advantages are indeed often major explaining factors of their situation in the urban hierarchy. However, collecting data on their relations, and especially information circulation remains a challenge because of the change in communication technology.
Some of the earliest research on urban systems has collected data from newspapers in order to analyse the circulation of information (Zipf, 1946a), because it was one of the only ways to develop a relational approach of cities at this time. But because of the cost of the data collection – involving analysing hundreds of actual paper newspapers – these studies were limited to a small number of cities, and very short periods of time. Today, thanks to the effort of digitization of historical newspapers undertaken by national libraries and the developments in data science, it is possible to upscale such analysis and apply distant reading techniques to extract similar data from millions of digitalized newspaper sheets. Digital humanities scholars have shown that these massive digital archives can be used to identify macroscopic trends related to cultural changes (Bod, 2013; Lansdall-Welfare et al., 2017), but very few studies have looked systematically at the geographical dimension of these archives.
In this paper, we look at the evolution of the circulation of information within the Dutch urban system with data extracted from Delpher, the digital archive of historical newspapers from the National Library of the Netherlands. This archive contains around 12 million newspapers pages containing even a much larger number of news items. We have selected a corpus of 31 local newspapers and collected the news referring to 312 settlements for the period 1869–1930. This represents a total number of 24 million of news items, which we use to analyse the evolution of the Dutch urban system over a long time period through its patterns of information flows. The overarching goal of the paper is to test the potential of this novel data source for reconstructing the evolving urban geography of an entire country. In order to achieve this goal, we will look for regularities in how flows of information develop over time and test different hypotheses related to the evolution of systems of cities.
Following our theoretical review (section 2), a variety of hypotheses will be formulated addressing the role of space and cities in information circulation. After a presentation of the novel data we use (section 3), and our initial research approach employing gravity modelling to understand the circulation of information over time (section 4), we test our hypotheses in the following section (section 5). Further explorations of our hypotheses using alternative approaches that handle spatial heterogeneity in information circulation are presented in section 6. Finally, we conclude in section 7.
