Understanding animal behavior (ethology) in natural conditions has been a hallmark of biology, beginning with Charles Darwin (Burghardt, 2009). By observing individuals or groups, scientists have been able to detect and understand complex animal behaviors, such as individuals interacting with others or individuals interacting with their environment (Homburger et al., 2014). However, discerning and deciphering behavioral states typically requires continuous observations over long periods of time. Unsurprisingly, the process of analyzing hours of activity is incredibly time consuming and not always accurate, reliable, or practical. Furthermore, defining behavioral parameters from a phenotype, such as the start and end time of a particular action, is often variable. One possible solution to the ambiguity is using electrocorticographic (ECoG) signals to create clear, defined parameters. Previously, we created a graphical user interface (GUI) called EEGgui that assisted in the detection of seizures observed after traumatic brain injury (TBI) using ECoG recordings (Sick et al., 2013). This was achieved by advancing short time period Fourier Transforms (STPFs) through ECoG signal time series to asses signal power in predefined frequency bands. Fast Fourier Transforms are a well-established technique chosen for EEG-DABS analysis because it is a widely utilized and understood algorithm to convert time domain functions, such as ECoG, into the frequency domain. Power in each frequency band was normalized to reduce variability between animals, and then events were only detected when their normalized power values exceeded values from an established “normal” ECoG recording (Sick et al., 2013). Seizure activity was quantitated using a predetermined pattern of power increase in all of the spectral frequency bands at every epoch.
Building on the previous design, we have altered the GUI to provide the possibility to detect multiple behavioral states, in addition to seizures, in an automated fashion over long recording sessions. EEG-DABS functions by detecting significant changes in frequency bands at every epoch, which creates a unique pattern of events that can then be correlated to a specific behavioral state. Furthermore, EEG-DABS is designed to automatically batch process multiple hours of records, by importing and analyzing data.
EEG-DABS incorporates a power normalization algorithm to facilitate EEG/ECoG comparisons amongst animals. The normalization corrects for quality differences between animal’s EEG/ECoG recordings and slow any long-term changes that might occur in a chronic recording (Gunasekera et al., 2015). One major problem stems from the tissue electrode interface, which affect signal amplitude and consequently spectral power (Freire et al., 2011). For example, activation of microglia during an inflammatory response will alter ionic concentrations, whereas activation of astrocytes, resulting from a glial scar, might cause the electrode tip to become encapsulated, which increases electrical impedance (Polikov et al., 2005; Vetter et al., 2004; Griffith and Humphrey, 2006). In order to correct this and allow animal comparison, EEG-DABS normalizes spectral power data continuously over time using median decaying memory, which normalizes power in each epoch of data to the previous 120 epochs (see Section 2.6: Median Decaying Memory). Median decaying memory was chosen for normalization because it outperformed 5 other common normalization techniques used to detect seizures in a recent publication. Logesparan and colleagues (2015) found that when removing signal noise, median decaying memory most accurately represented the original data and did not impair seizure detection ability. Moreover, its effects were consistent across human subjects, databases, subject vigilance, and lengths of recordings (Logesparan et al., 2015). Therefore, long-term changes in signal do not affect event detection since each section is normalized to the preceding epochs.
EEG-DABS described here uses three different modes to analyze ECoG recordings: Single File Mode, Batch File Mode, and Raster Plot Only Mode, which are described in more detail in the results section. The logic of the GUI was that Single File Mode would be used first to correlate a pattern to a behavior, and then the other two modes would be used to quantify that behavior over a long series of recordings. EEG-DABS detects significant changes in ECoG power compared with the power distribution of a reference ECoG in up to 10, user defined frequency bands. There are 6 default bands that correspond to traditional ‘brain waves’: delta (0.5–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), beta1 (12–18 Hz), beta2 (18–30 Hz), and gamma (30–60 Hz). Once a behavior is calibrated, EEG-DABS can then be used to quickly quantify the occurrences of that behavior over long recordings. To quantify EEG-DABS success rate, the commonly observed rodent behavior freezing was utilized. Freezing, which was defined as a moving before and after stopping, was correctly identified by EEG-DABS using a predetermined pattern of events.
