The creativeness area is one of the most brilliant and innovative in Europe, being well represented by architecture, interior design, advertising and other related disciplines and arts. These fields have continuously provided stimuli and challenges that have driven many of the recent technology innovations: from new building techniques and materials to computer-aided design and calculus. One of the most desired features in interior design and advertising is the possibility to change the color of objects, as the visual perception is the most powerful way of conveying information and emotions. It is in the frame of design-driven applications that the idea behind the LUMENTILE project was devised, in response to the strong request from designers and creative people to make available new luminous smart products based on the concept that a traditional object could become much more powerful and useful if it would be provided with the capability of emitting light of different colors.
The LUMENTILE project has been conceived to exploit frontier technologies in large-area and organic electronics and photonics to develop a new generation of modular luminous components for design-driven applications, namely an electronic luminous tile.
The objectives of the LUMENTILE project are both in the technical and in market-oriented domain. In particular, technical objectives include:

1.The engineering of high-efficiency ceramic materials to build integrated electrically interconnected luminous tile devices.2.The investigation of the best LED sources and light guiding structures for different luminous tile applications.3.Smart integration of large-area electronics/photonics with ceramic material technology, focusing on enabling the mass production of the luminous tile.4.Suitable video signal distribution system compatible with title-to-tile communication, without the use of an external dedicated bus.5.The development of autonomous operation logic that will allow a fast and easy installing and configuration of large sets of tiles.
On the other hand, market-oriented objectives focus on:

1.Flexible and versatile luminous tile product/technology, capable to respond to the needs of design-driven solutions and applications; in fact, design-driven solutions will be feasible only if designers will have freedom to choose shape, size and functions of the electronic/luminous tile.2.Functional demonstrators to showcase the proposed solution to the general public and to stakeholders of the design/architectural/building/advertisement worlds.
The unique characteristics of the luminous tile developed in the context of the LUMENTILE project, that distinguishes it from some existing products, are:

•No need for external dedicated wiring, as the luminous tile internally contains all contacts and wiring, thus realizing an intelligent network of interconnected devices. The absence of external wiring greatly improves the ease of installation and the design, as designers and architects must not design/realize/install a dedicated power supply or communication system. The power supply and control signal shall be applied only to a limited number of tiles.•Thickness less than 16 mm, thus being fully compatible with installation in any ambient, without the need for large extra-depth or to build a step.•Compatibility with traditional tile installation methods (i.e.: chemical glues; no specific qualification required to the installation personnel). This is also true for the management of the space between two adjacent tiles, which is used by installers to rotate and tilt the tile (up to 4 mm rotation/tilt are allowed by the intended connection technology).•The electrical contacts are on the bottom side of the tile, and not on the sides. This solution, based on small external and invisible cross-shaped connection elements, namely the ConnectTile, offers high performance from a reliability and installation points of view.•In case of failure of one tile, the overall system will continue to operate, as there is redundancy in the electrical connections. The system will send an alert signal in case of failure, and the tile to be replaced will be identified.•Tile replacement is possible by breaking the tile to be removed, and replacing it with a new one, as it would be normally done with traditional ceramic tiles.
The LUMENTILE project envisages two different products with different fields of application: the lighting tile and the video tile. The lighting tile will be used to change the appearance of a cover (floor or wall) projecting images or color patterns. The video tile, instead, will be used to play video on a large wall or facade. On the other hand, lighting tiles can be equipped with sensors to detect various environmental parameters, with applications including intrusion detection. Due to the large number of sensors deployed, techniques such as [1] can be used to handle the complexity of the sensory system. Moreover, foreseeable applications such as tracking of persons walking on a floor made by sensorized luminous tiles would require the storage and processing of a huge amount of data generated by the cyber-physical system represented by the installed tiles [2].
Finally, security issues are addressed being the embedded systems composing the core logic of a luminous cover a possible target of specific attacks aiming at taking the control of the cover or at compromising the correct functioning of the system [3].
This paper is an extended version of Facchinetti et al. [4]; it presents interesting details regarding the LUMENTILE project. The organization of the document is as follows. Section 2 describes the consortium. Section 3 illustrates the concept of large area electronic circuit. This section discusses also how the LUMENTILE project addresses the challenges introduced by this topic. Components of single tiles are described in Section 4. Section 5 describes the illumination issues of the luminous tile. The luminous tile and the system for the lighting application are described in Section 6. Section 7 describes the video tile and the data distribution issues of the video streaming application. In Section 8 the power distribution issues of the system are addressed. Section 9 shows the hardware-in-the-loop simulator used to test the software components of LUMENTILE. Finally Section 10 draws the conclusions.
