In power systems it is common to use different algorithms to solve the power flow problem for transmission and distribution systems. Algorithms used for solving transmission networks apply matrix based algorithms [1], [2]. These algorithms work well for meshed networks where transmission lines have small R/X ratios. However, they have poor convergence when the system is heavily loaded, and with systems that have large R/X ratios, such as distribution systems. In addition, while convergence rates are excellent for these algorithms under normal operating conditions, they require a Jacobian matrix to be factorized at every iteration. Also, convergence may not occur if initial conditions for the power flow algorithm are not sufficiently close to the solution, which can often be the case for extreme operating conditions.
For distribution networks, transmission network algorithms show slow to no convergence [3], [4]. This is due to the radial, or lightly meshed, nature of the network, and large R/X ratios. Distribution networks are unbalanced in many ways—number of phases, unbalanced construction, unbalanced loading, and unbalanced distributed generation. Power flow algorithms used for distribution networks are different from transmission system algorithms. The forward/backward sweep method for distribution networks has been used by many distribution power flow algorithms [5].
Based on the sweep method, power flow solution methods have also been developed for lightly meshed networks [6], [7]. With these algorithms the system is broken into radial networks and solved using sweep-based methods. A compensation technique is then used to solve the mesh equations. However, these algorithms become inefficient for heavily meshed systems. Improvements have been developed for this method by constructing a sensitivity matrix that saves time in execution [7], [8].
In this paper an alternative approach for power systems computations, Graph Trace Analysis (GTA), is described and used to solve the power flow problem. GTA and topology iterators have been used for over 20 years to develop many different algorithms [9]. GTA based power flow algorithms have been implemented that solve transmission, radial distribution, lightly meshed distribution, and heavily meshed distribution, all in the same model [10]. With the growth of generation resources at the distribution level, power flow solutions of hybrid, or integrated transmission and distribution models, are needed [11], [12], including the ability to solve hybrid models that include detailed substation models and even downtown network models.
It has been demonstrated that GTA algorithms can solve multi-domain models, and that the same algorithm can be used to analyze across different engineering domains [13]. These abilities derive from the generic programming architecture that GTA is based on, and the object oriented approach used in existing GTA algorithms, where system equations can have no knowledge of the internal behavior of the components.
Furthermore, the implementation of GTA relies on traces, which allows GTA algorithms to be naturally distributed across multiple processors by just distributing the model. Thus, with distributed computations there is no need for a master processor or parallel processing computer equipment [14].
This paper provides a description of GTA topology iterators and graph traces, including the implementation of Kirchhoff voltage (KVL) and current (KCL) laws. Then the GTA power flow algorithm is compared to other power flow solvers. Power flow solutions of hybrid models, including models with reverse distributed generation flow from distribution to transmission, are provided.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the concept of GTA topology iterators is introduced. In Section 3 the application of GTA to circuit analysis is discussed, while Section 4 presents a simple example of a GTA based power flow algorithm. GTA power flow solutions of IEEE standard transmission models, IEEE standard distribution models, and models that include both transmission and distribution, are presented in Section 5.
