Computer experiment is an efficient and cost-effective surrogate of physical experiment to study complex systems. It is not uncommon that computer experiments have both quantitative and qualitative factors (Qian et al., 2008, Han et al., 2009, Zhou et al., 2011). In such experiments, different qualitative factors may have identical or distinct numbers of levels. This article focuses on a special case that all qualitative factors have two levels. For example, in a knee computer model for investigating wear mechanisms of total knee replacements in bioengineering (Han et al., 2009), the qualitative factors are the prosthesis design and the loading pattern, both at two levels. The levels of the prosthesis design are “cruciate retaining” and “posterior stabilized”, while the levels of the loading pattern are “the loading corresponding to normal gait” and “the loading corresponding to stair climbing”. For reasons of efficiency and economy, orthogonal arrays, also known as fractional factorial designs, are most commonly used in practice for qualitative factors.
For efficiently choosing input settings for computer experiments with both qualitative and quantitative factors, marginally coupled designs proposed by Deng et al. (2015) have been argued to be a cost-effective alternative to the strategic plan, sliced Latin hypercube designs (Qian and Wu, 2009). The construction of such designs have been explored by Deng et al. (2015) and He et al. (2016). The designs for quantitative factors in the former, however, have undesirable clustered points. For a prime power s, the latter has developed the characterization for marginally coupled designs of su runs, and the obtained designs for qualitative factors can accommodate as many as (s+1−k)su−2 factors of s levels and designs for quantitative factors can hold k factors without clustered points, where 1≤k≤s. Therefore, the latter can only handle up to two quantitative factors when qualitative factors are all at two levels. The goal of this article is to introduce a method for constructing marginally coupled designs possessing a moderate number of quantitative factors when all qualitative factors have two levels.
Although the characterization of a marginally coupled design with su runs is derived, there is still lack of construction of desirable marginally coupled designs. We present here a new construction for such designs with qualitative factors of two levels. The construction is simple and it is done by introducing a novel use of subspaces of the vector space on Galois field GF(2u), where u is an integer greater than one. Along the way, useful theoretical results are derived. The results allow us to construct marginally coupled designs of 2u runs. In the newly constructed designs, designs for qualitative factors can accommodate up to 2u1−1 factors and designs for quantitative factors are Latin hypercube designs without clustered points for up to 2u−u1 factors, for 1≤u1<u.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section  2 introduces notation and background, theoretical results and the construction method are presented in Section  3, and the last section concludes the paper with discussions.
