While consumers naturally integrate online and offline shopping, retailers are still exploring the possibilities of optimal integration. The customer journey no longer follows only one channel. For example, when looking for a new product, 80% of Dutch consumers first orient themselves online before buying the product in a physical shop (ROPO research online, purchase offline). This percentage is even higher (DigitasLBI, 2014) in countries such as United States (89%), United Kingdom (90%) and China (92%). The opposite also occurs: consumers orient themselves in the physical shop before making the final purchase online. Sixty per cent of Dutch consumers do this so-called showrooming. This percentage is also higher in other countries. In United States 66% engage in showrooming, in United Kingdom 70% and in China 84% (DigitasLBI, 2014). Also, an increasing number of consumers are using their smartphones while shopping at physical outlets. For example, they look online for additional product information and pricing, or they make photos of the product to share with friends and family before even making the purchase (DigitasLBI, 2014).
While most retailers still seem to be searching for how to best integrate online and offline shopping, many examples already exist of retailers trying to optimise this integration. The shop chain Hema, for example, has developed a mobile application that allows consumers to check the inventory of different outlets (Fashionretailfuture, 2014). The warehouse Bijenkorf has experimented with, among other things, beacons as a way to bring online and offline together. Their goal was to offer clients more personal service in the physical stores by making client and purchasing information visible to the sales clerk whenever a client came into proximity to a beacon. Beacons can also be used in other ways, such as with the sending of push messages to attract passers-by into the store (Moes and Van Vliet, 2015). For example, these push messages can include a rebate coupon. According to research, a quarter of Dutch consumers would be happy to receive such digital coupons while shopping (TNS, 2013).
In addition to the existing technologies that bring the ease of online shopping to the physical shop, other technologies are being developed for e-tailers to translate the advantages of physical shops to the online world. For example, the social aspects of shopping can be brought online through enabling chatting with other social shoppers (e.g. Zebo.com). Methods also exist that allows one to experience a fabric online. Videos can show how a fabric falls when someone wears it and tests are underway that will allow consumers to experience for themselves how a fabric feels based on vibrations on a tablet screen (Lu, 2014). Online fitting is also in development − for example, through personalised avatars (e.g. iFashion) and smart fitting mirrors.
It is becoming increasingly clear that online and offline need each other in order to provide the best possible service for clients. For this reason, not only are many physical locations opening or renewing their website and/or webshop, but also many ‘pure players’ (players who serve clients only through online channels) are now opening physical outlets (Store of the Future, 2016). Pure players make this choice for the same reasons that traditional retailers begin an online channel: to meet the needs and wishes of the client. The advantages of webshops (such as extended opening hours, accessibility, worldwide reach) are different than the advantages of physical shops (personal contact, option to take products home immediately, trying out products) (Van Vliet et al., 2015). Consumers want to choose from a broad selection and shop whenever it suits them. Via online channels, a (r) etailer can usually respond to these requirements. On the other hand, consumers also want good service, the possibility to directly experience the product, to build up trust with a certain shop or brand, to pick up their products, to be able to take home the product immediately after buying it and to have an experience. Pure players cannot always fulfil these consumer needs with their online channels, and therefore see added value in opening a physical location. A physical location does not necessarily have to be a shop − a pick-up point or a showroom can serve a similar function (Store of the Future, 2016).
When compared to websites and webshops, a physical store seems to have the advantage of being able to offer consumers a shopping experience (Store of the Future, 2016). However, experiments have not yet been done with transferring this experience to the online world. Meanwhile, (r) etailers are already generally recommended to match their online house style with the atmosphere of the shop (Kloet, 2012), and to put a photo of the physical shop online (Bakker, 2014) − but that’s usually the extent of such efforts. To truly integrate online with offline, it could be very interesting to communicate the physical shopping experience to the online consumer − and in this way perhaps bring advantages to both the retailer and the etailer. For the retailer, this online communication of the shopping experience may lure more visitors to the physical shop. Conversely, for the etailer, consumers might experience their online visit better after having experienced the physical shop.
This study researches the level that the shopping experience of a fashion shop can be brought over to the consumer via visual material, without the consumer actually being in the shop. In addition, other outcomes will be measured, including visitor intention and online visit satisfaction.
The study focuses on the effects of the online viewing1 of a photo, a 360-degree photo and a virtual reality photo of a physical shop. The effects listed here have never been investigated within a fashion retail setting − even though such efforts can provide interesting insights for both retailers and etailers. It is important to empirically test what effects new technologies have in retail settings. As the study of Moes and Van Vliet (2015) concerning the effects of beacons shows, new technologies do not necessarily evoke desirable consumer attitudes, intentions or behaviour. In fact, implementation of new technologies can backfire and lead to negative consequences, even when they were assumed to add value to the retail sector. To distinguish technology hypes that do little good to retailers and consumers from possible real retail solutions, empirical research is necessary. The research question is:
To what extent can a shopping experience be created by means of online material (regular photo of the store, 360-degree photo or virtual reality photo), and to what extent do these different materials create different effects relevant for the online and physical store?
