Biotechnology includes technologies that enable organisms to be used in food, medicine sector, and help creation of organisms, cultivation of plants/animals specifically used for improvement of human health/local environment (Lamanauskas & Makarskaitė-Petkevičienė, 2008). Biotechnology implementations became popular socio-scientific topics that are discussed frequently in society and media (Chabalengula et al., 2011, Dawson and Soames, 2006). Hence biotechnology also became a significant subject of science teaching to educate informed society about biotechnology, today it is a learning area that necessitates teachers' personal development. Biotechnology that is rapidly developing field needs special interests and skills, that is why, educators and staff need to keep the pace with information that is updated frequently (Jenkins, 1997). Moreover, frequent use of biotechnology in our life has increased the expectations from students and science education. Students learning about biotechnology need to be informed about practical implementations of biotechnology and to make analysis of related social/ethical issues, thus they can make informed decisions in the future and contribute to public debates (Dawson & Schibeci, 2003).
There appear to be various problems associated with biotechnology teaching. Some of the biotechnological improvements were seen as dangerous by public, these reactions of public might be arisen from lack of education about them (Porter, 2007). Therefore, students are primarily expected to have scientific literacy regarding biotechnology. Based on this, scientific literacy was thought to be important in biotechnology teaching because scientific literacy postulates individuals to define problems on socio-scientific issues they face in daily life, make informed decisions and implement these decisions. This concept in general refers to active participation in different activities of modern life and, that is why, being technologically literate, scientifically literate, even politically and socially literate have become common in today's world (Harlen, 2001). Various classifications are made for scientific literacy (Bybee, 1997, Miller, 1983, Shamos, 1995, Shen, 1975). Bybee (1997) is a researcher who classified levels of scientific literacy. Applicability of Bybee's classification on goals of science teaching can be executed more easily than previous classifications. Bybee (1997) approaches scientific literacy in 5 levels:
1.Not Being Scientifically Literate: Students cannot answer any question on science. They do not have words, concepts, contents or cognitive capacity to define scientific problems.2.Nominal (So-called) scientific literacy: Students know about a concept on science but their understanding level is a sign of misconceptions.3.Functional scientific literacy: Students can define a concept correctly in daily events but have limited understanding.4.Conceptual scientific literacy: Students can develop understanding regarding big conceptual schemes of a certain discipline and create associations between these schemes and their other scientific understandings. Understandings on procedural abilities, scientific inquiry and technological design are involved in this type of scientific literacy.5.Multi-Dimensional scientific literacy: This dimension of scientific literacy necessitates understanding beyond scientific discipline concepts and scientific research procedures. It covers philosophical, historical and social aspects of science and technology. Students understand the relationship between science and technology and their everyday life. More specifically, in line with scientific disciplines, they try to create links between science and technology and serious issues faced by societies.
Regarding the framework, Bybee (1997) defines scientific literacy as a metaphor that refers to norms/standards for science teaching programs, methods, evaluations and equal opportunities for all children, representing continuity of understandings and capabilities, covering both science and technology with its various dimensions and focusing on goal of science teaching. With the increasing prominence of science literacy, science teaching researchers and practitioners have been trying to encourage individuals to gain science literacy enhanced with ability to make informed decisions on socio-scientific issues which is important for active and balanced citizenship (Fonseca, Santos, Costa, Lencastre, & Tavares, 2012).
Therefore, in order for effective teaching of biotechnology concepts and procedures which are very common in our life, students are expected to have high level of biotechnology literacy. Biotechnology literacy is a component of scientific literacy. Students both need to be informed about empirical applications in biotechnology and to analyze social/ethical problems so they can make conscious choices and contribute to public debates (Dawson & Schibeci, 2003). From this perspective, having biotechnology literacy is important for students' personal improvement and development of the society they live in.
Educational institutions, academic staff of them, and related teacher training institutions have significant responsibilities in assisting students to become biotechnologically literate. Teachers need to have biotechnology literacy in the first place to be able to help students become equipped with aforementioned content. In todays' world prospective science teachers' biotechnology literacy levels have been emphasized as basic teacher competence in various documents (Chabalengula et al., 2011, Fonseca et al., 2012, Sohan et al., 2002). Hence developing biotechnological literacy of prospective science teachers is an important step to go further in improving biotechnological literacy of society.
Theoretically the Web 2.0 tools have potential in contributing to development of biotechnology literacy of prospective science teachers since it makes learners active in reading and writing, and it provides opportunities of sharing, communication and discussion of biotechnology content. There are several definitions of Web 2.0. However, definitions are not different from each other and in these definitions connection, cooperation, social-interaction, sharing, synthesis and development of existing information were emphasized and by Web 2.0 tools producers become consumers while consumers need to be producers (Buffington, 2008, Drexler et al., 2008, Grosseck, 2009, Huang et al., 2009, Rosen and Nelson, 2008, Thomas and Li, 2008). Common use of Web in today's world has resulted in the emergence of Web 1.0 and Web 2.0 concepts. Web 1.0 is used only for reading and access information on internet. Web 2.0, on the other hand, started as a result of brainstorming session between O'Reilly and MediaLive International in a conference (O'Reilly, 2005). Web 2.0 refers to trends that aim to support creativity, communication, secure information sharing, cooperation in World Wide Web (www) and Web design use, and to increase functionality of Web (Tyagi, 2012). Static structure of Web 1.0 is replaced by dynamic structure of Web 2.0. Social networks sites such as blogs, wikis and Facebooks, and content networking sites (i.e. Flckr, YouTube and Slideshare) have become the most cited and used Web 2.0 communication technologies (Conole, 2010). These tools provide different services to users. They have applications such as calendar, magazines, note taking, writing, photo albums in Web 2.0 tools such as Wiki, Web diaries, Flickr, LibraryThing etc. for example, social networking sites allow common sharing in communities and creating of discussion content (text, photo, movie etc.) and transformation of sharing into personal activities (Rosen & Nelson, 2008). Due to these characteristics, Web 2.0 also could fortify learning environments.
In various educational applications, Web 2.0 provides interactions in more active and cooperative ways (Rhoads, Berdan, & Toven-Lindsey, 2013). Most activities related to education are carried out through these technologies and information can be accessed instantly. Educational debates are carried out through applications such as Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, Wikipedia (Gouseti, 2010). Presence of rich and varied information sources makes information more global. When students find themselves working together online with their peers' worldwide, educational perspective will be more global, and issues, values and traditions will be more enriched (Thomas & Li, 2008). Through use of cooperative learning, social structuring of knowledge and a different pedagogical approach via Web 2.0 technologies, academic learning can be transformed (Newland & Byles, 2013). Therefore, in order to socially structure knowledge, these technologies that are more frequently used every day in society need to be used in universities. Based on this, it is important that use of Web 2.0 technologies are used by prospective teachers who are responsible for education of individuals in the future should be investigated. Because it is observed that despite their digital literacy skills, prospective teachers' use of web technologies for educational purposes are limited (Albion, 2008, Kumar and Vigil, 2011). So, it is important to be aware of educational potential of Web 2.0, and to train prospective teachers to benefit from the advantages of Web 2.0 in their classroom work for teacher education institutions (Albion, 2008). Especially prospective science teachers' use of Web 2.0 tools and its association with their learning should also be investigated to increase their biotechnology literacy.
The potential of Web 2.0 tools in developing biotechnology literacy levels of prospective teachers should be taken into account and should be investigated by determining its association with the place of these tools in their lives and frequency of using these tools. Individuals, who are biotechnology literate need to be able to think, talk and write on biotechnological developments with aspects of social, ethical and economical perspectives (Darçın, 2007). From this view, Web 2.0 tools can provide effective services in terms of helping students to gain social consciousness and becoming biotechnologically literate. Internet use while conducting a research has a potential to develop scientific literacy as long as it is used critically (Childs, Sorensen, & Twidle, 2011). It is thought that in order to effectively use Web 2.0 tools in biotechnology education, students and science teachers need to use these technologies in their daily life. Teachers need to be equipped with necessary skills to access contemporary information and new advances in order to create social awareness (Bal, Keskin Samanci, & Bozkurt, 2007). Therefore, defining the current situations of prospective science teachers regarding Web 2.0 technologies and analyzing these situations with other important variables will give significant insights to science teacher educators to integrate Web 2.0 tools.
