Ecology has entered an era of “big data” in which the necessities for managing and analyzing data are inspiring scientists to develop novel approaches to use those data for answering contemporary ecological questions (Porter et al., 2012). Data from aquatic sensor networks are a good example of how observations for limnological variables, such as water temperature, dissolved oxygen, and phytoplankton biomass, have grown in volume. A few decades ago, one year of these data may have included hundreds of manually collected measurements; whereas, today, those same variables are sampled by autonomous sensors at frequencies up to one hertz, resulting in 0.5 M measurements per year per variable (Pellerin et al., 2016, Gries et al., 2016). When data from multiple depths, multiple years and multiple observatories are combined, the number of recorded measurements can reach into the billions. Data of these volumes stress the computational capacity of most desktop computers, and data analysis software commonly used by ecologists slows considerably when handling extremely large data sets. Even common data manipulations, such as searches, sorts, and sub-setting, become unacceptably slow.
Representation of time series data in ways that reduces the volume of data while retaining pattern relevant to ecological questions, would help ecologists overcome data volume as an obstacle to data analysis. In the field of computer science, symbolic representation of time series data was developed to help solve this problem. Specifically, SymbolicAggregate appro X imation, or SAX (Lin et al., 2003), was developed to transform time series data into symbols, as has been used in a variety of domains, such as acoustics, medicine, and image analysis (Kasten et al., 2007, Liu et al., 2006). Symbols not only require less space to store, but also retain essential statistical characteristics of the original time series and are amenable to machine learning algorithms designed for natural language processing (Lin et al., 2003). SAX has proven to perform as well as, or even better than, original representation of data for use in common data mining techniques, such as clustering, anomaly detection, classification, and motif discover (Lin et al., 2007). Despite these advantages, we are unaware of its implementation in ecology.
Here, we introduce SAX as an approach to analyzing chlorophyll and phycocyanin (both light harvesting pigments) data from high frequency lake sensors and lake algal biomass predicted from a simulation model. We demonstrate how the SAX transformation greatly reduces data volume. In addition, we adapt pattern detection and classification algorithms from computer science as first steps in addressing the following questions: What patterns exist in lake chlorophyll and phycocyanin data? Are the diversity and frequency of occurrence of patterns in fluorescence data matched by the patterns in predictions from lake simulations? What do the differences between observed and predicted variables tell us about lakes and the models we use to predict their time dynamics?
With SAX, we developed a set of R tools to conduct motif discovery (Lin et al., 2002) and anomaly detection (Keogh et al., 2004, Kumar et al., 2005) within a single lake time series, and relationship study among multiple lake time series through distance metrics, clustering and classification. We conduct comprehensive experiments on observational and simulated data to demonstrate the effectiveness of our tools.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the methodology of representing time series as symbolic characters, which serves as the foundation of mining algorithms to be developed. In Section 3, we present overall architecture and detail mining algorithms. Section 4 presents comprehensive experiments on observational and simulated lake time series data to validate the effectiveness of our approach. Related work is given in Section 5. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 6.
