Scientometrics is the science of measuring and analyzing science itself, such as a discipline's structure, growth, change, and interrelations (Hood and Wilson, 2001). Vassily Nalimov first coined the term in the 1960s and subsequent work focused on a discipline's methodologies and principles as well as individual researchers’ scientific output (Braun et al., 2006, Hirsch, 2005). The Linked Open Data Cloud has allowed for new types of scientometrics (Hu et al., 2013). Building upon the Linked Open Data (LOD) approach to scientometrics, we explore the scientometrics of the Semantic Web's influence in the geosciences.
The Semantic Web lends itself to multiple disciplines and, thus, many domains have adopted semantic technologies. The Geoscience discipline is leading the way in Semantic Web adoption and validation (McGuinness et al., 2009). Astronomy, Earth science, hydrology, and solar-terrestrial physics have seen a substantial amount of semantic integration (Dalton, 2007). The geoscience community has been willing early adopters of semantic technologies and have provided essential feedback to the semantic web community (McGuinness et al., 2009). This application of semantic technologies to geoscience research has been labeled semantic e-Science (Fox and Hendler, 2009). While there have been several studies of how semantic e-Science benefits researchers (Narock and Fox, 2012, Narock et al., 2010, Pouchard et al., 2013) there has been no systematic study of the community as a whole.
Assessing the semantic e-Science community as a whole remains a challenging endeavor. Despite the recognition to coalesce the geoscience and computer science communities, growth in semantic e-Science and semantic technologies has been largely independent (Fox and Hendler, 2009, McGuinness et al., 2009). While there are some exceptions, the semantic e-Science and broader semantic web communities remain notably distinct. There is further anecdotal evidence from the broader semantic web community that (a.) the results of Semantic Web research often take a long time before they are taken up by domain-specific researchers, leading to a noteworthy drag and the adoption of outdated (or even failed) methods and paradigms, and (b.) Semantic Web research is often not sufficiently informed by specific real-world needs and use cases. The aims of this work are thus several fold. First, we attempt to quantify the degree of overlap between the two communities and explore how semantic e-science has evolved over time. Second, we aim to investigate the topics of research in both communities to quantify observations a. and b. Our goal is to address the following research questions. Are both communities working on the same topics? How long does a topic take to transition from the computer science community to the more application oriented geoscience community? Finally, with the long term goal of enabling Linked Data scientometrics in the geosciences, we evaluate the quality of existing linked datasets and provide new links to additional datasets.
