Around the world, and in Europe in particular, there are several approaches which aim to teach academic content through a foreign language in primary or secondary schools (immersion). Whereas some approaches aim to teach only content, others aim to teach both content and language simultaneously (variously known as Content and Language Integrated Learning - CLIL, Content Based Instruction - CBI). In France, according to the Ministry of Education in 2014, 10%1 of children participated in such programs. In the context of growing internationalization, higher education has followed the trend initiated by primary and secondary education and also has provided tuition in languages other than the official language of the country, despite that language being neither the learners' nor the teachers’ native language (mainly English as a Medium of Instruction, or EMI). For students who did not follow a CLIL program in school, the shift to learning content in a foreign language in higher education is sudden (Arkin & Osam, 2015) and widespread (Bruton, 2013).
CLIL is defined as: “a dual-focused educational approach in which an additional language is used for the learning and teaching of both content and language (…)" (Coyle, Hood, & Marsh, 2010, p. 1). CLIL thus contains a strong pedagogical component aiming to support foreign language learning. Pedagogical approaches which aim at transmitting content through a foreign language in higher educational contexts tend to omit this important element, although their implementation is mostly based on research results from secondary programs using CLIL (Tatzl, 2011, Jiménez-Muñoz, 2016). While considerable research has been carried out in this field (Bruton, 2011, Bruton, 2013, Cenoz et al., 2013, Coyle et al., 2010, Dallinger et al., 2016, Dalton-Puffer, 2007, Dalton-Puffer, 2011, Dalton-Puffer et al., 2014, Fortanet-Gomez, 2013, Verspoor et al., 2015, Piesche et al., 2016, Rumlich, 2014, Rumlich, 2016), some researchers have also suggested that many variables that are not easily controlled in ecologically valid contexts such as selection of participating students, time exposure to the foreign language in and outside foreign language classes, the learning material and its presentation (Dale & Tanner, 2012), students' and teachers' motivation, students’ initial language proficiency, and the official languages of the country may lead to an overestimation of academic content and foreign language learning benefits (Dallinger et al., 2016). For these reasons (pedagogical component and contextual variables), it is obvious that CLIL may be difficult to transpose to every context. In particular, it should not be transposed to higher education without any foreign language instructional support, as it often occurs.
In this context, some researchers have warned against a lack of foreign language instruction in bilingual academic programs (Jimenez-MunozA, 2016) and in adjustments to the approach of already existing mother-tongue-taught courses. We may need to be concerned by what happens in situation where students, who are not selected, not particularly motivated, not particularly prepared and not particularly trained in the foreign language, are exposed to academic content in this foreign language without any foreign language instructional support. “The negative potential impact on grades and outcomes (Clegg, 2001) of this lack of adaptation is an evident concern” (Jimenez-MunozA, 2016, p.112) to researchers of the field. In this paper, we argue that empirical research using randomized, properly controlled trials (Shohamy, 2012, Pérez Cañado, 2013) and theoretical argumentation, here based on cognitive load theory, are needed and can contribute to the discussion.
Our empirical work was intended to investigate some of the relevant variables that may determine the efficacy of foreign language instruction in higher educational contexts. As previously mentioned, there are reasons based on cognitive load theory (Sweller, 2015, Sweller, 2016a, Sweller et al., 2011) to hypothesize that without any foreign language instructional support, learning academic content through a foreign language is likely to lead to sub-optimal results. We will outline some of the available data followed by predictions flowing from cognitive load theory.
