The concept of social agent is based on constructivist approach and theories of motivation (Dewey, 1913, Harp and Mayer, 1998, Renninger et al., 1992). According to the theory, students understand the present material better since the pedagogical material appeals them personally and therefore fruitful learning realizes. Today, computer-assisted instruction software (CAIS) are the primary materials which take the students' attention most. The studies conducted in the literature have indicated that the students who get their teachers' support do not have difficulty in using CAIS as a result of integrating CAIS to curriculums. However, it has also been stated that students encounter various problems for various reasons such as lack of guidance, lack of motivation, low self-efficacy and lack of interest while using CAIS, which have especially tutorial function (Allbeck and Badler, 2003, Atkinson, 2002, Baylor and Kim, 2003, Baylor and Kim, 2005, Baylor, 2002, Baylor et al., 2003, Kim et al., 2003, Lester et al., 2000, Moreno et al., 2001). In computer assisted instruction (CAI), primary causes for the mentioned problems are student's feeling lonely and lack of social learning environment (Akyüz, 2012). In order to provide social learning environment in CAI, some modules, which can build an interaction with the student, get information about the student, give feedback, support social environment, hinder student's feeling lonely and provide an environment according to the student's profile (Akyüz, 2012, Kızılkaya and Aşkar, 2006).
Pedagogical agents, which could enable students use the software, have been developed and integrated with instructional software since the late 1990s to remove the obstacles mentioned above. Those pedagogical agents, which can be provided to students in the form of human-like characters, animations or audio-texts; and also some features like hand-arm actions and empathic behaviors that can be added to agents, have become inevitable elements for CAI environments since they provide interaction between the users and computers. This study aims to examine the pedagogical agent, which is an immediate element of CAIS, in terms of a few aspects; namely, the effect of pedagogical agent use on students' academic success, motivational levels towards CAI, cognitive load in CAI environments and the participant students’ preferences on agent preferences.
The paper is organized as follows: the first section sets the context of pedagogical agents, stating the definition of pedagogical agents, and the primary literature; the second section reviews related work and the purpose of study. The next sections present the method of the research, results, discussions, conclusion, limitations, and future research.
