The success of Industry 4.0 [36] in Germany has prompted other countries to follow suit. Unfortunately, many small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Taiwan are hindered by the costs and complexity of computerizing and automating factories. This is largely due to the fact that most SMEs still use conventional machines that lack the sensors required for data collection. In this study, we developed an add-on triaxial sensor system to assist in monitoring the operational status of machines on the factory floor without incurring heavy costs.
Accelerometers are used for gesture recognition [26,43], posture recognition [2,24], and sleep detection [8,9]. Most of the algorithms used with these devices involve three steps: (1) collecting and processing data to facilitate feature extraction, (2) reducing feature dimensionality, and (3) detecting the operating status of machinery by using various artificial intelligent models (AI models). Signals collected by accelerometers are converted into a variety of digital features, which are then sorted according to the requirements of the target application before being input into AI models for processing. Jamie et al. [11] used microphones and accelerometers mounted on the human body to collect data related to motion. They used linear-discriminate analysis to reduce the dimensionality of features and completed gesture recognition using hidden Markov models. Bao et al. [3] employed a C4.5 decision tree to collect human motion data from five biaxial accelerometers to facilitate the recognition of human gestures. Karantonis et al. [14] collected motion data using triaxial accelerometers worn on the wrists, extracted various features from the data, such as the energy content of a signal, and then employed a hierarchical binary decision tree for gesture recognition. Watanabe [41] used triaxial accelerometers worn on the ankles to collect posture data from paraplegic individuals and then incorporated a neural network to recognize these postures. Jatoba et al. [12] designed a novel signal collector to collect signals related to human motion, and obtained good results using an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system to recognize these motions. Yang et al. [45] obtained data from accelerometers worn on the wrists, used linear-discriminate analysis to reduce the dimensionality of the features, before applying a neuro-fuzzy network to process the data for motion recognition. Ting et al. [34] used accelerometers to collect acceleration data and other signal features during the operation of machines. They then performed linear-discriminate analysis to reduce feature dimensionality and assessed the quality of the machine products using a neural network.
Based on the success in previous studies, we adopted the same approach to evaluating the status of machines within the Industry 4.0 production model. However, we discovered that existing methods were inapplicable to the target problems in this study. We ran into two problems. The first problem is that most of the above-mentioned methods are based on complex, time-consuming algorithms, such as linear-discriminate analysis, decision trees, hidden Markov models, and neuro-fuzzy networks in the establishment of AI models. The complexity and computational requirements of these methods puts them beyond the scope of most SMEs. The second problem is that most existing methods collect substantial amounts of data for offline processing. Industry 4.0 production models generally involve modest amounts of data from a wide range of applications. Furthermore, once a batch of products has been completed, that product may never be manufactured again. In other words, a production run could be concluded even before all of the data has been collected and analyzed. Furthermore, even when the available data can be used to enhance production, the length of production runs is insufficient to recoup the investment of time and money that went into its formulation. Reducing feature dimensionality offline and having operators select features manually is grossly inefficient. Thus, we developed a simple automated algorithm to reduce the dimensionality of features online and enable the automated recognition of machine status using a simple neural network.
To verify the validity of the proposed approach, we conducted an experiment on actual machine data from a renowned spring factory in Taiwan: Shuai-Hao. The majority of the machines used by this company are more than a decade old, but they are required to manufacture high-quality springs. Out of 10,000 springs manufactured, probably only 2 are defective. The production environment of this company fits our assumptions quite well; for this reason, we adopted data from this company for our experiment.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Chapter 2 presents related works, Chapter 3 introduces the methodology. Chapter 4 outlines the Simulation. Chapter 5 presents conclusion and future research.
