As one of the core technologies on which the “fourth industrial revolution” (Schwab, 2016) is based, the Internet of Things (IoT) is at the center of social enthusiasm. It is expected to create its own value while leading the relevant market within the next ten years (Business Insider, 2016, Cisco, 2013, McKinsey and Company, 2015). As services grow more widespread, IoT is evolving from merely a promising technology to an issue relevant to everyday life.
Expectations and concerns regarding IoT have both been raised. On one hand, IoT is considered to have many benefits, such as enhancing our quality of life and increasing productivity (Atzori et al., 2010, Brody and Pureswaran, 2015). On the other hand, technological questions concerning standardization and data management remain unsolved (Bandyopadhyay and Sen, 2011, Miorandi et al., 2012). Sociocultural concerns regarding legal regulations, financial costs, and ethical issues are also increasing (Dutton, 2014, Mikton, 2015, Nataliia and Elena, 2015, Weber, 2009, Weber, 2010, Weber, 2013). Lacking any consensus on goals, this explosion of discourse paradoxically reveals that our understanding of IoT is still insufficient. It should be a scholarly mission, from the perspective of social sciences in particular, to adjust the pace of development and present new agendas. However, academia has not yet addressed the task, widening the gap between social excitement and critical reflection.
This article thus focuses on academic papers written from non-technical perspectives to explore the current status of the scholarly discourse on IoT.1 Additionally, it tries to convey the perspectives of experts on IoT research based on analytic hierarchy process (AHP) analysis. With these two steps, this article aims to examine research trends and suggest future directions. In doing so, we intend to emphasize IoT as a social concept that contributes to human life and will cause a sociocultural transformation rather than a temporary fad.
