Making is beginning to enter the popular imagination as well as the field of computers and writing. It was the subject of the 2013 Computers and Writing Keynote by James Paul Gee, and continues to pop up in conference programs, journal articles, and books. I undertake this project in order to begin taking the first steps toward confronting making as an entity in the discourse of computers and writing. For this to happen, we must first explain, define, and understand the historic roots of making and prevailing theories that describe what’s happening when a person makes.
Making is the process of creating something outside of traditional manufacturing processes. Making can involve the use of technology of any kind. I find that in conversations with my colleagues, students, and friends that making is frequently conflated with inventing. In this way, making often intimidates people as they believe that in order to create something of import to the community they must wade into a sea of wires and circuit boards. This is not the case. Dale Dougherty (2012), founder of Makerfaire and Make magazine, avoids “the word ‘inventor’” because “most people just don’t identify themselves that way. ‘Maker,’ on the other hand, describes each one of us, no matter how we live our lives or what our goals might be. We all are makers: as books preparing food for our families, as gardeners, as knitters” (p. 11). Inclusivity is a major theme in the contemporary maker movement, both in key players and key technologies.
In this article, I argue that making is important to writing studies broadly, but very important to computers and writing. When I began the process of writing this article, it occurred to me that individuals in the field of computers and writing are already very interested in the practices used by makers and the products they create, even if they aren’t yet using the term “maker.” These differing threads of interest, though, could use a space for patching them together. I want to present a few different points of convergence to make a case for making. Incredibly rich and important work is being done by makers that changes relationships between people and technology. The maker movement focuses on these practices, enacting the calls of our very own scholars in their work. We should capitalize on the attention paid to makers in the contemporary moment. These aims converge with the goals of computers and writing and are worth exploring.
I begin with a brief survey that explains some of the history and broad cultural moments that have influenced making. Next, I argue that teachers and scholars within computers and writing are makers. Finally, I will explore a set of implications that outline how making can further help refine our teaching and scholarship, and some of the potential drawbacks of adopting maker practices and technologies. Throughout this article, I use the term “making” because it carries a positive cultural connotation. Making is also a useful umbrella term that encompasses many kinds of content production such as DIY (do-it-yourself) and crafting. Making often involves practices like hacking, but many makers (myself included) avoid the term hacking because of its negative public perception.
