Learning management systems (LMSs), such as Blackboard and Moodle, have been widely used in companies, universities, and educational institutions. They provide several advantages for teaching and learning. First, LMSs support teachers in conducting a variety of in- and after-classroom activities such as reading learning materials, asynchronous discussion, quizzes, and self-/peer-assessment. Second, students can freely select the course materials and control their learning pace and paths. The freedom of selecting and controlling can increase students' motivation (Kopcha & Sullivan, 2008) and provide them with more learning opportunities. Finally, students’ learning tracks are recorded in system logs. These logs can be analyzed to generate useful information for teachers to improve their instructional design.
With the wide adoption of LMSs in the recent decade, many students' learning tracks have been recorded and accumulated in system logs. Researchers have analyzed these logs using statistical and data mining techniques for understanding students' engagement levels of online participation (Henrie, Halverson, & Graham, 2015), for discovering students' behavior patterns of online participation (Lust et al., 2013a, Lust et al., 2013b Lust, Vandewaetere, Ceulemans, Elen, & Clarebout, 2011), and for exploring the relationships between online participation behaviors and learning performance (Cheng and Chau, 2016, Graf et al., 2010). The results of these studies have revealed that students’ behaviors of accessing LMS tools vary greatly, and the variations can significantly affect their learning performance (Lust, Collazo, Elen, & Clarebout, 2012).
Accessing online learning materials is one of the most frequently performed learning activities on LMSs (Lust et al., 2013a, Lust et al., 2013b, Lust et al., 2012). In general, teachers and students publish and create several kinds of online learning materials. These materials provide different advantages for learning. For example, lecture slides can provide students with an overview of the lecture contents and facilitate students' note-taking (Worthington & Levasseur, 2015), video lectures can let students review difficult concepts and prepare for examinations (Kay, 2012), while peers’ assignments and messages posted in discussion forums are important resources for self-reflection (Cho and Cho, 2011, Dennen, 2008). Students with different purposes, preferences, and motivations may demonstrate different engagement levels and behavior patterns when accessing these learning materials. These different engagement levels and behavior patterns may in turn affect their learning performance. Therefore, understanding how students access different kinds of learning materials and how their behaviors in accessing these materials affect their learning performance may give teachers useful information to improve their instructional design and provide insights for content and instructional designers to develop personalized learning supports.
