Emission from ships is strictly restricted by the regulations of IMO (international maritime organization). Recently, several countries such as USA, Singapore and EU installed ECA (emission control area) in their territory in order to reduce largely the emission gases from ships, such as COx, NOx and SOx. This implies that accurate measurement is necessary for the emission gases from ships. Currently, measurement methods for the gases on ships are based upon pointwise sampling, in which a sensor is installed in a branch of the ship’s chimney. For the measurements of the emission gas CO2, Wang et al. [1] used a WAV (surface acoustic wave) type sensor. Stemhagen et al. [2] extended the WAV sensor to measure the concentration and the temperature of the emission gas. Dossi et al. [3] adopted an electrochemical-type sensor to detect NH4 gas. Fine et al. [4] constructed a semiconductor-type sensor to detect CO, NOx, NH3 and CO2 gases. Since all of the conventional measuring methods are based on the measurements at a single location, it is impossible to predict the amount of emission gases from ships or vehicles. In order to estimate the amount of gas emissions, it is necessary to measure the concentration field and the temperature field. This study is concerned with the CT-TDLAS by which the concentration and temperature fields can be measured. To attain better measurements by the use of CT-TDLAS, the performance of the reconstruction algorithms in CT (computed tomography) process should be improved. There are several experimental researches in which the CT-TDLAS was adopted to the actual engine combustion, such as the studies by Deguchi [5], Kamimoto et al. [6], Zaatar et al. [7], Yamakage et al. [8], Morthier et al. [9] and Yariv et al. [10].
Ma et al. [11] and Deguchi et al. [12] used several optical paths that were intersected perpendicularly each other to form the analysis grids for the CT process. The algorithms adopted by Ma et al. [11] were based on HT (hyperspectral tomography) algorithm and two-wavelength algorithm. The temperature profiles calculated by the HT algorithm were quite similar to the conventional ones. However, the results on concentrations were mismatched between the original and the calculated. The results by the two-wavelength algorithm were similar profiles for both temperature and concentration fields. For the CT process, Deguchi et al. [12], [13] used the ART(algebraic reconstruction technique) algorithm. Generally, it is known that the ART algorithms take longer calculation time for data reconstructions due to strong dependencies on the initial values. Further, the results calculated by the ART algorithm showed high accuracy at low temperature region while showing lower accuracy at high temperature region.
In this study, three different reconstruction algorithms, MART (multiplicative algebraic reconstruction technique), SART (simultaneous algebraic reconstruction technique) and SMART (simultaneous multiplicative algebraic reconstruction technique)are proposed for data reconstruction for CT-TDLAS. Their reconstruction performances are compared. Elsinga et al. [14] firstly adopted ART and MART algorithms for reconstructing the intensity signals of images obtained in tomographic PIV (particle image velocimetry), in which the light intensity distributions of the 3D volume was reconstructed. Doh et al. [15] adopted ART and MART algorithms for reconstructing two flow fields, a ring vortex and an impinging jet flow via tomographic PIV. Jiang et al. [16] introduced the SART algorithm for reconstructing tomographic 3D images in order to enhance the calculation time of ART, in which the coefficients used for accelerating convergences are regarded as nonnegative. SART algorithm was proven that from any initial guess the sequence generated by the SART algorithm converges to a weighted least square solution. Byrne [17] proposed the SMART algorithm in order to save the calculation time, especially for the cases of large calculation load. The purpose of this study is to introduce the above MART, SART and SMART algorithms to CT-TDLAS, and to check their performances and to show their possible applications for CT-TDLAS.
