In scholarly research, the research paper does not stand alone as it is always embedded in the literature of the subject. Citations show the relationship between the citing research article and cited research article. Citations are the acknowledgment that one research article receives from another research article. Citations play an essential role in calculating different aspects of researchers and their research work such as; awards and noble prizes (Inhaber and Przednowek, 1976), allocation of research funds, institutional ranking, peer judgments (Anderson et al., 1978), and impact factor calculation. Currently, all the citations are treated equally to calculate these measures. However, the researcher suggested that all citations are not equally influential, and the quality of citation must be considered while evaluating the impact of research. The proposed approaches in this area analyzed the qualitative and quantitative aspects of citations.
The quantitative assessment of citation is the measure of citation frequency from different aspects of the research article (Benedictus et al., 2016). The qualitative assessment of the citations is to measure the citation quality, whether it is important or non-important, positive or negative. The researchers suggested that the qualitative assessment of the citation is more critical than a quantitative assessment (Bonzi, 1982). The researchers stated that citations are present in the papers where an author criticizes another author, and 40% of the citations provide only general knowledge and background knowledge, so that kind of citations affect the quantitative assessment of citations (Moravcsik and Murugesan, 1975). Therefore, different researchers have done a qualitative assessment of the citations by incorporating different attributes of research articles such as text similarity measures and in-text citation count (Zhu et al., 2015, Valenzuela et al., 2015, Qayyum and Afzal, 2018, Hou et al., 2011, Shahid et al., 2011).
Historically, the task of qualitative assessment of citation was performed manually by interviewing the author during or after the publication (Brooks, 1985, Case and Higgins, 2000). Afterward, the idea of automatic citation classification was presented by researchers (Finney, 1979, Garzone and Mercer, 2000, Sugiyama et al., 2010, Teufel et al., 2006). The proposed approaches of automatic citation classification classified the citations into multiple classes by incorporating citation reasons (Garfield, 1965, Nazir et al., 2020a, Erikson and Erlandson, 2014), citation count (Garfield et al., 1964), citation sentiment (Kim and Thoma, 2015, Athar, 2011), and in-text citation frequency (Hou et al., 2011, Shahid et al., 2011). Gradually the multiple classifications were turned to binary classes. The inventor of binary classification used the terms influential, non-influential in their research (Zhu et al., 2015). Afterward, (Valenzuela et al., 2015) proposed an approach for binary classification that utilized the full-text of the research article and extracted the citation frequency-based features such as; in-text count, text similarity, citation context, and citation position. The binary classification terms were further renamed as important and non-important by (Valenzuela et al., 2015) and enhanced the results of (Zhu et al., 2015) by further incorporating multiple features such as; total number of direct citations, number of direct citations per section, the total number of indirect citations and number of indirect citations per section, author overlap, being helpful, citation appears in table or caption, number of references, number of paper citations, the similarity between abstracts, page rank, number of total citing papers after transitive, field of the cited paper. The state-of-the-art research in this field was performed by (Qayyum and Afzal, 2018) and proposed a metadata similarity-based approach for binary classification. This state-of-the-art approach got the f measure of 0.73, which is considered inadequate for evaluating the impact of research and researchers.
Therefore, this research proposed a content-based approach for binary classification of citations by analyzing the sentiments of in-text citations. The in-text citation text was identified from the content of the paper. The automatic sentiment analysis was performed on the extracted in-text citation text. Different classification models were evaluated to perform this citation sentiment analysis. In state-of-the-art, it was not clear which model performs better on sentiment analysis. After analyzing the sentiments of citation text, the score was calculated. These sentiment results were further used for positive-negative, and neutral citation counts. The score of cosine similarity between paper citation pairs was calculated. This sentiment and cosine similarity scores were used as features in binary classification algorithms and classify the citations into important and non-important class. The proposed approach was evaluated on a benchmark dataset that was collected and annotated by (Valenzuela et al., 2015, Qayyum and Afzal, 2018). The results are compared in terms of Precision, recall, f-measure with the state-of-the-art.
The evaluation results show an improvement of 1.3% in f-measure and 4.1% in Precision for binary classification. The proposed approach got improved results as compared to the state-of-the-art results. Now this paper can claim that the proposed in-text-citation sentiment analysis technique can identify the important and non-important citations with more accuracy than the state-of-the-art techniques
The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 highlights previous work in the relevant area. Section 3 presents the dataset used for this research. Section 4 explains the methodology of the proposed technique, and its evaluation and Section 5 is the results section.
