Several books appeared in the 1980s and 1990s that popularized a group of concepts in science: specifically the concepts complexity (Holland, 1995, Waldrop, 1992), chaos (Gleick, 1987), self-organization, emergence (Nowak & Vallacher, 1998; Prigogine & Stengers, 1984) and dynamic systems (Capra, 1996, Thelen and Smith, 1994). While these concepts have different disciplinary histories, they are frequently grouped together, often under the rubric complexity thinking (Capra, 1996). These complexity concepts are now widely used in many branches of science, and increasing are being applied in psychology, education, nursing, and other social sciences. There is reason to be cautious regarding how these concepts are used, however, especially across the levels of complexity that separate material science and social science. On the other hand, insights of complexity science may hold great promise for a more adequate social scientific perspective if we can avoid the dangers of uncritically using concepts developed in material science to conceptualize living systems such as persons and groups of people.
This paper begins by grappling with some of the terminology of complexity thinking, noting that some terms, and ‘systems thinking’ in general, have long been used in social science. A brief sketch of the levels of complexity sets the groundwork for understanding the critique of self-organization to follow. The critique, in short, is that there is a vital difference between self-organization in systems that involve consciousness (those of interest to psychologists, educators, and social scientists generally) and self-organization in systems that are not conscious. If this is the case, several implications follow, including changing the way we speak about self-organization in the social sciences to reflect the role of consciousness in that self-organization.
1.1. The complexity clusterSome of the terms in the complexity cluster can be found historically in both social science and material science (including physics), while others, such as chaos and complexity were developed and are used almost exclusively in material science. I will focus on dynamic systems and self-organization – each of which grew at least partly out of studies in nonlinear change in the organization and growth of living things - living systems. Accounts of the development of complexity thinking as a whole suggest that this perspective has coalesced since the 1930s through insights in a variety of fields including physics, biology, psychology, ecology, and material science (Capra, 1996, Gleick, 1987). As noted in the following brief review, these terms have been active in social science discussion for longer than that, and hence, the full story of social scientists' contribution to dynamic systems has yet to be told.The scientists who formulated the science (Bertalanffy, 1968, Boulding, 1956, Holland, 1995, Prigogine and Stengers, 1984); the writers who popularized the ideas (Capra, 1996, Gleick, 1987, Waldrop, 1992); and those in the social sciences who have taken up aspects of this approach (Thelen and Smith, 1994, van Geert, 2012) all speak of complexity thinking as a universalizable approach to non-linear change. It is useful, they argue, for describing certain types of complex systems wherever they are found. This includes non-linear behavior in micro-particles, in cells, in organisms, including humans, in ecologies and societies, and in the universe of planets and stars (Capra, 1996, Waldrop, 1992). While I am not challenging that claim of universal relevance, I do argue that self-organization is sufficiently different as a process when dealing with human consciousness that some way of designating that distinction is intellectually necessary in psychology and social science more broadly.
