Sequential computers are no longer sufficient to meet the increased computational demand and already reached into the saturation point due to the scaling difficulties of uniprocessor architectures. In addition, high performance computer (HPC) has become the main focus for next generation of computers. Even today, the molecular research in health, nuclear energy, organic simulation and weather forecasting highly depends on parallel computers. Hence, the need for massively parallel computers (MPC) is increasing progressively. MPC with thousand of nodes is commercially available with tera-flops performance. However, efforts have been made to build MPC systems with millions of nodes for peta-flops or for exa-flops performance. To facilitate millions of nodes, the interconnection networks are one of the key elements  [8]. Interconnection network acts as a communication path between one node to another. However, to leap into the next level, there are few key constraints such as low network performance, high cost-performance ratio, high power consumption, low throughput and latency  [26].
In MPC systems, the number of physical links is also a major concern  [24]. Hence, the design of interconnection network has become a vital issue. Early research for interconnection networks was focused on the conventional networks. However, conventional network like the torus network  [22] shows better performance than the mesh network  [25] due to the tori connections, but consumes more electrical power than the mesh network due to the increased wraparound channels. One of the recently adapted network is the TOFU interconnection network  [3], which requires 10 outgoing links for each node; causing a higher cost than the other networks and the scaling at higher level increases the power usage. Hence, it is important to find a new interconnection network by considering the key constraints as well as reducing the overall power consumption than the other existing networks.
Hierarchical Interconnection networks (HIN)  [10] are a cost-effective way to interconnect a large number of processing nodes. Though many hypercube based HINs have been available, many HIN does not have the higher scalability. In some earlier research, HIN network like TESH  [16], [13] was introduced and showed better results than the conventional networks due to its high communications performance. However, TESH had failed to meet the high performance demand for higher scalability. In this paper, we introduce a new interconnection network named as ‘3D-TESH’, and we are able to show that 3D-TESH has achieved better performance over millions of nodes and better than that of TESH due to its multi-dimensional structure at the basic module.
The remaining of the paper describes about the architecture of 3D-TESH network, reviews the routing algorithm, shows the static and dynamic performance analysis and then finally evaluates the power estimation for 3D-TESH.
