Opioid ligands are known to interact with G-protein coupled opioid receptors (ORs) in several ways, and those interactions have been noted to occur through different mechanisms. They can exert effects via binding to orthosteric sites producing an unbiased or biased signal, or through biased agonism with β-arrestins. Their effects may be influenced by interaction with an allosteric site that can modulate the orthosteric sites effects.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 Efforts have been made to synthesize opioids that interact either singly or via orthosteric13 and allosteric mechanisms.14 Bivalent ligands15 have been synthesized that interact with μ- and κ-ORs14 that may exist as receptor dimers.16 Many non-selective opioids interact with two or all three of the main types of ORs by any, or several, of these routes. NOP (nociception/orphanin FQ opioid peptide receptor) activation has been found to exert a modulatory role in μ-OR mediated actions.17 Moreover, transmembrane conformational changes occur during μ-receptor activation18 that further complicates our ability to fully characterize the ligand-receptor interaction.
Most of the concepts referred to above are the results of the 21st century re-evaluation of the pharmacology of opioids. The increased complexity has resulted from the evaluation of both old and novel molecules that act as opioids. Explication of the complex ligand–OR interaction can be aided by the synthesis of sets of new ligands interacting with ORs by selective mechanisms. Among our goals is the synthesis of enantiomeric ligands that function as potent antinociceptives or as “pure” opioid antagonists through specific interactions with ORs.
Molecular modification of the N-substituent in the 5-phenylmorphan class of opioids, as well as many of the other classes of opioids, has been found to induce functional changes in the action of ligands, e.g., from agonist to antagonist,19 as well as modifying their interactions with the μ-, δ-, and κ-ORs. We previously found that a compound with an N-phenethyl substituent on a 9β-OH substituted 5-phenylmorphan (Fig. 1, (1R,5R,9S)-(−)-9-hydroxy-5-(3-hydroxyphenyl-2-phenylethyl-2-azabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane)) was a high affinity μ-agonist, a moderate affinity δ-agonist, and acted as a potent antinociceptive in mice (ca 470 times more potent than morphine).20 Notably, the 9β-OH substitution changed the μ-antagonist activity of 5-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-N-phenylethylmorphan21 to a potent μ-agonist. In a different study,22 we also pointed out that 5-phenylmorphan enantiomers with some restrained N-substituents could act as very potent μ-antagonists while others were inverse agonists. The conformational restraint was introduced by a cyclopropyl ring or through introduction of unsaturation in an N-substituent’s alkyl chain.Download : Download high-res image (228KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Effect of N-substituents in 5-phenylmorphans; an aromatic electron-withdrawing substituent, and introduction of conformational restraint.
We have also examined the effect of substituents on the aromatic ring in the N-phenethyl side-chain of a 5-phenylmorphan enantiomer23 and found that the addition of a nitro moiety in the para position of the aromatic ring of 5-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-N-phenylethylmorphan yielded a compound that had high affinity for the μ-OR, moderate affinity for the δ-OR, and acted as a μ-agonist, δ-antagonist in the [35S]GTPγS functional assay. The compound was also ca. 50 times more potent than morphine in mice antinociceptive assays. In the present work, we have further modified the N-phenethyl substituent of the (1R,5R,9S)-(−)-9-hydroxy-5-(3-hydroxyphenyl-2-phenylethyl-2-azabicyclo [3.3.1]nonane (NIH 11289) molecular template20 as indicated by Cheng et al.25, 26 The effect of these modifications were then assessed in both receptor binding assays and functional studies. In addition, molecular dynamics simulations were carried out with 1R,5R,9S-(−)-16 and NIH 11289 in the binding pocket of the μ-OR (inactive, X-ray crystal structure PDB 4DKL). These simulations were done to provide an atomic-level rationale for transforming the μ-antagonist activity of 5-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-N-phenylethylmorphan to potent μ-agonism upon 9β-OH substitution, as well as a rationale for the enhanced binding affinity and µ-agonist potency upon p-NO2 group substitution.
