Society is amid a transition towards a peer-to-peer (p2p) society that is characterised by a new way of produce of everything, ranging from software to food, to cities, to scientific knowledge (Bauwens 2012). In a p2p society, networks of individuals, or peers, take over tasks that were previously in the hands of institutions. This requires a new role for science. Instead of focussing on knowledge production for NGO's, governments and business, scientists should become aware that the citizen might be the new decision-maker in a future p2p society, and produce knowledge that is suitable and accessible to them.
In this essay, when I talk about citizens I mean non professionals who engage with their surroundings, which could be a city, a street, the environment, the democratic system etc. When I talk about citizen scientists I mean people who practise science outside of an academic or industrial environment. Citizen scientists may or may not have had any formal scientific training. My definition of a neoliberal system is a system with a free market, small government in a globalised world.
Looking around us we see old structures fail. The effectiveness of NGOs is doubted (Edwards & Hulme, 1996) and they seem to be mainly after their own survival. They are stuck to the methods of the 80′s; they dress up as pigs or bees, or wear gas masks and show up in a small unimpressive group at company or government headquarters. Their causes are legitimate and the problems they put on the agenda are urgent, but their methods are completely unfit for the world we live in. The focus of neoliberal governments is no longer on the well being of their citizens, it has long shifted towards concern for corporate interests (Chomsky, 1999, von Werlhof, 2008). Long term interests, including science, suffer (Saltelli & Giampietro, 2017). Corporations have no legal duty to act in the public interest, and no tendency to do so if that conflicts with short term economic interests (Banerjee, 2008, Chomsky, 1999).
The future of the planet could lie in the hands of small groups of citizens and individuals, who are building a new society next to the existing one by setting up grassroots sustainability initiatives that are interconnected by p2p networks. Already, science is providing technologies that give people the power to do their own research, using their smart phones, webcams and laptops (Bonney et al., 2014). But here is still a large gap between citizens and academic scientists when it comes to knowledge sharing. Knowledge collected by citizens hardly ever gets used by academic scientists, and outcomes from scientific research are still for a large part hidden behind pay walls.
If we want the sustainable transition to take place, we need to open up the barriers between science and the public. The concerns of citizens have to be taken seriously and their knowledge used and valued (Irwin, 1995).
In this essay I argue that citizens are ready to do sound science and to use and understand science produced by academics. They are ready to use science to jump into some of the gaps that governments, businesses and NGOs do not fill.
