Emotion analysis aims to determine which emotion is expressed in a text. In the recent years, it has been a popular research topic in the natural language processing (NLP) field. In the literature, the existing studies in emotion analysis can be divided into two tasks, i.e., emotion classification [1], [2], [3], [23] and emotion regression [4]. While emotion classification aims to label an input text with a single or multiple emotion categories, emotion regression aims to rate an input text with a single or multiple dimensional emotion scores.
In this paper, we focus on emotion regression due to two specific challenges compared with the well-studied emotion classification. First, the scatter of small-scale emotion regression corpora in different domains makes it difficult to collect a large-scale data set in the same domain for model training. Second, most existing studies in emotion regression only focus on a single emotion dimension, or train independent models for different emotion dimensions [4]. In this paper, we aim to jointly address both cross-domain adaptation and multi-dimensional learning in emotion regression.
In the meanwhile, attention mechanism, which highlights sentimental language units in a given text through weighting, has been widely applied in various tasks of sentiment and emotion computing in the recent years. Thus, in emotion regression, attention mechanism is supposed to be effective on determining what words are emotional to help rate the dimensional emotion scores. Fig. 1 illustrates an example of dimensional emotion regression. Obviously, the dimensional emotion scores can be inferred from the colored words in this figure. Although a degree adverb, such as very, usually suggests only one dimensional emotion score (i.e., the Arousal score), an emotional word often tends to suggest more than one dimensional emotion score. This example hints a possibility of leveraging the connection between two emotion dimensions, which is somewhat overlooked by the existing studies.Download : Download high-res image (101KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. An example of multi-dimensional emotion regression. The dimensional emotion score ranges from 1.0 to 5.0. In this example, the word very in blue only suggests one emotion dimension (i.e, a high Arousal score). The word glad and fantastic in red suggest two emotion dimensions. Specifically, glad suggests a high Valence score and a high Dominance score, while fantastic suggests a high Valence score and a high Arousal score.
In this paper, we treat the multi-dimensional learning as a multi-task learning problem through adversarial learning. Recently, adversarial learning has achieved much success in multi-task learning [5], [6]. Researchers tried to conduct adversarial learning [7] between multiple tasks to learn task-specific features, and enhancing the learning of multiple tasks in order to achieve a performance boosting. Furthermore, we apply adversarial learning to model the task not only due to its success in multi-task learning, but also due to its inherent collocability with attention mechanism. In the literature, adversarial learning has the difficulty in learning latent representations from discrete structures (e.g., sequence of word embeddings). Thus, most of the NLP-concerned studies applied autoencoder-based models to map a discrete word sequence into a continuous code space beforehand [8]. Differing from the existing studies, we propose a more straightforward yet effective way to better adopt adversarial learning by adversarially learning attention weights which are naturally continuous. In the meanwhile, adversarial learning has achieved a success in cross-domain learning not only in the image processing field [9], [10], but also in NLP through the adopting of resources across languages and domains [11], [12]. Inspired by above studies, we further propose a hybrid adversarial learning framework for cross-domain multi-dimensional emotion regression. This is done via a Cross-domain Multi-dimensional Adversarial Network (CMAN) which jointly conducts domanial adversarial learning and dimensional adversarial learning. Specifically, the feature of CMAN is twofold:
On the one hand, CMAN conducts adversarial learning between emotion dimensions to learn better dimension-specific features. Specifically, we conduct adversarial learning between emotion dimensions via different attention layers for different emotion dimensions. Through adversarial training, better dimension-specific word weights are learned in different attention layers separately. Furthermore, an additional shared attention layer is applied to learn the shared word weights between emotion dimensions.
On the other hand, CMAN conducts adversarial learning between domains to leverage resources from multiple source domains in order to train an emotion regressor in the target domain. To be specific, we adversarially train a domanial discriminator to determine whether an input text belongs to the target domain or the source domains. Furthermore, unlike the previous studies in adversarial cross-domain adaptation, we choose those data which are close to the data in the target domain through the domanial discriminator from the source domains. In other words, due to the domanial discriminator in adversarial training, the data that can successfully fool the domanial discriminator (i.e., with high discriminating scores) can be assumed to be more proper for model training in the target domain.
In this paper, we apply CMAN to the task of cross-domain multi-dimensional emotion regression on a multi-domanial emotion regression corpus, i.e., EMOBANK, contributed by [13]. Empirical evaluation on both EMOBANK Reader’s and Writer’s multi-dimensional emotion regression tasks shows that CMAN achieves notable improvements in r-values over several state-of-the-art baselines. It also shows that both domanial adversarial learning and dimensional adversarial learning improve the regression performance.
