Nowadays, China is home to the world’s largest number of “netizens,” or people who are active in online communities. The 31st Statistical Report on Internet Development in China, issued by the China Internet Network Information Center, reported that the total netizen population in China was 688 million in December 2015, with an Internet penetration rate of 50.3% of the total population. The popularity of Internet enhances Chinese’s participation in public affairs. Understanding people’s attitude and behavior model toward political affairs and social affairs online is becoming another way for us to understand Chinese society. The Internet plays a special role in China: it is an important channel for Chinese to participate in social affairs. The Internet has also expanded the freedom of information in China. Research into online hot events diffusion will help us understand Chinese preferences and concerns regarding public participation.
Online events reflect real-world situations of China economically and politically to some extent. In recent years, more and more collective events have taken place in China, which may compose potential threat to the social stability. As the world’s second largest economy, questions have been raised for many years concerning China’s social and political stability. On the one hand, China’s economic reform over the past three decades is considered an obvious success. China’s economic system has been transformed from a command economy to an expanding market economy (Lewis and Litai, 2003). Furthermore, its fast economic growth has ensured extensive support and social prosperity. On the other hand, rapid economic growth has resulted in social disruption, pervasive corruption, and social inequality (Cui et al., 2014, Ho, 2014). The complex change in China’s social strata brought about by economic reform has intensified unrest and insecurity (Knight, 2013). In contrast, China’s political system has remained unchanged in recent years, but mounting political and social problems have introduced volatility into society (Shirk, 2007). Large-scale online collective behaviors occur frequently in China (Sullivan, 2014, Yang, 2013). Research on the patterns of online collective behaviors with massive data opens more accessible way to observe Chinese interests and concerns regarding public affairs than conventional (usually offline) social questionnaire methodologies with sparse data.
In this paper, we conduct an interdisciplinary study of computer science and social science by investigating the following questions: 1) Are the behavior modes of netizens engaged in online hot political events or social events characterized by any special features? 2) Can we better predict the popularity of various online collective events based on netizens’ behaviors?
We offer an interdisciplinary research framework including Internet data collection, algorithmic popularity prediction of online hot events, and the related explanations about experimental findings from the viewpoints of public sphere (Habermas, 1991), individualism/collectivism and some offline empirical researches. Our empirical study of China’s online hot events is based on more than 14 million posts collected from Sina Weibo between September 14, 2012 and July 11, 2013. Controversial opinions regarding China’s current regime have inspired us to classify the hot events into three categories: political public events, social public events and non-public events, as based on a bag-of-words model used in social science (Dumais, 2004). Such classifications can help us observe the root reason for China’s hot events and better understand people’s collective behaviors and intentions.
To compare and predict the popularity of the three types of events, we used three algorithms: a linear algorithm, correlation-based algorithm and a modified state transition-based algorithm. For online political events, the modified state transition-based algorithm visibly improves the prediction accuracy compared with the other two algorithms. We found that the growth pattern for political events is more regular and predicable than the other two types of online events and people are more likely to cluster and converge on online political events.
The prediction results provide an interesting piece of computational social science work to assist in the analysis of incentives concerning China’s collective events. We discuss their far-reaching implications for Chinese politics and predict for China’s social stability justified by public sphere (Habermas, 1991), horizontal/vertical individualism/collectivism, and some offline empirical studies and observation.
