The continually increasing demands on and complexity and diversity of systems and networks have made proper performance evaluation increasingly important and challenging. The performance evaluation of a system is made more difficult by the fact that variation in performance occurs due to varying patterns of demand as well as internal changes and degradations within the system. The performance of a system over a specified time horizon cannot be judged by the average performance level alone. A realistic assessment must also take into account the variation around the average performance level. A strong case for taking production variability into account in manufacturing systems has been made in  [1]. In manufacturing systems, the observed throughput, the actual system flow time, and the actual amount of work in progress on a limited time horizon can be very different from their expected values. Such deviations from mean performance levels ultimately affect the profitability of the manufacturing system. The same is true in computer networks. For example, wireless network performance is extremely variable even on short timescales. Jitter in VoIP is always a serious concern. Variation in available bandwidth is a serious problem in stream transmission  [2]. Even the adjustments made by degradable and adaptive systems may contribute to higher variability. For example, the adaptive framework in mobile multimedia wireless networks causes bandwidth degradation contributing to variation of available bandwidth  [3]. Variability in performance, whether in computer networks, industrial manufacturing, or service industry, must be properly understood and estimated before a system can be improved.
Variability, usually measured by the variance of a suitably chosen performance metric, is generally time-dependent. Except for systems in steady state or in a state of statistical control, variance of a performance metric may change with demand, system degradations, system reconfigurations, and, in case of manufacturing systems, even by changes in raw material. Further, in view of the various facets of the performance of a system, a single metric may well be misleading or grossly incomplete. Therefore, a multi-metric approach may be necessary. Thus, in performance evaluation of a computer network, it is common to have metrics dedicated to various categories such as productivity, responsiveness, utilization, losses, and buffer problems. For example, productivity is measured by throughput or effective capacity; responsiveness by delay, round trip time, queue size, or uptime; utilization by percentage of time busy; losses by packet loss ratio or frame retries; and buffer problems by packet drops and rebuffer events.
The objective of this paper is to develop a signal-to-noise ratio type of performance index and its multi-metric extension to summarize performance behavior of a system over a specified finite time horizon when the system is subject to shocks which occur according to a homogeneous Poisson process and induce an increase in variance of a performance metric. Our focus is on degradation caused by Poisson-driven discrete events, not necessarily related to workload, which increase the uncertainty in performance. Poisson-driven shocks have been studied in various contexts in the reliability and applied probability literature since the pioneering work of Esary, Marshall, and Proschan  [4]. The classical reference for such shock models is [5] while two recent references are [6] and [7]. We describe our model and a related performance measure  over the time horizon  in Section  2. In order to clearly delineate our model and the rest of the paper from existing performance/performability evaluation literature, we point out the differences between our approach and the classical accumulated reward approach in Section  3. The expected value and variance of the performance measure  are computed in Section  4. In Section  5, we propose , defined as the expected value of  divided by the standard deviation of , as a frequently appropriate index of the performance of the system over the time period . Of course,  is the signal-to-noise-ratio so commonly used in the engineering literature. In terms of statistical terminology,  is the reciprocal of the coefficient of variation of . A natural extension of  to multi-metric situations is also given in Section  5. The applications of the proposed model and the performance index  are explained and illustrated in Section  6 through Multicast Beacon data for packet loss in the AG. Finally, in Section  7, we state our conclusions and indicate plans for future research.
