“Post-truth” has been named word of the year, due to its wide usage in reference to Brexit and Trump as the products of political decisions no longer based on facts (Flood, 2016). According to a New York Times article, “The problem is the oversupply of facts in the 21st century: There are too many sources, too many methods, with varying levels of credibility, depending on who funded a given study and how the eye-catching number was selected” (Davies, 2016). The oversupply of facts reveals one of the fundamental challenges of the use of science for policy, which is the focus of this paper. The challenge is dealing with complexity, both in the definition of issues and in the scientific and political processes governing them.
Complexity is defined as the existence of non-equivalent representations of the same object of study. Non-equivalent refers to the fact that different representations cannot be reduced to one another. An example of non-equivalent representations is the debate about water scarcity in Israel. While the level of the Sea of Galilee, the country’s largest fresh water source, is constantly monitored and used to provide evidence on the water crisis, the agricultural sector is taken as exemplary in overcoming water scarcity through efficiency and innovation, thanks to the adoption of drip irrigation, grey water recycling in agriculture and the development of sea-water resistant crops (Ministry of Environmental Protection, 2009, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2013, Rejwan and Yaacoby, 2015). Both narratives, the water crisis and the water efficiency narrative, are backed-up by scientific evidence. However, one cannot compare, or establish a trade-off, between the ecological status of a lake and water efficiency in agriculture.
The proposition “post-factual politics” assumes that facts play, or should play, a role in policy. Complexity raises a number of questions with regard to this assumption: which facts should be used for policy? If oversupply of facts is a problem, which facts should be left out? Should certain facts (e.g. ecological concerns, threats to sustainability) be given priority over others (e.g. the economic viability of farmers)? The answer to these questions requires value judgements and raises further questions: Who should decide which facts are to be considered? Post-normal science highlights the relevance of these questions for the science-policy interface. Funtowicz and Ravetz (1993) speak of soft facts as a criticism of the positivist view of facts as hard evidence that can guide policy towards the right course of action. Facts are not always hard, the right course of action cannot always be identified, and decisions cannot be taken in the abstract, with reference to supposedly undisputed values.
This paper analyses the science-policy interface from the point of view of complexity theory. The objective of this study is to assess how the complexity approach contributes to the understanding of some of the challenges of science for governance flagged by post-normal science.
