Over the past few years, skeleton-based action recognition has become very popular among computer vision research community due to background adaptability, illumination invariance and advancement in skeleton-extraction techniques and hardware. Skeleton-based action recognition techniques have begun to perform better due to the advent of graph convolutional neural network where body joints correspond to graph nodes and bones between joints symbolizes to the graph edges. One of the major reasons that action recognition is found to be challenging is due to high within-class variance and low between-class variance [1], [2].
Action recognition can be applied to numerous practical applications such as video surveillance and entertainment industry. In the literatures, the task of skeleton-based action recognition has been carried out using recurrent neural networks [3], [4], [5], spatio-temporal attention modeling [6], [7], [8], path signature features extraction [9], [10], [11] or graph convolutional networks [12], [13]. Signifying the importance of nodes and edges for action recognition, a two-stream graph convolutional network has been proposed for nodes and edges in [14].
Spatio-temporal representation contains significant information [15] and, therefore, is an elegant choice for graph convolutional network (GCN), however, graph representation becomes cumbersome when temporal length is increased to full-length of the video frames. Therefore, it seems appealing if this complex spatio-temporal graph is mapped to a simple sparsified graph, retaining the information of significant nodes and edges. This intuition drives us to investigate and incorporate graph sparsification for skeleton-based action recognition. It is also empirically realized that sparsified spatio-temporal representation of video exhibits promising results, compared to truncated spatio-temporal representations of the same video when fed to GCN.
Our proposed GCN-based framework is developed using spectral sparsification, inspired by [16]. The idea of spectral sparsification is based on cut sparsification to expedite cut algorithms and generate a subgraph with O(nlogn/∊2) edges in almost linear time, where n denotes the number of nodes and ∊>0. Spectral sparsification finds sub-graph in the original graph by random sampling, where the sampling probabilities are determined by the effective resistances of the edges. During sparsification some nodes and edges are removed from the original graph, and the weights of remaining nodes and edges in the sparsed graph are emphasized. It is obvious that graph sparsification is a lossy process where some redundant information is discarded by eliminating noisy nodes and edges. A general concept of graph sparsification is illustrated in Fig. 1.Download : Download high-res image (219KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Illustration of graph sparsification, (Better view in color).
In our graph convolution architecture, a self-attention pooling mechanism is also employed when pooling the feature maps from convolutional layers. The motivation for self-attention pooling is that it considers node features and graph structure. It also provides an end-to-end trainable representation learning for action recognition.
In this paper, our contribution can be summarized as follows: 1) to the best of our knowledge, we are the first one to investigate spectral sparsification for spatio-temporal GCN-based action recognition using effective resistance modeling; 2) we incorporate self-attention graph pooling for capturing long-term contextual information; 3) we devise a novel graph convolutional network for sparsified spatio-temporal action recognition which achieves state-of-the-art performance on different benchmark datasets.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows, that literature survey and contemporary techniques are listed in Section 2. Our proposed methodology for spatio-temporal graph sparsification is explained in Section 3, whereas Experimental details and discussion on results is made in Section 4.
