MotivationIn a 2.0 environment with an increasing IT-knowledge of users and the trend of digitalization, electronic data has become a significant role in today's life. From the point of view of crime investigators, evidence in different forms can be found on digital media like computers, mobiles or USB-sticks. In addition to the rising challenge of mass data, law enforcement agencies have to face more specialized defense lawyers and prosecutors. During a criminal investigation process, even in investigations that are of non-electronic nature, the search and seizure of digital devices is a standard procedure. In regard to the forensic soundness of the digital evidence, best practice guides like “The Good Practice Guide for Computer-Based Electronic Evidence” were introduced to forensic practitioners. The creation of a so called image (bitwise copy) of the original digital evidence has become common.
Legal considerationsThe idea behind the tool, which is proposed in Section Implementation, is based on German laws limiting the access and usage of information, for example the data privacy law (corresponding to the data protection act 1998 [UK], different information privacy and data protection laws in the US or Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) providing the right to respect “private and family life, his home and his correspondence”). Especially German law enforcement has strict legal specifications about the seizure of data and its utilization for criminal investigations. Content of data that leads to knowledge about one's way of life are prohibited to be utilized. §100a of the German code of criminal procedure (German: Strafprozessordnung) states in subparagraph 4, that recordings of such data are mandatory to be deleted immediately and that both, the obtainment and its deletion, are to be documented.This is derived by the so called “Elfes-Urteil”, a decision made by the German Federal Constitutional Court (German: Bundesverfassungsgericht) in 1957. It strictly states that one's data is part of a human being's inviolable dignity and freedom (Moser-Knierim, 2014). In consequence, law enforcement is forced to spare non-relevant data blocks to a case when imaging a suspect's volumes. As this guideline can hardly be executed in reality, the selective deletion approach provides a possibility to fulfill the legal requirement afterwards.Even though this legal requirement is expected to be fulfilled, its implementation is not yet actively pursued. If asked, the typical answer of local German criminal investigation offices is, that there exists no established tool that is yet able to selectively delete data, neither during acquisition nor afterwards (Lg frankfurt, 2004, für den Datenschutz, 2012). The main argument to not implement this feature is that the deletion of content always modifies images. As the modification of evidence damages the integrity of the very same and thus applicability in court may be endangered.
Expectations to a selective deletion toolFor a secure deletion of objects, a lot of specialized wiping tools exist. Carrier describes their function as: ‘Most wiping, or “secure delete” tools operate in the content category and write zeros or random data to the data units that a file allocated or to all unused data units’ (Carrier, 2005). Garfinkel stated, that tools which overwrite information are the ‘oldest and most common forms of anti-forensic tools’ (Garfinkel, 2007). Besides the functionality to overwrite entire media or individual files, the possibility to delete metadata as a possible source for creating timelines about the user's activity should be given (Garfinkel, 2007). In the context of personally identifiable information, Pan et al. claimed, that ‘Metadata can provide a place for sensitive data to reside, but it is not particularly easy to remove’ (Pan et al., 2010). Following these opinions, we believe that forensically sound deletion tools should include the possibility to securely delete all remaining associated information, for instance meta information given by file tables corresponding to the deleted files. On top of that, a detailed report or log file helps to a) document the deletion of selected files and b) to authenticate the integrity and the provenance of the image and the remaining files. Following the NIST Special Publication 800-88 (NIST, 2014) the presented deletion tool operates with a single overwrite mechanism.
Related workCastiglione et al. (2011) drafted an approach for the ‘Automatic, Selective and Secure Deletion of Digital Evidence’. They proposed different methods for the wiping implementation in regard of leaving possible traces for digital investigations by anomalies or suspicious patterns on the disk. By defining the wiping of the physical locations of the data, the removal of associated metadata and ‘unwanted’ or ‘suspicious’ traces as theoretical necessity, their case study only faced the deletion of the physical locations.In contrast to a selective deletion, Stüttgen et al. (2013) designed a DFF module for the creation of selective images. Contrary to full bitwise copies, the selective imaging allows the creation of partial images with only selected data. The main difference between this approach and ours is that selective imaging is done during the acquisition process, while the selective deletion is done after the imaging process.
Short introduction of toolThe tool for a selective deletion is realized as a plugin for the Digital Forensics Framework.1 As the tool was intended to investigate whether technically a secure selective deletion is possible, this plugin is bounded to NTFS as the only file system. Currently only raw images are supported.This tool only provides a technical solution to the deletion process and therefore is limited in its support for the investigator in some ways. First, the search of sensitive data is done manually by the investigator. The authors don't know of any possible way to automatically detect such data. Yet this question is out of the scope of this paper.Second, the tool works at file system level. If routines of an operating system shadows certain data or meta data, this tool cannot directly find corresponding entries. Using the Matcher-module, which is described later in greater detail, 1:1-copies of files are able to be detected in an automatic fashion. Hence, slightly changed data still needs to be detected by the user.
OutlineThe focus of this paper lays on the implementation of a forensically sound selective deletion tool for images of NTFS2-partitioned disks. Precise criteria for forensically sound deletion and provenance verification techniques will be defined in Section Expectations to a selective deletion tool and further described in Section Selective deletion. Section Implementation points out specific functions of the implementation. In Section Evaluation the functions are tested and compared to these of an existing forensic tool (X-Ways Forensics). Section Conclusion and future work finally concludes the paper.
