
“This is not science fiction…it’s science eventuality”—Steven Spielberg on his film Jurassic Park in (Cox,1993).
Wireless Technology has long been defined synonymously with mobile phones. In the last 5–10 years, the definition has expanded slightly to include tablets, laptops, and smartphones. However, current wireless technology encompasses so much more! Today, in 2015, we include technologies that communicate wirelessly not just to the user but to each other and the environment, as well. Medical wireless technology has grown to include implantable devices that communicate to each other and signals information back to the doctor. Automobile-based wireless technology now includes sensors and radars that signal drivers for blind spots, nearby vehicles, and parallel parking. Aviation-based wireless technology has advanced to include commercial and personal use drones for videography and deliveries. Similarly other industries have metamorphosed due to various wireless technologies including banking, employment, education, and broadcast television, to name a few. While our lifestyles, education, community participation, and employment environments are quickly transforming with the help of wireless technologies, the change has been slower for many people with disabilities. Very few of these aforementioned wireless technologies were actively designed with the considerations of people with disabilities in mind. However, many of these wireless technologies were designed with inspiration from science fiction. This paper conceptualizes how to influence our current innovators to universally design the wireless technologies of the future, thirty (or more) years into the future. Since we currently use science fiction as guides to design for the widest possible number of users, perhaps we can increase the number of inclusively designed, innovative concepts depicted science fiction to encourage the development of more universally designed wireless technologies in the real-life future. Furthermore, the influence on the science fiction genre might also help to culturally transform the perception of disability. Therefore, this paper also visualizes how the perception of disability may be culturally transformed from disabilities to just recognizing that each of us have differing abilities. To conceptualize universally design, wireless technologies 30 years into the future, this paper is based on two current well-established assumptions, (1) there is an undeniable lack of wireless technology products accessible for people with disabilities − those that are accessible were often retrofitted in hindsight to be more inclusive or built as assistive technology specifically for people with disabilities and not considered mainstream products and (2) many of our most pervasive wireless technologies (designed for the mainstream) were inspired by science fiction works of our past.
