Following a major incident (MI) with multiple casualties there is an immediate need to increase the capacity to triage, treat and logistically manage the high influx of victims, particularly at geographically close trauma hospitals that will have little time to react before patients reach the emergency department (ED). This increase in capacity is generally referred to as surge capacity, and is created by managing resources and patient flow (Barbisch and Koenig, 2006). Overcrowded EDs and a constant lack of hospital beds are common in many hospitals, and this directly influences disaster preparedness by reducing surge capacity (Abir et al., 2013). Even a moderate-sized incident can affect the health care system to the extent that a small expansion in capacity requires activation of the disaster plan and optimal use of every resource (Bradt et al., 2009, Khorram-Manesh et al., 2009, Lennqvist, 2012).
In the ED, nurses often assume responsibility for the management of emergency response and function in leadership roles, managing and coordinating health care and caregivers. ED coordinator nurses must be prepared to respond as local leaders, adapt nursing practices, and to coordinate with hospital command, medical officers and other staff to minimize adverse medical outcome caused by a MI (Gebbie and Qureshi, 2002, Jennings-Sanders et al., 2005, Smith et al., 2015). In the Swedish healthcare system it is typically the head emergency nurse that receives the initial MI alert at the ED and initiates the hospital response according to the disaster response plan (Nilsson and Kristiansson, 2015).
According to the National Board of Health and Welfare in Sweden, the ability of the healthcare system to handle MIs depends on appropriate planning with well-trained and practised organizations (Socialstyrelsen, 2013). There is a growing body of evidence that shows that training is essential for effective disaster response and for a rapid and correct decision-making process in the stress and chaos of the moment (Auf der Heide, 2006, Brannan et al., 2008, Pattillo, 2006, Smith et al., 2015, Watters et al., 2015, Wilkerson et al., 2008). MIs are rare events, which means that daily activities alone cannot be relied on to provide the necessary experience needed to manage such large-scale events. Simulation-based training is one method that has been increasingly used within emergency and disaster management to achieve the required knowledge, skills and experience. Simulation exercises can be an effective training method for teaching emergency management by creating opportunities for repetitive practice and facilitating different learning strategies in a safe and educational environment (Olson et al., 2012). Participants in a simulation exercise have the opportunity to test existing and new coordination strategies and receive immediate feedback. This supports complex decision making where difference strategies for decisions in different scenarios can be discussed in a cooperative learning environment (Lennqvist, 2015). Simulation exercises are also used for individual management training on how to act according to standard operation procedures to achieve an effective medical response to an MI. Studies have shown that simulation-based training can enhance clinical learning, confidence, motivation to learn, clinical performance, critical thinking, and self-efficacy (Brannan et al., 2008, Okuda et al., 2009, Pattillo, 2006, Smith et al., 2015, Stefanidis et al., 2012, Watters et al., 2015, Wilkerson et al., 2008). Some studies have also used simulations to successfully increase trainees' knowledge of disaster medicine and basic competence in performing mass casualty triage (Ingrassia et al., 2014, Nilsson et al., 2015).
It is important to ensure that simulation exercises really do improve the trainees´ ability to perform accurately in an MI. In a literature review specifically on the efficiency of hospital staff MI training, Hsu et al. (2004) stated that there was insufficient evidence to support firm conclusions on the efficiency of any one specific training method. They concluded that more attention should be directed to evaluating the efficiency of MI training activities. One problem, however, is that the actual results of a MI training intervention only can be seen during a real MI, which are rare events. There are several confounding variables, such as time elapsed since training or staff turnover, that reduces the ability to draw firm conclusions about the efficiency of previous training. Instead, the typical measure used is training performance, with the assumption that increased skill at performing in the simulated scenario will translate to the real situation (Ford and Weissbein, 1997, Grossman and Salas, 2011). A simulator that correctly and efficiently enables learners to gain new knowledge is said to exhibit a high level of educational validity, which reflects both the learners understanding of the simulation and the real-world applicability of knowledge and skills learnt (Feinstein and Cannon, 2002). Another way to look at the effect of a training intervention is to measure the participants' self-efficacy. Self-efficacy can function as an indirect measure of the impact of training to improve skills in health care and is one way to understand the potential impact of an educational intervention on later clinical practice (Hsu et al., 2015, Artino et al., 2012).
Self-efficacy is the extent to which an individual believes him or herself to be capable of performing a specific behaviour in a specific situation (Bandura, 1997). Specific self-efficacy is task-related and means the extent to which the individual claims to be capable of performing a specific task. Self-efficacy can be affected in four ways according to Bandura (1997): mastery experiences, social modelling, social persuasion and psychological responses. Master responses means that experience from previous similar situations increases self-efficacy. Social modelling considers that by observing others successfully performing a task, the individual believes that also he or she can do the same. Social persuasion means that an individual can be verbally convinced that he or she has the capability to perform a specific behaviour in a specific situation. The last source of self-efficacy, according to Bandura, is the individual's own response and reaction to the situation. Mood, emotional status and stress can affect an individual's self-efficacy. Anxiety, for example, can create a physical discomfort that reduces self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997). Individuals with high self-efficacy use more effective ways to solve problems because they believe in their ability to handle the situation. Self-efficacy can thus be used as an indicator of the ability to carry out a clinical behaviour (Cant and Cooper, 2010).
Simulated disaster exercises that allow participants to practice nursing leadership skills can increase their working knowledge and perceived self-efficacy related to emergency management through mastery experiences. Training can also enhance self-efficacy in clinical situations and nurses' perceived abilities relating to leadership and management of clinical scenarios (Watters et al., 2015, Smith et al., 2015). One of the major effects of simulated exercises may be to develop self-confidence in performance (Cant and Cooper, 2010). It is also the case that in an educational situation, individuals with high self-efficacy learn more and perform better than those with low self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997, Wood and Bandura, 1989). Thus, training to improve self-efficacy can be beneficial for subsequent training sessions.
The National Board of Health in Sweden recommends frequent and regular education, training and exercises as one way to enable head emergency nurses to deal with the managerial activities associated with MIs (SOSFS2013:22 §6–7). In order for such training to be realised there is an interest to explore small-scale training interventions with short time demands and minimal disruption on day-to-day healthcare operations. In line with the recommendations of Hsu et al. (2004) and Artino et al. (2012), the efficiency of such training interventions should be investigated, for example by measuring its effect on trainee self-efficacy. The aim of the current study was therefore to examine if short, small-scale computer-based simulation exercises, using a prototype training system called DigEmergo, would improve head emergency nurses' self-efficacy and MI management skills. The study was named Simulation-based Training of Resource Management in the Emergency Room (STORMER).
