In the introduction to this special issue, Antle et al. (2016b) discuss the critical need for data, models and knowledge products that provide user-friendly data acquisition and analytical capability for decision makers. The use cases range from farm-level decision support, to the agricultural research community and donors making research investment decisions, to policy decision makers whose goal is the sustainable management of natural resources. Janssen et al. (2017) provide examples of data and information technology structures that illustrate how private and public data components could be developed for such use cases. Jones et al. (2017) argue that the most important current limitation is data, both for on-farm decision support and for research investment and policy decision making. One of the greatest data challenges is to obtain reliable data on farm management decision making both for current conditions and under scenarios of changing bio-physical and socio-economic conditions.
This paper discusses how farm-level decision models can be used to support farm decision making and to provide data for landscape-scale models for policy analysis. In the second section of this paper we provide an overview of the kinds of information needed to support science-based policies for sustainable landscape management as well as improved on-farm management. We describe how existing decision support tools could be used to develop a data infrastructure that can provide this type of information. In sections three and four we describe a landscape-scale policy analysis tool (TOA-MD) and a farm-level decision support tool (AgBiz Logic) that could be used to support landscape scale and farm level decision-making. Section five illustrates the use of these tools with an analysis of the economic potential for a new oilseed crop, Camelina sativa, to be incorporated into the winter wheat-fallow system used in the U.S. Pacific Northwest. In the concluding section we discuss the challenges that will need to be addressed if these and other similar data and modeling tools are to be integrated into data and modeling platforms that could support new knowledge products for both farm and policy decision makers.
