An impasse of credibility currently prevails in the US around the issues of climate change that threatens to paralyze citizens and experts alike. Confidence in the expertise of scientists is at an all time low, with much of the internet, radio talk shows, and popular television deluged with challenges to the credibility and trustworthiness of climate scientists. In an effort to adhere to their traditional ethic of “balance,” even our most prestige newspapers and journals have contributed to the confusion by spreading the widespread misimpression that climate scientists are deeply divided about both the extent of the dangers we face and the relevance of human activity to global warming. Not knowing who or what to believe, the natural response for most people is to do nothing.
Meanwhile, evidence of the seriousness of the problem continues to mount, as does the apprehension of so many climate scientists. Yet notwithstanding their concern, most of these have been reluctant to weigh in on (often acrimonious) public debates, instead seeking recourse in the particular authority granted them by “peer review.” Their concern is two-fold: first, anxiety about overstepping the traditionally accepted boundary between science and politics, and second (and closely related), fear that going beyond the reach of peer review would undermine their scientific credibility. The consequence is that the debate that rages in the public domain goes largely unchecked for intellectual or scientific reliability, and even the most discerning of non-expert readers are left without any basis for assessing the costs of continuing inaction.
Expert predictions imply costs that few if any of us would be willing to accept, yet a pervasive atmosphere of skepticism drains these warnings of virtually all effective force. What makes the situation particularly dire is that, living as we do in a democratic state, the very possibility of putting the efforts of our scientists to beneficial use depends on the response of a public willing and able to take their warnings seriously. Furthermore, given the critical role of the US in what is unavoidably a global issue, what is an impasse for the US is also an impasse for the world. The questions I want to pose are therefore of two kinds: First, on what basis can lay readers decide who and what to believe? And how does the answer to this question affect their ability to responsibly participate in policy decisions that depend on expertise they do not share? Second, what are the nature and limits of the climate scientist's particular responsibility in this current political and social situation? More specifically, what role ought experts play in the world beyond their particular expertise when their findings have the dramatic social and material consequences for that larger world that follow from the findings of climate scientists?
One might also ask, what is the place of expertise in addressing these issues? And which experts? There exist many different kinds of literature that, directly or indirectly, bear on the questions I raise. They come from philosophers, from political scientists, from students of science and policy, and they are extensive. But they tend not to focus on the particular problems of climate change quite so directly as I would wish. I am not an expert in any of these fields, but I will draw on all of them in the effort to bring them to bear more directly on the issues at hand. I do so out of my belief that the magnitude of what is at stake places a moral imperative on all of us to find a way out of this impasse. Even though no expert, I feel compelled to do what I can.
In the end, I will argue that, with regard to the problem of global warming as with so many other issues, there is no escaping our dependence on experts; we have no choice but to call on those (in this case, our climate scientists) who have the necessary expertise. Yet just as in any other endeavor, our confidence in their expertise – our trust – needs to be earned; it requires more than the evidence of a union card. Furthermore, for the particular task of getting beyond our current impasse, I also suggest that climate scientists may be the only ones in a position to take the lead. Finally, given the tacit contract between scientists and the state which supports them on the other, I will also argue that climate scientists are not only in a position to take the lead, but also that they are obliged to do so.
