Porous media are most frequently characterized indirectly by conducting macroscopic measurements (e.g., mercury-intrusion porometry, BET measurements, bubble point) [1]. However, these measurements are inherently limited in capturing the real physical characteristics of the microstructure at the pore-scale. With the increasing complexity of the microstructural morphology of modern porous media, macroscopic investigations provide a useful, but highly simplified, measure of the microstructure. For optimum selection of the porous membranes for industrial or medical applications, information such as pore sizes, pore shapes, pore orientations, and their spatial distributions need to be considered. Moreover, with a rigorous quantification of the pore-scale structure, the underlying theoretical models for the performance related macroscopic properties can be improved significantly. For all these reasons, it is beneficial to develop robust and reliable methods for identifying and extracting the salient morphological features of porous media at the pore scale.
There are only a few main methodological pathways reported for the characterization of porous media in literature [2], [3]. As mentioned earlier, the simplest approaches focus on obtaining estimates of the surface area per unit volume, averaged porosity, and averaged pore size using macroscopic measurements. These approaches are founded in the general principles of capillarity, diffusion, and fluid flow developed in the 19th century. More specifically, the theoretical backgrounds of [2], [3] are based on the models from Young-Laplace, Fick and Darcy, and employ gross simplification and idealization of the porous structures [4]. Not surprisingly, the respective concepts have many limitations.
Another approach of pore structure analysis utilizes actual imaging (with the required spatial resolution) of the pore structures. Prior work has explored both 2-D (two dimensional) and 3-D (three dimensional) representations of the porous microstructures. Traditionally, for 2-D imaging, methods such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) have been employed. For 3-D representations, synchrotron x-ray computed tomography (XCT) on the micro- and nanoscale represents a state of the art technique [5]. These images are then analyzed applying various feature extraction methods, including concepts such as the medial axis that describes the pore space by a central skeleton. Some researchers have combined this approach with multiorientation scanning of the digitally reconstructed images or the so called “maximal ball” method to roughly classify the pore space into pores and throats [6], [7]. A note worthy benefit is that the pore size distributions can be extracted easily [8], [9], [10]. However, a disadvantage is the high sensitivity of the medial axis to small defects in the pore space (some of these could have been introduced in the experimental protocols themselves). Furthermore, the pore shape extraction and detection of geometrical anisotropies is difficult due to the lack of a clear identification of the pores and their shapes. Other methods for feature extraction with imaging utilize solutions of the Navier-Stokes or Lattice-Boltzmann equations for fluid dynamics in the pore space. The corresponding calculations allow an estimation of effective permeability. By assuming that the simulations are conducted under Darcy conditions, the permeability is essentially a geometry describing parameter. With this method, anisotropies of the permeability can be detected in different flow directions, but the results are still of macroscopic nature. As a consequence of these complexities, the quantification of pore shape anisotropies in the microstructure remains a challenge [11]. Even more problematic is the detection of geometrical anisotropies when the available experimental imaging methods are limited to 2-D investigations.
A quantitative analysis of porous structures involves the use of algorithm-based modeling of porous structures on the pore scale. As an example, the underlying method involves estimating the characteristic permeability of packed spheres [12], textile reinforcements [13], and other heterogeneous fiber architectures [14]. In another example, a method was developed for the generation of porous membrane structures and a comparison of pore size distributions from the generated model with SEM images was performed [15]. Although it was possible to manipulate the pore shapes in the generated 3-D microstructures, the comparison with the 2-D images remained mostly qualitative. With the generation of 3-D porous structures and the possibility of comparing them with the 3-D images obtained from X-CT, it is now possible to systematically evaluate the efficacy and capability of the algorithm-based microstructure generators. The modeling of real 3-D microstructures facilitates a reduction of time consuming and expensive 3-D imaging. In the long term, a powerful microstructure generation method can also serve as a design tool for porous materials in order to get microstructures with optimum properties meeting the application requirements [16], [17].
This paper builds on the statistical modeling approaches for porous structures. In doing so, we have employed novel, recently developed, data science methods to quantify the internal structure of the material. Data science is a field where knowledge/trend in data is extracted through approaches of several areas such as statistics, information sciences, machine learning. It is especially targeted in problems where analytical solutions to the problem are intractable from the data. Data science approaches focus on statistical learning of hidden correlations in complex datasets, while conventional modeling and simulations tend to focus on strategies for solving a set of mathematical relations describing a physical phenomenon of interest. As such, data science approaches can be applied equally to both, experimental datasets or simulation datasets. The first step in these protocols involves quantifying the material microstructure using the formalism of n-point statistics [18], [12], [19]. Even though there are multiple alternative approaches to quantify the microstructure, only the n-point statistics can provide the most complete information about the salient features of the microstructure organized in a systematic hierarchy. One-point statistics denote the probability of finding a discrete local state at any randomly selected spatial point. In other words, one-point statistics (i.e., n = 1) give the volume fractions of the discrete local states present in the material systems being studied (for example, porous microstructures can be represented using two local states, one for the solid phase and the other for the pore phase). On the other hand, two-point statistics, denoted by frhh′, reflect the probability of finding discrete local states h and h′ at spatial points separated by a vector r [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25]. The second step in the quantification of microstructure is the identification of microstructure features through reduced order representations. Due to the high dimensionality of the statistical representation of the microstructure in the n-point statistics framework, a reduced order representation is essential for any practical considerations. In prior work, principal component analysis (PCA) has been demonstrated to be remarkably efficient in addressing this need. PCA linearly transforms the coordinates of data in high dimensional representations in a way that the transformed data lie in a new coordinate system with ordered components from the highest to the lowest variance. The truncated information in the newly transformed coordinate system provides an objective reduced order representation of the microstructure. The approach of employing two-point statistics and PCA has been successfully implemented in our prior work [25], [22], [21], [24], [20], [26].
The main goal of this study is to evaluate the feasibility and benefits of employing the recently developed material data science approaches in identifying the salient features of porous membranes. Towards this goal, a microstructure generator is developed to create an ensemble of digitally created microstructures with a wide variety of features (e.g., stretched pores) and a broad range of values for statistical measures (e.g., porosity, pore size distributions). The entire ensemble of microstructures is quantified in the statistical framework using 2-point correlations and PCA to extract salient microstructure features typically encountered in porous membrane structures. The same protocol is applied to classify real porous membrane microstructures. It is seen that the approach presented in this study leads to an objective identification and quantification of the salient features in porous membrane structures in a computationally efficient framework.
