Ontology was originally a philosophical concept that describes research on the essence of the objective world. Ontology was founded, defined, and finally came into being during humanity's process of understanding nature. It is a cognitive activity directed toward the natural world and based on human ideology, and its main forms are judgment and inference through the medium of language (Chidamber and Kemerer, 1994). In the 1990s, ontology was introduced into geographic information science, and geo-ontology was formed as an extension and application of ontology into the field of geo-spatial information science. Moreover, geo-ontology is an explicit and formal specification of the shared conceptual models in the geographic information field (Kuhn, 2001). At the same time, the geographic information field needs geo-ontology to be the principal theory for its development, especially for the semantics-based technologies of the Internet, modeling, and integration. Through the introduction of the idea of ontology, existing data, knowledge, and information can be formed into a reasonable semantic system from object-oriented, process-oriented and other forms, which is easy for computers to process and users to share (Buccella et al., 2009).
In the past 20 years, many researchers have been dedicated to geo-ontology studies and published thousands of papers, most of which are primarily focused on a specific subdomain or subject of geo-ontology, such as the properties of geo-ontology (Smith and Mark, 1998, Smith and Mark, 2001), formal geo-ontology (Guarino, 1998; Li et al., 2008), geo-ontology integration (Hu et al., 2011, Kavouras and Kokla, 2002). These studies deepen our insight into geo-ontology. Geo-ontology has already become an important research topic in geographic information science. A summary analysis of its development will be helpful for orienting future studies in the field. Researchers have previously created summaries containing qualitative analysis (Li et al., 2015). In library and information science and scientific measurement, a qualitative review reflects a researcher's understanding and is suitable for the description and analysis of a topic at a micro level. In contrast, a quantitative review focuses more on the results of data analysis and is suitable for the large-scale investigation and prediction of these topics at the macro level (Frenken et al., 2009, Hood and Wilson, 2001). They emphasize a different focus. Using epistemology, researchers can obtain more reliable results from a qualitative analysis of topics (Bamberger, 2000, Gao, 2008, Hofer, 2000). Therefore, we make a summary of geo-ontology research based on quantitative bibliometric analysis. This summary not only supplements qualitative reviews, but also enables researchers to look at geographic research at macro and micro levels and provide an overview of its status and reference for further research.
Initially, bibliometrics was only a tool utilizing mathematical and statistical methods to quantitatively analyze science communication (Niu et al., 2014). Currently, bibliometrics can be used to quantitatively analyze and research risk assessments of not only papers of certain domains, authors, or journals but also specific papers. In the process of analyzing the communication and cognition of scientific knowledge, bibliometrics supervises its developments and determines emerging subject areas and knowledge structure (Liu et al., 2015, Raan, 1996, Silva and Teixeira, 2008). Bibliometrics can not only facilitate historical research retrospectives but also help us explore hotspots and trends in disciplines objectively from macro and micro perspectives, which can usefully supplement the views of subject specialists (Zhu et al., 2015).
This study analyzes papers from the Web of Science (WOS) database published from 1999 to 2014 that focus on geo-ontology. Specifically, the purpose of our analysis is to (1) identify general patterns for document types, publishing language, and journals in geo-ontology research; (2) visualize the number of nations and institutions, evaluate national and institutional research performance, and reveal the characteristics of international collaboration and geographical distribution of global institutions; (3) distinguish references that are the most cited and have the highest centrality; (4) provide an analysis of keywords, term words, and references, which may be a potential guide for researchers, especially newcomers in the geo-ontology field, and develop a reference for research focus and direction in the future.
