Faculty hiring networks, also known as faculty placement networks, are weighted networks of institutions that are interconnected by hiring relations. Faculty hiring networks have been examined at the department level to study relationships among universities within a discipline. Prior research has examined the knowledge diffusion aspect of hiring in disciplines such as sociology (e.g., Burris, 2004, Hanneman, 2001), political science (e.g., Fowler, Grofman, & Masuoka, 2007; Masuoka, Grofman, & Feld, 2007; Schmidt & Chingos, 2007), economics (e.g., Amir and Knauff, 2008, Terviö, 2011), communication science (e.g., Barnett, Danowski, Feeley, & Stalker, 2010 ; Barnett & Feeley, 2011; Mai, Liu, & González-Bailón, 2015), mathematics (e.g., Myers, Mucha, & Porter, 2011; Terviö, 2011), comparative literature (e.g., Terviö, 2011), law (e.g., Katz et al., 2011), computer science (e.g., Clauset, Arbesman, & Larremore, 2015), business science (e.g., Clauset et al., 2015), and history (e.g., Clauset et al., 2015). These studies have primarily focused on two tasks: examining prestige rankings through social network analyses of faculty hiring networks and probing into academic inequality of university departments.
In library and information science (LIS), Sugimoto, Russell, & Grant (2009) examined the landscape of the field by analyzing dissertations conferred by 38 LIS schools in the United States and Canada from 1930 to 2007. More recently, Wiggins and Sawyer (2012) explored faculty hiring data of 21 iSchools. They investigated interdisciplinary diversity of iSchools and manually clustered them into four different groups (i.e., computational, library & information, sociotechnical, and niche) to understand the community. Because not all iSchools are departments of LIS, their study did not specifically discuss the disciplinary characteristics of LIS.
In LIS, there are studies that examined the landscape and interdisciplinarity of the field by using dissertation or journal publication data. However, prestige rankings and academic inequality from the perspective of faculty hiring networks were rarely studied. Exploring these issues in LIS has vital importance as the outcomes will allow us to gain insights in the following areas: 1) the value of faculty hiring data on deriving objective LIS rankings; and 2) the revealing of academic inequality, if any, that hinders the growth of the field. Furthermore, this study provides additional understanding to the existing body of literature that enables cross-disciplinary comparisons and evaluations.
In this study, we intend to investigate faculty hiring networks of 44 American Library Association (ALA)1-accredited LIS schools ranked by U.S. News & World Report (U.S. News). Specifically, our goal is twofold. First, we examine network-based measures derived from faculty hiring networks to understand their implications on understanding LIS rankings. Second, we examine network structures of faculty hiring networks to understand academic inequality (if any) in LIS.
