Feature selection is required in many high-dimensional pattern classification tasks in order to remove redundant, noisy-dominated, or irrelevant inputs. The dimensionality reduction achieved by feature selection allows the improvement of the accuracy and interpretability of classifiers in applications where the number of features is too large compared to the number of available training patterns. In many bioinformatics applications such as sequence analysis, microarray analysis, mass spectra analysis, etc., the high-dimensional characteristics of the involved modeling problems frequently makes feature selection an important issue, as it is shown in the survey by Saeys et al. [23] on feature selection techniques used in bioinformatics. In [24], feature selection in high-dimensional feature spaces with small pattern samples is considered in the search of sets of genes whose expression levels can serve as features for diagnosis or prognosis. Another example of dimensionality reduction in the input patterns applied to electroencephalogram (EEG) classification is shown in [1], where the problem of recognizing epileptiform patterns is considered. This paper deals with brain–computer interface (BCI) tasks as an EEG classification problem. In a BCI system, the brain activity corresponding to a command to be given to a computer or a device has to be identified from the EEG signals, or other techniques such as positron emission tomography (PET), magnetoencephalography (MEG), etc. Our approach is based on EEG classification as it provides the characteristics of mobility and relatively low cost required by BCI systems.
In EEG classification for BCI applications [14], [22], feature selection is an important issue due to: (1) the presence of noise or outliers in the features; (2) the need to represent time information in the features; (3) the non-stationarity of EEG signals; and (4) the small number of patterns (EEGs) available for training. This circumstance results in the so-called curse-of-dimensionality problem as the number of patterns needed to properly define the different classes increases exponentially with the dimension of the feature vectors (at least from five to ten times as many training samples per class as the dimension [20]).
Moreover, besides classification quality, there are other BCI requirements such as real-time and usability which also take advantage from feature selection.
Despite many methods have been proposed for feature selection, this problem cannot be considered a closed and completely solved one. Feature selection is an NP-hard problem implying a high computational cost even in case of a moderate number of features to be considered. Meta-heuristics such as evolutionary algorithms are usually considered as the right approaches to cope with these searching problems, especially for problems with a large number of features as the one here considered. Indeed, recent papers have proposed approaches based on genetic algorithms to feature selection in BCI tasks [21].
Several criteria could be used to evaluate the quality of a given set of features, i.e., the utility function for feature selection. Thus, it is possible to take into account the classification accuracy and the generalization capability achieved by the considered EEG classifier while the input patterns use the selected features as components. Nevertheless, this approach can be only applied on supervised classification problems where the labels of the patterns are known, and it also requires taking into account the considered classifier. Another alternative that overcomes this limitation evaluates the selected features by the clustering structure of the input patterns described by those selected features. Here, we consider this second approach, although we also take advantage of the pattern labels, usually available in BCI applications. Moreover, as several utility functions can be considered to evaluate the selected characteristics (classification accuracy and generalization capability, and different cluster validation indexes), multi-objective evolutionary algorithms constitute a plausible approach to explore.
Thus, we propose a label-aided filter approach to multi-objective feature selection in motor imagery (MI) based BCI tasks and compared other multi-objective feature selection methods for the same application. MI is a BCI paradigm that uses a series of amplifications and attenuations of short duration occasioned by limb movement imagination, the so called event related desynchronization (ERD) and event related synchronization (ERS) [19]. The task of ERD/ERS analysis is complex because ERD/ERS patterns are weak and noisy and occur at different locations of the cortex, different instants within a trial, and different frequency bands [2], [19]. Moreover, there is no consistency in the patterns among subjects, and the patterns can even change within a session for the same subject, which may lead to high-dimensional patterns making the number of available patterns to conduct ERD/ERS analysis significantly less than the number of features. This constitutes a good scenario for evaluating the multi-objective feature selection approaches covering both wrapper and filter alternatives, and different objectives estimating the accuracy and generalization capabilities of the classifier under the selected features, and the clustering characteristics of the input patterns. This paper provides a detailed comparative analysis with the procedures proposed in [15], [18] thus contributing to an insightful evaluation of evolutionary multi-objective feature selection in supervised EEG classification for BCI.
In Section 2, feature selection as a multi-objective optimization problem is presented along with the wrapper and filter approaches to feature selection. The objective functions used by the multi-objective procedures are also described in Section 2. In particular, we describe a new version of our label-aided filter procedure proposed in [15]. Section 3 summarizes the approach to data acquisition and feature extraction of EEG signals by means of multi-resolution analysis (MRA) [2]. The corresponding data files including the EEG patterns built from the features extracted by MRA, for different BCI tasks and subjects, constitute the training and test data in the classification problems considered in the experiments. Finally, the experimental results obtained are shown and analyzed in Section 4, and Section 5 gives the conclusions of the paper.
