The sense of agency refers to the subjective feeling that one is controlling one’s own actions and external events (Haggard & Chambon, 2012). Although the sense of agency has mainly been studied in the fields of cognitive, social, and clinical psychology and neuroscience (David et al., 2008, Zalla and Sperduti, 2015), it is also an important topic in human factors on human-computer interaction (Limerick, Coyle, & Moore, 2014). In daily life, people operate various devices (e.g., personal computers and vehicles), and when the devices respond to their actions as intended, it could be assumed that people may experience a sense of agency and feel comfortable. By contrast, when the devices respond to their actions in a manner that was unintended, people may experience a decreased sense of agency and feel discomfort. From this viewpoint, the sense of agency could be an important clue in developing and improving devices that can be used without frustration (for a similar view, Spolsky, 2001).
According to the seminal model of the mechanisms generating a sense of agency, the internal comparator model (Blakemore et al., 1999, Frith et al., 2000), the sense of agency is determined by congruency between internally-generated predictions regarding the action consequence and the actual action consequence. When people plan an action, a prediction regarding the action consequence is generated by means of an internal predictive model (i.e., forward model; Wolpert et al., 2001, Wolpert et al., 1995). The predicted action consequence is then compared with the actual action consequence. If the predicted and actual action consequences are congruent, people feel that the action was performed by themselves and experience a sense of agency; if they are incongruent, people are unlikely to experience a sense of agency. The internal comparator model has been supported by many studies with a variety of paradigms and indices (e.g., Engbert et al., 2008, Haggard and Clark, 2003, Sato and Yasuda, 2005).
It should be noted, however, that there are several real-life situations in which people cannot make an accurate comparison between the predicted and actual action consequences. For example, when conducting a continuous action, such as driving a vehicle, sailing a ship, or piloting an aircraft, the consequences of actions might often be delayed and new actions might be executed before the consequences of previous ones can occur. In such situations, it is difficult to make an accurate comparison between the predicted and actual action consequences for every individual action; only ambiguous predictions of the flow of action consequences are possible. A recent study has suggested that in this situation, external cues, rather than congruency between the predicted and actual action consequences, play a dominant role in determining the sense of agency (Wen, Yamashita, & Asama, 2015). They found that the sense of agency during a continuous action is largely dependent on an external cue (i.e., task performance). In their study, participants were required to control the direction of motion of a dot by continuously pressing the left and right keys on a keyboard in order to place the dot within a goal as quickly as possible. In one condition, all key presses were reflected in the change of direction of the dot (the self-control condition). In another condition, erroneous key presses that caused the dot to move away from the goal were ignored by the computer (the computer-assisted condition), resulting in better task performance than in the self-control condition. As task performance improved, the sense of agency was greater in the computer-assisted condition than in the self-control condition, despite the fact that the association between the participant’s action and the action consequence was actually weaker in the computer-assisted condition. This result suggests that when an accurate comparison between predicted and actual action consequences is difficult, task performance can be a critical determinant of the sense of agency (for similar findings of an increased sense of agency with improvement in task performance, see Metcalfe and Greene, 2007, van der Wel et al., 2012). This finding is consistent with recent theories about the generation of the sense of agency, such as the two-step model (Synofzik, Vosgerau, & Newen, 2008) and cue-integration theory (Moore & Fletcher, 2012), which suggest that the sense of agency arises from not only a sensorimotor comparison process but also a higher-order inference process about external cues.
In Wen et al. (2015), the participants experienced an increased sense of agency together with an improvement in task performance, despite the fact that the performance improvement was actually induced by computer assistance rather than by their own actions. This means that the participants misattributed the performance improvement to their own action control. In Wen et al. (2015), however, most of the participants did not notice the existence of computer assistance, and thus it is unclear how their misattribution was affected by knowledge of the assistance. In order to understand the function of external cues in determining the sense of agency, it is important to examine whether or not misattribution occurs only when there is no plausible cause of the performance improvement other than their own actions. To address this issue, we used a dot control task similar to that used in Wen et al. (2015). We orthogonally manipulated the existence of computer assistance in dot control (assisted versus non-assisted) and instructions about the presence and absence of computer assistance (presence-instructed versus absence-instructed); participants were given false knowledge in both the assisted/absence-instructed condition and the non-assisted/presence-instructed condition.
It is possible that misattribution occurs only when there is no plausible cause of performance improvement other than the participants’ own actions. In this case, in the absence-instructed condition, participants should misattribute the performance improvement to their own action control, resulting in a greater sense of agency in the assisted condition than in the non-assisted condition. On the other hand, in the presence-instructed condition, the participants should not misattribute the performance improvement to their own action control, with the result of no increase in the sense of agency; in other words, the assisted and non-assisted conditions should produce a comparable sense of agency. Another possibility is that the misattribution occurs even when there is a plausible cause of performance improvement other than the participants’ own actions. In this case, in both the presence-instructed and absence-instructed conditions, the participants should misattribute the performance improvement to their own action control, resulting in a greater sense of agency in the assisted condition for both presence- and absence-instructed conditions equally.
