Helical coils have attracted wide attention due to their high heat transfer efficiency, compact design, ease of manufacture and freedom from thermal deformation [1,2]. Over the past two decades, helical coils have been widely used in energy and cooling systems such as air conditioning [3,4], heat exchangers [5], [6], [7], steam generators [8,9], renewable energy [10, 11], energy storage [12,13], and in the chemical and petroleum industries [14,15]. In helically coiled tubes, the centrifugal force induced by the geometry exerting upon the working fluid, leads to the secondary flows (Dean vortices) [16,17]. It is recognized that flow boiling heat transfer represents one of the most efficient type of heat transfer mode. The mechanism of flow boiling heat transfer inside a helical coil is different to that in a straight tube due to the secondary flows generated inside a helical coil [18].
In recent years, due to its practical relevance, research effort has been devoted to the flow and boiling heat transfer in helically coiled tubes. This paper does not, and cannot, attempt review all the interesting and important progress related to boiling heat transfer in helical coils, but rather attempts to summarize recently published results in the relevant field. Santini et al. [19] experimentally investigated the forced convection boiling of water in an electrically heated, 24 m long full-scale helically coiled steam generator tube with the operating pressures in the range of 2-6 MPa, mass fluxes from 200 to 800 kg m−2 s−1 and heat fluxes from 40 to 230 kW m−2. Their results showed that the heat transfer coefficient was found to be depend on the mass flux and heat flux, indicating that both nucleate boiling and convection were contributing to the heat transfer. It also noted that the effect of curvature on the heat transfer during flow boiling could be negligible and therefore the heat transfer coefficient in helical coils could be predicted with existing correlations for straight tubes. Later on, Tan et al. [20] conducted an experimental study to investigate critical heat flux characteristics in a uniformly heated horizontal helically coiled tube at near the critical pressure ranges from 2.85 to 4.03 MPa with R134a as the working fluid. There were two types of critical heat flux phenomenon, which were dry-out and departure from nucleate boiling, found from their experimental study. The dry-out occurred at the lower pressure while the departure from nucleate boiling happened at the higher pressure. Kong et al. [21] performed an experiment work to investigate the subcooled boiling heat transfer characteristics of R134a in vertical helically coiled tubes with the operating pressures varying from 450 to 850 kPa, mass fluxes from 147.5 to 443.7 kg m−2 s−1 and heat fluxes from 0.1 to 14.5 kW m−2. Their experimental results showed that the generated bubbles always slide along the heated surface in the vertical helically coiled tube. It was also found that the radial component force is negative, which contributes significantly to the heat transfer enhancement and nonuniformity of the wall temperature in subcooled flow boiling. Hardik and Prabhu [22] performed an experimental investigation to study the effect of curvature on local boiling heat transfer coefficient and two-phase pressure drop in helically coiled tubes with water as the working fluid. They concluded that in the subcooled region and in a low quality region, boiling heat transfer coefficient in helical coils will be much higher (12%-100%) than in straight tube, whereas in a high quality region, the boiling heat transfer coefficient in will be the same as in straight tubes. In addition, they developed a correlation for two-phase pressure drop in helical coils. Afterwards, the same authors [23] experimentally investigated the characteristics of the boiling heat transfer, pressure drop and critical heat flux for refrigerant R123 with six helical coils having three different tub diameters and two different coil diameters. They concluded that in fully developed flow boiling region, the circumferential averaged heat transfer coefficient in helical coils is same as in straight tubes. Xiao et al. [24] carried out various experiments in helically coiled tubes to explore the boiling heat transfer characteristics at high pressure with water as the working medium with the pressure ranges from 2 to 8 Mpa. Their experimental results indicated that the subcooled boiling and saturated nucleate boiling heat transfer coefficient would increase with the increase of heat flux, whereas heat flux showed no influence on saturated convective boiling heat transfer coefficient. The effects of mass flux and system pressure on heat transfer coefficients were also discussed. Niu et al. [25] developed an analytic model based on liquid film dryout theory to predict the onset of dryout quality in annular flow regime in helically coiled tubes and validated against previously published experimental data. It was found that the onset of dryout quality decreased as mass flux increased in the re-deposition-dominated region, and the total net entrainment rate increased gradually with the increase of heat flux. Chen et al. [16] experimentally studied the heat transfer characteristics of subcooled flow boiling in helical coils with different inner diameter and coil diameters. They concluded that the heat transfer coefficients in subcooled boiling regions can be improved by increasing heat flux, mass flux and system pressure. Sun et al. [26] proposed a two-fluid model taking the vapour phase and the liquid phase into account in order to capture the non-uniform wall temperature distribution of boiling heat transfer in a helically coiled tube. Their simulation results showed that the liquid accumulated at the outside and bottom of the cross section during nucleate boiling heat transfer, leading to a lower wall temperature. Hernández-Magallanes and Rivera [27] reported the experimental data of boiling heat transfer coefficients for the ammonia-lithium nitrate mixture in a laminar falling film. They found that the ammonia vapour could be produced at generation temperatures between 80°C and 105°C obtaining boiling heat transfer coefficients between 85 and 340 W/m2 K. Most recently, Shaver et al. [28] performed a numerical study of the boiling flow inside a helical coil with a two-fluid model using the spectral element code Nek-2P. Their simulation results indicated that a strong phasic separation driven by the effects of buoyancy and inertia.
From the literature review above, it can be concluded that most of the work on the boiling heat transfer in helical coil has mainly focused on experimental investigation and relatively few studies on numerical simulation. In addition, all the above research work were investigated under terrestrial gravity. However, it should be recognized that helical coils can be used as one of the heat transfer enhancement techniques in aerospace scenarios that frequently will experience a high gravity stage. High gravity conditions would make the boiling flow and heat transfer more complicated and make the experiment more complex to conduct [29,30]. Thus, investigations of the effects of the elevated high gravity conditions on the boiling flow and heat transfer is both important and challenging. Most recently, Bai et al. [31] carried out a numerical study on heat transfer of supercritical CO2 in heated helically coiled tubes under abnormal-gravity such as high-gravity, low-gravity and zero-gravity in order to explore the coupled mechanisms of buoyancy and centrifugal force. Their study did not consider the phase change. It was found that the heat transfer coefficient could be enhanced at higher gravity force in the liquid-like region, while it could be almost the same in the gas-like region. They also stated that the heat transfer could be enhanced by buoyancy force when the gravity is higher than terrestrial gravity, whereas the heat transfer could be weakened under lower gravity. It needs to be emphasised here that, under high gravity, extra forces such as centrifugal force and Coriolis force will make the phenomena more complicated whilst for boiling flow and heat transfer the nature of the two-phase flow will make the computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulation itself more difficult.
Deep learning neural networks with multiple layers between the input and output layer can model complex non-linear relationships. Most recently, a deep neural network called ‘physics-informed neural networks’ is able to model nonlinear partial differential equation characteristics with synergy between machine learning and classical computational physics [32], [33], [34]. Machine learning (ML) - artificial neural networks (ANNs) are not new in concept, but they have received considerable attention and they have been applied successfully in a wide range of fields for modelling and prediction in boiling flow and heat transfer [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40]. However, very little work on helical coils is available despite their wide application potential. Gill and Singh [41] developed both dimensionless correlation and ANN models to predict the mass flow rate of R134a/LPG refrigerant through straight and helical coil adiabatic capillary tubes in a vapor compression refrigeration system. It was found that the ANN model gave better statistical prediction than dimensionless correlation model. Parrales et al. [42] developed two new empirical equations based on ANN to determine the new void fraction in two-phase flow inside helical vertical coils with water as work fluid. The analyses of the contribution of input variables in the ANN model showed that the curvature ratio could not impact the simulative accuracy of void fraction under the current conditions. Izadi et al. [43] employed ANN and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) models to evaluate micromixing in micro-helically coiled tubes. It was found that an ANN approach has higher precision than ANFIS in segregation index modelling in micro-helically coiled tubes. Baghban et al. [44] proposed a machine learning approach with three different models such as multilayer perceptron artificial neural network (MLP-ANN), adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), and least squares support vector machine (LSSVM) to predict Nusselt number by considering Prandtl number, volumetric concentration, and helical number of helically coiled heat exchanger as input variables, as well as using water carbon nanofluid as the working fluid. Their results showed that LSSVM approach has the best performance. Most recently, Sharifi et al. [45] performed a three dimensional numerical simulation to investigate the effect of coiled wire inserts with various arrangements on friction coefficient and heat transfer rates for the helical wire inserted tube in heat exchangers. They stated that, with the assist ANN, the heat transfer rates and the friction coefficients could be accurately estimated within the ranges of input variables.
In the aforementioned literature survey, many significant results in the boiling flow and heat transfer characteristics of helical coils have already been obtained. However, there remains a lack of tests dealing with flow and heat transfer in helical coils under high gravity conditions. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, ANN methods have not yet been applied to that thermal system. In the current work, a data set is obtained experimentally and prepared for processing with the use of ANNs. A feed-forward back-propagation multi-layer perceptron deep ANN is proposed to predict the heat transfer coefficient in order to better understand the boiling flow and heat transfer mechanism as well as for future design and analysis.
