Contemporary society faces a range of complex and urgent challenges characterised by a high degree of uncertainty. Examples include climate change, global epidemics, and new technologies like genetically modified organisms. Funtowicz and Ravetz (1993) argue that such challenges require post-normal science. Post-normal science is distinguished from “normal” science, characterised as a kind of puzzle solving activity where scientists choose solvable problems and produce knowledge associated with a high level of certainty. The quality of this work is assured through a peer community that usually consists of other scientists. On issues where uncertainty and stakes are low (e.g. in terms of costs, impacts or risks), experts can feed decision makers with solutions based on a relatively value-free idea of science. Although there is an increased awareness of the limitations of science on complex issues, research suggests that the idea that policy should be informed by objective science is still strong (see, for example, Hauge et al., 2014, Hauge, 2011).
Problems like climate change, global epidemics or new technologies require a different approach, for which Funtowicz and Ravetz (1993) proposed the term post-normal science. These kinds of problems have several features, including high degrees of complexity, uncertainty and risk. These factors arise in the context of non-linear dynamics, multiple actors and contested values. For example, while the creation of a GMO crop strain in the laboratory may be considered normal science, the question of how to deploy GMO crops in commercial agriculture is much more complex. The release of GMOs into an ecosystem is difficult to model and may have unforeseeable outcomes. The use of GMOs may implicate farmers, agro-industrial companies, governments, aid agencies, local communities, protest movements etc. Each set of actors brings different values to the problem, leading to different ideas about what information is significant, what forms of data should be collected, what impacts should be considered serious, etc. In this sense, quality in knowledge production for policy has a strong connection to relevance; it must consider pluralities of knowledge perspectives and values, and uncertainty and its characteristics must be placed at the centre of debate. In the culture of normal science, by contrast, only expert voices count.
A key feature of post-normal science, therefore, is the idea of extended peer communities:
the evaluation of scientific inputs to decision making requires an ‘extended peer community’. This extension of legitimacy to new participants in policy dialogues has important implications both for society and for science. With mutual respect among various perspectives and forms of knowing, there is a possibility for the development of a genuine and effective democratic element in the life of science. (Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1993, p. 740–741)
In effect, Funtowicz and Ravetz are calling for the involvement of a wide range of stakeholders, not only in discussing the results of research, but ultimately in the conduct of science itself:
The relevant peer community is thus extended beyond the direct producers, sponsors and users of the research, to include all with a stake in the product, the process, and its implications both local and global. This extension of the peer community may include investigative journalists, lawyers and pressure groups. (Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1993, p. 747)
By extending the peer community to include a much wider range of stakeholders, including those directly affected by the situation in question, both science and solutions are likely to be enhanced, through, for example, an extended sense of what information should be taken into account (‘extended facts’) as well as a more broadly-based treatment of risk and uncertainty.
The extended peer community is a persuasive idea, but it also raises questions. As researchers in the field of mathematics education, we are aware that any understanding and interpretation of complex scientific problems requires some degree of mathematical literacy (see an example of this idea in Barwell, 2013a, on climate change). Participation in an extended peer community clearly demands an ability to interpret texts relating to advanced mathematical ideas (think, for example, of public discussion about climate change, or about restarting nuclear power production in Japan). These texts, even if simplified for a ‘non-scientific’ reader, may include or refer to data, graphs and charts, statistical analysis, probability and risk, use of mathematical models and so on. Moreover, the presentation of these ideas is never neutral; it represents particular positions and interests, and uncertain risks may impact stakeholders differently. Yet to participate in extended peer communities, citizens need to be able to engage with these mathematical texts and to some extent the ideas and techniques to which they refer. The question we explore in this paper, therefore, is: how can citizens be mathematically educated so that they can participate in extended peer communities? (See also the discussion on the emergence and role of citizen science by Wildschut, this issue). In order to keep our discussion focused, we specifically examine the place of uncertainty in post-normal science. Uncertainty is a key feature of post-normal situations. Participation in extended peer communities (and in democratic debates more generally) therefore requires a critical understanding of uncertainty. This theoretical paper advances the limited previous work on post-normal science and mathematics by drawing experiences from previous work together and going more into depth on how uncertainty, as a central feature of post-normal science, can be addressed within mathematics education in a way that supports the development of critical citizens.
Our approach to mathematics education is based on Skovsmose’s (1994) critical mathematics education, which we discuss in the next section. We go on to show how post-normal science and critical mathematics education are partly complementary perspectives, before going into more depth on the topic of uncertainty. We focus on uncertainty since it is a challenging topic, plays a central role in understanding post-normal situations, and is one of the primary reasons that extended peer communities are necessary in such situations. We include excerpts from classroom discussions conducted in Norway to illustrate our ideas.
