Several data-intensive computer simulations take a long time to execute even when using High Performance Computing (HPC) environments. When these simulations dataflows are managed by a parallel Scientific Workflow Management System (SWMS)  [1], they benefit from provenance  [2] and data parallelism among different programs that compose the workflow. Systems like Swift/T [3] and Pegasus [4] are highly scalable SWMS and have shown impressive performance results for many different scientific application domains  [3], [5].
A data analysis challenging problem occurs when users have to navigate and browse thousands of raw data files that result from these data-intensive simulations. Provenance data from SWMS are an important asset in relating these files, but still very far from supporting raw data analytical queries in these file contents. There are several solutions to improve data analysis through query processing on raw data file contents  [6], [7], [8], [9]. They typically parse the raw data file; extract relevant contents; index; and present query support, usually with the help of a Database Management System (DBMS). However, these solutions do not support queries that correlate elements from different raw data files.
Combining provenance support from SWMS and raw data query solutions bring a new vision to scientific data analysis. Current solutions are independent and offline  [10]. This means that users are only able to query provenance or raw data when the execution finishes. In data-intensive computer simulations, workflow executions may take very long to execute (hours or days) even in HPC environments  [5]. Typically, a user tries several different workflow configurations before reaching satisfactory parameters, convergence and error values. This requires a runtime data analysis support, where users may abort or fine tune, and debug their workflow long before it finishes.
In a previous work  [11] we have shown the advantages of adapting loop conditions based on partial data analysis, all during the iterative workflow execution. We used Chiron SWMS  [12] and its data-centric algebra  [13] to query provenance data related to domain data using a specialization of W3C PROV  [14]. The work in  [11] evolved into defining workflow algebraic operations to control and adapt loop conditions  [15]. In a study on uncertainty quantification we anticipated a convergent state and dynamically changed loop control  [15]. Such actions contributed to reduce execution time in several hours. These simulations or other iterative workflows typically take several hours or days to execute. These results led us to improve raw data analysis support into selecting raw data elements from files and relating them to workflow parameters at runtime  [16]. However, our previous solutions suffer from limited raw data access with no direct path to specific regions or elements of raw data files. Users still had to write specific programs to access and analyze the raw data files. Even though direct access to files can be obtained by querying the provenance database, the raw data file content analysis remains isolated from the provenance database.
There are several challenges in providing raw data file analysis, while the workflow is being executed by the SWMS. Performance is critical; the overhead in runtime data analysis support must not harm the parallel workflow execution time. Another challenge is managing the large size of these files with their specific raw data format; they cannot be converted to be inserted (i.e., replicated) into a database for queries. There is also the issue of mapping and accessing specific regions of interest inside the raw data file.
To address these challenges and benefit from SWMS provenance data with raw data analysis support, the following services must be provided during the workflow execution: 
•access to raw data files while they are being generated;•parse raw data to find relevant data;•extract relevant subsets of raw data;•index over data regions of interest;•prepare raw data for queries;•runtime query relating raw data from different files, provenance data, and performance execution data.
In this paper, we present a raw data analysis support to address these challenges. We implemented all these services in an architecture named ARMFUL (Analysis of Raw data from Multiple Files) that can be plugged in SWMS. In its current version, it is implemented in an extended version of Chiron and evaluated in an HPC environment with a real numerical simulation workflow. Experiments with a finite element solver for fluid dynamics  [17] workflow show the performance improvements in runtime queries obtained by the ARMFUL indexing techniques. The results present relevant costs/benefits considering the overheads of managing and indexing raw data, with further gains from powerful runtime data analyses obtained by queries accessing data directly.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 describes a motivating scenario from numerical simulations. Section  3 discusses related work on raw data analysis from the execution of computer simulations. Section  4 defines dataflow concepts with workflow algebra operations to analyze raw data files. Section  5 presents ARMFUL, an architecture to support raw data analysis, which is based on raw data extraction and index generation. Section  5 also presents how we use Chiron SWMS to implement ARMFUL. Section  6 uses the motivating example from Section  2 to present the experimental results. ARMFUL raw data support is evaluated with real computational fluid dynamics workflows, while extracting, indexing and querying raw data from XDMF and HDF5 files. Finally, Section  7 concludes.
