Smile is an influential biometric cue in social interactions, which is also the easiest facial expression to be voluntarily posed [1]. To make a computer better understand human smile, first, substantive smiling facial images or sequences need to be collected, which can be completed by smile detection. Besides, as a fundamental and crucial step of smile analysis, automatic smile detection in unconstrained scenarios provides input data for the following further analyses: smile intensity estimation and spontaneous versus posed (SVP) smile recognition. As is known, smile occurs with different intensities such as “grin” and “chortle”, thus, an effective method of smile intensity estimation can quantify the expression so as to determine the extent of joy. However, smile differs not only in intensity but also in motivation, which brings the diversity of smile. Smile can signal enjoyment, politeness or even can cover other emotions like embarrassment, fear or frustration [2]. So far, 18 different types of simile are identified by Ekman [1] who claimed there might be as many as 50.
A comprehensive smile analysis system is built in this paper, which has wide applications such as interactive systems, video conferences, digital video cameras and patient emotion monitoring. For example, the intensity estimation module is a measuring tool in analysing smile, which can be embedded in video cameras in order to capture the most brilliant smile. People suffering from autism [3] can use SVP smile recognition in social communication to distinguish genuine and deceptive facial expressions. By employing this technique in a video camera, a natural and unforced smile can be captured excluding artificial and posed ones.
In this paper, a comprehensive smile analysis system is proposed, in which three modules are involved including smile detection, smile intensity estimation and SVP smile recognition. Fig. 1 shows a brief framework of our system. First, the basic module of our system is smile detection, through which substantive data of smiling faces can be acquired. To meet the complexity of real-world conditions, smile detection in unconstrained scenarios is focused. The study of this module is explicitly presented in our recent work [4] which won't be repeated here. Second, smile intensities are estimated in terms of different facial subregions rather than merely the mouth region, in which the state-of-the-art method of facial landmark localization is employed. Also, with the computed intensities of different facial subregions, temporal phase segmentation of smile is accordingly carried out. Third, most proposed methods for SVP smile recognition extract only geometry-based features [5], [6], [7], which may lead to the loss of texture information. In fact, texture information plays an important role for smile analysis, especially for SVP smile recognition. Therefore, an appearance feature based on a discriminative learning model (DLM) is proposed by improving the discriminability of Completed Local Binary Patterns from Three Orthogonal Planes (CLBP-TOP). Note that the third module SVP smile recognition is a refined and expanded version of our conference proceedings paper [8]. In this paper, more details are given about this module and different methods of spatiotemporal division are applied.Download : Download high-res image (325KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Brief framework of our smile analysis system.
The rest of paper is organized as follows: Related work is introduced in Section 2. Section 3 presents smile intensity estimation including facial landmark localization and temporal phase segmentation. SVP smile recognition is addressed in Section 4 where the discriminative learning model is also described. Section 5 demonstrates experimental results and analysis, then conclusions of the paper are drawn in Section 6.
