Over the past decades, access of women to information and communications technologies (ICTs) has become a global concern. ICTs are seen as a cornerstone of sustainable and equitable development in both developed and developing nations; however, there is a gender gap in both with fewer women accessing and using ICTs compared to men (Ghadially, 2007, Hilbert, 2011, Mori, 2011). Studying European, Asian and North American countries, Huyer et al. (2005) found that women spend less time accessing ICTs than men. In Africa, women also have less access to ICTs than men, which is especially true for rural women. Reasons for this situation include that they have less time, money control, learning opportunities, and they give priority to others’ needs such as education of their children, business, and social relations (Ghadially, 2007). In addition, Hilbert (2011) found that in developing nations the gender gap in accessibility and use of ICTs increases the existing gender inequalities in the daily life of women in the areas of employment, education, health, and economic sectors. Therefore, this study aims at exploring how ICTs are accessed and utilized by women and men in Rwanda. Specifically, we analyze the factors that contribute to the gender digital divide in Rwanda. In addition, we assess the importance of equal access to ICTs between genders.
Rwanda is a particulary interesting case for studying the access and use of ICTs by men and women, since it is regarded as one of the most gender equal countries in the world, as evidenced in the Global Gender Gap Report, in which Rwanda ranked 5th out of 144 countries (The World Economic Forum, 2016). In addition, ICTs in Rwanda are considered a crucial sector, which can be a backbone for social and economic growth. Unlike most African countries, Rwanda has few natural resources. This limitation necessitates Rwanda to adopt different strategies for development that diverge from those of other countries in the region— strategies whereby ICTs form the cornerstone of developmental plans to transform Rwandan’s economy.
Some of these plans focused on building ICT infrastructures and enormous investments have been made toward this end. The outcomes are highlighted in the fact that a high-speed fiber-optic support network now interconnects all districts of Rwanda, including the border zones of the country. This network also interconnects all government institutions as well as private organizations situated in Kigali (Ntale et al., 2013). In spite of the remarkable progress that has been achieved, the ICT sector continues to face several challenges that impede its development. As highlighted by The United Nations Development Programme (2015), ICTs is a sector where women are most at risk for marginalization due to economic insufficiency, lack of ICT skills and heavy domestic responsibilities. Other hindrances pertain to the high number of the Rwandese population living in rural areas (about 80%, of which women make up 51.8%) where communication infrastructures are limited (The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2015).
Research regarding the accessibility and utilizations of ICTs is not new. In the last decade, studies on ICTs have found, for example, that some forms of economic marginality can be negotiated by technology; thus, for instance, mobile phones may allow fishers to get good prices for their daily catch (Jensen, 2007). Another study also focused on the challenges and potential of ICTs for rural women (Otto, 2006). From the findings of this study, it has been shown that despite great progress in the field of ICTs, a serious geographical and gender digital divide still exists in Kenya. Research on ICTs has also moved away from the core economic impact of its use to examine how ICTs and policies may have deep effects for men and women in relation to employment, health, community development, education and environmental sustainability (Cummings et al., 2005). However, such studies do not focus on factors that hinder equal accessibility and utilization of computer technologies among gender.
This growing number of studies suggest the need to enhance the accessibility and utilization of computer technologies. In the present study, we will, therefore, analyze if there are any differences in the access and use of ICTs by men and women in Rwanda and if this reflects the country’s image as one of the most gender equal countries in the world. Due to the imbalances in the accessibility and utilization of ICTs by men and women and the fact that the majority of studies have focused on other parts of the world (notably the USA, Europe, and Asia), we deemed it important to research this topic in the case of Rwanda. Thus, the main goal of this study is to explore the situation of the utilization and accessibility of computers and the Internet by men and women in Rwanda. Such an approach offers a new perspective and a better understanding on the gender digital divide, which can guide sustainable development policies in the area of gender and ICTs. Our research specifically tries to answer the question whether men and women have similar or different computer and Internet skills, which factors possibly hinder women’s access to computers and the Internet, what opinions respondents had about the equal access to computers and the Internet, and finally whether these results are in accordance with feminst theory claiming that women’s inequal access to computers and the Internet are based on the gender division of labor.
