With the new developments in information and communication technologies (ICT), governments have jumped on the bandwagon to offer online services to their citizens (De Róiste, 2013). The United Nations (UN) E-Government Development report defines E-government (eGov) as “the use of information and communication technologies and its application by the government for the provision of information and public services to the people” (UN E-Government Survey, 2014). eGov services are thought to increase effectiveness and efficiency of government services through improved connectivity and better access (Lin et al., 2011, Sun et al., 2015, Sá et al., 2017). Mauritius, a small island developing state located off the eastern coast of Africa, is the first country in Sub Saharan Africa to obtain a high score on the UN E-Government Development Index for 2014. Further, it is the second top most E-Government ready country in Africa behind Tunisia (UN E-Government Survey, 2014).
Despite having sustained an increase in internet subscriptions and international bandwidth quality (Statistic Mauritius, 2014), the island suffers from a lack of participation in eGov services. Shalini (2009) suggests that the e-readiness index fares poorly when it comes to assessing citizens’ willingness to adopt eGov services and concludes that “Mauritius is e-ready but the Mauritians are not”. This presents a severe challenge to governments and effective strategies should be used to improve engagement (UN E-Government Survey, 2014). Furthermore, governments have been neglecting the sociological part of this technology, contributing to the lack of adoption of eGov among their citizens (Savoldelli et al., 2014). The citizens’ uptake of these services remains disappointingly low in both developed as well as developing countries (Zhang et al., 2011, Tan et al., 2008).
Since the success of eGov services depends on citizens’ willingness to adopt these services (Shareef et al., 2011), a lack of eGov adoption hampers the realisation of benefits (Zhao et al., 2014). This results in an unsuccessful service and is a waste of tax payer’s money (Ozkan and Kanat, 2011). No gains in efficiency will result if no documents are processed online (Savoldelli et al., 2014). Moreover, Venkatesh et al. (2008) state that for any technology to be fruitful, it has to be used. Research on this topic is still at its infancy (Shareef et al., 2011) where the views of the citizens are not fully studied (Van Deursen et al., 2006). Moreover, Lee et al. (2011) argue that few studies have examined the decision to adopt eGov services by their citizens and there is considerable room for improvement (Zhang et al., 2014). Studying eGov adoption can lead governments to better understand their citizens’ needs and eventually lead to a successful delivery of online services (Ozkan and Kanat, 2011).
In this vein, this research seeks to investigate the factors that affect adoption of eGov services in Mauritius. Hence, we ask the following question in that respect: What factors influence the intention to use eGov services in Mauritius? The rest of this paper is organised as follows: in the next section, we discuss eGov adoption and eGov services in Mauritius as well as in developing and African states. We present the research model and hypotheses. The research methodology and data collection process are described. Next, the data analysis and a discussion of the findings are presented. Finally, implications, limitations and conclusions are provided.
