Forensic science offers an interdisciplinary approach that provides insights that can be applied to questions of law. This has traditionally been manifested in a range of fields that address directly individualising (such as fingermarks, DNA) or non-directly individualising (such as glass, paint, fibres, soils) forms of evidence. Forensic science has come under severe scrutiny for a number of reasons, with the underlying philosophical approach [1], [2] and the validity of techniques [3] being significant areas of contention. In the light of these issues, the current situation of forensic science has been the subject of discussion, and at the heart of these debates is the fundamental issue of the identity of the discipline, and the aim, scope and capabilities of forensic science.
There have been significant discussions addressing the issue of identifying the current paradigm of forensic science and coming to a consensus of the nature of the discipline. The articulation and exploration of what has arguably become the dominant model of ‘forensics’ in contrast to that of ‘forensic science’ [4], [5] is one of the key issues for reaching that consensus. Within ‘forensics’ the focus is predominantly on how the parent disciplines (such as chemistry, biology, computer science, geology) can assist in the exploitation of evidence within the criminal justice system. The crime scene is considered to be a distinct activity generally addressed by the police in an operational and processing capacity [4]. This paper has its foundations in the argument that there needs to be a wholesale return to the roots of ‘forensic science’, in a manner that enables the discipline to be a true scientific endeavour rather than solely a series of mechanical and standard technical operations. By offering robust, transparent and appropriate problem solving approaches to the whole forensic science process (crime scene to court), rather than focussing almost exclusively on the technical analysis and classification of exhibits, it is possible to regain the potential that lies in ‘forensic science’. Such an argument is not new [4], [6], [7], [8] but engagement with how we can regain ‘forensic science’ from the, more recently, dominant ‘forensics’ approach is imperative for setting the future course of the forensic science discipline.
It is important to acknowledge that forensic science is an intersecting discipline that lies at the nexus of practice, science, law and policy. There are multiple actors and voices that contribute to where the agenda for forensic science comes from, and that sets out what that agenda is. This affects what is being sought in practice and influences where efforts are channelled in research endeavours. This leads to large scale and overarching complexity as forensic science seeks to operate within the intersecting domains of practice, policy/law and research. Yet more complexity is present when the backdrop of cultural, economic and political factors are taken into account, which impinge on each domain to greater or lesser degrees at different times and places [9]. The practice, policy and research domains each have different aims, structures, and individual and corporate expertise, and there are therefore multiple calls made on forensic science. If we are to ‘define what it can deliver and with what limitations’ [8:102] and focus resources productively and effectively to enable that delivery, we must articulate conceptually what forensic science needs to achieve. Such a conceptual understanding will enable the identification and development of the approaches that bring together these different domains effectively in order to deliver robust, transparent, accurate, problem solving forensic science.
This paper therefore seeks to present a conceptual model that articulates a holistic, problem solving forensic science approach for the use of trace evidence in forensic reconstructions. From the model it is possible to offer insights into the pathways forward that will enable forensic science to deliver evidence based forensic reconstructions in a manner that incorporates the strengths of the intersecting domains and meets the diverse needs of each of those domains. Ultimately the conceptualisation of what forensic science is seeking to achieve with regard to trace evidence, will offer insights for setting forensic science on a course to future growth and development that is grounded in its traditional routes of scientific endeavour to assist the justice system.
