Researchers increasingly rely on Big Data, Computational Data Science, and High Performance Computing (HPC) to solve problems within scientific domains and explore them in new ways [10]. However, it is often difficult to effectively apply these approaches in practice. They draw heavily from domains including computer science and applied mathematics, and most researchers are not substantially invested in them [2]. Moreover, petascale and exascale datasets require new data science techniques to process and manage. Many practitioners have not encountered these new techniques in their studies or work [10].
University training is largely offered through a multidisciplinary Computational Science discipline, or as specializations in existing domains such as computational chemistry, computational physics, etc. [2]. These offerings cannot keep up with current demand, or the rapid changes in technologies and practices. Students are not entering the field with enough real-world skills, and there aren’t enough programs to rapidly affect a change in the talent gap.
To overcome this challenge, we envision to cultivate an online community focused narrowly on data science and computing in biomedicine, and fostering high quality, well informed, and freely accessible knowledge. Our community, the Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative (BBDTC), targets the development of technical skills as well as education. Our effort will assist educators in developing and communicating best practices for content development and deployment, along with adaptive learning, assessment metrics, and testing practices.
Our educational material not only includes traditional video and text but all of the data and tools required to participate in our courses or learn independently. Tools come preinstalled and preconfigured on virtual machines that can be run on a local workstation, or in Amazon EC2 cloud. Users can adapt existing material to their needs, by assembling parts of multiple courses into their playlists. Our training material is accessible to a broad community of biomedical researchers and students, including those without access to high performance computing facilities.
By focusing on technical training as well as education, providing real-world datasets, and presenting packaged toolkits that are simple enough to learn yet powerful enough to perform real work, BBDTC differentiates itself from other online learning providers.
Unlike university courses, BBDTC’s online presence makes it available to more content providers as well as more students. Being a community-driven resource allows it to evolve quickly and be more responsive to user needs.
This work is an extension of the BBDTC framework discussed in [9]. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we describe the software architectures of our framework, its user interface, our repository, its playlist builder, and how it integrates with other important software platforms. In Section 3, we define our user scenarios. In Section 4, we cover our current usage statistics. In Section 5, we outline related work. In Section 6 we conclude, and discuss future work.
