Since 2009 multilateral and government weather and climate modellers have argued for a shift in focus from climate science research towards applied climate services in aid of adaptation. Climate services1 are “easily accessible and timely scientific data and information about climate that help people make informed decisions in their lives, businesses, and communities” (National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, 2011). A climate service can contain simple information such as historical data sets or more complex products such as climate and weather predictions, computer programs, or decision-making platforms. Key to climate services is a focus on decision-making, such that the products must be scientifically credible but also technically accessible to a wide variety of decision-makers. In addition, climate services should be on-demand for individuals, business, and governments to use. Accordingly, transforming climate science into ‘actionable information’ is understood as integral to adapting to climate change through sector policies and plans (World Meteorological Organization, 2011).
For example, the Fiji Meteorological Service collects and stores daily weather data, and can provide a range of ‘packaged’, ‘on-demand’ services including annual and monthly climate summaries and climate outlooks. In addition to facilitating daily forecasts, The Fiji Meteorological Service generates additional information for the sugar industry and electricity providers, with the objective that they might adapt their planning to suit anticipated climate conditions. According to one analysis (World Meteorological Organization, 2011, 156–60), the Fiji Meteorological Service has successfully and innovatively linked public and private sector interests, and, through an El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Update and other tools, is able to provide client-focused services that address the country’s development and industrial needs. The ENSO Update is an example of a climate service.
This article examines the production, circulation, and consumption of climate services. It focuses specifically on products intended to assist adaptation decisions and investments in the Pacific region. Much of the existing scholarship on the science-policy interface argues for the creation of climate services in order to address a “persistent gap between production and use” of scientific information in environmental decision-making (Kirchoff et al., 2013, 393). These proponents argue that useful, co-produced, or actionable products can help inform climate change adaptation policies, projects and investments, something that is vitally necessary given anticipated climate impacts. Although this science-policy literature acknowledges that there are few examples of climate services informing specific adaptations (e.g. Meadow et al., 2015, Brasseur and Gallardo, 2016), these advocates remain ‘future positive’ (see Mosse, 2005), diagnosing the need for better products and better relationships between producers and consumers.
In contrast, this article brings the existing literature on climate services into conversation with critical geographical scholarship on the neoliberalization and commercialization of science and environmental governance. In doing so, the article builds on recent research in economic geography and political ecology concerning the logics, conditions, and effects of marketization (Christophers, 2014a, Christophers, 2014b, Dempsey and Suarez, 2016). I will argue that the failures in the climate service model – identified in the existing science-policy literature as well as the cases outlined below – do not stem from incomplete or poorly conducted engagements between service providers and decision-makers. Instead, I demonstrate that these failures emerge from tensions that arise from commercialized attempts to produce useful science. In its current construction, the need for ‘useful’ science is joined to appeals for valuation methodologies, unleashing demand, and competition between producers. This commercialized and instrumental narrative governs the logic of providing climate services for consumers. Focusing on attempts by Australian climate science and adaptation programs to create ‘actionable’ science for use in decision-making in the Pacific Island countries of Kiribati and Solomon Islands, I will demonstrate that these commercial logics create tensions. In particular, the article charts three tensions that emerge directly from attempts to bound dynamic and fluctuating climate science as circulating ‘immutable mobiles’ (Latour, 1987) – packages that are able to travel intact, and in a legible form, from sites of service production to sites of consumption in adaptation decision making.
The argument proceeds in the following manner. Section two introduces the existing literature concerned with climate services, describing the mechanisms proposed by advocates for science to better address adaptation to future climate change. Given the commercialized and instrumental rhetoric and practices of the climate service business models, I introduce critical geographical scholarship concerned with neoliberalized and marketized environmental and climate governance. Section three outlines the methodological approach, situating this research alongside claims about the powerful role that science, projections, and models have played in responding to climate change. I also here introduce the ecosystem of climate service provision in the Pacific region, the climate prediction tools that were studied, and how the research was undertaken. Then, section four provides a description of the commercialized business model, followed by three cases of breakdowns, or failures, in the circulation of climate services that stem from this model: the trade-off between relationships and circulating products, disagreements about downscaling and uncertainty, and the disjuncture scientists feel about maintaining objective and entrepreneurial identities. Finally, section five concludes by discussing the stakes of efforts to commercialize science for adaptation.
