1.1. Technological advances for decision support in environmental resources managementDevelopments in virtual technologies for data collection, processing, transmission, and visualisation provide an increasing opportunity to create and exchange data, information, and knowledge for decision support in environmental management (Beven et al., 2012). For clarity and consistency this article first establishes the terminological differences: “In computational systems data are the coded invariances. In human discourse data are that which is stated, for instance, by informants in an empirical study. Information is related to meaning or human intention. In computational systems information is the contents of databases, the web, etc. In human discourse systems information is the meaning of statements as they are intended by the speaker/writer and understood/misunderstood by the listener/reader. Knowledge is embodied in humans as the capacity to understand, explain and negotiate concepts, actions and intentions (Zins, 2007)”.The Internet in particular, allows for an unprecedented level of information-integration, providing the possibility to combine new and existing data and technologies (interoperability) and cope with growing resources and number of users (scalability) through the adoption of distributed systems (cloud computing). This evolution facilitates access to existing scientific and official datasets, for instance through standards such as the Open Geospatial Consortium's, Sensor Model Language, Sensor Web Enablement and Sensor Observation Service (Vitolo et al., 2015). It has also promoted non-conventional data generation activities, such as crowdsourcing, social networks, online surveys, unofficial data repositories, and citizen-science monitoring (Buytaert et al., 2014, Georgiadou et al., 2011). These sources may provide complementary information resources, particularly for data-scarce areas. Although some of the information may be affected by a higher level of uncertainty, their uptake within decision making processes is well-aligned with the principles of post-normal science (Funtowicz et al., 1992).The exponential growth of these information sources and related technologies has implications for the way in which they are leveraged by environmental decision support systems (EDSS) to support growing public and private decision-making needs. Here, we define EDSS as computer-aided environmental information systems that support unstructured and semi-structured decision-making in environmental management contexts (McIntosh et al., 2011). The anatomy of these decision support systems typically contains three components: (1) databases, (2) analytical processing algorithms (e.g. environmental models), and (3) a user interface. The latter allows users (i.e. the decision makers) to interact with the information but typically hides the technological complexities.
1.2. Environmental decision support systems in a polycentric governance contextThe diversification of information sources and availability implies their democratisation for decision support across multiple governance actors and scales (Buytaert et al., 2016). The idea of information democratisation has gained particular significance as part of debates on re-positioning the role of science in society through transdisciplinary processes of engagement with science and stronger involvement of citizens (Scott and Gibbons, 2001, Nowotny, 2005). However, in reality, EDSS solutions continue to be strongly single-actor oriented and science-driven (first versus second generation “Environmental Virtual Observatories” in (Karpouzoglou et al., 2016a)). As such, they are more closely aligned with monocentric (centralised) and technocratic governance structures that are incompatible with high institutional and geographical diversity (Lankford and Hepworth, 2010). The availability and access to information (Ransbotham, 2015) and environmental decision support for the wider range of actors involved remain impeded by lack of understanding of institutional, cultural, and geographical differences. As a result, there is risk that environmental governance processes can become dominated by the better-educated or politically-connected. Political science scholarship highlights that the chances of a particular policy option being adopted in an environmental governance context may largely be determined by the extent to which powerful actors see that option as meeting their interests and/or values (Underdal, 2010).This has implications for how we conceive of power relations in the context of monocentric and polycentric governance arrangements. The classic monocentric approach ultimately assumes highly centralised forms of power (often concentrated around the State). However, the polycentric governance model attempts to capture and describe a more distributed model of power which makes more explicit linkages with local actors, everyday resource management practices, informal institutions and indigenous knowledge systems (Pahl-Wostl, 2009, Lankford and Hepworth, 2010, Underdal, 2010, Boelens et al., 2015). A polycentric institutional arrangement has been defined as “a mosaic of nested subunits” of decision making rather than a fully integrated, hierarchical whole (Lankford and Hepworth, 2010). It recognizes a high degree of heterogeneity over a large geographic domain in the production and consumption of public goods (environmental resources) as well as policy preferences (Ostrom, 2009). Such a model is more supportive of bottom-up approaches to decision making that improves the voice of the public in matters that impact them directly (Arnstein, 1969, International Association for Public Participation, 2002, Irvin and Stansbury, 2004) and can ultimately enhance the ability to cope better with change and uncertainty (Ostrom et al., 1961, Huitema et al., 2009, Huntjens et al., 2012).The polycentric model has gained significance in adaptive governance scholarship, for example, as part of addressing more explicitly the interaction between actors operating at different levels of governance but who may have different and overlapping spheres of responsibility in terms of policy and management (Folke et al., 2005). Adaptive governance brings emphasis on integrating ecosystem dynamics with management structures, fostering experimentation in policy design as well as anticipating surprise as a tool for learning (Gunderson, 1999, Karpouzoglou et al., 2016b). In the discussion of polycentricity and adaptive governance, the links with information management are still less well developed as compared to the understanding of institutional interaction (Lebel et al., 2006, Buytaert et al., 2016). In this article we therefore propose polycentricity as a useful concept for strengthening the understanding of both data and institutional diversity and how this understanding may inform a new approach to EDSS (Table 1).Table 1. Types of knowledge and areas of knowledge with high potential for decision support, adapted from (International Institute for Environment and Development, 2014).Type of knowledgeDescriptionExampleEDSS potentialTarget usersTacit knowledgeKnowledge that the knowledge holder is not aware of and is expressed through experiencePeer-peer exchanges; radio; tv; mobile messaging (text, voice, multimedia)High potential (but underutilised despite opportunities to address local scale management goals)Small scale or subsistence farmers, pastoralists, governmental officers, NGO workersIndigenous, traditional knowledgeLocal knowledge unique to a culture or society that is passed down in communitiesOral community historiesIntermediate potential (but difficult to operationalise)Communities of elders, village councils, community religious and spiritual leadersParticipatory, citizens science knowledgeKnowledge held by citizens based on their daily livesCitizens perceptions of climate change impacts, citizen monitoringHigh potential (some utilisation but orientated towards scientific data harvesting)Small scale farmers, agro-pastoralists, citizen science volunteersProject/programme knowledgeGenerated from implementation of a programme or development projectProject briefings; online databasesHigh potential (some utilisation, easier to codify and integrate?)Development programme administrators; international donors; NGOs, politicians, bureaucratsResearch knowledgeAcquired through scientific investigationEmpirical data; published literature;High potential (over utilised but little spread outside scientific communities)Scientists; scientific knowledge brokers; Policy makers
1.3. Tailoring EDSS: insights from human-computer interaction researchDeveloping EDSS for organisations is a well-recognized problem that is not unique to the environmental management application context (McIntosh et al., 2011). Many development projects are either cancelled before completion or unsuccessful (Díez and McIntosh, 2009). Research continues to find ways to improve EDSS solutions and in meeting user requirements, early participatory engagement and the use of prototyping is found to be a recurring theme across more successful approaches (Díez and McIntosh, 2009, Sieber et al., 2013). Yet a focus on task-based usability may not reveal what motivates and demotivates users from EDSS use (Cooper et al., Cronin); furthermore, the EDSS ‘clients’ are often specific groups of users without consideration of their potential links with other information providers and beneficiaries in a larger network of actors (i.e. polycentric decision making). Hence there is scope for bridging the gap between a well-developed tradition of co-design of software (Sieber et al., 2013) with participatory environmental management (Reed, 2008).Although technologies evolve and become obsolete, the psychological basis behind successful human-computer interactions (HCI) in past products remains relevant in guiding the design of future technologies (Grudin, 2011). Among the guiding principles are cognition, perceptions, mental models, attention and memory (Ebert et al., 2012, Schnall et al., 2012, Wickens et al., 2004) - and customization. As to the latter, a design has to be sensitive to the users’ preferences, the environments they operate in, and their value systems (Callahan, 2005, Stone et al., 2006, Ishak et al., 2012, Shin, 2015, Alostath et al., 2011). HCI design prioritizes how individuals and cultures interpret, understand and respond to different tools (e.g. software, new information, or methods), build relations and define context for using these tools, and how they are exposed to different information resources, and share resources and information (Sedlmair et al., 2012). It also seeks to prevent information overload, for example through embedded computation and interactive information retrieval that is adaptive to personal learning strategies (Ebert et al., 2012, Ruthven, 2008). It is thus linked to research areas such as scientific visualisation, data mining, and information design, which push the envelope of what can be communicated with data, and in doing so, open new opportunities for extending their outreach and impact for non-technical audiences (Grainger et al., 2016, Karpouzoglou et al., 2016a, Ebert et al., 2012, Spiegelhalter et al., 2011, Vitos et al., 2013, Zooniverse, 2015).HCI design seeks initially to build usable products, but increasingly a good user experience needs to be taken into account for the product creation to be justified and its use to be sustainable [User eXperience (UX) design (Kuniavsky, 2010). The premise is that a usable product is not necessarily a valuable product and the user's definition of what constitutes good experience needs to be the starting point. As a concept, there is no clear scientific consensus yet of what constitutes a good user experience as experience is by definition intangible, subjective, and contextual; however as a method, there is a clear aim to design the experience before the product (Law et al., 2014, Lallemand et al., 2015). The UX design method draws heavily on formative user research and user interactions with early, low-fidelity prototypes of the technology for creative inspirations using a rich and evolving design toolkit (IDEO.org, 2015). Although the method has been well tested in commercial products e.g. groceries shopping websites, banking facilities, design of TV apps, tablet operating systems, and smart mobile phones, we identify a broader potential for its application in defining and crystallising in an iterative, participatory way, the elements that constitute useful (relevant), usable (intuitive), and exchangeable (institutionally unobstructed) information for decision support for different types of actors within a polycentric governance arrangement.In this paper we describe our new user-driven approach, which departs from standard software application design models such as Waterfall (Royce, 1987) and Agile (Martin, 2003) in the diversity of users, sources of environmental information and knowledge, decision-making analysis, and forms of EDSS tools considered. We begin by proposing the design criteria (section 2.1) for polycentric decision support system development, and follow with an elaboration of the methodology in two parts. First, we describe an active field-based discovery phase to elicit a better picture of decision-making structures and processes and existing experiences with access to information (Section 2.2). Second, we set out a participatory design phase of the decision support system that leverages the interdisciplinary nature of the research team through rapid prototyping and testing (Section 2.3). We illustrate the method (section 3) through a case study within the context of upstream/downstream water users in Lima, Peru, who are adapting to water scarcity at the community as well as at the regional decision making scale. As such, the case provides an excellent test-bed for developing a participatory design experiment for evaluating how EDSS could be designed to map onto existing multi-actor interaction and promote the creation and exchange of useful, useable information at and across different scales. In the final section, we critically reflect upon the merits and limitations of the approach.
