Breast cancer constitutes the leading cause of cancer-related death among women worldwide [1]. Breast cancer diagnosis has been addressed in the past few decades by many modern medical imaging technologies, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which try to detect the disease at its early stages when it is more vulnerable to existing treatments [2].
It is well known from a large number of studies that MRI is the most sensitive method in detecting breast lesions. It is more sensitive than digital mammography in the detection of both high grade and low grade tumors [3]. Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE)-MRI with contrast medium (gadolinium) constitutes a very promising protocol for boosting up the sensitivity in breast cancer detection. DCE-MRI produces time intensity curves, whose shapes have been found to correlate with the nature of the suspected lesions [4]. The shape of the curve is formed according to the washout time of the contrast agent through the vascular system of the breast. When the lesion enhancement is progressive, a type I curve is produced suggesting a benign case. In the presence of washout, a type III curve is formed, which implies the presence of malignancy. When there is an initial uptake of the contrast medium followed by plateau, a type II curve is produced which raises concerns of malignancy [5], [6]. The sensitivity of the DCE-MRI protocol has been shown to be more than 90%, however, the specificity is still debatable (37–97%) [7].
Thus, the vascularity of suspected breast regions, which affects the washout time of the contrast agent, is of crucial importance since it can be correlated with the tumor's malignancy status. In order to further boost up the sensitivity and improve the low specificity of the DCE-MRI protocol, research studies have proposed additional analyses of the DCE-MRI images, which aim to quantify the vascularity of suspected breast regions in an accurate and reproducible manner. Such methods have investigated means for vascularity quantification by visual inspection using scoring systems, such as the Sardanelli et al. scale [8], [9], which are based on the manual measurement of the number, the length and the conspicuity of the vessels with the aid of image analysis software. In this way, cases may be classified from low (score 0) to high (score 3) vascularity. These assessments have been shown to correlate with malignancy and have been used by many research studies as an additional, to the washout curves, predictive feature [10], [11], [12]; however, they are dependent upon the operator's visual and software mastery and are time consuming. Only recently, methods have been presented towards by-passing the visual/manual processing by utilizing semi-automated estimation of the vascularity [13] and the parenchyma [14] of the breast.
The aim of this study was twofold: first to design an image processing methodology to estimate the vascularity of the breast region in DCE-MRI images and second to investigate whether the differences in the composition/texture and vascularity of normal, benign and malignant breasts may serve as potential indicators regarding the presence of the disease. To the best of the authors' knowledge, such a comparative analysis of the textural and vascular changes that appear between normal, benign and malignant breasts in DCE-MRI images has not been previously published.
