A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) in the ubiquitous Internet of Things (IoT) domain having constrained nodes that are spatially scattered over large areas like building complexes, agricultural fields or an electrical grid requires some unique routing capabilities. The small radio range of such sensor devices mandate the need for a hop by hop packet transmission mechanism to gather and guide the data packets to intended destinations. With new concepts like edge computing and the need for bidirectional communication in IoT networks, nodes within the WSNs are required to directly communicate with each other. For the sustainability of the low power network, there is a great need for the routing protocol to operate in a sleek manner with less control overhead and energy utilization.
Routing Protocol for Low Power Lossy Network (RPL) protocol has been designed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) in response to the specifications stated for LLNs in the RFC6550 [1]. The aim was to design a routing protocol that can empower large number of constrained devices to communicate with each other on top of the Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) [2], [3]. RPL forms routes by creating a directed acyclic graph (DAG) in which nodes select a parent with the goal of orienting itself to the DAG root. An objective function (OF) is designed for the protocol to select forwarders with the help of a metric [4]. The minimum rank with hysteresis objective function (MRHOF) uses ETX (Expected Transmission Count) as metric and objective function 0 (OF0) uses plain hop count as metric. This paper studies MRHOF objective function and addresses the same as simply OF. Rank is calculated for all eligible parents using the ETX metric and a parent with minimum rank is selected as forwarder. When packet delivery fails with the previously selected parent, it switches to the next best forwarder.
The survey by Ala Al-Fuqaha et al. sees RPL [5] as an enabler for smart sensors to collaborate directly without human involvement and deliver a new class of IoT applications. RPL is expected to interconnect a multitude of low power devices through multi-hop mesh network [6], [7] in smart cities. RPL’s suitability for Advanced Metering Infrastructure(AMI) networks was studied in the papers [8], [9], [10]. IoT networks in urban cities are expected to have hundreds of nodes in close proximity and the network formed would be dense with an uneven concentration of nodes. With new models like IoT Data Marketplace, the traffic load on IoT networks could increase in the future. This study aims to explore the robustness of the RPL’s path selection in such cases of large and dense networks. Nodes that are far off the root node are found to suffer from frequent course changes than the nodes having shorter paths. The presence of multiple neighbours at lower levels of the DAG tree, link failures and a high data rate increases this volatility.
To the best of our knowledge the research on RPL link estimation improvements concentrated only on the immediate neighbourhood — the link between a child and parent node. We propose an alternate methodology for path selection by factoring the connectivity information of a parent node along 2-walks in the upward direction and proceed to show that this metric is effective compared to ETX for networks with longer paths. The global neighbourhood connectivity of a parent node is quantified by the drop in laplacian energy of the network when that node is removed from the network. The next section provides a summary of the past relevant research on RPL and the subsequent section outlines RPL’s existing path selection strategy. Section 4 introduces the concept of laplacian energy and Section 5 explains in detail, the proposed L-RPL methodology. Later, Section 6 elaborates on simulation, testbed setup, results and their interpretations. The final section concludes the paper with key findings.
