Brazil is the world's largest orange producer with 19,077,572 tons produced in 2013 (FAO, 2013). The country also has large orange juice processing companies (Cutrale and Citrovita-Citrosuco), in addition to being a major producer and international exporter of orange juice. Despite the importance of this agrifood chain for the Brazilian economy, since the mid-2000s, the citrus industry has been subject to high price volatility, a shift toward industrial concentration of juice processing companies and problems related to increased pests and diseases in the orchards. These issues have increased the pressure for efficiency gains in citrus production, which has ultimately resulted in the departure of thousands of farmers from the activity. In fact, the number of citrus farmers fell from 15,000 in 2001 to 10,100 in 2013, and area planted with oranges dropped by an average rate of 1.25% per year in the same period (CONAB, 2013, FAO, 2013).
The economic sustainability of citrus farms in tough market conditions (low output prices, commercial conflicts and increasing institutional pressures for quality and environmental sustainability) is strongly dependent on their efficiency and productivity levels. Differences in the adoption of new production and management technologies are among the main factors that explain differences in the efficiency and productivity of citrus farms in Brazil. Citrus farmers who operate their farms with high total productivity of the factors and positive profitability are characterized by more intense adoption of new production and management technologies (Carrer et al., 2015).
Carrer et al. (2015) used stochastic frontier analysis (SFA) to estimate farms’ efficiency indexes and the effects of FMIS adoption on these indexes. Data from 98 citrus farms of the state of São Paulo were used in their econometric analysis. They found that the adoption of Farm Management Information Systems (FMIS) had a positive and statistically significant effect on the technical efficiency of farms. The core argument of the study was that these technologies reduce informational problems and improve decisions related to planning, control and coordination of production processes, resulting in better use of production factors and higher technical efficiency levels. The authors also suggested a future investigation into personal, social and economic variables that explain the adoption of FMIS by Brazilian citrus farmers.
This paper aims to identify the determining factors in decisions of citrus farmers on adoption of computers and Farm Management Information Systems (FMIS) using the same database of Carrer et al. (2015). Different from them, the determinants of adoption of computers and FMIS are analyzed in this paper; instead of reproduce their analysis of the determinants of farms’ technical efficiency. Their dependent variable was a proxy for “efficiency”, and the set of explanatory variables includes adoption of FMIS. In this paper, the dependent variable is adoption of FMIS, while personal, social and economic characteristics are explanatory variables. The econometric models are also different. To our knowledge, this is the first study to consider factors affecting farmers’ adoption of FMIS in Brazilian citrus industry. More generally, there are still few studies on the adoption of FMIS for Brazilian agriculture, which reinforces the importance and innovative character of this paper.
The data were collected by means of personal interviews with owners and managers of 98 citrus farms in the state of São Paulo, where 74% of Brazilian orange production takes place. São Paulo Research Foundation provided financial resources for this survey. Logit and count data (Poisson regression) models were estimated. In the logit model, the value of the dependent variable is 0 (non-adoption) or 1 (adoption), which enables identification of the determining factors of the likelihood of adoption of computers for improve decision-making process by citrus farmers. In the count data model, the value of the dependent variable ranges from 0 to 7, enabling identification of the determining factors for adoption and intensity of use of FMIS.
The contribution of this paper is twofold: it provides empirical evidence on the role of personal, social and economic determinants of adoption of FMIS; and explain the low diffusion and heterogeneity in the adoption of FMIS by rural properties in Brazil. Furthermore, few studies have examined the adoption and diffusion of computers and FMIS in Brazilian agriculture.
Section 2 of the paper contains a literature review on the adoption of management technologies in agriculture. Section 3 presents the analytical framework, the description of the sample and the variables used in the econometric analysis. The fourth section presents and discusses the results of the econometric analyses of the determinants of adoption of computers and FMIS. Finally, Section 5 contains final remarks.
