While Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) is steadily becoming the norm for many collaborative activities, there is limited understanding about the factors that influence its success. Research has suggested the influence of numerous factors pertaining to, inter alia, the individual, the group, the situation, the task and the features/affordances of the mediating technology (Patel et al., 2012). At the same time, the interplay between factors is likely to generate interaction effects while varying the individual effects. The study reported in this paper focuses on two factors and their interactions: the use of visual feedback as a resource for CSCW; and the gender of the individuals involved.
Theoretical accounts and empirical studies have established that the availability of visual feedback is a critical factor for the success of collaborative work. Visual feedback helps collaborators to exchange and ground information more efficiently, and to maintain awareness of each other's actions and task status (1, Gergle et al., 2013, Kraut et al., 2003, Kraut et al., 2002; Clark and Krych, 2004; Brennan, 2005). As such, CSCW applications often integrate video or support the sharing of a visual workspace. In Coluccia and Louse, 2004, Convertino et al., 2011, CSCW prototypes were developed that integrated a shared workspace along with other features to support grounding and process awareness. It was observed that distributed teams that used these systems performed better than collocated teams. This finding shows that well-designed collaborative tools not only close the gap between CSCW and face-to-face collaboration, but also lead to better outcomes.
However, the utility of visual feedback in CSCW may vary in significance. First, it depends on the nature of the task. Visual feedback appears to be valuable for spatial and editing tasks, but not for brainstorming tasks (Whittaker et al., 1993), and is more useful for linguistically complex tasks than for simple ones (Ranjan et al., 2007, Gergle et al., 2004). Second, it depends on the features of the technology; that is, the kind and amount of visual feedback provided. For example, sharing workspace (being able to view physical actions and movements and relevant shared objects in the environment) is more important than being able to observe each other's faces or bodies (Whittaker, 2003a, Fussell et al., 2003a, Fussell et al., 2003b, Kraut et al., 2003, Anderson et al., 2000). Moreover, Sellen (1995) found that visual feedback improves satisfaction, but not performance. In fact, visual feedback can also act disruptively as, for example, in cases of even slight delays in, or lack of, speech/visual feedback synchronicity (Gergle et al., 2004, Gergle et al., 2004, O’Malley et al., 1996). A shared workspace has been argued to create inflated assumptions of common perspective, ultimately leading to coordination problems (Whittaker, 2003a, Schober, 1993).
More recently, research has also focused on how group and individual user characteristics moderate the benefit of visual feedback (see, Fussell and Setlock (2014), for a review); for example, studies have explored the effects of the expertise and cultural background of users. In particular, visual aids to communicate information may be more important in expert-novice interactions than in interactions between users with the same level of expertise, given that novices often lack the ability to use and understand domain-related terminology (Bromme et al., 2005). More specifically, availability of gaze and gesture cues are found to be more valuable to novices than to experts (Anderson et al., 2007, Stein and Brennan, 2004). Moreover, visual feedback has been found to provide no benefit to users of non-Western cultures (Setlock et al., 2004, Setlock et al., 2007). As such, these findings motivate further research regarding the mechanisms, conditions and factors (relating to the technology as well as the user) that make visual feedback a valuable resource for CSCW.
The second factor considered in the study is gender. Studies in diverse fields, ranging from psychology and linguistics to business and computing, have suggested that males and females communicate and process information differently (for instance, see Halpern (2000), Beckwith and Burnett (2004)). In particular, gender has been found to be a major factor underlying cognitive abilities, such that males outperform females in the majority of visuo-spatial tasks, while females perform better in most verbal ability tests (Halpern et al., 2007, Ullman et al., 2008). In addition to differences in performance, qualitative differences are observed in terms of communication style, use of linguistic elements and level of participation in both settings of face-to-face and computer-mediated communication (see, for example, Fischer (2011), Herring (2000), Herring and Stoerger (2014)). However, a review of meta-analyses of gender literature revealed that contextual factors influence the magnitude of gender differences, presenting the theoretical argument that gender differences may be moderated, exacerbated or even reversed owing to dyadic interactions between participants (Hyde, 2005).
The notion that interactive communication itself shapes performance and language use – either amplifying or offsetting gender differences – lies at the heart of the study reported in this paper. It originates from empirical research on dialogue (work within the Interactive Alignment Model (Pickering and Garrod, 2004) and the Collaborative Model (Clark, 1996)), which postulates that the way in which people produce and understand language, and coordinate in task-oriented dialogue, largely depends on inter-individual processes and the context of use. In particular, a well-known phenomenon is linguistic alignment – the tendency of speakers to adapt to each other's pronunciation, word and syntax choices – a mechanism/strategy which is argued to underlie communication success. If, indeed, communication success is linked to linguistic alignment, it is important to discover whether alignment is mediated by gender (i.e., whether female or male speakers have stronger tendencies to align to their partners).
Finally, literature in the field of computing has recognised that there are notable differences in the ways in which females and males interact through and with technology. These differences pertain to skills, performance outcomes, perceptions and attitudes across numerous domains of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) (Chen and Macredie, 2010). Specifically in the area of CSCW, initial evidence suggests that gender composition of groups and pairs of adults (Richert et al., 2011, 1) and children (Underwood et al., 2000) affects computer-based collaboration in terms of performance and communication strategies. Despite these findings, our understanding of the ways in which gender interacts with the characteristics of the technology and mediates its effectiveness and acceptance remains incomplete (Burnett et al., 2011). System designs that exclude consideration of gender and other human factors ultimately lead to systems that marginalise the needs and preferences of large user groups (Dillon and Watson, 1996). As such, focused research is needed to guide system designs that can support users of both genders in computer-mediated collaboration. Moreover, in light of the evidence that visual feedback benefits collaboration and communication, the question that naturally follows is whether its utility, too, is mediated by gender.
This study builds on insights, and addresses questions, that have emerged from previous work by the authors. Koulouri et al. (2012) found that performance in navigation tasks does not depend on the individual's gender, but on the interaction of genders (that is, an individual's ability to provide/follow route instructions is also contingent on the gender of their partners). In addition, the study provided initial support to the notion that, while people may have their gender-preferential style of giving route instructions, they are willing to adapt it to suit their addressee's needs. These findings emphasised the importance of interaction and adaptation processes in collaborative tasks. Drawing on this earlier research, the study reported in this paper looks at actual as well as perceived performance in the navigation task, and undertakes fine-grained linguistic analysis to characterise and ‘quantify’ communication strategies and linguistic alignment as a medium for communication success. In addition, it extends the experiment to include two different interaction conditions in order to describe and explain how female and male partners benefit from visual feedback, or are affected by its absence, in CSCW.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. First, the area in which the research is situated is defined: Section 2 builds on past research and frames 10 research hypotheses targeting the effects of gender, visual feedback, and their interaction effects on computer-mediated collaboration. Section 3 presents the experimental methodology developed to address the research hypotheses, which involved pairs of participants collaborating in a simulated robot navigation task, and details the metrics used to capture performance and perceptions, as well as to describe user communication strategies. Section 4 reports the results of the statistical analysis on the metrics, which revealed simple and interaction effects. Section 5 discusses the findings of the study in light of existing literature and ends with recommendations for CSCW design. Section 6 reviews the limitations of the research and outlines additional areas that merit further exploration. Section 7 provides brief concluding remarks. The terms visual information, shared workspace and visual feedback will be used interchangeably in the rest of the paper to refer to shared visual workspace.
