1.1. In search of an engaging learning environmentThe original cell biology course, which is the subject of this study, was a conventional course with 26 teacher-centered lectures and 6 practical classes. Lecture content was and continues to be fully covered in 11 multimedia resources, comprising texts, images, animations and references to key articles. The resources also contain auto-evaluation questions so that students can master the subject independently of the lectures (for more information http://www.cellbiol.net/cbe/multimedia.php). Lecture attendance is not compulsory but students must attend practical classes. Course questionnaires repeatedly revealed that they find the subject of cell biology interesting, important and that they appreciated the course. Indeed, student retention rates are well above average for 1st year university courses in France, in the range of 75%. Despite their alleged interest in and satisfaction with the course, we observed over the years a gradual disengagement in class as witnessed by an increase in the incidence of disruptive behavior. Students would frequently form “discussion groups” on unrelated subjects, incessantly consult messages on their smartphones, and would watch and share unrelated videos on their laptops. We concluded that the traditional lecture format seemingly lacked purpose. The students were unable to pinpoint the predominant underlying cause of their behavior. Some accused the disruptive students of being unsuitable for higher education, others expressed the need to release pressure from a heavy curriculum, a number of students mentioned that they could not follow the lectures since the cognitive load was too high, and certain students did not see the point of being focused in class because the course content was fully covered anyway by multimedia resources. The situation was better in practical classes mainly dealing with microscopic analysis of body tissues, but even there students manifested a minimal-effort attitude. Frequent questions about what exactly they needed to be able to do, or to know, in order to pass the test, were the order of the day.We wished to counter this type of behavior by creating a more engaging, motivating and learning-centered environment. We also thought that we should not try to oppose the students' desire to talk with each other nor counter their interest in social media and information technology, but rather find ways in which it engaged them to learn. In other words, we had to think of a suitable pedagogical setting that would allow the affordances of team-based and web-based tools to be exploited for the learning of cell biology (discussed in Dabbagh and Reo, 2011, Jaffee, 2003). Questions that are key in this respect are: what is it about a particular technology that makes students want to interact with it in a particular way or what perceived abilities does the technology provide or enable (Dabbagh & Reo, 2011)? In order to find this suitable setting, we sought inspiration in theories and findings about the facilitation of engagement and chose the Self-Determination Theory (SDT) of motivation. This theory qualifies different types of motivation and connects them with goal-orientation (Pintrich, 2000, Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b). Goal orientation matters because we wanted our students to be able to function in a self-regulated fashion with a minimum of external control.The outcome of our reflection led in 2012 to a complete overhaul of the cell biology course by offering students more say; more choice (autonomy) and a stronger sense of perceived competence and relatedness. Firstly, lectures became “structured” (Freeman, Haak, & Wenderoth, 2011), meaning that they comprised a blend of activities including teacher-centered teaching, quizzes with the use of student response systems (“clickers”) (Caldwell, 2007) and short exercises in which students had to explore the web to find the answers. Secondly, we replaced practical classes with an open-ended collaborative project in which the students created a science-writing blog. Instead, a separate course was developed in which they studied microscopy and molecular biology techniques.This article concerns the science-writing blog project of the cell biology course and deals with the question of how exactly students perceived the project. Over a period of four years we asked them to describe the positive and negative features and analyzed their comments in light of the motivation criteria set forth in the Self-Determination Theory. Moreover, they completed a quantitative survey, known as the “Intrinsic Motivation Inventory”, which measured to what extent they felt they had functioned in an autonomous motivated fashion.Before presenting the research questions and the results of this study, we discuss theories to date about motivation and dedicate a section to the Self-Determination Theory. We define what blogging is and how it is currently used in higher education. A brief account is provided of the pilot projects that have been decisive in developing our science-writing blog project. Finally we describe the affordances of blogging in the perspective of the Self-Determination Theory.
1.2. MotivationMotivation is a fundamental concept in any behavior, including learning. In the context of learning, motivation gets students to: 1) establish a personal learning agenda (what to do and when): 2) take at least some of the initiatives (mobilizing executive functions) that shape the learning process (employing cognitive skills) and: 3) develop an ability to assess the extent and success of their learning (employing metacognitive skills) (Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b). Motivation became a subject of research in order to understand what drives behavior. The earlier studies in humans described motivation as a means to satisfy one's need to achieve. Motivation leads to employing means to overcome obstacles, to exercise power, to face challenges and render activities efficient (theory of Murray, cited by Franken, 1988). Then followed a series of theories that distinguished between different needs: basic needs (being safe, nourished and recognized by a community) and the need for self-actualization, also known as fulfilling one's potential or exploiting one's talents. Motivation to achieve was supplemented with another drive, namely motivation to avoid failure. Which achievements people seek depend on their innate abilities but also on task difficulty (cognitive load) and a perceived sense of luck (Attribution Theory) (Weiner, 1974). The duality in motivation, seeking and avoiding, may have an important gender component where women may seek to avoid achievement and choose to underperform, because it could tarnish their femininity, which is held by some to be culturally determined. Tarnishing femininity could lead to social exclusion resulting in a lack of fulfillment of one's basic needs. According to the Social Cognitive Theory, the choice of achievement is largely determined by the social context because we learn by observing behavior around us and by imitating those actions that are socially rewarded or not punished. Through observation and imitation we develop a sense of self-efficacy, which in turn determines which activities we undertake or choose to persist at. With a given sense of self-efficacy and a concomitant level of motivation for achievement, we may approach the learning task with different goals: one where we are eager to prove our ability relative to others, i.e. performance goal-orientation, or another where we wish to explore the matter to the fullest, obtain a real understanding, i.e. mastery goal-orientation (Ames and Archer, 1988, Astin, 1993, Dweck, 1986, Pintrich, 2000). The Self-Determination Theory adds another layer of complexity by postulating that motivation comes in different qualities and that these, in turn, determine goal orientation (Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b). The quality of motivation interests us particularly because it is instrumental not only in the way people learn (deep, mastery-, versus surface, performance-oriented) but also in the sense of well-being and satisfaction with an educational trajectory. In the context of life sciences education, the quality of motivation is thus expected to contribute toward students becoming more capable biologists, who might then contribute more effectively to research, business, education or administration. For a detailed review about motivation theories, see Kusurkar, Croiset, Mann, Custers, and ten Cate (2012). Although higher education institutions realize the importance of mastery goal-orientation, and often complain about students' lack of it, few take the effort to investigate the underlying reasons (Kusurkar et al., 2012). Despite its importance (Meyer & Turner, 2002), affective and motivational components of learning are generally undervalued in universities. Below we outline how we used the Self-Determination Theory as a framework for developing a learning environment in which students could function in an autonomous motivated fashion and adopt mastery goal-orientation.
1.3. Self-Determination TheorySelf-Determination Theory posits a taxonomy of motivation comprising amotivation, extrinsic motivation and intrinsic motivation. Amotivation is a lack of motivation, characterized by being devoid of regulation, impersonal, and associated with a sense of incompetence, a lack of value and perceived contingency. Boredom could possibly qualify as a state of amotivation (Pekrun, Goetz, Daniels, Stupnisky, & Perry, 2010). Extrinsic motivation can be subdivided according to the quality of regulation. Four subtypes are recognized: external, introjection, identification and integration. External and introjection regulation are characterized by processes such as compliance and reactance, avoiding punishment or reaping reward, seeking approval from others or performing because of ego-involvement (being considered “clever” and wanting to live up to that reputation). The two other subtypes, identification and integration, refer to different levels of agreement with objectives, of finding the activity important for understanding the learning material, of finding it interesting and congruent with personal ideas about, for instance, a future job. The best quality of motivation is referred to as intrinsic motivation which occurs when activities offer genuine enjoyment and satisfaction. When behavior is externally regulated, which is the case for the first two subtypes of extrinsic motivation, one speaks of non-self-determined behavior and controlled motivation. When behavior is internally regulated as in the last two subtypes of extrinsic motivation and in intrinsic motivation, one speaks of self-determined behavior and autonomous motivation (summarized in Fig. A1, Supplementary material) (Kusurkar et al., 2013b, Kusurkar et al., 2013a, Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b, Vansteenkiste et al., 2009). Controlled motivation means that an activity is carried out because of internal or external pressure or for external reward. The activity will cease when the pressure drops and it is associated with surface learning and short-term memory. In an educational setting, controlled motivation is exemplified by questions such as “what do you need to know to pass the test”. Autonomous motivation, on the contrary, means that an activity is carried out because of an inherent interest or because a person finds it personally important. In this, students set their own learning agenda and operate in a self-regulated fashion. Educational institutions should seek to function in a culture of autonomous motivation because this is associated with deep learning and a long-term memory.According to the Self-Determination Theory, autonomous motivation requires the fulfillment of three basic psychological needs which are: a perceived sense of autonomy, competence and relatedness. Autonomy refers to the need for choice and the need to feel ownership for one's behavior (De Charms, 1968). The need for competence refers to feeling capable of completing a given task (Harter, 1978). The need for relatedness pertains to the feeling of belonging to a group of friends or peers. Learning environments where teachers incorporate practices that satisfy these needs enhance students' autonomous motivation for learning (Kusurkar et al., 2011, Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b).The bulk of studies concerning the quality of motivation have been performed in secondary schools (Niemiec & Ryan, 2009). With respect to higher education, medical education has received much attention recently (Kusurkar et al., 2012, van Berkel and Schmidt, 2000, Vansteenkiste et al., 2009, Wouters et al., 2014). Moreover, most of the research on motivation has been driven by a predominant focus on cognitive and individual psychological aspects and tends to discount the importance of additional contextual factors such as team effort and the importance of task quality (Fulmer & Frijters, 2009).
1.4. Blogging and higher educationBlogging is a form of social media and can be considered as a social software learning environment (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012). The term ‘blog’ is an abbreviation of ‘web log’, a mode of communication with posting of news items, hyperlinks to third-party sites and the opportunity for readers to enter personal responses. Among many other social media, blogging is considered the most versatile with many dimensions that are suited to students' unique voices, empowering them and encouraging them to become more critically analytical in their thinking (Oravec, 2002, Williams and Jacobs, 2004). The use of blogs in educational settings can be globally divided into three genres: 1) filters where authors comment on the content of other sites; 2) personal journals where authors write about their lives, thoughts and feelings; 3) knowledge blogs where authors make observations and record relevant references about a particular knowledge domain. In a survey of blogs used in education, it was found that over 70% were personal journals through which learners created a personal learning environment (Sim & Hew, 2010). It should be noted that blogs are not necessarily personal journals; they can be team-based or institution-based (Oravec, 2002, Williams and Jacobs, 2004). Studies have shown that personal journals (genre 2) enhance learning engagement by promoting education in an informal setting because students comment on each other's work outside class or beyond campus (Dabbagh and Kitsantas, 2012, Harrison et al., 2011). Moreover, personal journals may help in fostering a learning community, where participants feel they are an important part of the classroom in which their opinions matter (Churchill, 2009). In a broader context, the use of social media may enhance a sense of personal agency in the learning process (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012), a sentiment that students often express as “feeling empowered” (Oravec, 2002). Schmidt (2007) suggests that social media facilitate three social cognitive processes: information management, identity management and relationship management. These processes result in a change of self-representation and generally lead to an enhanced sense of competence, relatedness (sense of being a part of the activity) and acceptance (social approval) (Turker & Zingel, 2008). As a consequence, higher education courses that employ a multitude of social media (ranging from Delicious, blogs, wikis, Second Life and Facebook) give rise to more self-regulated communities (Hemmi, Bayne, & Land, 2009). Finally, in the opinion of Brown and Adler (2008), who consider that understanding is socially constructed, the use of social media impacts education by expanding the various aspects of social learning. It should be noted that students' willingness to participate in publically exposed personal journals is still a matter of debate and the question of whether or not students contribute merely because of external pressure has not been properly addressed (Sim and Hew, 2010, Williams and Jacobs, 2004). Moreover, no studies have analyzed how students experience the creation of team-based blogs.The finding that the use of social media leads to an enhanced sense of competence, relatedness and social approval (Schmidt, 2007, Turker and Zingel, 2008) played an important role in our decision to choose blogging as a tool for our collaborative course project, because it concurs with the requirements of autonomous motivation. Two of our pilot experiences also helped in this regard. The first experiment concerned the use of an internal (accessible only to course students and teachers) collaborative Wiki platform where students were asked to write a personal journal about a specific course subject and were encouraged to use the platform to comment on each other's writing. After one semester, the students largely refrained from making written comments about other people's work and the platform effectively became an on-line correction tool for teachers. In a second experiment we asked students to prepare a Wiki document collectively in teams and to provide us with associated illustrations, which we then published on the Cell Biology Promotion website (http://www.cellbiol.net/ste/alp.php). Now students reported a great interest in collaborating with each other, felt responsible for each other's contributions and felt excited by the public exposure of their work (unpublished observations). We took this to mean that it would be difficult to entice students into social interaction and collaboration on the basis of personal journals but that, on the contrary, collaborative effort within teams would work out well, in particular when the product eventually became accessible via internet.We chose to focus on blogging rather than on other social media for four reasons. First, blogs are an effective collaborative platform for the production of team-based scientific documents. Second, they allow the creation of a compilation of blog posts where teams can expand their documents with time and experience and thus cover substantial material. Third, blogging platforms offer a rather versatile graphical approach, allowing teams to personalize the layout. The fourth reason is the possibility to publish the scientific document on the web. We consider this type of blog as a knowledge blog or, more specifically, as a “science-writing” blog. A successful science-writing blog requires the input of multiple skills: finding an interesting subject, making the subject visually pleasing, properly pitching the laymen's level of understanding and revealing the state-of-the-art of the subject in question. Collectively, these affordances offer a rather complex learning environment, a challenge that provides real meaning to teamwork. They also help students to think critically about their subject, stimulate them to synthesize and communicate scientific information, and importantly, support self-regulated learning (Dennen, 2014, National Research Council, 2011, Sim and Hew, 2010, Williams and Jacobs, 2004). Lastly, we chose blogging as the tool for the open-ended learning project because this is the least amenable to a performance-goal orientation. Students do not know what will be appraised and by whom (the teacher, the blog visitors or their social network). We are aware that such an approach conflicts with objective grading.The blogs were not considered for public debate in the sense that students were not asked to make comments or express opinions that would lead to counter-arguments or counter-opinions. Students were asked to display consensual knowledge that was verified and approved by the scientific community. In this respect, beyond the collaborative team effort, the level of interactivity is limited because of the nature of the product. Instead, we envisioned that students could use more specific network tools to enhance social interaction since virtually all students have a Facebook account. Finally, we felt that blogging was most suited to establishing group identity, building social contexts of knowledge, enabling personalization of the learning path and contributing to folk knowledge as semi-experts. Combined with the possibility to integrate the blog into web-based social networks, blogging by itself would largely support the principle of “learning as a social process” (Brown & Adler, 2008). This in turn should lead students to take on a mastery-oriented learning approach. In self-determination terminology, team-based blogging could possibly qualify as an intrinsically interesting task because it bears the characteristics that satisfy three essential needs, a sense of autonomy, competence and relatedness, for the natural expression of the curiosity of man (Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b).
1.5. The creation of science-writing blogs in the perspective of the Self-Determination TheoryBelow we outline in more detail how the affordances of team-based blogging fit with the motivation criteria set forth by the Self-Determination Theory.A sense of autonomy is generally described as giving learners the opportunity for self-regulation, allowing them to master their own future, and letting them work at their own pace and seek challenges that are optimal for their level of development (Harter, 1978), whilst being devoid of an excess of repression or instructions. In this context, autonomy is not about individuality or self-regulated behavior; it is about giving choice to the learners. We anticipated that the freedom of choice of subject, freedom to design the blog to the team's liking, as well as an assignment period of roughly four months, would largely satisfy this need. Moreover, by letting students work in teams, the authority of the instructor is naturally reduced, which also is conducive to enhancing perceived autonomy. The matter of autonomy is delicate because groups need both freedom and guidance (Kusurkar & Croiset, 2015). Instructors must feed the collaborative effort with input such as facts, symbols, concepts and paradigms, thus eliciting worthwhile conversation that enhances the sense of competence, but they must also support group-functioning and facilitate productive interaction among the team members, as the latter is a key factor in students' appreciation of collaborative projects (Deci et al., 1994, van Berkel and Schmidt, 2000)The need for competence is generally understood as being the consequence of an inner necessity to produce desired outcomes. The need for competence refers to having the tools and the cognitive skills to succeed at a task. It has a direct impact on one's confidence and the perception of efficacy. Engaging in an individual learning task is largely dependent on perceived competence and on some level of control (Harter, 1978, Vallerand and Reid, 1984). Competence is not static because it is constantly subsumed by task evaluation, progressive instruction and by constructive feedback throughout the learning process. The team-based blog project offers two types of support with respect to perceived competence. First and most importantly, students can support each other by sharing different cognitive skills and insights, thereby reducing the individual cognitive load (Kirschner, Paas, & Kirschner, 2008). Bandura refers to this as “perceived collective efficacy” that is considered to foster “motivational commitment to the task, resilience to adversity and performance accomplishments” (abstract, p75) (Bandura, 2000, Prussia and Kinicki, 1996). In terms of the Self-Determination Theory, we refer to this as collective competence. Secondly, science-writing blogs may offer students an additional “empowering” dimension, namely the utility of their work for people actually visiting or commenting on their articles. Internet traffic might serve as a formidable source of positive feedback, thus boosting perceived competence.The need for relatedness with significant others originates from studies dealing with interpersonal attachments, also known as identification with peers (Baumeister and Leary, 1995, Reis, 1994). Team-based projects offer rich interactions that allow identification with the group (Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b). However, relatedness goes much further because it also applies to identification with goal achievement, such as learning biology or career objectives. Furthermore, it applies to identification with instructors and with the specific learning task, all elements that help to create motivation (Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b). Studies have shown that identification with learning tasks is facilitated by task authenticity (Barab et al., 2000, Blumenfeld et al., 1991, Larmer and Mergendoller, 2010, Visser et al., 2017). The science-writing blog format is particularly useful in this respect because it constitutes an authentic task in an authentic environment (Oblinger, 2012). It is authentic because the semester-long project contains features of a scientific project comprising elements such as negotiation of the subject, sustained involvement and project ownership, all characteristics of a typical research project in science (Rahm, Miller, Hartley, & Moore, 2003. In addition, science increasingly involves communication via the internet, i.e. authentic communication between stakeholders. Besides the web editions of hard-copy science journals, many publishers have created additional features on their websites such as protocol exchange, job opportunities, science blogs and science podcasts through channels such as nature.com, science.com and elifesciences.org. In other words, the web is becoming increasingly important for the social negotiation of knowledge. From a students' perspective, it constitutes an authentic environment (Clark et al., 2009, Fox and Rainie, 2014, Greenhow et al., 2009). Students use it and contribute to it by using Web 2.0 tools (Fox & Rainie, 2014). The term Web 2.0 describes the second stage of the evolution of the World Wide Web in which content delivery has been facilitated by user-friendly editing software, i.e. web-based tools devoid of any requirement for markup language. The term Web 2.0 encompasses social media, or social software, and the more ancient computer-mediated communication technologies. Collectively, Web 2.0 refers to the web as a channel for communication, collaboration and creative expression that is accessible to anyone with an internet connection (Dabbagh & Reo, 2011). Facebook, LinkedIn, Wikipedia, YouTube, WordPress, Blogger, Twitter and others offer means, via tools and applications, to participate in the web-based “conversation of mankind” (phrase from Michael Oakeshott, discussed in Bruffee, 1984).
1.6. Purpose of the study and research questionsThe purpose of this study was to analyze the underlying motivational factors that led students to undertake the blog project and to evaluate these factors in light of the criteria postulated by the Self-Determination Theory (Slater, Slater, Heyer, & Bailey, 2015).1)How do students experience the collaborative blog project; are their motivational arguments in line with criteria for autonomous motivation as postulated by the Self-Determination Theory?2)How has the collaborative effort contributed to the success of the blog project?3)Does the blog project stimulate learning and enhance interest in cell biology?4)Do students function in an autonomous motivated fashion and adopt a mastery-oriented learning approach?
