History begins with the utilization of writing (Munis, 2004). Writing is a unique and one of the most significant inventions of humanity. The analysis of writing is defined as graphology which is a method aimed at analyzing the character of a person by looking at the handwriting of a person. Research in this discipline is surprisingly promising. In the future, further developments will be achieved (Gökmener, 2009). Thanks to graphology, many people have been able to choose the occupation that they are skilled for, a great many diseases have been treated, a lot of problematic marriages have been prevented and employers are able to pick the employees with optimum performance (Altınköprü, 2005, Ketizmen, 2013). Although a quite many people are curious about graphology and find it interesting, they have no idea about where it is used exactly. In fact, graphology is in the foreground even if people are not aware of it (Altınköprü, 1999). Although graphoanalysis is a useful tool for a couple of reasons, the fact that the number of the studies is limited and that the criteria used for the analyses seem insufficient poses a problem.
Graphology can be used for people's choices of a profession in education. It can give clues about the children graduating from elementary school for their professional orientation (Dirks, 2000). The analyses are feasible for both children and adults. It is generally used for confirming the educational level of a child, monitoring the following periods, advising parents, educators and school management about his/her current level and future progress that fits her/his character best. Graphology is also proved to have some valid diagnosis properties (Dirks, 2000).
It is used in business to analyze the natural features of intelligence (e.g., to assess perception and discernment, the form and development of comprehension, to show selection skills for responses and regulating actions) (Gökmener, 2009). It is also utilized to understand a person's style of socialization, his/her level of self-control and whether s/he has got philanthropy, enthusiasm, sophisticated tendencies, etc. The effect of deliberate actions on handwriting can be analyzed to some extent with the use of graphology in legal system (Ataç et al., 2012).
Many mental and physical problems are known to influence handwriting. The examination of the notebooks kept for years simultaneously make it available to analyze the big changes in one's handwriting giving clues about one's character and state of health. The research shows that it is possible to get a check-up with the examination of one-year handwriting as a whole (Brewer, 1999, Kusiak et al., 2000).
