Mobile devices (and mobile apps) are increasingly pervasive and common in our daily lives (Frank et al, 2013, Imgraben et al, 2014). According to a report from the International Data Corporation (IDC), the worldwide smartphone market grew 25.3% year over year in the second quarter of 2014, establishing a new single quarter record of 301.3 million shipments (IDC, 2014). Thanks to the popularity and increasing computing power of smartphones, more users start to use them as frequent storage medium for sensitive information (e.g., passwords, trade secrets, credit card numbers, personal photos) (Karlson et al., 2009), as well as use them for security sensitive tasks due to their fast and convenient data connection (Dunphy et al., 2010) (i.e., authorising commercial transactions (Van Thanh, 2000)). Thus, smartphones have become an attractive target for hackers and malware writers (Shabtai et al., 2010). For instance, according to a Symantec report, smartphones are easily lost or stolen (Symantec Enterprise, 2011). The stored personal and sensitive information in those lost phones might be exploited for malicious use by others (Mobile and NCSA, 2012). Because of these potential risks, it is very crucial to develop a powerful user authentication scheme for smartphones aiming to authenticate legitimate users and detect imposters.
At present, the most commonly used method for user authentication is called text-based password, in which users have to input their user names and text passwords for authentication. However, a number of studies in the literature have correctly identified that user authentication based on text-based passwords suffers from both security and usability limitations (Wixted, 2004, Yan et al, 2004). For example, (human) users generally have difficulty in remembering long, complex and random passwords (also known as long-term memory (LTM) limitations); thus, users are likely to either recycle passwords or choose short and simple strings that are easily memorised (i.e., simply choosing “123456” (SplashData, Inc., 2013)).
To mitigate the limitations of traditional text-based password authentication, authenticating users by means of images is one of the promising alternatives, in which several studies have shown that human brain was better at remembering and recognising images than text (Nelson et al, 1976, Shepard, 1967). In addition, users tend to remember self-contributed graphical passwords better, in comparison to randomised graphics (Renaud, 2009). Existing graphical password-based schemes (GPS) can be broadly categorised into recall-based schemes, recognition-based schemes, and cued-recall schemes (Biddle et al., 2012). Specifically, recall-based GPs require users to draw their passwords either on a blank canvas or on a grid, recognition-based GPs require users to memorise a portfolio of images during enrolment and identify them during authentication, and cued-recall GPs require users to remember specific locations within an image. Several security studies regarding graphical passwords can be referred to Chiasson et al. (2007), Dirik et al. (2007), and Gołofit (2007).
Motivation. Current smartphones often employ touchscreen as the main input method. In real-world applications, we figure out that users are able to perform more actions like multi-touch in creating graphical passwords on a smartphone than on a desktop computer. The multi-touch refers to the process of making contact with a touchscreen with multiple fingers simultaneously, which is a distinguishing feature for any touch-enabled mobile phones. This observation indicates that the creation of graphical passwords may be varied depending on platforms due to different types of input methods. Moreover, touchscreens are becoming the leading input method on the mobile platform, where 74% of all phones in the market use a touchscreen (Millennial Media, 2012). Our interest and motivation is therefore to explore the influence of multi-touch on creating GPs through users' performance and their feedback.
Goals and Targets. With the motivations mentioned above, in this work, our main goal is to investigate the effect of multi-touch behaviours on creating click-draw based graphical passwords (CD-GPS) through experiments and user feedback. The choice of CD-GPS is due to its collective use of different popular input types (e.g, clicking, selecting and drawing) in the generation of a graphical password. The work reported in this paper differs from our earlier work (Meng, 2012), as we extend CD-GPS to mobile device deployment and use multi-touch behaviours to facilitate the generation of a secret.
In particular, we investigate the influence of multi-touch on password space, users' performance and touch preference during CD-GPS creation, which can be specified into six aspects: 1) theoretical password space, 2) success rate and completion time, 3) the number of clicks, 4) the percentage of multi-touch usage, 5) multi-touch patterns and 6) image preference. To the best of our knowledge, this is an under-explored topic and our work is one of the earliest research efforts on this topic. We aim to complement the existing literature regarding the application of multi-touch to graphical passwords.
Contributions. In this work, we mainly conduct a user study with a total of 90 participants, those who will be randomly classified into two experiments (45 participants for each). The scope of the user study (and this paper) is limited to exploring the influence of multi-touch behaviours on the generation of click-draw based graphical passwords. We refer interested reader to Meng (2012) for a comparative summary between schemes based on click-draw based graphical passwords and traditional text-based passwords. Our contributions of this work can be summarised as below:
–We first give an analysis of the possible impact of employing multi-touch on CD-GPS password space. In addition, we develop an example system of multi-touch enabled CD-GPS on smartphones that enables users to perform multi-touch behaviours (with two fingers) in creating CD-GPS passwords.–To investigate the performance, we conduct two major experiments with a total of 90 participants. Through comparing the obtained results, applying chi-squared tests and collecting users' feedback, we find that the multi-touch behaviours can positively enhance users' performance in creating CD-GPS passwords (i.e., increasing success rate and reducing completion time). More details can be referred to Section 4 and Section 5.–We further analyse the influence of users' multi-touch behaviours on password creation such as the number of clicks, multi-touch usage and patterns, and users' preference of image selection. Our analysis validates that the use of multi-touch behaviours can provide a positive impact on both security and usability. More details can be referred to Section 6.
The remaining parts of this paper are organised as follows. Section 2 briefly introduces the background of click-draw based graphical password scheme (CD-GPS) and reviews related work regarding different kinds of graphical passwords. Section 3 analyses the potential impact of multi-touch on computing password space. Section 4 presents our developed multi-touch enabled CD-GPS and our experimental methodology. Section 5 describes the experimental results and Section 6 analyses more about the effect of users' multi-touch behaviours such as the number of clicks, multi-touch usage and patterns, and users' preference of image selection. Later, Section 7 discusses the impact of multi-touch on security and usability, analyses several potential attacks and presents the limitations of this work. Finally, Section 8 concludes this paper.
