Lower back disorders are very common in modern society. In the United States, back pain is the most common cause of impairment among young and middle-aged people and the second most frequent reason for visiting physicians (Andersson, 1999). The cost associated with occupational lower back pain is also high. The total direct medical and indirect costs of low-back pain in the United States exceed $100 billion per year (Frymoyer and Cats-Baril, 1991, Katz, 2006). The data from other western countries are similar. For example, it accounted for 76% of the total compensation cost in 1981 in Canada and was estimated 4.2 billion euros in Dutch society in 1991 (Andersson, 1999, Lambeek et al., 2011).
Lower back pain is often the consequence of lifting and manual material handling (MMH). This association is confirmed in a study by Bigos et al. (1986) showing among 900 back injury cases, about 63% of which was attributed to lifting and manual materials handling. The result of another study done by Chaffin (1973) recommended that load lifting should be considered as a potential risk factor for lower back stress. Kuiper et al. (1999) and da Costa and Vieira (2010) also showed with reasonable evidence that lifting is one of the main risk factors for lower back, hip and knee work related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSD).
In order to improve workplace safety and mitigate the risk of lower back pain, it is important to quantify the exposure to the risk of developing musculoskeletal disorders. Biomechanical analysis approaches have been proposed to link the musculoskeletal risks with joint loadings applied on worker's body in performing industrial tasks. They are useful tools for calculating the peak and cumulative loads on the body joints in order to compare the result with the limit of a person's capacity. Generally, there are two three-dimensional multi-segment models to estimate the joints reaction loads: top-down and bottom-up (Riemer et al., 2008). In the top-down model the starting point is at both hands and in the bottom-up model, it is at both feet. When there are no “gold standard” values from literature, the results of joints reaction forces and moments can be internally validated by comparing the calculated value at L5/S1, at which both models end up.
Biomechanical analysis approaches require assessment of human body postures and movements associated with lifting and manual material handling tasks. A variety of methods and tools have been developed for assessment postures and movement of manual tasks. These methods are mainly categorized as self-report questionnaires, direct measurement and observational methods (Van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1998, Spielholz et al., 2001, David, 2005). Results show that self-report questionnaires are the least accurate assessment method and most estimates of external exposure are imprecise and overestimated. (Van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1998, Spielholz et al., 2001). Most direct measurement methods require the attachment of reflective markers onto subjects' body to measure body segment movements or 3D positions of body joints, which can be used for relatively reliable and accurate estimation of the joints loads. In order to calculate external forces, force plates may be in need, especially in the case of bottom-up models. Numerous studies have investigated lower back joint load and moment by using direct measurement methods and have compared the results obtained from bottom-up and top-down approaches. There are reported values for a variety of tasks like lifting (De Looze et al., 1992, Desjardins et al., 1998, Kingma et al., 1996, Coenen et al., 2013, Larivière and Gagnon, 1998, Larivière and Gagnon, 1999, Plamondon et al., 1996), balance recovery movement (Robert et al., 2007) and walking (e.g. Hendershot and Wolf, 2014). Since direct measurement approaches require the use of complicated experimental setup in laboratory environments, which may affect the task behavior, they are not practical for onsite analysis and field studies.
Recent studies have used observational methods such as video-based coding systems instead of direct measurement to estimate the joints force and moment (Chang et al., 2003, Coenen et al., 2011, Coenen et al., 2013, Hsiang et al., 1998, Xu et al., 2012). These video-based coding systems extract a few key frames from captured task videos and then raters make an optimal fit of digital manikins to the selected video frames. Then the lifter's angular trajectory for the whole frames are identified and serve as the input of inverse biomechanical models to calculate the L5/S1 joint loadings. It was shown that the video-based coding system was not as accurate as a marker-based motion tracking system in estimating joint loads (Andrews et al., 1997, Chang et al., 2003, Xu et al., 2012). Another drawback of the video coding systems is that the result accuracy also rely on the experience of the observer, especially when joint angles become close to the posture boundaries and when they have to analyze more variables at once (Coenen et al., 2013). These video-based systems provide an alternative solution for in-field ergonomic evaluation where the use of a marker-based motion tracking system may be impossible. They are not intended to replace traditional direct measurement methods that usually provide more accurate results (Chang et al., 2003).
Advances in computer vision, offer novel potential solutions using optical camera and marker-less motion capture systems to overcome the limitations of the direct measurement and observational methods for biomechanical analysis. Studies have been conducted to evaluate the accuracy of the predicted joint positions and the resulting joint angles from marker-less motion capture systems compared to direct measurement methods. The comparison has been performed for activities such as gait cycle (Ceseracciu et al., 2014, Corazza et al., 2006, Mündermann et al., 2005, Saboune and Charpillet, 2005, Sandau et al., 2014), front crawl swimming (Ceseracciu et al., 2011), sit-to-stand tasks (Goffredo et al., 2009) and ladder climbing (Lee and Armstrong, 2014). These studies demonstrate the feasibility of the marker-less method; however, only a few motions were examined in the previous works (mostly in gait analysis) and lifting as one of the most common motions in the workplace and an important risk factor for WMSD is missed.
In this paper, we propose a marker-less and optical camera based tool to estimate the 3D L5/S1 joint moments during symmetrical lifting. Optical camera/digital camcorders are used for capturing the task movements. The angular trajectory is estimated by the novel computer vision techniques proposed in this study. It does not need to attach markers onto subjects' body segments or hire raters to estimate the pose of the subjects. The main goal was to evaluate the validity of this tool for onsite biomechanical analysis against a reference marker-based method. With this method, we aim to overcome the abovementioned drawbacks associated with direct measurement and observational methods.
