Many countries worldwide are facing water stress, and this is expected to become more acute in the future. Demands for water, food and energy are rising; at the same time, environmental degradation and climate change are limiting the capacity of natural systems to provide secure, regulated supplies. As a result floods, droughts and water conflicts are becoming more frequent (Arnell et al., 2004). Against this backdrop, more sustainable water management, preserving both human access to water and the flows needed to keep ecosystems alive, is vital (Pahl-Wostl, 2002). To achieve this, an integrated approach involving extensive stakeholder dialogue is widely advocated (Global Water Partnership, 2009). However, implementing this transition is challenging, and recent attempts have revealed difficulties (Jeffrey and Gearey, 2006, Medema et al., 2008, Pahl-Wostl et al., 2007).
For the transition to be implemented, a social learning process needs to take place in which stakeholders become aware of the relationship between their own frames of reference and those of others. Then, differences can be dealt with constructively, and shared ideas can be used to facilitate cooperation. The sectoral command-and-control approach inherited from the past, factually wrong, incomplete or unshared mental models, and lack of science-policy dialogue are key obstacles in this process (Pahl-Wostl and Sendzimir, 2005).
To overcome these barriers, a space is required which is free of the restrictions of past systems, where mental models can be safely and easily compared and corrected, and where scientists and policy-makers can come together. A “serious game” can serve as such a space. Serious games are games or simulations used to achieve an organisational or educational goal, and such games have already been used to facilitate stakeholder cooperation in the water management sector (Rusca et al., 2012). As well as bringing stakeholders together, they can be an accessible interface between scientific models and non-experts.
Simulation games are regarded by many as valuable tools for social learning (Hofstede et al., 2010) or increasing participation in modelling practice (Voinov et al., 2016). There are various theories for how they may work. Some argue that since humans are designed for learning through active enquiry, as we do as children, serious games provide a more natural group learning experience (Garris et al., 2016). Another theory is that gameplay makes us create a second persona which represents us in the game; this persona is free to explore new knowledge and ways of thinking which our real persona is restricted from exploring by emotional factors or responsibilities, but the experience gained is ultimately transferred to the real persona (Wagner and Wernbacher, 2013). Still others argue that the fun component of games motivates players to engage with material or people they would not usually interact with (Simons, 1993). Another theory is that games provide a simulation of organisational life and change, which then allows players to integrate what they have learned into their professional environment (Hofstede et al., 2010).
Reviews of studies of serious gaming note that although it is difficult to determine the long-term impacts of serious gaming, there is evidence that serious games are at least as effective as other communication and education tools, especially for group learning. However, the literature emphasizes that a game in itself does not necessarily stimulate learning, and must be supported by meaningful instruction to be effective (Hays, 2005, Hofstede et al., 2010, Ulrich, 1997). A review of serious games in the water and land management sectors was also carried out. Such games range from complex computer simulations such as Deltares Sustainable Delta game (van Pelt et al., 2015, Van der Wal et al., 2016), DHIs Aqua Republica (Chew, 2014) and the LandYOUs land management game (Schulze et al., 2015), to board games such as the FloodCom game (FloodCom, 2014), and games with sticks and pebbles, like the River Basin Game (Magombeyi et al., 2008). Some more games from Europe are reviewed in detail in a 2007 review (Schanze et al., ). Objectives and audiences vary and the game format must vary to match; however, a common goal is providing a way for players to interact with complex information in a way which is both understandable and emotionally engaging. Of the games reviewed, few explicitly quantified variability and risk and for most, little information was available on the evaluation of the game and whether it finally achieved its intended purpose.
Here, we present a description and evaluation of SimBasin, a basin management simulation game developed to stimulate social learning in the Magdalena-Cauca basin in Colombia. This large basin covers 24% of the land area of the country, and provides 80% of Colombia's hydropower, 70% of its agricultural production, and a home to 32.5 million people. However, the basin has experienced significant ecological damage due to this intense anthropogenic pressure, including a loss of 77% of its natural land cover and 50% of the freshwater fish population (The Nature Conservancy et al., 2014). Studies of the governance reasons for this identify institutional fragmentation, poor access to scientific decision-making tools, short-term planning and lack of a sense of urgency as key issues (Willems, 2013).
Therefore, the objective of the game is to help tackle these obstacles by bringing stakeholders together, stimulating discussion and bridging the gap between policy and science to achieve a better shared understanding and sense of urgency around the management of the basin. To achieve this, it was decided that the game would be a multiplayer game played by groups containing players representing different sectors. The asymmetries in decision-making can be represented by controlling the level of communication between the sectors. Hydropower, ecological flows, agriculture and flooding were identified as key issues. The target audience, high-level decision makers, are unlikely to have time to play the game more than once and so the game must be attractive and easy to understand quickly. To ensure appropriate instruction and discussion, the game was designed to be used offline in facilitated workshops of around 90 minutes' duration. To familiarise stakeholders with scientific modelling tools the game was created as a layer on top of a basin-scale WEAP water resources model. From this, the outline concept of a computer-based basin management strategy game for groups emerged (Fig. 1).Download : Download high-res image (634KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A SimBasin session in progress.
This paper presents a description of the SimBasin game and an evaluation of the impact of the game based on a beta testing session in Bangkok and a stakeholder forum using the game in Bogota, both in 2015. Finally, further improvements and lessons learned from the game are discussed.
