The Internet of Things (IoT) is a term very popular nowadays. Every day we can listen people taking about Smart Homes  [1], [2], Smart Cities  [3], [4], Smart Earth  [3], and many other kinds of distributed intelligence around heterogeneous and ubiquitous objects. The IoT allows gathering a huge quantity of data that can be processed to help making different decisions. These data may be very varied and confused and processing them might become inoperable.
Humans and computers make decisions in a different way. Whereas human reason uses words, computers use numbers  [5]. Moreover, even though the logic applied by humans seems more primitive, they can make better decisions in the real-world when an unexpected problem appears. Computing with words could improve the capability of computers to deal with problems of real-world and thus, improving decision making  [5].
The human capability to take decisions without computations is usually referred as ‘common sense’. Common sense allows us to take decisions quickly although they are not always the best ones. For example, in the past, we thought that the Earth was flat due to common sense  [5]. Moreover, common sense provides a way to get solutions to problems with incomplete or imprecise information whereas classical logic is better to resolve problems well defined. Furthermore, if we always used classical logic, we would take only a few decisions throughout the day.
While classical logic deals with binary sets of values, 0 (false) and 1 (true), fuzzy logic deals with a range of values that represents different degrees of truth on a scale between completely false and completely true  [6]. A range of values allows having more states and thus, making decisions knowing more information. For instance, fuzzy logic is able to optimise the moment when collected data should be pushed to a server  [6]. Applying classical logic, we would have only two states, push or wait, whereas if we applied fuzzy logic, we could have many states which would indicate the best moment to push data to the server and what data should be pushed.
Our daily life could be benefited with the combination of the IoT and fuzzy logic. For example, local businesses could enhance the management of temperature systems that involve the use of heating systems and air-conditioning systems in order to adapt the indoor conditions taking into consideration the outdoor conditions. Following this path, we would be able to achieve a really Smart City where the indoor locations will be capable of adapting themselves to the outdoor conditions. Using fuzzy logic will allow us to decide the best moment to heat up or to cool down the environment considering the outdoor conditions.
Moreover, fuzzy logic could help to reduce the energy consumption of cities’ buildings in order to achieve the zero energy building (ZEBs). The ZEBs are a part of the way towards achieving the Smart Cities  [7].
In addition to use fuzzy logic in the IoT, there are also several platforms which allow not only publishing data gathered from our sensors but also consuming data gathered from third-party sensors that could help us to achieve our proposal.
The aim of this research is the development of a prototype that will combine fuzzy logic applied to the IoT and the use of IoT platforms in which the prototype where it will able to consume third-party data. The prototype will be able to automate a system that will control the environmental conditions of a specific place. Moreover, the prototype will address different issues in the world of the IoT like the energy savings and some points of the livability according to  [8]. Our goals are the following: 
•Consuming data from online open IoT platforms.•Consuming data from sensors located in microcontrollers like Arduino or microcomputers like Raspberry Pi and working with actuators located in these devices.•Setting fuzzy rules to achieve a better performance in the suggested solution.•Keeping an optimum temperature inside a room for a long time.•Saving energy. Moreover, this can help to achieve economic savings.•Achieving some points of the livability.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In Section  2, we will introduce involved topics in this research like fuzzy logic, the IoT, IoT platforms, and the works related with this research. Section  3 will show the case of study, how it works, and how its architecture is. Section  4 will show the software and hardware used in this research. In Section  5 we will cover the evaluation and discussion of the data obtained from comparing the behaviour of our approach with the behaviour of the traditional approach. Section  6 will contain the conclusions of this paper and finally, in Section  7 we will describe the possible future work that can be done from here.
