Breast cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death after lung cancer among women worldwide. Early detection is the most effective way to reduce the mortality. The best practical approach to detect breast cancer is breast imaging by which radiologists can detect cancer's symptoms in early stages [1].
Nowadays, many imaging modalities are being developed to find breast cancer among which mammography is the most common. However, it has some limitations such as having low sensitivity for women with dense breasts and exposure to X-ray. X-ray is an ionizing radiation which is not applied for women under 30 years old because exposure to X-ray radiation may increase the risk of incidence of breast cancer [2]. In addition, mammography may cause pain for women with sensitive breasts due to pressure on breast during imaging process. Moreover, mammography may result in many false positives such that 65–85 percent of cases are wrongly recalled to undergo biopsy surgery [3]. Biopsies are usually expensive and stressful. Therefore, using mammography by itself is not the best approach for young women. Hence, it is recommended to use an alternative modality besides mammography to increase the detection rate of radiologists. A common approach is to use handheld ultrasound imaging by which small tumors that are missed in mammograms due to existence of dense tissues can be detected. Also, handheld ultrasound is a modality for high risk women who are not supposed to be exposed to X-ray radiation. Although handheld sonography has some advantages compared to mammography, it has some limitations. For example, an expert radiologist is needed for image acquisition and it is operator dependent. That is, handheld ultrasound images cannot be reproduced and even expert radiologists produce different images for same cases [4]. Reproducibility is an important feature when radiologists need to track mass changes in certain time intervals. In addition, this type of screening is expensive because a radiologist instead of a technician needs to gather images. Moreover, handheld ultrasound is time consuming since whole region of breast should be scanned by radiologists. Simultaneous gathering and interpreting images make radiologists exhausted and may increase the missing rate of cancers [5].
The problems of handheld ultrasound imaging can be solved using automated breast ultrasound systems (ABUS) in which image acquisition is handled by a radiographer who can be a trained technician not an expert radiologist. During scanning, transducer automatically moves across or around the breast region and gathers 2D image slices that are stacked together to form a 3D volumetric image. Kelly et al. have shown that ABUS as an adjunct to mammography for dense breasts not only increases sensitivity but also decreases false positive rate [6]. The ABUS imaging modality is faster, reproducible and it is not expensive. However, the workload of radiologists dramatically increases because they need to interpret many slices for each of the volumes obtained from different views. Therefore, volume screening process will be time consuming and exhaustive for radiologists and may cause them to miss small lesions. When image resolution and number of slices in each volume are increased it is inevitable to use computer aided systems to help radiologists in finding masses. A computerized method can be designed to show suspicious regions to radiologists enabling them to perform the screening more precisely by concentrating on these regions.
Computer aided systems assist radiologists to find and diagnose abnormalities in images. In fact, these systems act as a second interpreter to detect disorders and they are not designed to replace radiologists by computers. Computer aided systems are generally categorized into Computer Aided Detection systems (CADe) for detecting disorders and Computer Aided Diagnosis systems (CADx) for diagnosing them. Contrary to mammography, development of computer aided systems for 3D ABUS images is in preliminary stages and designing a CADe system for this type of images is more challenging and more required. We propose a CADe system for detecting cancers in 3D ABUS images.
Lo et al. used sigma filter to reduce speckle noise of images and segment them by a special version of watershed transform called toboggan watershed [7]. Watershed transform and its variants suffer from a well-known phenomenon called over-segmentation especially for images with many local minima just like ABUS images. Moon et al. proposed a blob detection algorithm to find the location of masses which usually look like dark blobs in ABUS images [8]. They enhanced the blob like structures in images based on eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix. Based on their method, blob structures that exist in one slice are enhanced but most of these structures are false positives because there are many dark blob regions like fat tissues that emerge in one slice and disappear in subsequent slices. In fact, masses are structures that appear in at least two subsequent slices. The same enhancement is occurred for line structures that should not be enhanced. Moreover, some malignant masses have hyper-echoic properties that means inside of malignant masses can be bright not dark. Hence, their algorithm fails to enhance such malignant masses. Ikedo et al. considered a new hypothesis that a normal case consists of semi horizontal edges but an abnormal case consists of some vertical edges on the boundary of the mass. Canny edge detector followed by a thinning method on each slice of the volume was applied to detect edges [9]. All edge based methods like Canny suffer from low resolution and speckle noise of ultrasonic images which result in discontinuous edges. This discontinuity can undermine their strong presumptions about edge characteristics of normal and abnormal cases. Moreover, the angle of semi-horizontal and semi-vertical edges seems to be very tight in their study. Their database includes 36 masses (16 malignant masses, 5 fibro adenomas, and 15 cysts). Drukker et al. studied women whose cancer was not observable in mammograms, those with BIRADS category 3 or 4 for whom sonography had been prescribed after mammography [4]. They combined a k-means clustering followed by an adaptive thresholding. In their method, the whole image is clustered into 3 region categories: bright regions (Parenchyma), dark regions (nipple) and candidate regions. The most drawback of this method is the use of k-means itself because it considers only gray level of the pixels not the spatial information. Moreover, k-means is sensitive to centroid initialization such that results may vary for every run. Tan et al. applied a two-stage detection scheme to detect breast cancers in ABUS. In the first stage a voxel classification is implemented to determine the cancer candidates and in the second stage, a region classification is used to reduce false positives [10]. The first stage was later improved by incorporating Haar-like features [11]. The disadvantage of these two methods is that the initial voxel candidate detection stage tends to miss over 10% cancer cases.
In this paper a computer aided detection system for detecting cancers in 3D ABUS images is proposed. In this system, preprocessing operations including speckle noise reduction and unnecessary slide removal are applied at first to the images. Then, suspicious candidate regions are extracted using a novel algorithm based on isocontours. Domain specific knowledge is used in the next module to discard false positives. Afterwards, the centers of the remaining regions are calculated as markers (seeds). The sensitivity of this stage is high and those seeds which are considered as “hit” are close to the center of masses. Because of this closeness, it is promising to use a voxel classifier to reduce too many seed points extracted in previous step. In this work, 432 voxel features are fed to a new cascade learning module based on RUSBoost classifier to filter out false positives even more.
