English is the international medium of publication and conferences in the medical sciences throughout the world (Taavitsainen and Pahta, 2003, Tardy, 2004). As Duszak and Lewkowicz (2008) posit, utilizing English for global publication may enhance the networking and circulation of new ideas. At the same time, the choice of English can be viewed from two opposite perspectives. On the positive side, publishing research articles (RAs) in English is a way to increase international recognition of scholarly work and reach a wider audience. On the negative side, it is a burden to scholars whose first language is not English.
Even non-native English speakers (NNESs) who are competent writers in English face challenges to succeed in publishing their research in English. Once a scholar acquires a working academic writing proficiency in English, s/he has to meet the strict review criteria of a journal to publish her/his research output (Burrough-Boenisch, 2003). As gatekeepers, journal editors and reviewers enforce rigid standards in reviewing manuscripts (MSs). In addition to meeting the standards for quality research, NNES authors may also be expected to have their MSs proofread by native-English speakers (NESs) prior to submission (Li & Flowerdew, 2007) or in the process of reviewing, which may further exacerbate publication difficulties for them. While this added layer of review may be feasible in countries where authors have easy access to NES, in countries such as Iran with limited access to NESs, the native speaker proofreading stipulation may be impossible to meet. As Shashok and Handjani (2010) assert, in Iran, in particular, the ongoing political tension and crippling sanctions have compounded Iranian scholars' publishing difficulties and have dramatically limited their access to reference materials, journal databases, and learning tools, although Iran enjoys a well-developed, long-established university system, and a dynamic academic community. Given the obstacles that NNES face in their efforts to publish, they often seek assistance from other NNES. This has recently led to a growing body of research studies investigating how different groups play facilitative roles in the publication of research articles by NNES.
Publication facilitators have been referred to by different names and labels such as ‘text shapers’ (Burrough-Boenisch, 2003), ‘literacy brokers’ (Lillis & Curry, 2006), or ‘convenience editors’ (Willey & Tanimoto, 2012). Text shapers include revisers, correctors, language professionals, language service providers, local editors, and authors' editors (Burrough-Boenisch, 2003). According to Lillis and Curry (2006), literacy brokers consist of academic professionals, language professionals, and non-professionals. In this paper, we use two terms: ‘text shaper’ and ‘convenience editor’, following Burrough-Boenisch (2003) and Willey and Tanimoto (2012), respectively.
In many non-English speaking countries, such as Iran, there are two predominant text shapers for author-researchers, namely English as a Foreign Language (EFL) teachers and field specialists with a high proficiency in English. In an early paper, Willey and Tanimoto (2012) considered any sort of editing done by EFL teachers to be ‘convenience editing (CE)’ since these teachers are in many cases easily accessible and are thought to have the linguistic resources to help researchers get their papers published. Later, Willey and Tanimoto (2015) defined convenience editors more specifically to be “English teachers, often but not always native English speakers, without training in editing or scientific fields, who correct manuscripts mainly as an unpaid favor to their colleagues” (p. 64). While convenience editors include English teachers, they can also be authors' colleagues or similar figures with a native-like or even native command of English, but who may have no formal editing training. The term ‘convenience’ in convenience editors underlines the fact that these people happen to be conveniently at hand and can be called upon to assist the author. They are not professional editors, nor are they members of editing organizations. Therefore, these convenience editors need to be distinguished from the growing number of professional editors and translators, some of whom even hold doctorates in the scientific field in which they edit and offer commercial editing services through their registered companies or publishers.
Willey and Tanimoto (2012) considered EFL teachers in Japan to be convenience editors who provide assistance to medical doctors in that setting. Similarly, Luo and Hyland (2016) investigated the facilitative role Chinese EFL teachers play in making NNES scientists' manuscripts publishable. According to these researchers, English teachers are valuable resources in China for scientists who seek publication. We build upon these works in the present study, subscribing to the same definition of CE and focusing on medical field specialists in Iran with a good, albeit not native-command of English, whose peers can be called upon for editorial help. Given our interest in peer-to-peer editing, we exclude EFL teachers.
