As a classical topic in the domain of image processing, image recognition has attracted much attention from academia to industry for a very long time. In many cases, we want to search a certain kind of image that has specific content within a set of images or even a large image database.
Human vision (HV) may be the most effective and robust way to fulfill such tasks since the visual system of human beings can parse scenes and recognize objects easily, despite wide variations of images in scale, lighting, pose, background, etc. However, HV is often thought to be inferior to computer vision (CV) in terms of efficiency, even though HV can finish with an image in as little as a few hundred milliseconds [1].
Recent years have seen great achievements in the field of CV, which aims at solving various image recognition problems with computers. The arrival of a variety of deep learning methods, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [2], [3], [4] for image classification, has boosted the CV developments and attracted the attention of many researchers. Being focused on automatic imagery processing, state-of-the-art CV systems have impressed people with their great efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, when the processing task is not well-defined, or the images to be processed contain unstructured information, CV systems usually do not perform as good as HV.
Considering their respective advantages and shortcomings, a promising direction is to combine the complementary strengths of CV and HV. From this perspective, the interaction between humans and computers is the first thing that should be considered. Over the past 2 decades, noninvasive electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings have been successfully utilized to quantify human perception to certain kinds of stimuli [5], [6], [7], which makes it possible to perform direct interactions between brain and computer. Unlike traditional human-computer interfaces which employ extra devices, e.g., buttons or a mouse, these so called “brain-computer interfaces (BCIs)” aim at “reading the mind,” can realize brain-actuated control, and help handicapped users with complex and difficult tasks.
In this paper, we focused on a BCI that makes use of a subject’s EEG signals for image retrieval [8]. In such BCI applications, images are presented to the subject by a specific paradigm; meanwhile, the subject’s EEG signals are collected and analyzed in real-time (a person attentive to certain stimuli will produce measurable scalp EEG signals, in particular, event-related potentials such as the P300 [1]). The problem we considered here is target image retrieval in rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) sequences, which aims at searching for images that the subject is interested in among a set of images that are presented to the subject using an RSVP paradigm.
Previous works have provided enlightening guidance for this study. The most common strategy of solving the target image retrieval problem in RSVP sequences works in a 2-stage manner: (1) The EEG signals are firstly filtered by a spatiotemporal feature extraction method, or down-sampled by a specific operation; (2) Then, a binary classification approach judges whether an image is a target image. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA, [1], [6], [9], [10]), principal component analysis (PCA, [9]), and independent components analysis [11] has been demonstrated as practical feature extraction methods. There are also specifically designed feature extraction methods, such as bilinear discriminant analysis [12], bilinear discriminant component analysis [13], etc. Among these methods, LDA is most commonly utilized. For summaries of feature extraction methods, we refer readers to the literature [7], [14]. In the second retrieving stage, classification algorithms, such as logistic regression (LR) [1] and support vector machine (SVM) [15], are trained and used to detect target images in RSVP sequences. For classification algorithms, we further refer readers to other literature[16], [17], [18], [19] and the experimental comparative research on ensemble algorithms [20].
Recent research take target image retrieval in RSVP sequences as a key step in image searching tasks in large-scale image databases [1], [8], [21], [22]. In these works, open-loop processes [21], [22] or closed-loop (iterative) processes [1], [8], which often incorporate extra manual labor, were proposed for RSVP target image retrieval so that a good initial set of target images was sent to further image database retrieval schemes. Lately, this kind of research has been extended to face retrieval tasks [23], [24]. Since database retrieval schemes are commonly linked to a pre-trained CV system, these works have presented a real sense of combining HV with CV.
However, after investigating these works fully focused on target image retrieval in RSVP sequences and those treating it as a subpart of image database retrieval systems, we found that there remains some problems. The first is to discover a better EEG decoding method. Since comparative research in the problem of decoding EEG signals is not adequate, there still exists potential for exploration. Second, we should investigate whether there is any better way of building brain-computer interactions. Specifically, we desire a brain-computer interaction method that directly improves target image retrieval performance in RSVP sequences without extra manual labor, but with the help of CV insights. With such an interaction method, not only would the original problem of target image retrieval be better solved, but also retrieval in large image databases would be more efficient (with less manual labor involved in iterations, or even free of extra manual labor).
The main contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows: (1) We compared EEG decoding performance of 6 classification algorithms on 3 feature sets derived by different feature extraction methods. Comparisons showed that the random forest (RF) outperformed all other candidate algorithms. (2) We proposed an innovative BCI framework Bayesian HV-CV Retrieval (BHCR) for target image retrieval in RSVP sequences based on a Bayesian brain-computer interaction (BBCI) method, which incorporates CV insights provided by a pre-trained CNN CV system to improve retrieval performance. Experiments showed that the retrieval performance of BHCR improved significantly compared to the EEG-only scheme in both the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) and classification aspects. Furthermore, we correctly discovered the category of target images in all test sequences and almost all simulation sequences (99.7%), which indicated the potential of our RSVP retrieval results to be a good starting point for following retrieval in a large image database. (3) We designed a probability propagation scheme that improves the CV system with the help of HV insights, and then presented a one-shot imagery database retrieval scheme as a natural extension of our work.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: We first introduce the construction of the BHCR framework in Section 2. Then, we describe the proposed BBCI method in detail in Section 3. The comparison between different classification algorithms is presented in Section 4. Experiments and simulations for demonstrating the BHCR framework are shown in Section 5. The proposed probability propagation scheme and the one-shot image database retrieval scheme are illustrated in Section 6. In Section 7, we compare our work to previous works, and discuss future topics. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section 8.
