The number of academic publications is increasing at a rapid pace and it is becoming increasingly unfeasible to remain current with everything that is being published. Moreover, the emphasis on empirical contributions has resulted in voluminous and fragmented research streams (Briner & Denyer, 2012). This hampers the ability to accumulate knowledge and actively collect evidence through a set of previous research papers. Therefore, literature reviews are increasingly assuming a crucial role in synthesizing past research findings to effectively use the existing knowledge base, advance a line of research, and provide evidence-based insight into the practice of exercising and sustaining professional judgment and expertise (Rousseau, 2012).
Scholars use different qualitative and quantitative literature reviewing approaches to understand and organize earlier findings. Among these, bibliometrics has the potential to introduce a systematic, transparent, and reproducible review process based on the statistical measurement of science, scientists, or scientific activity (Broadus, 1987, Diodato, 1994, Pritchard, 1969). Unlike other techniques, bibliometrics provides more objective and reliable analyses. The overwhelming volume of new information, conceptual developments, and data are the milieu where bibliometrics becomes useful by providing a structured analysis to a large body of information, to infer trends over time, themes researched, identify shifts in the boundaries of the disciplines, to detect the most prolific scholars and institutions, and to present the “big picture” of extant research (Crane, 1972).
Although over time, the use of bibliometrics has been extended to all disciplines, bibliometric analysis is complex because it entails several steps that employ numerous and diverse analyses and mapping software tools, which are frequently available only under commercial licenses (Guler, Waaijer, and Palmblad, 2016). These difficulties are compounded by the reality that few researchers and practitioners are trained in how to review literature and to identify evidence-based practices (Briner & Denyer, 2012). The cumbersome nature of the process reduces the possibilities and the potential of bibliometrics, especially for scholars who have no general programming skills.
Recently, automated workflows to assemble specialized software into a comprehensive and organized data flow have begun to emerge for bibliometrics. They are particularly well suited to multi-step analyses using different types of software tools (Guler, Waaijer, Mohammed, & Palmblad, 2016). In this paper, we propose a unique tool, developed in the R language, which follows a classic logical bibliometric workflow that we reconstruct. We have designed and produced an R-tool for comprehensive bibliometric analyses. R is a language and environment for statistical computing and graphics (R Core Team, 2016). It provides a wide variety of statistical and graphical techniques and is highly extensible (Matloff, 2011). In addition to enabling statistical operations, it is an object-oriented and functional programming language; hence, you can automate your analyses and create new functions. It has an open-software nature, which means it is well supported by the user community and new functions are regularly contributed by users, many of whom are prominent statisticians. As it is programmed in R, the proposed tool is flexible, can be rapidly upgraded, and can be integrated with other statistical R-packages. It is therefore useful in a constantly changing field such as bibliometrics.
The aim of this paper is twofold. First, we present the proposed open-source bibliometrix R-package for performing comprehensive bibliometric analyses, comparing it to other important software tools. Secondly, we discuss how the proposed tool supports a recommended workflow for performing bibliometric studies. We illustrate the main bibliometrix functions in this workflow, using all the articles written in English on bibliometrics in the management, business, and public administration domains over a span of 30 years.
