Comprised of the structures that arise from processing and mediate properties, microstructure is a core focus of the discipline of materials science. Microstructural information is most often conveyed via images obtained through various microscopy techniques (i.e. micrographs), sometimes supplemented by other structural and compositional probes. Traditionally, microstructural images have been evaluated by human experts, both to interpret the micrographs themselves and to connect them to processing conditions and property outcomes. However, recent research in microstructure data science has begun to explore applications of contemporary computer vision to construct microstructure representations suitable for use in machine learning and microstructure analytics tasks [1], [2], [3], [4]. For example [3], compare several image texture representations and find that off-the-shelf convolutional neural network (CNN) features can be applied to microstructure analytics tasks (e.g. classification) without fine-tuning any of the CNN parameters. Likewise, Lubbers et al. [4] apply bilinear CNN representations [5], [6], [7] to synthetic lamellar structures, and relate this representation to the generative microstructure model parameters (i.e. lamellar spacing and orientation and noise). While promising proofs of principle, these studies used comparatively simple and well-parameterized microstructures. To move towards quantitative application of generic computer vision techniques, we require real-world, technologically-relevant microstructure systems exhibiting the complex, hierarchical structures that challenge conventional microstructure segmentation and quantification.
To this end, we introduce the CMU-UHCS (Carnegie Mellon University Ultrahigh Carbon Steel) dataset [8], [9], based on the work of Hecht et al. [10], [11]. This dataset consists of 961 scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs of Ultrahigh Carbon Steel (UHCS) subjected to a variety of heat treatments and taken at several different magnifications. The dataset spans several complex and hierarchical microconstituents typically found in UHCS and other technologically relevant alloy systems, offering a compelling real-world microstructure data science challenge.
UHCS (steels with 1–2.1 wt% carbon) are intermediate in content to high carbon steel (0.6–1 wt% C) and cast iron (2.1–4.3 wt% C). Due to their high carbon content relative to conventional steels, a characteristic microstructure feature of these alloys is proeutectoid cementite (Fe3C), typically forming a network associated with the grain boundaries of the high-temperature austenite phase. The hard, brittle carbides help lend UHCS its well-known high strength and wear resistance, but highly-connected intergranular proeutectoid cementite networks can be detrimental to toughness and ductility by providing extended pathways for crack propagation [12], [13]. Recent UHCS research has focused on mitigating this weakness by optimizing the network microstructure through various heat treatments [14] and addition of minor alloying elements [15], [16]. Hecht et al. recently developed a quantitative measure of the proeutectoid cementite network connectivity, relating this to annealing schedules and toughness measurements [10]. In a similar study, Hecht et al. explored the effect of annealing conditions on spheroidite morphology [11]. The present UHCS microstructure dataset is built on the characterization efforts for these two UHCS studies.
In this study, we use the UHCS dataset to compare state-of-the-art CNN-based image texture representations with the classic bag of visual words (BoW) representation [17], [18]. As microstructure representations, the BoW has the theoretical advantage of strong explicit scale and rotation invariance, while CNNs notoriously outperform BoW on typical natural image recognition tasks (e.g. facial recognition, object detection and identification, scene classification). We evaluate each image representation using both supervised and unsupervised learning methods, and demonstrate how these techniques can be used together for exploratory microstructure analysis. Specifically, we used a Support Vector Machine (SVM) [19] approach to classify microstructures both by primary microconstituent and annealing condition. We complement this understanding by applying the unsupervised dimensionality-reduction technique t-SNE (t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding) [20] to visualize the high-dimensional distributions of each microstructure representation, relating this structure to available annealing schedule and imaging metadata.
Our primary contributions in this report are:
•A real-world dataset of complex, hierarchical microstructures annotated with microstructure constituent metadata, as well as partial imaging and processing metadata, such as heat treatment, cooling procedure, and magnification [8], [9].•Evaluation of several competitive computer vision techniques, with discussion of their relative strengths and weaknesses for a range of real-world microstructure analytics tasks.•Exploration of microstructure data visualization techniques for inferring processing – microstructure – properties relationships for realistic complex, hierarchical microstructure systems.•Considerations of microstructure data bias and quality that will be essential to developing reliable data-driven microstructure models and standards.
