A structured mathematical model based on limited experimental data is often used to predict model or system attributes that cannot be measured directly. This often engenders two fundamental analysis problems: model structural identifiability (SI) and model structural indistinguishability. The word ‘structural’ in both of these indicates that perfect input-output data are assumed; neither problem is concerned with parameter estimation accuracy using real data. SI analysis addresses whether particular model parameters or combinations of them are quantifiable in principle from the input-output I-O data. Many techniques are available for analysing the SI of both linear and nonlinear models, and several computer packages are available for facilitating the analysis. Examples of packages that test for global (i.e. unique) structural identifiability are given in [1], [2], [3].
By contrast, the less familiar model indistinguishability problem addresses whether there are other models within the same class (e.g., the class of compartmental models), but with different structures that may equally well fit the input-output (I-O) data, again assumed perfect. Techniques for analysing structural indistinguishability among Linear Compartmental (LC) models were first established more than 25 years ago, for LC models in general [4] and more specifically for pharmacokinetic models [5]. For LC models, indistinguishability analysis involves constructing every other LC model that can give rise to identical input-output behaviour through a suitable choice of its unknown parameters. Techniques available in 1990 for analysing structural identifiability and indistinguishability of LC models were compared and contrasted in [6]. Techniques for analysing indistinguishability between nonlinear compartmental models have been established [7], [8], but by the very nature of the problem, the analysis has to be much more restrictive, confined to whether a single candidate nonlinear (NL) model is indistinguishable from a postulated structured NL model.
Establishing model uniqueness – or model disambiguation – is a major multifaceted problem in quantitative science, with methods and solutions available only for the very limited classes of models described above. The indistinguishablity problem is often ignored or unknown by modelers, which could lead to incorrect models and false predictions. Algebraically, the problem is computationally complex, involving structured symbolic (non-numerical) analysis of typically large matrices (as we describe in Section 2). Until now, no software tools have been made available to address this problem.
The present paper describes and exemplifies the use of DISTING, a freely available web application (app) for structural indistinguishability analysis of LC models. The DISTING app was partially motivated by substantially increased interest in model selection methods within the systems biology and systems pharmacology communities. Recent developments in computational matrix analysis and parallel computing algorithms – for facilitating and speeding up the symbolic computations needed for indistinguishability analysis – and more user-friendly web interface design also motivated its creation.
The computational algorithms embedded in DISTING are based on the geometric and algebraic properties of LC models described in [4], embedded in a graphical user interface. They are advanced versions of the algorithms proposed in 1991 by Zhang and co-workers [9] for implementing these properties. No software based on the work in [9] was offered or made available at the time and, as far as we are aware, none has been made available since.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. The techniques used in DISTING are described in Section 2 and three examples of its use are given in Section 3. Conclusions are drawn in Section 4.
