The enormous scale and complexity of current environmental problems pose serious challenges for the fields of conservation biology, natural resource management, and environmental protection. Citizen science offers a powerful tool for tackling these challenges.
The challenges are immense. The biological and physical systems of our planet are undergoing rapid rates of change as the impact of human activities becomes nearly ubiquitous (Pimm and Raven, 2000, Steffen et al., 2011). Stressors like urbanization, deforestation, land conversion to agriculture, and climate change strain the capacity of natural systems to sustain life and threaten the persistence of many species (Dirzo et al., 2014, McCauley et al., 2015, Pimm and Raven, 2000, Steffen et al., 2011). Extinction rates might be as high as 100 to 1000 times greater than pre-human levels (Pimm et al., 1995), and these bleak estimates may be too low if unidentified species disappear before they are discovered (Scheffers et al., 2012).
Yet cataloguing even a fraction of the unknown diversity is ambitious (Carbayo and Marques, 2011). Conservation strategies require knowledge of species distributions, but even well-known species can have poorly resolved geographic ranges (Jetz et al., 2012) that can shift in response to climate change (Chen et al., 2011). Moreover, successful conservation efforts must focus on more than ecological dynamics and address the social, cultural, and political factors that affect natural ecosystems (e.g., Balmford and Cowling, 2006, Mascia et al., 2003). To be effective, conservation efforts must also incorporate public input and engagement in crafting solutions (Eden, 1996, Germain et al., 2001, Steelman, 2001).
We describe here how citizen science can improve conservation outcomes by building scientific knowledge, informing policy formulation, and inspiring public action. We focus on the United States, but many of our findings are relevant to other countries with similar systems of governance. We start by describing citizen science and discussing how it can help to address major conservation challenges. We then describe the value and limitations of citizen science for meeting core scientific needs, as well as the value and limitations of citizens for promoting public input and engagement in conservation. We end by discussing the investments that citizen science requires.
Our goal is to help people involved in conservation science and decisionmaking, natural resource management, and environmental protection (1) decide whether citizen science will help them meet their science and/or public input and engagement needs, and (2) make informed decisions about investing in citizen science. We aim to provide a balanced assessment of whether, when, and how to employ citizen science to help meet information and public engagement needs.
