In a rapidly changing society of advancing science and technology, it is critical for all students in every level of schooling to have a strong foundational knowledge of science and its application to solving real-world problems (National Research Council; National Research Council, 2011, U.S. Department of Education, 2015). This priority has been emphasized in the United States through the new conceptual framework for K-12 science education (NRC, 2011) that describes the major practices, crosscutting concepts, and disciplinary core ideas that all students should be familiar with by the end of high school. The framework provides an outline of how the practices, concepts, and ideas are designed for building upon each other beginning in elementary school. Elementary classrooms serve as the foundation for students to develop scientific understandings, skills and mindsets of scientists, and as a place that may ignite a lifelong interest in the field. There have been national concerns with the lack of performance of elementary students on international science tests, weak science content knowledge of elementary teachers, and limited amount of science being taught in elementary classrooms (Olson, Tippett, Milford, Ohana, & Clough, 2015). Despite numerous programs, courses, and efforts to develop primary teachers' skills, knowledge, and attitudes in the field of science, findings still suggest that elementary teachers need more hours of professional development focused on science teaching (Bennett et al., 2001, Kind et al., 2007, Osborne et al., 2003).
Currently, elementary teachers are traditionally prepared as generalists in teacher preparation programs, learning and practicing strategies that support learners in all disciplines. It is common for elementary preservice teachers (EPTs) to participate in one course and one clinical field experience to practice science teaching. This method of teacher preparation has recently be challenged in effort to build the capabilities of students in science before they reach middle school, and new models are being introduced that support preparing teachers in all of the major content disciplines (National Science Teachers Association, 2012). This includes understanding reformed-based knowledge specific to the discipline (Hanuscin, Lee, & Akerson, 2011). It is argued that elementary science teachers need to be as thoroughly prepared as middle school teachers to teach science in the classroom (Century, Rudnick, & Freeman, 2008). Few teacher preparation programs have responded to these calls (NRC, 2010; Olson et al., 2015; Smith & Gess-Newsome, 2004). Those that have offer promise for increasing the content knowledge, skills, and interests of elementary teachers in science (Darling-Hammond, 2006; Roehrig & Luft, 2006; Steinberg, Wyner, Borman, & Salame, 2015).
1.1. An Elementary Science Concentration (ESC)In turn, we developed an elementary science preparation program for teachers at a large southeastern U.S. university. Through research and collaboration between science education faculty members of the teacher preparation program, a proposal was developed (and internally funded) to prepare students in a structured scheme of discipline-specific science teaching courses with the objective of developing elementary science specialists in the field. A small team of elementary science methods instructors (including the second author who teaches in the program and the first author from a nearby teacher preparation program) revised the requirements and curriculum for elementary majors to receive a bachelor's degree in elementary education with an 18 credit hour concentration in elementary science (out of 128 credit hours required overall for the undergraduate degree). The design of the Elementary Science Concentration (ESC) included the following components: (1) discipline-specific content preparation, (2) specialized instructional methods for teaching each discipline of science for elementary school, (3) application of meaningful field experiences in formal and informal settings, and (4) lessons developed through a humanistic lens that connected these components through real-life approaches and problems in science. The sequence of the courses was important for emphasizing these components. Prior to their second year, preservice teachers would complete one standard length course in science within the College of Arts and Sciences. Preservice teachers would then complete specialized content and pedagogically focused courses targeted for elementary science teaching including a physical science course in the first semester of their second year, an earth science and life science course during the second semester of their second year, a general science methods course in their third year, and a capstone class in the first semester of their fourth year prior to student teaching called Science Methods in Informal Settings.The three elementary science content courses (physical, life, and earth) were designed to follow a similar structure of specific content modules that embedded reformed based practices for teaching elementary science that require discipline-specific pedagogical content knowledge. Our design of reformed-based teaching methods is consistent with social constructivist views of learning, inquiry environments that engage students to seek answers to questions, experiencing phenomena, sharing ideas, and developing explanations of students' everyday world (Minstrell & Van Zee, 2000). Reform based teaching models the shift from traditional teacher-centered lecture to student centered, activity based learning that emphasizes collaboration and discussion among students forming a deeper understanding on selected topics (Schneider, Krajcik, & Blummenfeld, 2005). Each of these fifteen-week courses were divided into four content modules aligned with the elementary disciplinary core ideas found in A Framework for K-12 Science Education (Schweingruber, Keller, & Quinn, 2012) and the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS; Achieve, Inc., 2013). Within each module, EPSTs explored the concepts needed for teaching each of the disciplinary core ideas in the first six years of the primary education science curriculum. For example, the physical science course focused on the following four core ideas: Core Idea PS1: Matter and Its Interactions, Core Idea PS2: Motion and Stability: Forces and Interactions, Core Idea PS3: Energy, and finally Core Idea PS4: Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer.At the end of a three-week module exploring each core idea, EPSTs completed a disciplinary core idea project when they designed performance tasks and rubrics for teaching selected NGSS performance expectations. Each course was designed to identify specific misconceptions of the EPSTs and used researched-based approaches to create conceptual changes (Posner, Strike, Hewson, & Gertzog, 1982). Science and engineering practices (e.g. asking questions, developing problems, interpreting models, analyzing data) and specific discipline foci (i.e. physical, life, earth, and informal science) were incorporated into class investigations and projects for each content course (see Fig. 1). EPSTs were required to maintain a notebook with all lab write ups and connections to current scientific readings.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Example of how the NGSS Core Ideas, Practices, and Cross Cutting Concepts were incorporated into the development of courses within the concentration.We specifically incorporated current event topics into all courses as well as interview assignments, where students were asked to interview a professional to understand how discipline-specific science practices were used in diverse STEM careers. We also aimed to foster the agency of students to become science citizens, developing scientific values and a commitment to lifelong learning in science (Jenkins, 2011). We incorporated real-life situations such as; energy shortages, and fracking to guide scientific discussions and problem solving activities (Marincola, 2006, National Research Council, 2007).
1.2. Purpose statement and research questionsAction researchers within elementary preservice science methods classrooms encourage qualitative approaches that may elaborate upon EPSTs' initial and changing beliefs, attitudes, and self-efficacy through instructional methods and strategies (Kazempour, 2014). The following research questions guide our study:1)Why do elementary preservice teachers want to specialize in science teaching?2)How do the EPSTs narrate change in their identities following enrollment and through the progression of one or more courses?
