Face recognition [1] is one kind of technology, which analyzes face images using computers and extracts effective identification information to recognize identities. It is one of the most vital biometric identification techniques. Compared with other biometric identification techniques, face recognition is easier in acquiring data and more likely to be accepted by users. Since the early 1990s, face recognition has gained widespread attention in pattern recognition and machine learning. Face recognition can be widely applied in security system, authentication, digital surveillance, human–computer interaction and other public places. Although great results have been achieved under constrained face images, face images in the real world usually have changes in illumination, pose, expression, occlusion, etc. When we take a face picture, it is easy to be affected by the illumination and pose, especially in outdoor environment. Face appearance can alter drastically due to illumination and pose changes, and the changes among images of the same face due to illumination and pose are almost larger than image changes due to variation in face identity [2]. Thus face recognition is a challenging task with illumination and pose variances which affect the accuracy [3].
In this paper, we put forward an adaptively weighted ULBP_MHOG and WSRC method for illumination and pose variant face recognition. Illumination is normalized firstly, which can greatly reduce the lighting effects. Due to the insensitivity of the local binary pattern (LBP) and histogram of oriented gradient (HOG) to light and posture, we extract uniform LBP (ULBP) and multiple HOG features (ULBP_MHOG) in each image block. As different information exists in different face areas, the idea of weighting is proposed. We use the information entropy to calculate weights and form adaptively weighted ULBP_MHOG (WULBP_MHOG) features, which highlight more face details. Finally, weighted sparse representation is utilized to classify probes to improve performance of face recognition.
The proposed method is used to recognize facial images under various lights and pose. Due to the consistency of the facial structure, this method has extensive applications for other heterogeneous face recognition with pose and illumination variant, such as low resolution face recognition [4], the sketch face recognition [5], face recognition with various expressions [6], etc. Besides, it can also be extended to combine with face hallucination [7], facial expression cloning [8], and other modified face images to improve accuracy.
The contributions in this paper are shown as follows:
(1) We divide images into blocks and extract WULBP_MHOG features, where MHOG has lower dimension than original HOG.
(2) Information entropy is used to calculate weights, which are adaptive. We use a discriminative classifier WSRC which fuses the location and sparse information.
(3) The proposed method combines Tan’s [9] illumination normalization with WULBP_MHOG and WSRC, which improves the accuracy effectively. Extensive comparison experiments have been carried out with different blocks, features, classifiers and the state-of-the-art methods.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews related works. In Section 3, the proposed method is presented. Experimental results are shown and analyzed in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 presents conclusions.
