Understanding students’ aspirations to study and work within science continues to be a central concern for science educators in England and other countries (EACEA, 2011, NSTC, 2013, Royal Society, 2014). More students studying science-related subjects have been desired as a means to foster greater quantitative skills, to meet an expected demand for increased numbers of science-related professionals, and to address under-representation and promote equity (CASE, 2014, OECD, 2015, Royal Society, 2008, WISE, 2014).
In England, in common with many other countries, studying science subjects at upper-secondary school is generally necessary to study science courses at university, and studying science at university is generally necessary for a science career. Accordingly, experiences in school may be especially important in facilitating or precluding future careers in science. Primary and secondary education have indeed been found to be important times for developing students’ interest in science (Maltese, Melki, & Wiebke, 2014), and students’ interest in science and their perceived utility of science (students valuing science through thinking that science leads to various benefits such as fostering their skills and facilitating careers) have been found to be closely associated with their studying and career aspirations (Regan & DeWitt, 2015). Students’ attitudes and aspirations to study science reported during secondary school have indeed predicted whether they subsequently gained science-related degrees at university (Maltese & Tai, 2011; Morgan, Gelbgiser, & Weeden, 2013; Tai, Qi Liu, Maltese, & Fan, 2006). However, it remains somewhat unclear what educators can or should do in order to foster attitudes such as interest in science and to promote aspirations towards science, especially with regard to applying particular teaching approaches such as using practical work or debates within classrooms.
Numerous teaching approaches are possible within science education, and historical attention on selecting approaches to increase attainment, and/or on approaches that are assumed to reflect what scientists do, has increasingly expanded to also consider how teaching may influence students’ attitudes (Osborne and Dillon, 2008, Savelsbergh et al., 2016). Students’ classroom experiences in secondary school have been found to associate with their interest in science, for example, but any direct associations between specific teaching approaches and students’ aspirations remains somewhat unclear (Abrahams, 2009, Hampden-Thompson and Bennett, 2013, Wang, 2012).
Accordingly, the research presented here focused on revealing the associations between students’ reports of encountering different teaching approaches and students’ reported science-related career aspirations, while accounting for students’ different background characteristics. In more detail, the research considered associations between teaching approaches and theorised antecedents of aspirations (including students’ interest and perceived utility), and then considered what factors (including teaching approaches, interest, utility, and other factors) actually associated with students’ reported aspirations, in order to gain greater practical insight. The analysis considered nationally-representative samples of students (aged 15) from the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) from 2006 and from 2015 in order to consider the consistency of any findings to enhance the overall insight. The analysis focused on students in England in order to maximise its local contextual relevance.
1.1. Science aspirations and choicesThe numbers of students studying science-related subjects at upper-secondary school and at university in England have historically varied, and have often been lower than other subjects and imbalanced with respect to students’ gender and home backgrounds (Homer, Ryder, & Banner, 2014; Royal Society, 2006, Royal Society, 2008, Smith, 2011). These differences in studying choices have often been explained by students’ different attitudes and beliefs (DeWitt, Archer, & Osborne, 2014; Mujtaba & Reiss, 2014). Essentially, various aspects of students’ lives, such as their parents’ beliefs (DeWitt et al., 2011) and classroom experiences (Wang, 2012), may influence their attitudes about science, which may then primarily influence their aspirations.Considered in review across multiple studies, students’ interest in science and their perceived utility of science have most strongly associated with their studying and career aspirations, to greater extents than other attitudes, measures of their attainment, and various other indicators related to their homes and backgrounds (Bøe and Henriksen, 2015, Regan and DeWitt, 2015, Tripney et al., 2010). Recent research in England has reaffirmed the relevance of interest and utility to students’ prospective aspirations towards studying and working in science, together with further factors including the personal value of science to their identities, their current confidence, their confidence in their future attainment, and influences from their parents (DeWitt and Archer, 2015, Mujtaba and Reiss, 2014, Sheldrake, 2016). Similarly, students in England have retrospectively reported that their studying choices have followed from their interest, perceived utility, and confidence (Bates, Pollard, Usher, & Oakley, 2009; Jensen & Henriksen, 2015; Mellors-Bourne, Connor, & Jackson, 2011; Vidal Rodeiro, 2007). Studies undertaken outside of England, such as in the United States of America (e.g. Maltese and Tai, 2011, Tai et al., 2006) and in continental European countries (e.g. Bøe and Henriksen, 2013, Bøe, 2012), have revealed broadly similar findings, especially regarding the importance of students’ interest and perceived utility.It remains unclear whether any one factor is the most influential, however. Studies highlighting that students cited interest as the primary reason for their choices (Bates et al., 2009, Mellors-Bourne et al., 2011), for example, may contrast with studies that highlighted the primary importance of students’ perceived utility of science (Mujtaba and Reiss, 2014, Vidal Rodeiro, 2007). Any number of methodological differences may be relevant, given that studies have variously considered students’ prospective studying aspirations (e.g. Mujtaba & Reiss, 2014) or their retrospective recollections about their choices (e.g. Jensen & Henriksen, 2015). While many studies have been large in scale, and broadly generalizable to students across England given particular attainment characteristics (e.g. DeWitt et al., 2014, Mujtaba and Reiss, 2014), they have not necessarily considered precisely nationally-representative samples.Overall, while students’ attitudes towards science have been found to associate with their aspirations, greater clarity would be beneficial, especially as to whether any teaching approaches also associate with students’ aspirations and/or with any attitudes that may in turn associate with aspirations. In general, it remains less clear as to what might associate with (and hence potentially influence) students’ interest in science and perceived utility of science.
1.2. Teaching approachesStudents’ studying and career aspirations have been found to be difficult to directly change (Archer, DeWitt, & Dillon, 2014). Pragmatically, in order to increase the numbers of students aspiring towards science careers, educators could instead attempt to foster students’ attitudes, such as their perceived utility of science, and/or apply various different teaching and learning approaches or activities in order to inspire or engage students.Various interventions have explicitly focused on fostering students’ attitudes towards science (Rosenzweig & Wigfield, 2016). Numerous approaches have been applied to help increase students’ interest in science, such as emphasising the relevance of science and explaining the experiences and work of scientists (Bernacki, Nokes-Malach, Richey, & Belenky, 2016; Hong & Lin-Siegler, 2012; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). Similarly, promoting the relevance and utility of science to students and their parents has been found to associate with higher science interest and attainment in students, and with students selecting courses in science (Harackiewicz, Rozek, Hulleman, & Hyde, 2012; Rozek, Hyde, Svoboda, Hulleman, & Harackiewicz, 2015). In general terms, educators may be able to explain science careers or the wider applications of science in various ways, perhaps during and/or to supplement other teaching approaches or activities.Various teaching approaches have been historically applied or recommended within science education. Practical work (often experimental laboratory work) remains valued within science education, for example, due to practical work being assumed to reflect the empirical nature of science, but other justifications and contrasting views are possible (Abrahams and Reiss, 2012, Hodson, 1993, Millar, 1998). More broadly, ‘inquiry-based’ teaching of science focuses on student-led rather than teacher-led activities (but with some guidance and support from teachers), often via observation and experimentation (and so can overlap with practical work), and where students broadly apply a scientific approach or method (Furtak, Seidel, Iverson, & Briggs, 2012; Minner, Levy, & Century, 2010; Schroeder, Scott, Tolson, Huang, & Lee, 2007). Further teaching approaches, such as fostering ‘argumentation’ or debates, are also assumed to both develop and reflect practices that scientists apply in their work, such as critical reasoning and justification (Cavagnetto, 2010, Erduran and Jiménez-Aleixandre, 2007). Alternately, ‘context-based’ teaching focuses more on enhancing students’ interest and perceived relevance of science, through using applied contexts as avenues to learn scientific skills and ideas (Bennett, Lubben, & Hogarth, 2007).Teaching approaches have often been considered in the context of attainment, essentially in order to determine optimal or efficient practices. Considered in review across multiple studies, inquiry-based learning has generally associated with increased attainment, with the most benefits arising from including some degree of support from teachers (Furtak et al., 2012, Savelsbergh et al., 2016, Schroeder et al., 2007). The benefits of argumentation approaches appear less clear or less explicitly quantified (Cavagnetto, 2010; Rönnebeck, Bernholt, & Ropohl, 2016). Context-based approaches have appeared broadly equivalent to other teaching approaches in relation to developing students’ understanding, while appearing to help increase students’ attitudes to science (Bennett et al., 2007; Vaino, Holbrook, & Rannikmäe, 2012). More specifically, both inquiry-based and context-based approaches (and also using computers to enrich learning, collaborative learning, and providing extra-curricular activities) have generally associated with students’ interest in science (Savelsbergh et al., 2016).Most evidence has come from (and/or reviews have focused mostly on) the United States of America (e.g. Furtak et al., 2012, Schroeder et al., 2007). Specifically in England, practical work has sometimes appeared less effective than expected in developing students’ understanding of underlying scientific ideas, and may not necessarily help foster a process of inquiry and ‘working like a scientist’; nevertheless, students have found practical work interesting, although it has been unclear whether this has helped foster wider interests in science (Abrahams and Millar, 2008, Abrahams, 2009, Toplis, 2012). Interventions in England to develop students’ scientific argumentation/justification have appeared effective in promoting particular patterns of argumentation, but this appeared to have no clear impact on students’ science attainment (Osborne, Erduran, & Simon, 2004; Osborne, Simon, Christodoulou, Howell-Richardson, & Richardson, 2013). In England, context-based learning of chemistry has appeared equivalent to other approaches in terms of developing students’ scientific understanding while also appeared to be interesting to students (Bennett and Lubben, 2006, Ramsden, 1997).Overall, it may be difficult to justify any particular teaching approach as clearly being ideal or optimal. Variable findings have arisen from research, which is perhaps complicated due to potentially differing conceptualisations or operationalisations of the underlying ideas (e.g. Rönnebeck et al., 2016). Justifying a particular teaching approach may also require considering which justifications are favoured, necessary, and/or sufficient for a recommendation, such whether teaching approaches should reflect practices within science, follow from theories of learning, be empirically identified as increasing attainment or other measures of understanding, and/or for any other reasons. Fundamentally, and to pragmatically avoid such issues, further clarification would be beneficial into whether and how specific teaching approaches influence students’ aspirations and/or attitudes, especially within England.
1.3. Research aimsResearch has highlighted that students’ attitudes are especially relevant to their science-related career aspirations, particularly their interest in science and their perceived utility of science (Bøe and Henriksen, 2015, Regan and DeWitt, 2015).Research has increasingly considered these attitudes within motivational theories, and has especially focused on the expectancy-value model of motivated behavioural choices within social-cognitive theory (Bøe and Henriksen, 2015, Bandura, 1997, Eccles, 2009). The expectancy-value model proposes that science studying and career choices are closely related to someone’s ‘expectations for success’ (their confidence in their current abilities and/or future capabilities in science) and the ‘subjective values’ attached to their various options (specifically including someone’s interest and perceived utility regarding science); these beliefs are developed within someone’s wider environment, such as their family and learning contexts (Eccles, 2009). These assumptions have been broadly supported by studies that have found that contextual aspects of students’ lives have associated with the students’ expectations (confidence) and subjective values (interest and utility) about science, which have then associated with their studying intentions or choices (e.g. DeWitt et al., 2011, Wang, 2012). Nevertheless, it remains less clear whether or which particular teaching approaches associate with students’ attitudes and/or career aspirations within such models.Accordingly, this study aimed to (1) clarify how various teaching approaches associated with theorised antecedents of choices from the expectancy-value model (interest, utility, confidence, and also attainment), and then (2) clarify which factors (including teaching approaches) actually associated with students’ science-related career aspirations.Given the assumptions of the expectancy-value model and prior studies (e.g. Eccles, 2009, Wang, 2012), it was hypothesised that teaching approaches would not necessarily directly associate with students’ aspirations, but might instead associate with interest and utility (and hence potentially indirectly associate with aspirations). Specifically, given prior research, it was hypothesised that approaches representing inquiry-based teaching, context-based teaching, and/or providing general explanations of the wider context or applications of science would associate with students’ interest and potentially with their perceived utility of science (e.g. Savelsbergh et al., 2016, Straw and Macleod, 2015). Additionally, given prior research, it was hypothesised that students’ interest and perceived utility of science (key elements from the expectancy-value model) would have the strongest associations with students’ aspirations (e.g. Mujtaba and Reiss, 2014, Sheldrake, 2016).
