Cervical cancer ranks as the second most common type of cancer in women aged 15–44 years worldwide [1]. Over 80% of deaths due to the disease occur in less developed regions of the world [1]. Therefore, there is a need for lower cost and more automated screening methods for early detection of cervical cancer, especially those applicable in low-resource regions. Screening procedures can help prevent cervical cancer by detecting cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), which is the potentially precancerous change and abnormal growth of squamous cells on the surface of the cervix. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) [1], CIN is divided into three grades: CIN1 (mild), CIN2 (moderate), and CIN3 (severe). Lesions in CIN2/3+ require treatment, whereas mild dysplasia in CIN1 only needs conservative observation because it will typically be cleared by an immune response in one year. Thus, in clinical practice one important goal of screening is to differentiate CIN1 from CIN2/3 or cancer (denoted as CIN2/3+ [2]).
Widely used cervical cancer screening methods today include Pap tests, HPV tests, and visual examination. Pap tests involve collecting a small sample of cells from the cervix and need a laboratory and trained personnel to examine these samples under a microscope for squamous and glandular intraepithelial lesions (SIL). Also Pap tests suffer from low sensitivity in detecting CIN 2/3+ [3]. HPV tests are DNA tests which detect human papillomavirus (HPV) strains associated with cervical cancer. The sensitivity of HPV tests in detecting CIN 2/3+ lesions varies greatly [3]. Colposcopy is a visual diagnostic procedure that often involves taking a biopsy. Digital cervicography, a non-invasive visual examination method that takes a photograph of the cervix (called a Cervigram®) after the application of 5% acetic acid to the cervix epithelium, has great potential to be a primary or adjunctive screening tool in developing countries because of its low cost and accessibility in resource-poor regions. However, one concern with cervicography is that its overall effectiveness has been questioned by reports of poor correlation between visual lesion recognition and high-grade disease, as well as disagreement among experts when grading visual findings. To address this concern and investigate the feasibility of using images as a screening method for cervical cancer, we conjecture that computer algorithms can be developed to improve the accuracy in grading lesions using visual (and image) information. This conjecture is inspired and encouraged by recent successes in computer-assisted Pap tests such as the ThinPrep Imaging System (TIS) [4], FocalPoint [5], and the work by Zhang et al. [6]; these computer-assisted Pap tests apply multi-feature Pap smear image classification using support vector machines (SVM) and other machine learning algorithms, and they have been shown to be statistically more sensitive than manual methods with equivalent specificity.
In this work, we describe our efforts in building a dataset of multiple features extracted from Cervigram images along with patient diagnosis ground truth for evaluating image-based cervical disease classification algorithms. First, we design a new type of pyramid features. From each image, we extract three complementary pyramid features: Pyramid histogram in L*A*B* color space (PLAB), Pyramid Histogram of Oriented Gradients (PHOG), and Pyramid histogram of Local Binary Patterns (PLBP). Second, besides hand-crafted pyramid features, we investigate the performance of convolutional neuron network (CNN) features for cervical disease classification. Third, on this multi-feature dataset, we also present some baseline results of applying different classic machine-learning algorithms (e.g., SVM, random forest) to differentiate patient visits that are high-risk from those visits that are low-risk. We train binary classifiers to separate CIN1/Normal and CIN2/3+ images. All the classifiers are trained and tested on the same dataset, with a uniform parameter optimization strategy. They are then compared by ROC curves and other evaluation measures. On the same dataset, our lower-cost image-based classifiers can perform comparably or better than human interpretation on other traditional screening results, such as Pap tests and HPV tests.
