Reports such as the National Academy of Science’s (2007) Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Future mark a renewed concern that U.S. students are not being prepared for successful careers in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) subjects at a rate that is congruent with the country’s needs. Issuing warnings about the United States’ declining innovative edge and the economic pressures of globalization and rapid technological advances, many advocates are seeking to reform current STEM education at the K-12 level. Although the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (2012) cautioned that we need a 33% increase in the number of bachelor’s degrees awarded annually, completion rates for undergraduate STEM majors have barely increased since 2004 (currently 34%, up from 33%) (National Student Clearinghouse Research Center, 2014). Female, Black, and Hispanic Americans are particularly underrepresented in certain STEM fields in relation to their proportion of the total U.S. population (National Science Foundation, 2014).
Middle school is a crucial time for students to learn science and begin to formulate their attitudes toward it as a potential lifetime activity. Indeed, measures of science achievement in middle school are strongly related to the later achievement of a career in science (Mau, 2003). By eighth grade, female students begin showing disproportionate signs of disinterest in science careers and non-Asian racial minorities are less likely than Whites to enroll in more academically demanding science classes (Catsambis, 1995). Performance in middle school science classes is predictive of high school course choices, which are important precursors of later STEM careers (Burkam and Lee, 2003, Reynolds, 1991, Schneider et al., 1998; Schneider, 2003; Singh, Granville, & Dika, 2002; Tyson, Lee, Borman, & Hanson, 2007).
In this paper, we investigate predictors of eighth-grade science achievement using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998–99 (ECLS-K). Drawing upon an opportunity-propensity (O-P) framework (Byrnes, 2003, Byrnes and Miller, 2007) to analyze a comprehensive list of student, teacher, classroom, and school factors, we ask which predictors concerning opportunities to learn (e.g. classroom, teacher, and school variables) and propensity to learn (e.g. student’s motivation and science knowledge) within or leading up to the students’ eighth-grade science learning environments are associated with greater eighth-grade science achievement. A particular strength of our study is the inclusion of classroom, teacher, and school opportunity factors that have not been fully included in previous empirical work within this framework.
In particular, and unique within this literature, we examine the determinants and consequences of middle school curriculum track placement (honors, standard, or remedial science). Track placement is a key middle school opportunity variable that could not be included in prior studies that focused on elementary school. We find that this variable is strongly related to other middle school science learning opportunity variables as well as to science achievement. Our analyses suggest that even though factors relating to family background and propensity to learn are the strongest predictors of eighth-grade science achievement, school-wide demographics, science instructional track placement, and teacher certification level are also significantly related to student outcomes when tested within a comprehensive model of opportunities and propensities to learn.
