The concept of fake news has been in existence even before the emergence of Internet and other computational technologies. Dissemination of fake news and misleading information has always been used as a weapon to fulfil immoral objectives since ages. The advancement of Internet and web technologies has made it very easy for anyone to post anything in online platforms like blogs, comments to news articles, social media, etc. The advancement of technologies has enabled convenient access to authentic and falsified information even faster posing a real challenge. The involvement of social media replacing the traditional media has an even more catalytic effect, where both fake and authentic news are spread extremely rapidly [1], [2]. The spread of such fake news has extremely negative impact on target individuals and also the society at large. Consequently, it also creates an impression among readers such that the general perception and responses towards authentic news also gets diluted hampering the balance of news ecosystem [3], [4], [5]. One of the startling example is the US 2016 presidential election wherein fake news were purposely spread through Facebook and twitter at a larger scale in comparison to authentic information [6].
The spreading of such falsified information often act as a basis of deriving political strategies instead of traditional debates wherein civilized discussions lead to mutual agreements of facts. Such fake information affects stock prices, choice of stock purchases, investment plans and even reactions to natural calamities. The contents of fake news are framed to make believable information that would create mass opinions and completely convince the readers or make them utterly confused. Such information thus enforces readers to change their perceptions and reactions indirectly shifting attention from real news.Download : Download high-res image (779KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Fake news levels.
Extensive studies have been conducted to analyse the pattern of spreading fake information through social media as depicted in Fig. 1. But the need of empirical investigation towards its detection, identification of source and stopping of its spreading still exists. It is very important to stop circulation of misleading falsified information. This can primarily be achieved through human intervention by verifying authenticity of information using the International Fast Checking Network (ICFN) and other manual fast checking websites like Washington post, Snopes, Fast Checker, FastCheck and TruthOrFiction [7], [8], [9]. These websites are quite authentic and efficient, but they have scalability issues in handling large volumes of data. To overcome this aspect, the concept of automatic fact-checking has evolved consisting of three elements, namely, identification, verification and correction. These three elements work hand in hand to identify false claims, verify authenticity of the claims and delivers rectified genuine information across social media platforms. These automated fast checkers have agility in responding to information and are scalable in handling the high volume of news created across social media platforms [10].
Print media organizations also have developed their own customized web extensions like Decodex that help to segregate authentic and fake information. Fake news are often disseminated seeking help of automated algorithms and hence antidote algorithms also exist that help in identifying contents and sources of such information. These advanced algorithms are basically of three categories, content based, message diffusion dynamic based and hybrid. In spite the best efforts, all of these approaches have their limitations pertinent to absence of an all inclusive dataset having multidimensional information that would help to detect fake news characteristics with high accuracy. Machine learning approaches tend to yield higher accuracy and hence the present study investigates the authenticity of tweets validating the same with specific training features [3], [11], [12]. Strict enforcement of privacy and security [13], [14], [15] laws help in combating fake news in social media.
The present study involves experimentation on two popular fake news datasets, ISOT and Liar datasets, using Google Colab which is an open source cloud service provided by Google Inc. The data is cleaned and feature extraction is performed resulting in selection of the most significant features contributing towards detection of fake news. As part of the proposed algorithm, 70% of dataset is used for training and remaining 30% is used to test the classification model using k-fold cross validation. The extracted features are further classified using an ensemble machine learning model comprising of Decision Tree (DT) classifier, Random Forest (RF) algorithm and Extra Tree (ET) classifier. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

1.Using feature extraction to use the most significant features that influence the classification of fake news.2.Selection of an Ensemble model to achieve optimized accuracy in classification.3.Reduction of training time of the ensemble classifier.
The organization of the paper is as follows - Section 2 provides extensive review of the relevant studies done in this topic of research. Section 3 presents the Background and proposed model followed by the Results and Discussion in Section 4 and the paper is concluded in Section 5.
