Effective evacuation during disastrous events is one of the most challenging issues for many local government agencies and large city traffic control centers in U.S. To build an effective evacuation model and response plans, the responsive agencies need to consider the dynamic change of human population in impact areas and social perception from local residents when designing traffic assignment plans, evacuation procedures, and shelter locations [1]. Conventionally, population data come from government cross-sectional episodic census surveys. Census data represent only the nighttime population distribution, which hardly reflects dynamic population during a day, on weekdays vs. weekends, or with variations in seasons and holidays. Emerging Big Data from cellphone calls [2], social media [3], volunteered geographic information (VGI) [4], and sensor networks [5] open unprecedented opportunities to analyze and model human dynamics in space and time [6] and furthermore to capitalize on crowdsourcing intelligence for hazard information reporting, sharing, and modeling during disastrous events. This paper introduces a novel data integration framework for developing an evacuation decision support system for wildfire, Integrated Wildfire Evacuation Decision Support System (IWEDSS). IWEDSS integrates multiple data sources including social media, census survey, geographic information systems (GIS) data layers, volunteer suggestions, and remote sensing data. It consists of four core modules: (1) dynamic population estimation, (2) stage-based robust evacuation models, (3) social perception analysis, and (4) a web-based geospatial analytics platform. The system provides key functions for data collection, traffic demand modeling, evacuation operation, and information dissemination. IWEDSS offers scientifically-based and data-driven analytic tools for evacuation planers and resource managers to make better decisions that can reduce the evacuation time and potential number of injuries and deaths. This paper also presents a case study to demonstrate the suitability of incorporating social media data to estimate the dynamic change of human population.
