It is the very nature of every human being, from the ancient time, to beautify the body with attractive decorations, including clothing. It is the mission of every designer to satisfy such human desire that consequently keeps the momentum of growth in the fashion business. Fashion designers determine the silhouettes, colours, fabrics, trimmings, and details in the design process for each product [1]. The best figure-flattering design should have the ideal prints and colours to match silhouettes; nevertheless, fashion designers do not have full control of all these five elements in the design process. This is because the fashion business has one of the longest supply chains, taking over two years to move from raw materials of fibres, to yarns, to fabrics, and to apparel; each stage involves hundreds of operations.
Textile and fashion design are two separate processes in the fashion supply chain. As shown in Fig. 1, textile products typically pass through a complex lifecycle beginning with the production of the raw materials (fibres), to spinning of yarns, fabrication of cloth from yarns (by weaving or knitting), followed by a variety of processes to make the finished cloth more appealing, colourful and useful. Further stages in the supply chain include apparel product development and manufacture, and the final step of sale and logistics (transferring clothes to consumers). It is important to note that fabric manufacturing is done in bulk at least six months ahead of the design and production of clothing (fashion), and fabric design is done by another team of experts, textile designers, not fashion designers. As shown in Fig. 1, fashion designers are not responsible for fabric design; rather, they choose the prints and colours of the fabrics to best present their products.
On the other hand, for a figure-flattering design, the prints on the clothing must follow the 3D body shape. Designers may wish to visualise the prints/pattern on the garment in 3D so as to have the best print arrangement. Although the final wearing effect is assessed in 3D, the upstream garment manufacturing and fabric print design are mainly completed on two-dimensional basis. It is the ideal case if the 3D wearing effects can be visualised before confirmation of which textile prints to use. However, this requires reversing the design process of textiles and clothing.
The current technology tries to tackle this problem with a technique called ‘engineered’ patterns, i.e. the careful placement of clothing pattern pieces on fabrics in the process of marker planning; when these pieces are cut and assembled into a garment, a degree of continuity is maintained in that the design flows unbroken around the body. Matching prints along seams is capable of helping disguise the seams of a garment [2]. Clothes with engineered patterns are perceived to be more luxurious and elegant [3] because matching prints demand a lot in terms of operators’ skills and patience. Notable designers using such techniques include Mary Katrantzou and Alexander McQueen [4], [5]. Other designers such as Sonia Delaunay, Emilio Pucci, Gianni Versace, and Basso & Brooke all favour engineered prints  [3]. It is also an observed trend in recent catwalk shows, as illustrated in Fig. 2, that textile prints are matched specifically to fit the form of a garment following the body contours of the wearer.
Although print placement or engineered prints can obtain continuous patterns, they have a number of drawbacks. This will be further explained in Section 2.2. In this paper, a novel method is proposed that allows the textile and fashion design processes to be reversed; a computer system is developed by which fashion designers can customise designs for individual customers and create figure-flattering prints on 3D garments. Taking advantage of cutting-edge digital printing technology, the 3D design can be digitally printed out on plain fabrics as pattern pieces with matched prints. The pattern pieces fulfil the apparel manufacturing requirements with proper seam allowance and correct grain. This method ensures continuity of prints along all seams on complex pattern pieces, and it also improves fabrics. The main contributions of the paper are summarised as follows.
A new design concept : traditionally, 3D garments are made of fabrics, and garments designed must fit the constraints of a patterned fabric. The method proposed in this paper is the reverse of the traditional garment-making process, where prints/patterns are designed on 3D garments directly, and the resulting pattern pieces with texture are printed on plain fabrics.
Intuitive, customised and figure-flattering design : designing textile patterns on a 3D garment directly is an intuitive way to show the final wearing effects. Designers can experiment and see the end-results without actually producing the garments. Designers can create one-of-a-kind fashion products with figure-flattering prints for individual customers.
Unbroken continuity of design eliminating tedious pattern placement : the textile patterns on the garment work with the shape and form of the garment. The continuity design flows unbrokenly around the body and is capable of helping disguise the seams of the apparel.
