Theories of embodied simulation in social perception assume that humans gain knowledge about the actions, intentions, sensations, and emotions of others through automatic simulation processes within their brains (for reviews see Gallese, 2007; Gallese, Keysers, & Rizzolatti, 2004). Involved in these simulation processes is the mirror neuron system, which is activated when actions and motions are self-performed or observed.
The sensorimotor embodiment of observed actions within the mirror neuron system (either depicted in paintings or performed by actors) might form the basis of the spectator’s empathic and aesthetic response towards the artwork (Ticini, Urgesi, & Calvo-Merino, 2015). For instance, cortico-spinal excitability was increased in observers of Michelangelo’s Expulsion from Paradise painting (depicting hand extension movement), but not when comparable photographs of natural hands had to be observed (Battaglia, Lisanby, & Freedberg, 2011). On a neuronal level, the observation of embedded motions in paintings reduces activity of inhibitory connections between the dorsal premotor cortex and the primary motor cortex (Concerto et al., 2016).
However, the mirror neuron system might not only be sensitive to observed actions, but also to the product of those actions, like sounds of actions (Gazzola, Aziz-Zadeh, & Keysers, 2006), speech (D'Ausilio et al., 2009), handwriting and scribble (Heimann, Umiltà, & Gallese, 2013). In their embodied simulation account of aesthetics Freedberg and Gallese (2007) proposed that the mirror neuron system might also simulate the movements used to create artwork, and that this motor simulation might be part of the aesthetic experience. For instance pointillist-style paintings are perceived as more aesthetically pleasing, when the paintings were primed with actions compatible to the artists painting style, compared to incompatible movements (Ticini, Rachman, Pelletier, & Dubal, 2014). Two neurophysiological studies tested whether the mirror neuron system is involved in the perception of abstract action traces in artwork, utilizing mu-activity as an index of mirror neuron activity (Umiltà, Berchio, Sestito, Freedberg, & Gallese, 2012) and event related potentials (Sbriscia-Fioretti et al., 2013). Results of both studies indicate that mirror neuron system might respond more strongly to handmade original abstract art as compared to computer-generated counterparts. However, the handmade and computer-generated graphics differed not only with respect to their origin, but also with respect to the level of detail and complexity (e.g. smoothness of the contour or three-dimensional information like shadows). Therefore, the results of these studies might be confounded with effects of visual complexity. Even more, alpha-activity, which is affected by the complexity of visual stimuli (Gale, Christie, & Penfold, 1971) and which is measured in the same frequency band as mu-activity (Pineda, 2005), might overshadow mu-activity, leading to confounded results.
The aim of this study is to dissociate motor-simulation from visual processes. As in previous studies (Sbriscia-Fioretti et al., 2013, Umiltà et al., 2012), handmade and computer-generated graphics are used. Both types of graphic were altered in their complexity. Central mu-activity, as an index of activity of the mirror neuron system (Arnstein, Cui, Keysers, Maurits, & Gazzola, 2011; Pineda, 2005), and alpha-activity as an index of visual processes were recorded (Gale et al., 1971). If central mu-suppression is associated with the perception of action traces, it should be modulated by the complexity of handmade but not by the complexity of computer-generated graphics. In contrast, alpha-activity should be modulated by the visual complexity regardless of the graphics’ origin. Several studies indicate that the mirror neuron system is involved in empathic processes (for an overview see Iacoboni, 2009). Specifically, mu activity within the EEG seems to be affected through empathic processes (e.g. Hoenen, Schain, & Pause, 2013). Therefore, it was further tested whether self-reported empathic abilities positively covary with the sensitivity of the mirror neuron system for traces of actions.
