Science and scientific knowledge are an important part of our culture and play an essential role in our everyday lives (Bybee, 1997, OECD, 2016). To understand the fundamental elements of our world and to be able to participate in socioscientific discussions, it is essential to have not only knowledge and skills in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) but also an understanding of the nature of science (Driver et al., 1996, Duschl et al., 2007, OECD, 2016). An understanding of the nature of science (for reasons of better legibility, we refer to this as an understanding of science in the following) includes an understanding of “what science is and how it is done” (McComas, 1998, p. 50). Due to the essential relevance of science, most nations have advocated the development of students’ understanding of science as a normative goal of science education as early as elementary school (e.g., European Commission, 2007).
Several approaches have been developed to increase students’ understanding of science (e.g., Bendixen, 2016, Muis et al., 2016). In this context, extracurricular interventions are one important part of the educational landscape and complement science education in school (e.g., Valla & Williams, 2012). Interventions can offer an effective way to promote students’ understanding of science (e.g., Bendixen, 2016, Elder, 2002). Also, the European Commission (2007) encouraged the importance of science interventions especially for elementary school children when they are in their “curiosity golden age” (p. 12). In order to promote students’ understanding of science across a broad range, it is important to put effective interventions into practice (Lendrum & Wigelsworth, 2013). However, interventions that have considered not only science content knowledge but also a fundamental understanding of science have been rather rare, especially in the context of elementary school education (e.g., Bendixen, 2016, Elder, 2002, Muis et al., 2016). Furthermore, not many interventions have been successfully evaluated when implemented under real-world conditions (see Fixsen et al., 2013, Spiel et al., 2016).
To close this gap, the goal of this study was to analyze the effectiveness of a recently developed science intervention for elementary school children when implemented under real-world conditions. The intervention was part of an extracurricular enrichment program and focused on promoting the understanding of science as well as need for cognition and epistemic curiosity. The effectiveness of the intervention under standardized conditions was already demonstrated in a randomized controlled study (Schiefer et al., 2017). In the current study, we applied a randomized block design with waitlist control groups and tested the effectiveness of the intervention with respect to the same outcomes as in the first study but added instruments to measure further central aspects of the understanding of science.
1.1. Conceptualization of the understanding of science and its related motivational dispositions1.1.1. Understanding of scienceTo date, there is no universal view or standard conceptualization of this broad construct, which can be theoretically located at the intersection of philosophy of science, history of science, sociology of science, and psychology of science (McComas, 1998). Lederman’s (1992) operational definition has been cited most often. According to him, the understanding of science refers to the epistemology of science, science as a way of knowing, or the values and beliefs inherent to scientific knowledge and its development (Lederman, 1992, Lederman and Zeidler, 1987). Two constructs are considered particularly essential for the development of a basic understanding of science: (a) inquiry-based methodological competencies and (b) epistemic beliefs (Elder, 2002, Lederman, 1992, Osborne, 2013).Inquiry-based methodological competencies. Inquiry-based methods build the basis for the genesis, construction, and development of knowledge in science. An understanding of these methods is an important aspect of the understanding of science (e.g., Dogan and Abd-El-Khalick, 2008, Ryder and Leach, 2000, Zimmerman, 2007). A basic inquiry-based method is the control and systematic combination of variables (Chen and Klahr, 1999, Zimmerman, 2007). This so-called control of variables strategy (CVS) is required for the design of unconfounded experiments. It is relevant for the targeted testing of hypotheses and enables causal inferences to be made from experiments (Simon, 1989, Zimmerman, 2007). Beyond strategies such as the CVS, the understanding of the whole process of scientific inquiry (the so-called scientific inquiry cycle, SIC; Kuhn, 2011, White and Frederiksen, 1998, White et al., 2009, Zimmerman, 2007) is a central methodological competence in the context of the understanding of science. The SIC includes the consecutive steps of (a) generating hypotheses on the basis of a specific research question, (b) planning and conducting experiments, (c) collecting data, (d) computing analyses, (e) evaluating evidence, and (f) drawing inferences. Thus, the SIC subsumes all individual components of scientific inquiry under a meta-perspective. The SIC emphasizes a holistic view as the single components of this cyclical and cumulative process build the basis of knowledge acquisition and change (Kuhn and Franklin, 2007, Zimmerman, 2007). It represents the theory-driven deductive approach that is applied in scientific investigations (e.g., White et al., 2009).Epistemic beliefs. Besides methodological competencies, the development of sophisticated epistemic beliefs plays an essential role in the development of a profound understanding of science (Elby et al., 2016, Lederman, 1992, Osborne, 2013). Epistemic beliefs are subjective beliefs about the nature of knowledge (what one believes knowledge is) and the nature of knowing (beliefs about the process through which one comes to know) in science (see Elby et al., 2016, Hofer and Pintrich, 1997, Lederman, 2007). In recent decades, one major line of research has focused on identifying dimensions of epistemic beliefs, and a debate has raged on this issue for a long time (e.g., Chinn et al., 2011, Hofer and Pintrich, 1997, Schommer, 1990, Schommer, 1994). In our studies, we adhered to Conley, Pintrich, Vekiri, and Harrison’s (2004) conceptualization of epistemic beliefs, which was based on previous work by Elder (2002) and Hofer and Pintrich (1997). Conley et al.’s (2004) model as well as their respective questionnaire has focused explicitly on elementary school children (fifth graders). They identified four dimensions: source, certainty, development, and justification of knowledge.The source dimension addresses beliefs about the knowledge that resides in external authorities. Sophisticated stances include an engagement in critical evaluations, an avoidance of “blind faith” in external authorities as teachers, and the ability to generate knowledge through one’s own thinking and inquiry. Although there is a current debate on this dimension (e.g., Bromme & Thomm, 2016, emphasized the importance of accurately judging experts’ pertinence for science topics), we refer to the dimension described by Conley et al. (2004) as the debate is based primary on research with adults.1 The certainty dimension reflects beliefs about the (un)changeability of knowledge in the natural sciences. Sophisticated stances include statements about the possibility of change and further development in scientific knowledge and a variety of answers to complex problems. The development dimension is associated with beliefs that recognize science as an evolving subject. Sophisticated stances include statements about how scientific ideas are continuously changing (e.g., due to new discoveries or data). Finally, the justification dimension refers to the role of experiments and how students evaluate claims. Sophisticated stances include justifications for judgments and the acceptance of a variety of explanations for scientific phenomena (see Conley et al., 2004).1.1.2. Motivational dispositions in the context of science learning and inquiryNeed for cognition. Need for cognition is an individuals’ tendency to “engage in and enjoy thinking” (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982, p. 116) or “to enjoy effortful cognitive endeavors” (Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao, 1984, p. 306). People with a high level of need for cognition show a high individual disposition for the willingness to solve problems through thinking and reflecting (Cacioppo et al., 1984). Need for cognition has been found to positively affect cognitive behavior such as elaborating on, evaluating, and recalling information (e.g., Peltier & Schibrowsky, 1994) as well as problem solving and decision making (e.g., Nair & Ramnarayan, 2000). There is also evidence that need for cognition influences students’ level of interest in and attitudes toward science (Feist, 2012). According to Feist, 2006, Feist, 2012, need for cognition is associated with interest in science because the latter begins with wonder, questioning, and curiosity about how the world operates. Studies have reported associations between the need for cognition and aspects of reasoning related to science, such as critical thinking and rational thinking (Cacioppo et al., 1983, Kardash and Scholes, 1996). It is assumed that need for cognition develops, inter alia, through the completion of cognitive challenges and the satisfaction and joy that is experienced afterwards (Cacioppo, Petty, Feinstein, & Jarvis, 1996). Children’s positive science experiences (e.g., feeling competent in solving problems by thinking) are assumed to foster need for cognition (Preckel & Strobel, 2017).Epistemic curiosity. Epistemic curiosity is conceptually related to need for cognition. It reflects the desire for knowledge that motivates individuals to learn new ideas, to close information gaps, and to solve intellectual problems (Litman, 2008, Litman and Spielberger, 2003). Epistemic curiosity has been found to be positively related to epistemic beliefs, exploratory behavior, and the closure of gaps in knowledge (Litman et al., 2005, Richter and Schmid, 2010). Epistemic curiosity might be important in the context of science learning and inquiry, where problems very often require the elimination of knowledge gaps and the genesis of new knowledge (e.g., Kuhn, 2011). Students might then be curious about the missing information and be motivated to fill the information gaps (Loewenstein, 1994). In this regard, the roles of inquiry-based learning approaches as potential modes of stimulating student curiosity have been described (Pluck & Johnson, 2011). There is also evidence that students’ epistemic curiosity can be aroused in the process of participating in competitive hands-on activities in the domains of science and technology (Hong, Hwang, Szeto, Tai, & Tsai, 2016).
1.2. Promoting children’s understanding of science1.2.1. Existing approaches and their effectivenessDue to the great importance and the call for the early promotion of students’ understanding of science (e.g., European Commission, 2007, National Research Council, 1996, OECD, 2016), a variety of approaches in school as well as extracurricular settings have been developed (e.g., Bendixen, 2016, Cavagnetto, 2010, Valla and Williams, 2012). Overall, especially at the secondary school level, inquiry-based learning approaches and hands-on science activities seem to be successful approaches for fostering the understanding of science because they have been found to be positively associated with science competencies as well as several motivational outcomes (e.g., Blanchard et al., 2010, Klahr et al., 2007, Pluck and Johnson, 2011, Satterthwait, 2010, Stohr-Hunt, 1996). Although inquiry has been defined in various ways (see Furtak, Seidel, Iverson, & Briggs, 2012), inquiry-based science units enable students to work like scientists themselves (De Jong, 2006) through questioning, formulating hypotheses, conducting experiments, and drawing inferences (National Research Council, 1996). Experiencing research as an interesting process that can be influenced is assumed to be associated with a better understanding of science as well as an increasing need for cognition (e.g., Blanchard et al., 2010, Preckel and Strobel, 2017), in particular when actively guided by a teacher (Furtak et al., 2012). Furthermore, epistemic beliefs could be enhanced by constructivist or explicit reflexive approaches in which teachers include critical discussions of epistemic issues (e.g., Akerson and Hanuscin, 2007, Smith et al., 2000) or address contradictory or conflicting evidence in scientific investigations (e.g., Kienhues, Bromme, & Stahl, 2008). Empirical studies indicate that inquiry-based approaches, hands-on activities, and reflections on epistemic issues are particularly effective in secondary school (for a meta-analysis, see Furtak et al., 2012).In comparison with interventions for secondary school children, interventions for elementary school children are rare, particularly for children below Grade 52 (see Bendixen, 2016, Furtak et al., 2012, Valla and Williams, 2012). However, hands-on activities and inquiry-based approaches seem to be similarly important for promoting the understanding of science for elementary school children as has been described for older students (Cotabish et al., 2013, Satterthwait, 2010). Cotabish et al. (2013), for instance, used inquiry-based science units that engaged students in Grades 2 and 3 in creative and critical thinking through investigations and problem solving and revealed positive effects on students’ science process skills, science concepts, and content knowledge. With regard to epistemic beliefs, Conley et al. (2004) found that the epistemic beliefs of fifth-grade students could be enhanced during a 9-week “hands on” science course. Results showed that students’ beliefs about source and certainty of knowledge became more sophisticated. In summary, inquiry and problem-based approaches, hands-on science activities, as well as critical reflection and argumentation seem to be relevant for promoting young children’s understanding of science.1.2.2. Rationale for the development of a new interventionThe reviewed intervention studies provide insights into some of the most promising methods that can be used to successfully foster children’s understanding of science. However, these studies have some limitations. Existing approaches have often focused on only single aspects of the understanding of science or science content and not on a comprehensive view of the nature of science. For instance, the program by Cotabish et al. (2013) focused on the effect on science content or the design of controlled experiments but not on the understanding of epistemic issues. Furthermore, the research designs of most of these studies have been limited. More specifically, some of the described instructional designs were confounded with a specific teacher (e.g., Akerson and Hanuscin, 2007, Smith et al., 2000), and there were hardly any experimental or quasi-experimental intervention studies with control groups, which are needed to investigate causal relations (see Bendixen, 2016). Thus, although single intervention approaches seem to be effective, there is no clear, empirical evidence for this assumption.To add to prior research and to foster several relevant aspects of the understanding of science, we developed a new 10-week extracurricular program to foster third- and fourth-grade students. We considered an understanding of inquiry-based methodological competencies (i.e., the understanding of the complete process of the SIC and the CVS) as well as sophisticated epistemic beliefs to be particularly important for the development of a comprehensive view of the understanding of science (see Lederman, 2007). In developing the intervention, we combined the most promising methods as inquiry-based and problem-based learning, hands-on activities, and reflection on epistemic issues to foster methodological competencies and epistemic beliefs (e.g., Akerson and Hanuscin, 2007, Conley et al., 2004, Cotabish et al., 2013, Ryu and Sandoval, 2012). Furthermore, the intervention included intellectually challenging problem-solving tasks and hands-on-science activities, which were intended to foster motivational factors in the context of science learning and inquiry (see Pluck and Johnson, 2011, Preckel and Strobel, 2017). We also adapted methods that were originally developed for older students, for instance, the use of conflicting evidence (see Kienhues et al., 2008) as we view this as another promising method for fostering students’ epistemic beliefs. To address issues that are relevant for the understanding of science but not yet covered by existing studies (e.g., the fostering of an explicit understanding of the constituent processes of the SIC), we developed our own methods through the step-by-step implementation of the SIC. The content, methods, and basic design principles of our intervention are described in the Method section.
1.3. Implementing interventions in the real worldBased on the requirement and development of science interventions, questions concerning the successful implementation of such programs are a major focus of educational research and practice (Hulleman and Cordray, 2009, Lendrum and Wigelsworth, 2013, McDonald et al., 2006). Putting an intervention into practice offers a great challenge (Lendrum & Humphrey, 2012). For the successful implementation of an intervention, its effectiveness and practicability should be demonstrated at different stages between its development and broad dissemination in practice (Humphrey et al., 2016). It is particularly important to investigate whether an intervention is effective under real-world conditions (Durlak, 1998, Gottfredson et al., 2015), for example, when it is implemented by the staff and resources that are normally available (Dane and Schneider, 1998, Greenberg et al., 2005). Thus, it is important to investigate factors that affect the implementation of an intervention such as the implementer’s characteristics (e.g., education, skills, attitudes, and experiences) as well as implementation fidelity (i.e., Hulleman and Cordray, 2009, Humphrey et al., 2016, Rockoff, 2004, Sadler et al., 2013). Implementation fidelity is the degree to which an intervention is delivered as intended (Carroll et al., 2007). By understanding and measuring whether an intervention has been implemented with fidelity, researchers gain a better understanding of “how and why an intervention works” (Carroll et al., 2007, p.1).
1.4. The present studyThe goal of the present study was the practical implementation of a science intervention for elementary school children, which was recently developed by a team of researchers at a university as part of a statewide enrichment program in southwest Germany (Hector Children’s Academy Program, HCAP). The effectiveness of the intervention was already analyzed in a first effectiveness study with 65 children under standardized conditions: It was held by three program developers from the university who followed the manual strictly (Schiefer, Golle, Tibus et al., 2017). Specifically, a randomized block design with a treated control group (who participated in a parallel course, a speech training) was used in the first study. Positive effects of the intervention were found on children’s epistemic beliefs (0.18 < ES < 0.61) and epistemic curiosity (ES = 0.34). The current study involved a larger sample (N = 117 elementary school children), and the intervention was offered under real-world conditions by 10 HCAP course instructors—teachers and course instructors with a professional background in the natural sciences—who usually taught the courses in the HCAP. To maximize implementation fidelity, they participated in a mandatory training program and were given a detailed course manual and all required materials. We applied again a randomized block design with pretest and posttest, but used instead of a treated control group—who also dealt in part with scientific topics—a waitlist control group to estimate the treatment effects more ecologically valid and simple. The effectiveness of the intervention was assessed with respect to the same outcomes as in the first study, but the current study used additional instruments that were required to assess central aspects of children’s understanding of science (see Schiefer, Golle, Tibus, & Oschatz, 2017). These were the understanding of the SIC, experimentation strategies, and need for cognition.The science intervention was the same as in the first study. It was intended to foster children’s inquiry-based methodological competencies (experimentation strategies and understanding of the SIC) and epistemic beliefs. Both constructs are essential for the development of a basic understanding of science (Elder, 2002, Lederman, 1992, Lederman, 2007, Osborne, 2013). The intervention included learning settings that allowed students to participate actively, that is, by means of inquiry-based learning approaches, active experimentation and testing of hypotheses, application of the CVS, and working scientifically according to the SIC. Thus, we expected to find positive intervention effects on inquiry-based methodological competencies. Consequently, we hypothesized that after participating in the intervention, the children would show a better understanding of the SIC and experimentation strategies than the children in the waitlist control group (Hypothesis 1). Second, the intervention included reflections on epistemological issues (i.e., by means of discussions, science communication, teaching, and critical scrutiny). Specifically, we expected that children in the intervention would develop more sophisticated epistemic beliefs than children in the control group (Hypothesis 2). Finally, the intervention included intellectually challenging elements with the aim of engaging children in critical thinking and reflection on scientific problems and was therefore expected to help eliminate information gaps. These aspects are associated with need for cognition and epistemic curiosity. Consequently, we hypothesized that after participating in the intervention, the children would show a higher level of need for cognition and epistemic curiosity than the control group (Hypothesis 3).
