Information security is one of the primary concerns for executives leading organizations across the globe, with increasing visibility among key decision makers each passing year (PWC, 2015). Media coverage of high profile security breaches has exacerbated concerns that current strategies to detect and prevent intrusions are inadequate. Some researchers argue that this inadequacy is derived from reliance on statistical models or attack signatures that attackers have learned to avoid (Beaver et al, 2013, Chen, Malin, 2011, Ioannou et al, 2013, Shiva et al, 2010). Other researchers argue that point solutions may be capable of detecting certain aspects of attacks actions, but cannot provide all data required to verify malicious activity due to their inability to observe all events that occur across the network affecting multiple computing systems (Claycomb and Shin, 2010). Due to these limitations, it has become increasingly important to analyze data from multiple auditing systems deployed in separate locations within a network topology in order to detect sophisticated attacks (Best et al, 2014, Claycomb, Shin, 2010, Flagg et al, 2007, Ioannou et al, 2013, Ross et al, 2011, Rush et al, 2015, Shalyapin, Zhukov, 2015). Unfortunately, aggregation of data from multiple sources presents several challenges such as managing large volumes of data from disparate sensors and making sense of disorganized, incompatible, or seemingly chaotic data (Beaver et al, 2013, Best et al, 2014, Chen, Malin, 2011, Claycomb, Shin, 2010, Shiva et al, 2010). These challenges greatly impact information security and incident response teams' ability to identify security breaches or implement corrective action to detect, prevent or mitigate the damage incurred during attacks.
This paper focuses on overcoming these challenges by implementing a mechanism for fusing multi-sensor data into machine generated alerts that accurately depict attack actions across multiple disparate sensors, ultimately resulting in improved detection rates and streamlined analyst workflows. Analysis of historical security breach data and successful security analyst investigative techniques has yielded insights toward effective threat identification via behavioral modeling (Hutchins et al, 2010, Ioannou et al, 2013, Kul, Upadhyaya, 2015, McWorther, 2013, Rush et al, 2015, Shalyapin, Zhukov, 2015). Research in threat behavioral modeling resulted in the adoption of the term “kill-chain,” borrowed from United States military doctrine for targeting individuals of interest through behavioral analysis, as a means to describe the sequence of events an attacker must perform in order to achieve success during an attack (Hutchins et al., 2010).
This paper was inspired by the Lockheed Martin Kill-Chain, which is currently used by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as a component of the Cyber Security Framework, and is often cited as the original cyber kill-chain model (Hutchins et al., 2010). However, attempts to implement the Lockheed Martin Kill-Chain within production environments as a mechanism to aggregate or correlate data from disparate sensor systems proved to be a difficult, if not impossible, task. This led to the hypothesis that additional phases would be required to properly address the challenges imposed by variations in metadata generated within the generic phases of the kill-chain. This paper presents a novel kill-chain model with specific phases designed to facilitate meta-data aggregation in order to overcome the challenges of incomplete or disconnected sensor data presented by other security researchers.
Application of this framework within a security information and event management (SIEM) system proved that the additional kill-chain phases were easily adaptable to the existing correlation engine resulting in improved alerts that outperformed individual sensor false positive and false negative rates. Additionally, alarms generated via this correlation framework resulted in a drastic reduction in alarm noise and volume while simultaneously providing fused data conducive to more efficient investigation workflows and rapid threat identification by security analysts.
