According to different effects imposed on other system components, two types of component failures can be identified: local failure (LF) and propagated failure (PF). An LF only causes an outage to the component itself; has no effect on other system components. A PF not only fails the component itself but also causes failures of other system components [1]. According to the scope of affected components, a PF can be further classified into two types: PF with global effect (PFGE) that propagates through the entire system and thus leads to the overall system failure, and PF with selective effect (PFSE) that only affects a subset of system components [2]. Refer to Section 4.4 for a detailed example of PFGE and PFSE.
However, it is not always the case that a PF can affect other system components; the global or selective propagation effect of a PF could be isolated in systems with functional dependence (FDEP) behavior, where the failure of certain component(s) (referred to as a trigger) causes other system component(s) (each referred to as a dependent component) to become unusable or inaccessible [3], [4]. In particular, if the trigger component fails before the occurrence of any PF from dependent components, the propagation effects of the PF are isolated. In other words, the failure isolation effect takes place. However, if any PF from a dependent component happens before the trigger fails, the failure propagation effect takes place affecting other system components. Such competition between the failure propagation and failure isolation events in the time domain is referred to as competing failures in this work [5].
Consider an example of a local area network (LAN) where computers access the internet through routers. Since the router failure makes the connected computers inaccessible, each router is considered as a trigger component and the corresponding connected computers are components that are functionally dependent on the router. A PF (e.g. virus) occurring in a connected computer would propagate to other LANs through the router and thus crash the entire network. However, if the router has already failed before the PF happens to any connected computer (e.g., due to access to infected local files on a flash drive), the failure isolation effect occurs; computers of other LANs in the network are not affected by this PF.
Note that the type of competing failures considered in this work is different from those addressed in literature [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], which are mainly concerned with multiple failure or degradation processes. The competing failure addressed in this work is concerned with competition in the time domain between the failure isolation and failure propagation effects in systems with the FDEP behavior.
Considerable research efforts have been expended in the reliability analysis of single-phase systems subject to the considered competing failures [5], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. However, many real-world systems, such as aerospace, nuclear power systems, air borne weapon systems and distributed computing systems, are phased-mission systems (PMSs) where the system mission involves several different tasks that have to be accomplished in consecutive phases [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. Because a PMS may be subject to different stresses, environmental conditions and reliability requirements during different phases of the mission, system configuration, success criteria, and component behavior may vary from phase to phase. Consider the above mentioned computer network example where computers are working together to complete a computational task involving several sequential sub-tasks or phases. In some phases, only computers within an LAN are needed to complete the sub-tasks, that is, no FDEP behaviors are involved in these phases; whereas in other phases, external data or files are needed from outside the LAN, which can be accessible from the network through routers, and thus the FDEP behavior between the relevant computers and corresponding routers exist in these phases. The competition between virus propagation and router failures has to be addressed when analyzing reliability of such PMSs. Moreover, statistical dependencies exist across phases for a given component (the state of a component at the beginning of a new phase has to be identical to its state at the end of the previous phase). The dynamic behaviors in both component and system levels as well as the statistical dependencies bring unique challenges to competing failure analysis of PMSs [23].
Ref. [24] has recently studied effects of competing failures in the reliability analysis of PMSs. But the model of [24] is limited, assuming there is only a single FDEP group appearing in only one phase of the mission and any PF has the global effect (i.e., PFGE). In this work, we make new contributions by modeling PMSs with multiple FDEP groups that may appear in a single phase or multiple phases. Moreover, different FDEP groups are not necessarily independent; they may share the same trigger event or the same dependent component. For the computer network example, different groups of computers within the same LAN may be involved in different phases of the mission, which access internet through the same router. The common router makes the multiple FDEP groups dependent. Both PFGE and PFSE are addressed through case studies in this work.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the system model studied. Section 3 presents a Markov-based method for reliability analysis of PMS subject to competing failures involving multiple independent or dependent FDEP groups. Section 4 presents four case studies. Conclusions and future work are given in Section 5.
