Mummy Science has become an established aspect of biomedical, paleopathological, and bioarchaeological study (Aufderheide, 2003). In many contexts, medical imaging plays an important role in the non-destructive analysis of mummified remains. New imaging methods, primarily borrowed from biomedical sciences, continue to be adapted to bioarachaeological investigations of the past. Notable among these newer methods are multi-detector computed tomography (MDTC) (Beckett and Conlogue, 2010) and magnetic resonance (MR) (Posh, 2015, Rühli, 2015), as well as experimental techniques such as terahertz imaging (Thz) (Öhrström et al., 2015). With both these newer and more standard technologies however, it is critical to understand the importance of rigorous adherence to scientific methodology during both data acquisition and data interpretation.
The rigor of mummy science and the role of imaging data are perhaps best exemplified in the critical concept of context as described in the following paragraphs. Similar to the crime scene in a forensic case, context is critical. Without context we have little hope of meaningfully interpreting data collected in mummy science studies. Original contexts may be disrupted or impacted by post-depositional, taphonomic changes, both natural or created by human interaction. The many variables associated with the original context must be carefully considered when making any interpretations. We will focus here on two aspects of context in considering the rigors of imaging data collection and interpretation, external and internal contexts.
The initial features associated with context are those of the external context. The archaeological findings are critical to our understanding of what is being studied. To improve the accuracy of imaging data interpretations, the researcher must consider place, time, climate change over time, water table changes, erosions, endemic disease patterns (if known), structures, materials used, tombs and other burial styles along with their created microenvironments. All available archaeological and historical data, along with social theory are additional aspects of the bioarchaeoogical context. If the study is conducted away from the point of discovery, in a museum collection room, for example, the current context and resultant environmental conditions also need to be considered along with any records describing the original context and the means of transport to the alternate location.
An equally important construct is the internal context. Imaging studies are well suited to provide internal information inaccessible other than by autopsying or otherwise opening the object or mummy, both destructive procedures. The internal context as it relates to imaging applications is described as the condition and bioanthropological information derived from within closed artifacts or mummified remains. Paleoimaging helps to collect data regarding the internal context by being able to ‘see’ within a wrapped mummy or ‘see’ within a mummy that is unwrapped but still encased in its mummified integument. A variety of bioanthropological questions can usually be addressed using imaging methodologies. In a setting where direct access to the body is not possible without disrupting the enclosure or wrappings, imaging can be employed to acquire data regarding sex, age at death, dental health, presence of some paleopathologies, as well as evidence of pre or perimortem trauma or injuries. These data have the greatest meaning if collected at the point of discovery (POD). Understanding the internal context can inform researchers regarding the internal structures associated with the burial be they archaeological or biological in nature. Another important point is that the POD data can be used to understand post depositional changes within the subject if transport has occurred. Without the POD information, interpretation of imaging data risks being severely compromised.
1.1. The role and contribution of collected imaging data to bioarchaeological interpretation effortsImaging methodologies have been very helpful in answering specific anthropological and archaeological questions. The data derived from imaging methods are of significance particularly when the mummified remains are within a burial chamber, enclosure, or wrapped in textiles, bandages or other presentations that decrease the efficacy of macroscopic visual inspection alone. Given that imaging can ‘see what can’t be seen’ a variety of questions can be answered that assist in the reconstruction of lives as described above. In addition, imaging is useful in ascertaining the presence/absence of medical interventions, such as trepanation, and are instrumental in conducting tissue targeted biopsies.Regarding the archaeological perspective, imaging can provide data that may allow interpretations related to the use of and type of artifacts present and other evidence of both funerary and burial practices. Objects discovered may potentially assist with understanding the temporal context and imaging may also guide additional research by assisting in artifact retrieval.As we consider the significance of digital data recording and interpretation, it is critical that the concepts be placed in the bioarchaeological construct. Buiksrta, (2006) defines bioarchaeology as the attempt to reconstruct human histories with focused effort on anthropological problem solving and inquiry with integration of archaeological data. To reconstruct life experiences, imaging data must be carefully collected and scrutinized in consideration of the external and internal contexts of the archaeological and biological findings. Only in this manner are we able to reduce unfounded assumptions and speculations and thus reconstruct human histories with a greater degree of accuracy and confidence.I begin with a brief overview of paleoimaging and its use in mummy sciences. This is followed by a discussion of the need for rigor in digital data recording, including sections on standards development, image acquisition, image interpretational phase, and in digital archiving and its significance for bioarchaeological research.
