The information security community has come to realize that the weakest link in a cybersecurity chain is human (Sasse & Flechais, 2005). To develop effective cybersecurity training programs for employees in the workplace, it is necessary to understand the security behavior of both men and women, and the similarities and differences of their security behaviors. According to U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics in 2010, women comprised 47 per cent of the total U.S. labor force and 66 million women were employed in the U.S. Gender is one of the most fundamental groups and membership in such a group is likely to have a profound influence on an individual's perceptions, attitudes, and performance (Nosek, Banaji, & Greenwald, 2002). As a result, studying the role that gender plays with respect to cybersecurity beliefs and behaviors is very important.
Morris, Venkatesh, and Ackerman (2005) studied gender differences in technology adoption and use in workplace and found that gender differences were more pronounced with increasing age. Specifically, gender differences in technology perceptions became more pronounced among older workers and less pronounced among younger workers. Several studies show that gender is related to the degree of online privacy concerns and females show greater privacy concerns than males (Hoy and Milne, 2010, Laric et al., 2009). Hearth and Rao (2009) found that gender has a significant correlation on employees' policy compliance intentions and females have higher policy compliance intentions than males. Ifinedo (2014) found that males appeared to have lower security policy compliance intentions compared to females and suggest that practitioners pay attention to gender differences in relation to security policy compliance in organizations. Targeted security awareness program and monitoring are also suggested to bridge gaps in security behavior between male and female (Ifinedo, 2014). However, a recent study by Vance, Siponen, and Pahnila (2012) surveyed a Finnish municipal organization and received 210 survey responses from 22% male and 78% female employees. The survey results did not reveal any gender difference in employees' intention to comply with information system's security policies.
Theories such as the Health Belief Model (Rosenstock, 1974) and Protection Motivation Theory (Rogers, 1983) have been used primarily to explain users' intention to employ security technologies, and how and when a user adopts adaptive or maladaptive behaviors when he/she is informed of a threatening security incident. Health belief model (HBM) is a conceptual model developed to explain why people do not participate in health behaviors. The components of HBM include perceived susceptibility, perceived severity, perceived benefits, perceived barriers, and cues to action. Protection motivation theory (PMT) is an extension and reworking of HBM. PMT considers intention to protect oneself as the determinant of health behavior, and intention is dependent on perceived susceptibility, perceived severity, self-efficacy, and response-efficacy.
Guided by these theories, recent empirical studies (Mohamed and Ahmad, 2012, Ng et al., 2009, Pahnila et al., 2007) in information security also found that perceived susceptibility, perceived severity, perceived benefits, and self-efficacy are correlated with security behaviors. In addition, other studies (Vance et al., 2012, Son, 2011, Hearth and Rao, 2009) show that perceived barriers, peer behavior, cues to action (i.e., experiences or triggers that would motivate and activate a user to practice computer security), past security compliance habits and personal factors (e.g., gender, education level) also have some effects on users' security behavior. Other studies also found that computer skills, information seeking skills, and prior experience with computer security practices (Ng et al., 2009) can predict a person's security behavior (Wan, Wang, & Haggerty, 2008).
The prior research has revealed evidence of gender differences surrounding beliefs and behavioral intentions regarding cybersecurity. Following the prior research studies, there is a need for more research investigating the similarities and differences of the cybersecurity beliefs and behavior among men and women. Furthermore, research has applied psychological factors that have been developed to explain health related behaviors to the domain of cybersecurity. Therefore, this research investigated the relations between gender and the components of the proposed cybersecurity behavior model (Fig. 1), which is based on Protection Motivation Theory and Health Belief Model. Thus, we conducted a survey study to investigate the relations between gender and these factors of the model. Five-hundred-seventy-nine (579) employees from various U.S. organizations and companies completed an online survey with 87 Likert scale survey items. The survey items are drawn from the perspectives of cybersecurity, information technology, and psychology and decision science. Many of these survey items are designed anew while the rest are adapted from the literature. The results from data analysis of the survey data are presented in this paper.Download : Download high-res image (226KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Cybersecurity behavior model.
