Land managers and environmental scientists are increasingly recognizing the need to learn from Indigenous peoples, especially regarding climate adaptation (Crate, 2008, Orlove et al., 2009) and sustainable resource management (Berkes et al., 2000, Turner and Berkes, 2006, Turner et al., 2000). In support of such learning opportunities, researchers have identified linkages between traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) as a subcomponent of broader Indigenous knowledge systems and western scientific knowledge (Berkes, 2012, Bohensky and Maru, 2011, Ford and Martinez, 2000, Higgs, 2005). At the same time, many Indigenous communities are seeking to engage more effectively in environment policy processes that impact Indigenous peoples by creating their own science programs (e.g. Goetze, 2005, Diver, 2012), or leveraging existing policy frameworks as a strategic pivot point to push back on the status quo (Diver, 2016a). Yet existing scholarship rarely examines how environmental policy-making is shaping and shaped by Indigenous knowledge. Efforts to bring Indigenous knowledge into environmental decision-making are typically fraught with political challenges, including conflict over Indigenous lands and resources (Taiepa et al., 1997, Tindall et al., 2013, Usher, 2003). Working with Indigenous knowledge is further complicated by differences in values and uneven power relationships among actors (Diduck et al., 2005, Nadasdy, 1999, Natcher et al., 2005).
This article addresses a gap in our understanding of how and why some Indigenous communities are effectively engaging in environmental policy-making by linking knowledge systems, despite the challenges of doing so. Through a case study of the Xáxli’p1 Community Forest, involving twenty years of Indigenous forest management negotiations between the Xáxli’p First Nation community and the Ministry of Forests in British Columbia (B.C.), Canada, this work examines Indigenous knowledge production processes that are linking TEK and western science in a political context. The case analysis unpacks how Xáxli’p used community-driven mapping and planning strategies to shift standard forest policy—a political shift that was co-produced with new articulations of Xáxli’p knowledge. Using a co-production lens, this article develops a conceptual framework for understanding how Indigenous knowledge is co-constituted with environmental politics, and helps rethink how to better include Indigenous knowledge in environmental policy-making. This study has broader implications for understanding how Indigenous knowledge is shaping science-policy negotiations, and vice versa.
1.1. Linking knowledge systems: TEK and western scienceNumerous scholars have focused on places of overlap and difference between TEK and western science (Barnhardt and Kawagley, 2005, Berkes, 2012, Turnbull and Watson-Verran, 1995), with some researchers arguing that the differences are not so great in practice (Agrawal, 1995). While acknowledging such debates as well as the plurality of knowledge systems acting on a given system, this article starts from the premise that there are particular qualities of TEK that depart from western science. This work examines how communities are linking western science and TEK in a political context to shift environmental policy, and the implications of such knowledge linkages for Indigenous communities and policy-makers.In this article, traditional ecological knowledge refers to “a cumulative body of knowledge, practice, and belief, evolving by adaptive processes and handed down through generations by cultural transmission, about the relationship of living beings (including humans) with one another and with their environment” (Berkes, 2012; p7). I use the broader term Indigenous knowledge to describe knowledge that is created and/or mobilized by Indigenous peoples, which may include TEK and scientific knowledge frameworks (see TallBear, 2014). Following Agrawal (1995, I discuss western scientific knowledge as being “guided by empirical measurements and abstract principles that help order the measured observations to facilitate the testing of hypotheses,” while recognizing that these knowledge traditions are not exclusive to western science (Harding, 2008). The term science-policy interface describes the social processes among scientists and other actors engaged in policy-making, and conceptualizes of science and policy as intersecting and co-evolving domains (van den Hove, 2007). Although not all Indigenous communities have the capacity or desire to engage in science-policy negotiations, this case focuses on a community that has chosen to do so.
1.2. Challenges with knowledge integration frameworksBuilding on “Mode 2” science, defined as scientific inquiry that involves interdisciplinary and heterogeneous teams working to solve complex, real-world problems (Gibbons et al., 1994, Nowotny et al., 2001), researchers have suggested multiple frameworks to explain how different sources of knowledge, including scientific, bureaucratic, and lay knowledge, can be brought together to improve environmental policy-making (Edelenbos et al., 2011, Mauser et al., 2013, Roux et al., 2006). Some authors have developed the concept of joint knowledge production to describe how scientists, policymakers and other societal actors engage with one another around a specific problem to generate knowledge that is more scientifically valid, socially robust, and policy relevant (Edelenbos et al., 2011, Hegger et al., 2012). Others have used the term knowledge co-production to describe how multiple stakeholders engage in social learning—where a deliberative process attempts to bridge the divide between “experts” and “non-experts,” reveal the case-specific complexities of a given problem, and address the plurality of values at stake in environmental decision-making (Hegger et al., 2012, Pohl et al., 2010, Steyaert et al., 2007).Although such knowledge co-production frameworks have been used to characterize research partnerships with Indigenous communities, identifying a framework that addresses the complexities of bringing TEK and western scientific knowledge traditions together has proven difficult. Knowledge co-production concepts often represent knowledge production processes as a “joint” endeavor that “integrates” western science and Indigenous knowledge, with an emphasis on collaboration and social learning (e.g. Armitage et al., 2011, Dale and Armitage, 2011, Idrobo and Berkes, 2012). Such knowledge integration concepts can be misleading, however, because they do not address the underlying challenges with power asymmetries and cultural differences that typify environmental negotiations with Indigenous peoples (Nadasdy, 1999, Feit and Spaeder, 2005, Menzies and Butler, 2006, Spak, 2005).Although there are cases where Indigenous knowledge has played a significant part in environmental policy-making (e.g. Diver, 2012, Te Aho, 2010), high stakes science and policy negotiations consistently reveal structural barriers to knowledge production with Indigenous peoples. Even when agencies articulate a desire to incorporate Indigenous knowledge into environmental management, state-driven policy frameworks are often too rigid to meaningfully incorporate customary norms directed by TEK (Vaughan et al., 2016). Another challenge arises with the “politics of calculation” (Mitchell, 2002), whereby regulatory processes that favor surveys, enumeration, and reporting disconnect resource management decisions from primary community concerns, such as cultural survival and access rights, thereby furthering state political interests (Norman, 2013). In other cases, environmental policy frameworks exclude important components of Indigenous knowledge, such as Indigenous understandings of colonial histories that shape contemporary conflicts over Indigenous lands and resources (King, 2014). An additional problem is the knowledge hierarchies that occur when policy-makers place Indigenous knowledge in a subordinate position to western scientific knowledge (Nadasdy, 2003). Because working across knowledge systems requires each side to “assimilate something of the other,” Indigenous knowledge linkages with science are often highly contentious (Watson-Verran and Turnbull, 1995; p363).
1.3. Co-production of knowledge and social orderScience studies scholar Sheila Jasanoff (2004) has provided a helpful framework for understanding the political context of knowledge production with the co-production of knowledge and social order. Jasanoff (2004) defines co-production as an analytic approach that shows how ways of knowing the world (natural and social) are inseparably linked to the ways in which people seek to organize social order. Jasanoff’s framework does not separate knowledge contestations from political conflict, but rather considers the simultaneous ordering of knowledge and politics, of science and society. Thus, co-production explores, “how knowledge making is incorporated into… governance, and in reverse how practices of governance influence the making and use of knowledge” (Jasanoff, 2004; p2-3). Researchers have used this approach to address the messy interplay between scientific knowledge production and environmental politics, e.g. the emergence of new international climate governance institutions and new understandings of human-wildlife relations in Africa (Miller, 2004, Thompson, 2004).Jasanoff’s co-production framework has yet to be applied to a case like the Xáxli’p Community Forest, where Indigenous communities are linking TEK and western scientific knowledge to affect environmental policy decisions. To do so requires engaging with the particular challenges of negotiations over Indigenous resource management and land rights, including the ongoing formation of Indigenous cultural identities in the context of politically charged policy processes or court proceedings. Environmental science and policy forums are typically dominated by legal and scientific experts, who often question the authenticity of Indigenous knowledge and cultural identities (e.g. Weir, 2009). In some cases where Indigenous rights are linked to cultural claims, the courts have used narrow interpretations of traditional cultural practices to limit Indigenous access to land and resources, e.g. when legal experts do not view communities as being “traditional enough” (Young, 2001). In other cases, Indigenous resource managers, or the non-Indigenous people working with them, are viewed as being unqualified, biased, or not “scientific enough” (Diver, 2012, Diver, 2016a). A conceptual framework that improves our understanding of how communities are linking TEK and western science must therefore account for the evolving nature of Indigenous identities and knowledge—a dynamic set of ideas and practices that inform and respond to ongoing environmental and cultural changes (e.g. Berkes et al., 2000 and Turner et al., 2003), including changes that arise from Indigenous participation in contemporary science and policy forums (TallBear, 2014).
