The attention on performance optimization of operating wind farms has recently increased, due to the financial crisis discouraging new investments and lowering energy consumption, and due to the increase of the percentage of energy harvested from stochastic renewable sources. Actually, in order to build smart grids [1], judicious balance of electricity coming from renewable and not renewable sources should be estimated: accurate power forecast and performance assessment are therefore precious. Modern wind turbines are therefore equipped with sophisticated Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) control systems, spreading on 10 min time basis a vast amount of information: details on the wind flow and meteorological conditions, on turbine alignment to the wind, on the conversion of wind kinetic energy into active power, on the vibrational and mechanical status of the machine, on thermal conditions at relevant parts of the turbines, and so on. The scientific and technological challenge is therefore tackling the complexity of SCADA data stream, processing it into novel knowledge and possibly integrating it in the control system itself. Due to the non-trivial physical properties of the source, to the complexity of the machines and of the data flow, the focus of the study spreads the fields of mechanical engineering, physics, statistics and computer science.
Machine state dynamics has a typical time scale much more shorter than the SCADA 10-min basis, and its analysis therefore requires a much wider bandwidth. Actually, by the point of view of condition monitoring, abnormal SCADA data measurements can be used only as late-stage indication of a fault. Early fault diagnosis and condition monitoring techniques therefore usually exploit more sophisticated approaches with respect to SCADA data analysis. An exhaustive survey on the state of art on condition monitoring, fault detection and forecast techniques, is provided in [2]. In [3] the most common condition monitoring techniques are listed, moving from their motivations. Gearbox failures are a very common mechanical breakdown in wind energy technology. They impact with a high cost and long downtime, and for this reason the most widespread condition monitoring technique is vibrational analysis for gearbox fault prevention. Actually in [4] it is estimated that a sudden failure of a 1.5 MW wind turbine during winter time leads to around €50,000 of missed production. This amount is up to 5 times greater than the missed production due to a wisely planned maintenance program. This sheds a powerful light on the economic impact of condition monitoring for wind turbine fault prevention. In [3] a comprehensive list is provided of condition monitoring techniques (thermocouple, oil particle counter, ultrasonic testing, vibro-acoustic measurement, torsional vibration, thermography, and so on), their cost, their pro’s and con’s, the components which are overseen by each of them. Condition monitoring techniques, especially as regards vibration signals, exploit the high capability of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) in pattern recognition from the complexity, which helps in classifying states of the machine. Even though SCADA-based condition monitoring nowadays cannot replace ad-hoc techniques, impressive achievements are being reached. In [5], [6] an Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Interference Systems (ANFIS) is proposed for monitoring wind turbine SCADA signals.
Numerical models and statistical techniques come at hand not only for SCADA-driven condition monitoring, but also for optimization of operating wind farms. In [7] a review is provided on performance optimization, summarizing objectives, targets and formulations. Machine learning from SCADA data is a rapidly growing subject: in [8] the most fundamental wind turbine performance characteristic curve, i.e. power curve, is reinterpreted through data-driven models, which can be used as a reference profile for on-line monitoring of the power generation process. In [9], data-mining algorithms are used to construct prediction models for wind turbine faults. Random forest algorithm models are shown to provide the best accuracy among all algorithms tested. The robustness of the predictive model is validated against experimental data. In [10] four data-mining approaches for wind turbine power curve monitoring are compared and sensible impact of ambient temperature and wind direction is highlighted. In [11] pitch faults are analyzed. Via an inductive rule learner, it has been possible to separate turbine states in three classes with 85% accuracy: no pitch fault, potential pitch fault, pitch fault established. From these references and many more, it arises that classifying data in categories is fundamental in order to prevent faults or evaluate performances through machine-learning models. This is commonly possible through a blind approach, within a certain extent, considering one turbine at a time, as in the examples above.
Yet, there is a typical phenomenon which involves more wind turbines at the same time: wakes. They are the most common cause of severe power losses during the operative phase and have therefore stimulated a vast amount of scientific literature. Horns Rev wind farm in Denmark has been the object of several studies about wakes [12], [13]. In [14] for the Horns Rev test case, a systematic analysis is carried in order to highlight dependency of power deficit on wind rose, wind speed, turbulence intensity and stability of the atmosphere. Peculiar attention has been devoted to wakes, as interpreted by the point of view of wind direction [15] and yaw alignment to it: in [16] turbine nacelle misalignment under a range of downstream wake angles is highlighted, indicating a characteristic of wind turbine behavior not generally considered in wake studies. It is shown that the turbines yaw independently in order to capture the increased wind speeds present due to the lateral influx of turbulent wind, contrary to many experimental and simulation methods found in the literature. On the grounds above, suggestive hints arise that, for interpreting wakes, it would be valuable to upgrade from the analysis of wind direction to the analysis of nacelle configurations as a response to wind direction. Identifying and classifying configurations of turbines under wake therefore should take into account wind direction, yaw response to it, and possibly clusterization effect. Actually first glimpses of wake characterization through clusterization are collected in [17], [18]. The test case is the same as in the present work: a cluster of turbines of an onshore wind farm, affected by multiple wakes when the wind blows from the 270° sector. It is shown that, when severe wakes manifest, the cluster tends to behave as a whole rather than as a collection of individuality and considerable power losses occur. The lesson, which is collected and developed in the present work, is that an underworld of nacelle and cluster configurations exists, associated to each wind condition.
The motivation of the present work therefore is the difficulty of discriminating the quality of turbine states, by on operational point of view, through blind data-driven models when a collective phenomenon as wakes dominates the dynamics. Yet, patterns do exist and must be recognized. If blind models cannot be effective, a first input to the subject might be provided by human boost, through the knowledge of wake phenomenon. This is exactly where the present work lies its foundation. The wind farm is subject to a global phenomenon, the wind flow, which might suffer very local effects. Further, each turbine has its own independent control system, which could have different responses resulting in slight different and unique yawing position distributions. On these grounds, the philosophy of this study is that the patterns to identify and classify should, because of the complexity and the global nature of the phenomenon, be physical: the patterns we propose are indeed the nacelle alignment configurations of the cluster to the wind. This is supported, apart from intuitiveness, by the fact that wind direction and response of the yawing system to it are highlighted as crucial agents of wind turbines when there are considerable wakes [15], [16]. A cluster of turbines, lying very close to each other and affected by severe wakes along the most common wind direction, is employed as testing ground. A SCADA post-processing method is proposed for identifying and separating alignment patterns of the cluster: nacelle positions are discretized with a judicious grain and it shown that this automatically leads to the identification of patterns. Subsequently, tools are to be developed in order to discriminate patterns: some are proposed in Section 3. For example, the number of times the pattern occur and the characteristic time distance between one occurrence and the subsequent, the average power output of the cluster, the efficiency of the cluster. Efficiency deserves a little discussion: in [19] it is shown that efficiency cannot be defined as usual in the literature, even for a test case sited on a very gentle terrain, which is exactly the same of this work. Therefore, in the present work, the alignment configurations for the selected cluster are also classified according to the efficiency, as redefined in [19], in order to make it consistent for the onshore case. The main conclusion of this study is that the discretization approach indeed provides a consistent pattern separation and identification, and the patterns might be classified and evaluated intuitively through the formulated indicators. This constitutes somehow a first analysis of alignment patterns of clusters of turbines through SCADA data-mining, which would be valuable to encode in more sophisticated models or to cross with more complex sources of information. The future perspective is that, learning from the knowledge that each farm has of itself through historical SCADA data sets, custom alignment rules to the wind direction could be favorable and might become realizable: this is the philosophy of yaw active control systems, which are recently attracting a considerable attention in the scientific literature [20], [21].
The structure of the paper is as follows: in Section 2 the test case wind farm and the testing ground (selected cluster, meteorological regime) are described. In Section 3, the SCADA data mining method and the analysis are introduced. In Section 4, the nacelle configurations are analyzed by the point of view of their recurrence (frequency of recurrence, time distance between one recurrence and the subsequent), power, efficiency. Further, some statistical Indexes, introduced in Section 3, are discussed. It is shown that sensible performance deviations arise between the most frequent patterns of the cluster and that a consistent approach needs to take into account both efficiency and average power output associated to a given configuration. Conclusions and further directions of this work are drawn in Section 5.
