CMOS transistor dimensions have been shrinking for decades in an almost regular manner. Nowadays this trend has reached a critical point and it is widely accepted that the trend will end in a decade [1]. Even Gordon Moore, who made the most influential prediction in 1965 about CMOS size shrinking (Moore’s Law), accepted that his prediction will lose it validity in near future [2]. At this point, research is shifting to novel forms of nanotechnologies including molecular-scale selfassembled systems [3], [4]. Unlike conventional CMOS that can be patterned in complex ways with lithography, self-assembled nanoscale systems generally consist of regular structures. Logical functions and memory elements are achieved with arrays of crossbar-type switches. This project targets this type of switching crossbars by using models based on diodes, FETs, and four-terminal switches [5], [6], [7], as illustrated in Fig. 1. In particular, Fig. 2 shows three implementations of a specific Boolean function with these models. Among these models a model based on four-terminal switches deserves a special mention.Download : Download high-res image (94KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Different models of switching crossbars.Download : Download high-res image (270KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Implementation of a Boolean function f=x1x¯2+x¯1x2 with a) diode, b) FET, and c) 4-terminal models.
A four-terminal switch is specifically developed for crosspoints of nanoarrays; note that each crosspoint has four neigbour crosspoints. The four terminals of the switch are all either mutually connected (ON) or disconnected (OFF). If a controlling literal takes the value of 1, the switch is ON; otherwise, it is OFF. On the other hand, diode and FET are conventional two-terminal switch based devices, i.e., their two terminals are either connected (ON) or disconnected (OFF).
In this paper we describe the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 691178 (European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme). Section 2 provides a general overview of the project. The following sections summarize the obtained results and the main objectives identified in the first part of the project. In particular, Section 3 investigates logic synthesis and area optimization techniques for diode, FET, and four-terminal switch based nanoarrays by comparing array sizes needed to implement given Boolean functions. Section 4 shows a new decomposition method for the four-terminal switch based model. Section 5 briefly discusses reconfiguration and redundancy approaches needed to face temporal and spatial variations of component electrical properties and hard faults. Section 6 introduces capacitor-resistor models for diode, FET, and four-terminal switch based nano-crossbar arrays that are to be used for power and delay analysis. Section 7 concludes the paper.
This article is an extended version of the conference report in [8].
