Subject segmentation in medical images is a very important step in establishing various medical diagnoses, medical image analyses, and computer-aided diagnosis systems. Because of the variety and complexity of images, the design of robust and efficient segmentation algorithms remains a very challenging research topic. Although previous studies have proposed many varieties of image segmentation methods with varying degrees of success, many problems in current image segmentation practices remain unsolved, including low accuracy, high complexity, low robustness, and lack of versatility. These problems make medical image segmentation an open problem in image processing research. Thus far, many image segmentation theories have been proposed, such as  active contour models (ACM) [1], region growing [2], zero-crossing [3], thresholding [4], region-based segmentation [5], watersheds [6], fuzzy C-means (FCM) [7], texture features [8], [9], classifier-based methods [10], [11], the level set method (LSM) [12], [13], and composite technologies (combining multiple different algorithms) [14], [15]. These existing theories can be roughly classified into three categories: ACM, classifier-based segmentation, and thresholding methods. The accuracy of an ACM is affected by the initialization and extent of sinking at the edge of a subject. Classifier-based segmentation must be equipped with suitable feature extraction and an image might be segmented into individual blocks, considerably reducing the image resolution. The thresholding method inevitably causes significant errors if the gray value distribution has considerable overlap between the subject and the background. Furthermore, among these existing segmentation methods, some use the gradient as a basis for segmentation; due to the uncertainty of gradient magnitudes in the vague edge, these methods may cause improper segmentation on images with vague edges. Some methods are based on intensity; these methods are susceptible to noise interference. In addition, some methods use only local characteristics; these methods are unstable in terms of segmentation accuracy.
The main objective of this study was to develop a robust and accurate technique for segmenting the subject of the medical image with the goal of applying it to clinical medical diagnoses and various computer-aided medical systems to improve diagnostic accuracy. To address the shortcomings of current segmentation methods while maintaining their advantages, the proposed progressive support-pixel correlation statistical method (PSCSM) is designed to count only meaningful edge pixels (support-pixels) and to establish specific threshold values for the subject and the background during the initialization stage. On the basis of two initial threshold values, partial pixels that have been identified as belonging to both the subject and the background can be first segmented. Next, pixel segmentation can be gradually extended to the entire image by using progressive threshold values and approaching the surrounding pixels.
To confirm delivery of excellent results using the PSCSM, experimental data are assigned to three groups: single-spectrum computer-simulated images, single-spectrum mammograms, and multi-spectral breast magnetic resonance images (MRI). Computer-simulated images help us to observe based on quantitative analysis while mammograms and breast MRIs are used to confirm efficiency in clinical applications. Moreover, single-spectrum mammograms and multi-spectral MRIs are required to undergo different preprocessing steps before being processed by the PSCSM. Single-spectrum images are subjected to gradient enhancement (GE) to enhance contrast between the subject and the background. In the case of multi-spectral images, input images of different spectra were overlapped and converted into a 3D pixel model; then, a multi-spectral technique, constrained energy minimization (CEM) [16], converted the 3D model into a 2D image with high contrast between the subject and the background to facilitate subsequent processing using the PSCSM.

Fig. 1 shows the proposed system architecture, wherein our proposed PSCSM plays a crucial role. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the PSCSM in segmenting medical image subjects from their backgrounds (and thereby the method's clinical applicability), the PSCSM's performance is further compared with that of well-known, competitive image segmentation algorithms such as entropy thresholding (ET), fuzzy C-means (FCM), Otsu's thresholding method (Otsu) [17], the level set method (LSM), and Snake. It is noteworthy that preprocessing techniques (GE for single-spectrum images and CEM for multi-spectral images) is also applied with all of the above competing methods for a fair comparison.Download : Download high-res image (184KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1.. System architecture diagram.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the experimental materials and the proposed method are described in Section 2. The experimental results are presented and compared with the existing methods in Section 3. Finally, conclusions are provided in Section 4.
