Subjective experience is a major factor in the success of an interactive system – a person's willingness to use (or re-use) an application is strongly influenced by the perceived enjoyment of doing so (Carroll, 1987, Davis et al., 1992, Hassenzahl et al., 2000, Malone, 1980, Venkatesh et al., 2003). Understanding the factors that influence user assessment of subjective experience is therefore a key objective for research in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI).
Studies of subjective user experience in HCI have focused on several different aspects of interaction, including: methods for measuring user satisfaction (Chin et al., 1988, Hornbaek, 2006), the role of interaction aesthetics (Hassenzahl, 2004, Porat and Tractinsky, 2012, Tractinsky et al., 2000, Udsen et al., 2005), improving engagement through gamification (Deterding et al., 2011), and interaction features that delight users (Levesque et al., 2011, Shneiderman, 1987, Zhang and von Dran, 2001). Others have developed models of users’ acceptance of technology, such as the Technology Acceptance Model (Davis, 1989, Venkatesh et al., 2003).
An important feature in studies of subjective experience is the difference between the user's instantaneous experience (as the interaction is happening), and their recollected experience (after the interaction is complete). Although both are important, recollected experience is more of a concern for designers, because the user's memory of their experience will influence their willingness to repeat an interaction. For example, user retention at an e-commerce website is likely to be strongly influenced by users’ recollection of their shopping and checkout experiences at the site.
One factor in user experience studies that has not been examined closely is the way that changes to the sequencing of sub-interactions (called “moments”) can influence people's memory of an interactive experience. Psychological research has found that a person's recollection of an experience is not always faithful to what actually happened. In particular, three factors – primacy, recency, and peak-end effects – are known to influence people's memory of experiences. Primacy effects refer to an enhanced memory and an over-weighted influence of the initial moments of an experience (Murdock, 1962, Shteingart et al., 2013, Zauberman et al., 2006), while recency and peak-end effects refer to an over-weighted influence of the terminating (end) and most intense (peak) moments (Kahneman et al., 1993). These effects have been demonstrated to influence hedonic assessment (i.e. assessment of pain or pleasure) in several settings, including memory of pain during medical procedures (Redelmeier and Kahneman, 1996), the retrospective assessment of payment sequences (Langer et al., 2005, Nasiry and Popescu, 2011), the remembered enjoyment of holidays (Kemp et al., 2008), and assessments of quality of life (Diener et al., 2001) or material goods (Do et al., 2008). Further consequences of these effects are that the duration of an experience has relatively little effect on the remembered experience (duration neglect), and that adding positive experiences (or, less-negative experiences) to the end of a generally negative event can improve its overall subjective evaluation (Fredrickson and Kahneman, 1993). That is, people's memories are generally insensitive to the duration of an event, but are instead concentrated on the sensations felt near its end.
Despite the wide range of psychological studies that show a robust influence of sequencing effects, HCI has seen few experiments examining their influence on user experience. In addition, attempts to directly test the existence of peak-end effects in interactive settings have produced equivocal results, with hypothesised preferences observed in only one of three conditions involving form-filling interfaces (Cockburn et al., 2015) and only one of eight tested conditions with computer games (Gutwin et al., 2016).
The previous work in HCI provides only limited evidence that sequencing effects influence user preferences in interaction. However, if validated and understood in interactive contexts, sequencing effects could have important implications for interface design: for example, they might reveal opportunities for designers to influence a user's memory of an interactive experience simply by altering the sequence of elements within an interaction, potentially leading to a more favourable view of the system. As stated above, it is a user's retrospective assessment of experience that is crucial for design, because their willingness to repeat an interaction will be influenced by their memory of it.
In this paper we examine whether sequencing effects influence user preferences for interactions with computer systems. We first review prior literature examining related effects across various disciplines, including HCI, and then describe two empirical studies in which participants were asked to choose which of two sequences they would prefer to repeat, where the sequences manipulated only the ordering of otherwise identical tasks. The individual tasks involved drag-and-drop manipulations of objects – with positive, neutral, and negative momentary sensations induced through positive, control, and negative snap-to-grid assistance while aligning the dragged object with the target. During positive tasks, the dragged object and target were aligned with a coarse grid that made task completion easier and faster; during control tasks, the dragged object moved under direct-manipulation (i.e. without snapping); and in negative tasks, the dragged object snapped to a grid, but with the target purposely misaligned with the grid – requiring participants to drop the dragged object and reacquire it with the ‘control’ key pressed, which reverted to direct-manipulation (control) dragging.
The first experiment (n = 46) compared sequences with a positive start to sequences with a positive end, and sequences with a negative start to sequences with a negative end (in both cases, comparing recency vs. primacy effects). Although participant preferences overall were in line with the recency hypothesis (i.e. that people are influenced more by moments at the end of a sequence), only one significant difference was found on any measure (frustration/satisfaction ratings were significantly worse for a “negative end” compared to a “negative start”).
The second experiment (n = 73) modified the experimental method in order to accentuate the magnitude of momentary sensations, and added new conditions in order to isolate primacy and recency effects. The second study found significant effects of recency on preferences for both positive and negative endings – that is, participant preferences were influenced more strongly by the final moments of the sequence. No effects of primacy were observed – that is, positive or negative moments at the start of the sequence did not reliably influence preferences.
In the discussion, we examine the results from these and related studies to identify interaction conditions and stimuli likely to influence user experience through sequencing effects, and we identify implications for UX designers and HCI researchers. The existence of sequencing effects, even for simple repetitive tasks in user interfaces, shows that designers must think carefully about the ordering of experience in addition to more traditional aspects of design such as usability, utility, and aesthetics.
Overall, this research provides new evidence that sequencing effects can have a significant impact on user experience and user preferences, even in common interactive tasks. We also contribute to a new understanding of how, where, and why these effects can influence preference, including a discussion of the types of interactive stimuli that are likely to induce reliable effects, as well as establishing an agenda for further research. Our studies suggest that consideration of sequencing effects can provide new opportunities for improving user experience in interactive systems, as well as warnings to designers and researchers who study UX and usability.
