The poor learning outcomes demonstrated by U.S. elementary school children (National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) (2012)) and the identification of an achievement gap for early science that begins at kindergarten entry and persists through middle school (Morgan, Farkas, Hillemeier, & Maczuga, 2016) have motivated investigations of ways to encourage science education for young children prior to kindergarten entry. Children’s learning experiences at home (Hindman & Morrison, 2012; Puranik, Phillips, Lonigan, & Gibson, 2018) and in early education environments (Aos, Lieb, Mayfield, Miller, & Pennucci, 2004; Howes et al., 2008; Mashburn et al., 2008; Peisner-Feinberg et al., 2001) contribute to children’s development across domains. In light of the limited science opportunities observed in preschool classrooms (Gerde, Pierce, Lee, & Van Egeren, 2018; Nayfeld, Brenneman, & Gelman, 2011; Tu, 2006), particularly for young children living in poverty, like those attending Head Start (Greenfield et al., 2009), understanding the science opportunities low-income families provide to young children is critical to identifying approaches to reduce the achievement gap.
1.1. Early childhood science experiencesVery early experiences with science are developmentally appropriate and foundational for later learning (Greenfield, Alexander, & Frechette, 2017). Early science experiences provide valuable opportunities to capitalize on children’s curiosity about the world while helping them acquire tools to develop their reasoning skills (Morris, Croker, Masnick, & Zimmerman, 2012). Longitudinal studies show that early interest in science is a strong predictor of later science interest (Alexander, Johnson, & Kelley, 2012). Not only do science experiences help children gain exploration and curiosity skills (Eliason & Jenkins, 2003), they are helpful in fostering positive attitudes about science (Zimmerman, 2007). Children who engage in early science experiences have a better understanding of science concepts later in life (Eshach and Fried, 2005, Greenfield et al., 2017, Kuhn, 2009). In fact, children’s PreK experiences have a direct impact on their K-12 development around science (Morgan et al., 2016). Thus, in order to facilitate their continued science development, it is vital to know more about children’s experiences with science prior to kindergarten.Despite the powerful potential of early science opportunities, quality science instruction and engagement are rare in preschool (Cabell, DeCoster, LoCasale-Crouch, Hamre, & Pianta, 2013; Nayfeld et al., 2011; Piasta, Pelatti, & Miller, 2014; Tu, 2006), particularly in high poverty or low-achieving schools (Pianta, Belsky, Houts, & Morrison, 2007). Preschool teachers spend just 4.4-8.0% of class time on science (Tu, 2006), less than any other developmental domain (Early et al., 2010). Further, 85% of Head Start classrooms do not meet basic criteria for quality early childhood science education, and Head Start children are rated lower in science than in all seven other school readiness domains (Greenfield et al., 2009). In addition to understanding science experiences offered within the early childhood classroom, science exposure within the family context warrants attention.
1.2. Family supports for early science learningFamilies are often considered a child’s first teacher (Martini & Sénéchal, 2012) because many families expose children to resources and learning opportunities that support cognitive skills prior to entering formal schooling (Burgess, 2011; Weigel, Martin, & Bennett, 2006). For language and literacy, informal supports like providing children with picture books (Evans, Kelley, Sikora, & Treiman, 2010) and engaging in shared reading with children (Bingham, Jeon, Kwon, & Lim, 2017; Sénéchal, Pagan, Lever, & Ouellette, 2008) as well as formal literacy instruction such as teaching about letters (Martini and Sénéchal, 2012, Sénéchal and LeFevre, 2002) or print (Justice, Pullen, & Pence, 2008) have been found to support children’s language and literacy development. For early mathematics, the home learning environment including both formal (e.g., counting, number naming) and informal (e.g., cooking, playing store) math experiences relate to parent-reported (Hart, Ganley, & Purpura, 2016) and directly assessed child math outcomes (LeFevre et al., 2009; Skwarchuk, Sowinski, & LeFevre, 2014). For science, however, a recent report found that parents believed families played a lesser role in teaching science than does the school (Silander et al., 2018), suggesting that families may use informal opportunities to expose children to science (e.g., provide materials, book reading) rather than directly teaching science.Currently, little is known about how families of young children, particularly those living in low-income households, promote early science at home. One report, from the Education Development Center (EDC, Silander et al., 2018), describes parents’ support of science learning across a broad range of families with young children. In their study, over half of participating parents reported that their child engaged daily in a science-related activity. While this report establishes that some families of young children support early science, important gaps remain regarding what is known on this topic. First, while the ECD report utilized open-ended survey questions to identify how parents supported earth, physical, and life science, they found that parents struggled to identify what these categories entail. Thus, they recommended the use of more detailed questions for follow-up work to more clearly understand how families support early science (Silander et al., 2018). Second, the report engaged families of a broad range of SES but did not fully examine variations in SES. Socioeconomic status matters for parenting behaviors (Conger & Donnellan, 2007). While generally, children living in low-income families, across all ethnicities, tend to have fewer home learning resources than their wealthier counterparts (Bradley, Corwyn, McAdoo, & García Coll, 2001), it remains unclear whether this is true for science specifically, but has important implications for identifying potential strengths and needs for this group of children. To expand the initial ECD study and understand more about the home and community resources leveraged by those most at risk, the present study provides the first examination of how low-income families support early science learning. In addition, the work utilizes detailed questions which allow families to accurately identify the informal approaches they do use including book reading, providing materials for play, and media (i.e., TV/internet) to engage children with science.
1.3. Home and community opportunities for science learningWhile parents rarely specifically introduce complex scientific principles to young children (Callanan & Jipson, 2001), according to the bioecological perspective (Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 2006), an important way in which adults contribute to children’s early learning is through the provision of learning materials, which can take the form of books, toys, media, and community resources. Thus, multiple modalities exist for creating science experiences for young children at home and in their communities.1.3.1. Book reading for scienceFifty-five percent of all families and 40% of families living in poverty report reading to preschool-age children daily (Hagedorn, Roth, Carver, Van de Kerckhove, & Smith, 2009). Informational books about science exist for young children covering many topics, including animals, human bodies, plants, weather, insects, dinosaurs, or space (e.g., Barnum’s Bones, Fern, 2012, Planting The Wild Garden, Galbraith & Halperin, 2015, Volcano Rising, Rusch, 2013, Dreaming Up: A Celebration of Building, Hale, 2012). Informational texts provide children with content knowledge, deepening their understanding of real-world events and phenomena (Neuman et al., 2006). Reading these books with children can promote children's vocabulary and concepts of text structures and features (Duke, Bennett-Armistead, & Roberts, 2003; Lapp, Grant, Moss, & Johnson, 2013). Multiple children’s magazines, including Zoobooks, Ranger Rick or National Geographic Kids, also cover a range of science topics. While young children have access to books purchased at bookstores or through their local library, children living in poverty often own fewer books than their wealthier peers (Evans et al., 2010) and their families are less likely to utilize the library (Lee & Burkam, 2002).1.3.2. Play materials for scienceBeyond books, opportunities for young children to experience diverse phenomena by exploring and observing the properties of science-related materials lays the foundation for later science, even when minimal adult guidance is provided (National Research Council, 2012). Exploratory play with science-related materials allows children to begin to identify patterns and make sense of the world (Lillard, 2013, National Science Teachers Association, 2014). Opportunities for this play aligns with the reform-based science shift from children knowing about science to “figuring out” science (Schwarz, Passmore, & Reiser, 2017). Even without direct guidance from adults, children naturally seek information in ways similar to scientists (e.g., Gopnik, 2012) and “figuring out” aligns with the way young children inherently make sense of the world (National Science Teachers Association, 2014).Play-based experiences with science materials help children develop background knowledge about the properties of objects and phenomena that can be retrieved later during formal science learning (Bulunuz, 2013). For example, as children explore the properties of various blocks by moving, stacking, and knocking down different types of blocks, they make sense of how blocks behave in various contexts generating scientific knowledge that they can use later to make formal predictions about how blocks move (National Research Council, 2012). Play is enriched by the inclusion of varied, open-ended materials which can be used to represent children’s ideas across a range of science themes (Kostelnik, Soderman, Whiren, & Rupiper, 2018). Science materials can include animals, plants, or insects to promote life science, blocks, wheeled vehicles, or pullies to promote physical science, and rocks, sand, and soil to promote earth science. In addition, children may experience science through the use of science tools including magnifying glasses, magnets, or binoculars.1.3.3. Media for scienceFamilies may leverage television or other technology (e.g., computer or tablet) to support science learning (Mares and Pan, 2013, National Research Council, 2009). On average, children living in low-SES backgrounds, like those attending Head Start, experience over two hours of screen time each day (Lee and Burkam, 2002, Rideout, 2017); some of that exposure may be science-themed programming for children available on public television (e.g., Sid the Science Kid, Nature Cat, Wild Kratts) or paid stations (e.g., Animal Planet, Discovery Channel). The recent ECD report (Silander et al., 2018) indicated that 66% of parents reported their children watched TV shows or videos about science weekly. In addition, the increasingly ubiquitous use of home computers, tablets, and smartphones (Office of Communications London, 2014, Rideout, 2011) represents more technology in the hands of young children. Even very young children use tablets to play, create, and solve problems (Tahnk, 2011) and to engage in early writing and literacy (Neumann, 2016). About 45% of parents report their children play apps or games about science (Silander et al., 2018). It remains unclear whether this is true for children living in poverty as well.1.3.4. Community resources for scienceDirect contact with nature provides invaluable science learning opportunities for children. Children are naturally curious and want to explore the world around them to understand how it works (Frost, 2010). Children use their five senses to explore nature which in turn promotes learning about the properties of objects and living things. Such exploration, even when done independently, allows children to develop concepts about science phenomena (National Research Council, 2012). When children observe a dragonfly land on their arm and fly away again, roll down a grass hill, listen to a bird sing, or explore flowers, they are trying to make sense of what they are seeing, feeling, hearing, and smelling in ways that inform their ideas about science phenomena. Families may leverage natural environments like community parks or public gardens to support children’s science experiences. Community learning spaces including science museums, zoos/aquaria, and nature centers all provide opportunities to support science learning.
1.4. Family and child characteristics and science learningDecision-making around the opportunities families provide to their child to learn about science is complex and should be considered within the context of other important parent and child characteristics. The caregivers’ self-efficacy for science and beliefs about the value of early science education may matter for science opportunities. Adults need to feel confident in their own ability in a specific content area, such as science, to feel confident in teaching it (Vartuli, 2005). For example, parents who struggle to read themselves have few books in the home (Scarborough, Dobrich, & Hager, 1991). Further, parents are more involved with children’s learning at home when they have a high level of mastery in an area (Jones & Prinz, 2005; Machida, Taylor, & Kim, 2002). Beyond self-efficacy, parents’ beliefs about children’s development and academic skill learning vary widely (Evans, Fox, Cremaso, & McKinnon, 2004). For example, mothers with more positive literacy beliefs tend to provide more home supports for literacy like books and book reading opportunities (Bingham, 2007). For science, the EDC report highlights that families reported low confidence in their ability to teach science, lower than for teaching literacy, math, or social/behavior skills, but did consider science to be important for children (Silander et al., 2018). Families who feel more efficacious in their science skills and have beliefs that value science for young children may provide more science-based learning opportunities for children in the home and community.Other characteristics that may play a role in the science learning opportunities families provide include parent education, ethnicity, home language and child gender. Mothers with more education provide richer general home learning environments (Dearing et al., 2012), which may be true for science as well. The underrepresentation of African American and Latinx adults in STEM careers in the US (Committee on Equal Opportunities in Science & Engineering, 2018) and lower science knowledge of these two groups compared to White adults reported in national surveys (Funk & Goo, 2015) may influence the way African American and Latinx (compared to White) families approach science at home. In addition, ideas that English proficiency is requisite for science education (Collier, 1989) or language barriers that inhibit accessing school or community initiatives for science, may prompt families to provide different opportunities at home or access different resources in the community. Finally, the gender of the child may matter regarding the learning opportunities families provide to children. At least for middle-SES families, parents provide boys, even as young as 4 years old, with more science-related opportunities than girls (Alexander et al., 2012). This may be true for families of Head Start children as well.Early science experiences lay the foundation for later science success (Greenfield et al., 2017, Morgan et al., 2016). Before we can help families increase or enhance the science learning opportunities at home and in their communities, we need a better understanding of what families are currently doing. Understanding current family practices will offer guidance for extending those opportunities into rich science learning experiences.
1.5. The current studyThe present study sought to understand the opportunities Head Start families provide at home and in their community to support children’s early science learning. Building from the work of Silander and colleagues who identified difficulties when families were asked broad, open-ended questions about home supports for science, following Korpan and colleagues (1997) example, specific categories were used to ask families about activities with the potential to support science. The items were then tested to identify factors of home and community supports for science. Next, family and child factors including family self-efficacy, beliefs about science education, parent education, ethnicity, and home language along with child gender were explored as predictors of providing science opportunities at home and in the community. The following research questions guided the study:1What science resources (i.e., books, toys, tools, media/technology) do Head Start families provide at home to children to support their play and learning?2What community resources do Head Start families access to support science learning for their young children?3What is the factor structure of family resources for science learning at home and in the community?4How are family features including beliefs about science, science self-efficacy, and demographic characteristics associated with the factors of science resources families provide children at home and in the community?We expected families to support children’s science learning by providing a range of home and community resources for science. We also anticipated that family characteristics including science self-efficacy, beliefs, education, ethnicity, home language, and child gender would be associated with the resources families provide at home and in the community to support children’s science learning.
