Windows 10 was launched globally by Microsoft in 190 countries on July 29, 2015. Many new features are introduced in Microsoft's new OS including Edge Browser, Cortana, Notification (or Action) Center, OneDrive, Universal App Platform (UAP), Quick Access, Continuum, Windows Hello etc. From a forensic perspective, these features may have potential artifacts useful for forensic investigators. Microsoft introduced Cortana as a personal digital agent in Windows Phone 8.1 and later on integrated with Windows 10 desktop operating systems. The feature is enabled by default and is configured to start automatically upon Windows startup. The feature can be used for a number of tasks such as setting up reminders based on time, place, or person; tracking packages, teams, interests, and flights; sending emails and texts; playing games; searching stuff on local device, web, or OneDrive; opening any Windows App.
Cortana has to collect various pieces of information and personalized data to learn more about users so that it would be able to assist users more efficiently. Some information collected by Cortana about a user includes user's contacts, calendar, location, Internet history and favorites, speech, and more. According to Microsoft, Cortana has access to device location information and location history must be on for Cortana to work (MSDN, 2015). Cortana records location of a user'sfavorite places such as home, work, or grocery store so that it can help user by providing the traffic alerts, suggestions, ideas, reminders, and more. This means Cortana artifacts may contain a wealth of invasive information regarding a user's location (latitude, longitude, and name of place) that may be helpful in forensic examinations.
The feature works with Microsoft Edge browser and is powered by Bing. When users perform web searches on Cortana box, the search results are obtained by Bing search engine. Therefore, information related to web searches can also be found in Edge browser's Jump List and can be extracted using available parsing tools. Initially, Cortana was designed to work with Microsoft Edge browser; however, users were able to customize the default web browser that would launch on performing web searches on Cortana. Singh and Singh (2016) identified and compared the information recorded in four popular web browsers' Jump Lists when web searches were performed on Cortana, considering each as default web browser. On April 28, 2016, Microsoft announced that Microsoft Edge browser will be the only browser that will launch when a user performs web searches on Cortana box (Gavin, 2016). That means the artifacts related to web searches on Cortana can now be located in Jump List of Microsoft Edge browser.
The Cortana App is also available for Android mobile devices that can be synced with Windows 10 PC using the same Microsoft account. Thus, a user can set a reminder on his Windows 10 PC, but it could trigger on his mobile device or vice versa. Also, this enables a user to get notify and send a quick text reply from his PC if he missed a call on his mobile device. Therefore, the forensic investigation of Cortana is worth to reveal the information related to reminders and missed call notifications on a Windows 10 PC.
This paper provides an overview of the artifacts created by Cortana application including its format and the type of information stored in these artifacts. The study mainly investigates the artifacts created and retained in Cortana databases when a user performs certain actions on Cortana such as setting up time, place, or person based reminders in Windows 10 PC. The effects of an Android device having synced Cortana with Windows 10 PC are also taken into consideration. For decoding information stored in Cortana database, four python scripts have been developed as a part of this applied research. A limited analysis and interpretation of these data is demonstrated considering various test scenarios and results are highlighted in the Experiments and Results section. The paper also identifies the locations and information recorded in other Cortana artifacts; however, the prime goal of the study is the artifacts of investigative interest in Cortana databases in a Windows 10 system.
