The rapid emergence and advancement of mobile technologies have opened up new opportunities for teaching and learning (e.g., Motiwalla, 2007, Wu et al., 2013a). An increasing number of mobile devices, such as tablets and smartphones, have become part of classroom practice (e.g., El-Gayar et al., 2011, Enriquez, 2010, Falloon, 2013, Murray and Olcese, 2011, Zydney and Warner, 2016). Yet, as Wedemeyer (2009) argued, educational technology must “go beyond the hardware and equipment” and “place software above hardware” (p. 118). Green, Hechter, Tysinger, and Chassereau's recent study (2014) of a selection rubric for mobile applications (apps) does indeed reflect the growing attention to the design of educational software for mobile devices. To extend the benefits of the mobile technologies, educational apps thus play a vital role in enhancing positive learning outcomes (Kucirkova et al., 2014, Schneps et al., 2014).
However, compared to research on computer-based educational software and simulations, studies of educational apps for mobile devices are still in their early stage, and are relatively few in number. For example, in the journal of Computers in Human Behavior, there have been more than 500 articles focusing on learners' use of simulations, whereas by July 2016 only 10 articles examining the effects of mobile apps were found when “app” was used as the search keyword. Additionally, some educational apps have not fully incorporated or utilized the features of tablets, including their intuitive interface, embedded sensors, and multi-touch screen (Wang, Wu, Chien, Hwang, & Hsu, 2015). Furthermore, research on innovative technologies in education has shown that various factors such as technology design, instructional methods, and students’ characteristics could contribute to the effectiveness of technologies (e.g., Falloon, 2013, Wu et al., 2013b). There is a need to systematically examine the possible effects of these factors on learning with educational apps.
This study was thus designed to address the aforementioned research issues. First, we developed educational apps on the basis of the design guidelines (Mayer and Moreno, 2003, Wang et al., 2015) to enhance students' learning of a physics topic. The topic covered concepts of the projectile motion and collision of moving objects. These kinematic concepts were chosen because it has been well documented that students tend to hold nonscientific ideas about them (e.g., Dilber et al., 2009, Gilbert and Watts, 1983). Technologies could promote conceptual change in students' thinking by helping them make links between concepts and phenomena (Weller, 1995). Simulations could also support students’ visualization of conceptual entities such as velocity, force, and acceleration (Christian et al., 2011, Wu and Huang, 2007).
Secondly, although a variety of simulations, probes, and multimedia tools have been designed for science learning, as indicated by a recent review of mobile apps, so far relatively little research has “isolated a particular design feature, making it impossible to discern the effectiveness of a single feature” (Zydney & Warner, 2016, p. 13). In this study, we exploited the features of tablets to produce two versions of an app offering students learning experiences through the touch sensory input and the tilt feature, and provided students with learning experiences that could seldom be replicated in computer simulations. In the mobile touchable version of the app (the TA app), the intuitive interface and multi-touch tablet screens were used; students could create one or more virtual objects by touching the screen and dragging the object(s) to set up the initial speed. In addition to the touch sensory input, the second touchable-with-gravity-sensor version of the app (the TAG app) implemented the tilt feature by utilizing the embedded sensors of tablets. When the virtual objects moved along the trajectories or during a collision, the students could tilt the tablet so that the magnitude and direction of gravity would change, and the trajectories would adjust accordingly. Furthermore, we designed a similar computer simulation that was performed using a mouse to create and control virtual objects and gravity. The three types of simulation design allowed us to investigate whether and how different features of tablets may support physics learning.
Thirdly, this study took students' characteristics into consideration by examining the effects of spatial ability and visual-motor integration on students’ conceptual understanding. Previous research has reported a relationship between spatial ability and physics learning, where students with high spatial ability tend to demonstrate better performance than those with low spatial ability (Kozhevnikov et al., 2007, Pallrand and Seeber, 1984, Uttal and Cohen, 2012). What remains unanswered is whether educational apps that allow students to have direct interactions, such as using the touch sensory input and the tilt feature with finger and bodily motions, would enlarge or narrow the performance gap between low and high spatial ability students. Additionally, the touch sensory input could involve visual-motor coordination. When interacting with mobile apps, students are expected to visually follow the movement of virtual objects while appropriately controlling their hands and fingers so that they could precisely click on these objects and drag them to different places. These interactions may require visual-motor integration ability, so this ability was another learning factor examined in this study.
