The strong interdependence of economies in a globalizing world causes companies to face an increasingly risky and competitive environment. One possible solution to overcome such a hostile business environment is the use of informatics technology to innovate in products, services and processes (Sirilli and Evangelista, 1998).
The success of firms in the service sector represents an important contribution to the country, since it is a significant source of employment. In recent decades there has been strong evidence of this sector’s development and its increasing relevance to the economy, mainly due to innovation, competition, employment and growth (see De Jong et al., 2003, Hauknes, 1998, Howells and Tether, 2004, Tether, 2005).
Considering the relevance of this sector and the impact of innovation on it (see Miles, 1993), this paper focuses on innovation in services regarding their production process. The production process is a set of tasks carried out by the service supplier (see Agya Yalley and Singh Sekhon, 2014, Barras, 1986), and innovation in the service production process is defined as a change in the set of tasks required to perform the production process (Djellal and Gallouj, 2007). Therefore, this paper aims to answer the following question: is the set of tasks performed in the service sector affected by informatics technology?
From a policy perspective, it is crucial to understand how the labor market is affected by a change in informatics technology and which kinds of tasks are more demanded. From the government’s view, strategies that subsidize and invest in the labor market can be designed to facilitate the flow of workers between jobs that involve different types of tasks. On the other hand, from companies’ view, strategies of training and investment in workers can be designed to maximize the productivity gains from the dissemination of this technology. Bloom et al. (2012) evidence higher productivity gains from technology when firms are more able to manage people and their skills.
This study approaches a subject that is still insipient in the service literature, dealing with the influence of informatics technology on the production of services. As stated by Vence and Trigo (2009), the discussion of innovation in services focuses on the development of new types of services. Debates on innovation of the production process, a factor that tends to improve the existing service, reduce the costs and/or increase the aggregated value, are still rare. Accordingly, it is necessary to consider the influence of technology on production, allowing automation and better conditions in service output (Agya Yalley and Singh Sekhon, 2014, Barras, 1986, Collier, 1983, Ettlie and Reza, 1992). Note that, although several authors discuss innovation in services, the results pertaining to how this happens remain vague.
Thus, our goal is to determine whether informatics technology affects the service production process, resulting in innovation. As its main characteristic, the production of services is the sum of a set of tasks performed by workers to produce outputs (Djellal and Gallouj, 2007, Carmona-Lavado et al., 2013), and the development of informatics technology affects certain tasks executed to produce outputs, which represents innovation in the service production process (henceforth ISPP). Thus, the use of informatics technology in the service sector is an innovation in services, more precisely in their production process (Agya Yalley and Singh Sekhon, 2014).
As our specific goals, we focus on: (a) comparing the effects of informatics technology on the labor tasks carried out in the service sector with those performed in the manufacturing sector; and (b) identifying the segments of the service sector that are the most affected by informatics technology.
To answer our questions, we take advantage of the sudden end of an informatics technology barrier: the Informatics Law in Brazil. This law was enacted in 1984 to control the importation of computers, with the purpose of nurturing a homegrown computer industry. The policy proved unsuccessful, and the law was repealed in 1992, triggering a surge in the importation of informatics technology products, which rose by nearly 400% from 1992 to 1997 (Botelho et al., 1999).
Based on this episode, we estimate the impact of the use of informatics technology on the performance of each kind of task in the Brazilian service sector. Using panel regressions with fixed effects, we show that the use of informatics technology changed the production process in the service sector by increasing the use of a specific type of non-routine tasks. We also show that the effect is stronger for non-service sectors than for the service sector, since they substitute routine tasks for non-routine tasks that complement technology.
From the policy perspective, these results may orient government investment policies in technical education to ease the flow of workers between different types of jobs and different tasks. The lack of this policy is one of the reasons that contributed to the surge of the Rest Belt in the United States (see Akst, 2013). The development of automation technology in the 1960s had job-killing effects in areas intensive in routine manual tasks. Concerning the service sector itself, technology can create jobs instead of destroying them, since the use of technology increases innovation with tasks that complement technology, such as non-routine analytical tasks. Thus, from service sector companies’ perspective, informatics technology boosts workers’ productivity, mainly for those who perform non-routine analytical tasks. Therefore, investments in training focusing on this type of task tend to bring higher returns to the company.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses innovation in the service sector, innovation in service procedures and the potential impacts of new informatics technologies on the production process; Section 3 discusses the interaction between labor tasks and informatics technology in the service sector; Section 4 presents the database; Section 5 reports the empirical results; and Section 6 concludes.
