Deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA stores genetic information required by all livings in order to build, function and develop. DNA is said to be the blueprint of all living organisms since its components encode all the information needed for maintaining life. This genetic information are preserved and passed from one cell to another during the process of cell division in which a parent cell splits into two new daughter cells. DNA molecules form a double twisted helix bonded together and arranged in a very precise order. The basic four molecular units forming the DNA helix are then sequenced in a particular arrangement such that each component on one strand can only bond with a certain component in the other strand. DNA replicates by breaking the bond between its two strands -the double twisted helix- and each strand form a matching strand, re-bond and re-twist once again.
The genome -the entire DNA sequence- provides a template for the synthesis of a variety of RNA molecules. The main types of RNA are messenger RNA (mRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), and ribosomal RNA (rRNA). One of the major functions of the DNA is to construct proteins which are responsible for carrying out most of cell functions. The process of constructing proteins consists of two major steps; namely, transcription stage in which DNA molecule is transcribed into messenger RNA or mRNA (which is a type of ribonucleic acid RNA); and translation stage, where mRNA is translated into proteins’ amino acid sequences to perform cell functions. Once protein is constructed, the gene is said to be expressed. The standard technique for measuring gene expression is to measure the mRNA instead of proteins. The reason behind using mRNA sequences is that they hybridize with their complementary RNA or DNA sequences while this property lacks in proteins.
Gene expression level represents the amount of RNA produced in a cell under different biological states. So during cell division process, if the cells suffer from diseases -i.e. cancer or malignant tumors- that cause alteration or mutations in genes, the uncontrollable behavior of the gene will be transmitted to daughter cells. Moreover, certain gene expression values will be affected and hence expression levels can be realized by monitoring the RNA.
The expression levels of thousands of genes can be simultaneously measured under particular experimental environments and conditions due to the significant advancement of DNA microarray technology. This technology made it possible to understand life on the molecular level, and enables to generate large-scale gene expression data. Besides, it has led to many analytical insights because it produced large amount of gene data ready to be analyzed rapidly and precisely by managing them using several statistical and machine learning processes.
In order to transform the DNA microarray samples from their analog form, which is DNA sequences printed in a high density array on a glass microscopic slide, into a digital form, which is the gene expression data matrix that can be handled and manipulated, several steps should be done.
The standard technique is to transcribe mRNA from two cells and reverse transcribe both of them into cRNA, label them using fluorescent dyes (red if cancerous and green if benign). Both samples are distributed over the whole microarray in order to hybridize with their corresponding cDNA (labeled cDNA try to bind to their complementary cDNA on the microarray in order to form a double stranded molecule in the process called hybridization). Hybridization thus acts like a detector of the presence of a certain gene. The slide is then scanned to obtained numerical intensities of each dye. Then, the substrate can be scanned as an image that can be manipulated by image processing techniques; the intensity of the colors corresponds to the number of mRNA transcribed for each gene. By comparing the intensity of the colors for a gene under two different experimental conditions, gene expression levels can be monitored. For all genes on a single chip, gene expression value is: log2(IR/IG) where IR is the intensity of the red dye and IG is the intensity of the green dye.
DNA microarray technology provided a considerable amount of important data ready to be explored. This massive amount of data suffers from several issues. First, the process of extracting samples under the right conditions is extremely difficult to meet and it involves high level of noise. Second, there are thousands of gene expressions versus few dozens of samples, which require excluding the irrelevant genes before actual classification. The choice of the discriminating genes between different cancer types or classes is a major research field. Third, several tradeoffs have been revealed such as maintaining accuracy rate versus ensuring generalization, controlling complexity versus improving classifier’s performance, improving the performance versus memory requirements. Those factors have affected the efficiency of the cancer classification algorithms.
