The Langevin function L is defined as(1)y=L(x)=cothx−1/x
Its inverse function appears in diverse contexts, such as polymer science [25], magnetism [24] and the theory of rubber elasticity [9]. It cannot be represented in a closed form. There are two methods to find their values: using numerical methods or by an approximation formula. The second method is more demanded by most researchers who use this function in practice.
Exact approximation can be used in different applications to provide extensive information on rheological properties of various polymer.
For the first time, the inverse Langevin function appeared in the statistical model of the single chain of polymer which was introduced by Kuhn and Grün [27].
This theory assumes in its simplest form that the mechanical properties of rubber and similar polymers depend only on the entropy of the system, which is a function of the distribution of configurations p(r) of the constituent chain molecules.
They removed the restriction of a Gaussian distribution on chain end-to-end distances and obtained in such a manner a probability distribution p(r) of the form(2)lnp(r)=const−N[rLL−1(rL)+ln(L−1(rL)sinhL−1(rL))]
From this distribution can be derived the following formula for the entropy of the single chain:(3)uc=kTN(rLL−1(rL)+lnL−1(rL)sinhL−1(rL))where: k - Boltzmann constant, T - absolute temperature, N - number of rigid links in the chain, r - chain end-to-end distance and L - contour length of the chain.
Next the axial force versus displacement can be derived by the use of the derivative formula fc=duc/dr(4)fc=kTNLL−1(rL)When chain length r approaches its maximum value L corresponding to a fully stretched state, the chain force tends to infinity. The inverse Langevin function L−1(rL) captures this property which is shown by its asymptotic behavior near the value r/L=1.
Below we try to outline a few main reasons for finding very exact and relatively simple approximation for the inverse Langevin function. The first one is connecting with time-consuming computation in specialised FEM software (for example Abaqus). For the numerical solution of the inverse problem it is proposed to use a simple approximation formula which gives very fast results. The second one states that theorists and experimental scientists often use approximation formulas because simple expressions provide great help for their research. The third reason for using very exact approximation can be found in the paper written by Ammar [1]. He analyses the significance of Kröger [25] approximation, which is the more accurate approximation than traditional one, regarding to the value of the probability distribution function (PDF) in the framework of a kinetic theory simulation. He demonstrated, by making some simple simulations, that the PDF prediction within aforementioned theory as well as the macroscopic stress value are both affected by the quality of the approximation.
In recent years, some significant papers have been published devoted to the use of an approximation formula for the inverse Langevin function in diverse research context. Our survey shows the great popularity of rational and Padé approximation.
Hao et al. [11] use this kind of approximation as it is superior to the polynomial approximation. They emphasize the fact that Padé approximation shows the singular behavior of the inverse Langevin function at x=1 and exhibits very good results. They use approximation in numerical study on the mechanical behavior of filled rubber-like materials.
Hossain et al. [12] claim that the Padé approximation is applied due to its superior performance over other approximation procedures. They use it to show performance of the eight-chain model on the Treloar data.
Ehret [9] conducts very interesting study on the accuracy of Padé approximation and the Taylor series of the inverse Langevin function. He expresses the fact that Padé approximants and other rational functions have been proposed as an alternative to the Taylor series because of the fact that the Taylor series does not capture the singularity of the inverse Langevin function. From his study we can find out that the Taylor approximations show divergent behavior, which is also reflected by the increasing error for the 100-term approximation.
Silberstein et al. [41] implement their theory in the well known software suite for finite element analysis and computer-aided engineering called Abaqus. They evaluate the inverse Langevin function using the Cohen approximation.
Paturej et al. [35] conduct molecular dynamics simulations for forced detachment of a single polymer chain, strongly adsorbed on a solid substrate. They use Padé approximant and underline that it is a very good approximation for the inverse Langevin function.
Itskov [16] uses the Cohen rounded Padé approximation for the verification of the accuracy of numerical integration over the unit sphere for the full network models.
Cellini et al. [4] adapt the classical Arruda–Boyce model [3] to elucidate microstructural modifications of the polymer-dye blend. To solve this problem they apply rational approximation formula of the inverse Langevin function.
Lexcellent et al. [28] provide interesting research on the shape memory polymers thermomechanical modeling. They use in their computer simulation Padé approximation of the inverse Langevin function.
Tehrani and Sarvestani [44] inspect the effect of chain length distribution on mechanical behavior of polymeric networks. They use Puso approximation of the inverse Langevin function for that purpose.
We can find interesting remarks in the paper written by Mezo and Keady [31]. They study Lambert function, which is very popular in many fields of science. For our study it is worth noting that the inverse Langevin function is a specially parametrized generalized Lambert function.
This brief review of the most important papers which were published recently, shows the great popularity of application of the inverse Langevin function, mainly by a rational approximation. The authors, who use this function in their modeling research, expect an approximation formula to be simple and accurate.
On the other hand, there is a renewed interest in finding a new approximation formula of the inverse Langevin function.
The paper written by Nguessong et al. [32] opens a series of dedicated works to the subject of the development of a new approximation formula. The procedure of receiving an approximant is based on the two-step modification of the Cohen formula. After each step the error between the Cohen formula and the inverse Langevin function is minimized. Finally authors receive very high approximation accuracy. Recently this formula was used by Nkenfacka et al. [33] who provided a new constitutive model for rubber-like materials. They emphasized its high accuracy to well describe the affine part of the rubber behavior.
Our last paper [20] shows another proposal of approximation of the mentioned function. The approximation formula is based on the new method called the N-point Padé approximation (NPA). We are the first to use it in solution of this problem. More information about this very exact method can be found in [22]. We used also successfully the similar procedure to approximate the Gaussian statistical integral [23]. This type of Padé approximation gives more chances to obtain a more accurate approximation than classical one.
The similar procedure was used by Darabi and Itskov [6]. They give a proposal of a new Padé approximation [3/1] which is slightly simpler of our [3/2] from the mentioned paper. The main advantage of this formula is that it is more exact than our one at the vicinity of the asymptote.
In this paper we use the following notation: [m/n] means Padé approximation [10], [20], [21], [22], Rm,n rational approximation [40].
Recently Kröger [25] proposed a new mathematical procedure for establishing an approximation of the inverse Langevin function. It takes into account the following features of function: exact asymptotics, symmetry, and integral behavior. He gives a series of new solutions and improvements of existing formulas of the inverse Langevin function. He also performed a detailed assessment of a large number of previously suggested approximants. As a result of that deep study the reader can find very interesting figure which presents state-of-the-art diagram of approximants to the inverse Langevin function versus their complexity. Current state-of-the-art diagram of approximants is presented in Fig. 1. The conclusions drawn from it can be treated as a very important element in the choice of the optimal approximation. The wider analysis of this diagram will be provided further in the later section.Download : Download high-res image (197KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Current state-of-the-art diagram of the approximants to the inverse Langevin function on the basis of [25]. It presents maximum relative error vs. complexity for Padé/rational approximants discussed in (Appendix F) and includes improved [1/4], [7/2] approximants and our new proposal R9,2, which is the best reported approximant at complexity 11.
The paper written by Marchi and Arruda [29] opens a new trend in finding the best solution of approximation of the inverse Langevin function. They formulate the problem as classical optimization issue and obtain new formulas.
Petrosyan [36] has just proposed a new complex approximation of the inverse Langevin function. This formula has relatively simple form and high accuracy 0.18% than the previous rational approximations. It represents a compromise between accuracy and simplicity.
Takacs [42], [43] gives approximation formulas for the Brillouin function and its inverse one. We note the fact that the Langevin function is a special case of the Brillouin function.
The paper is constructed as follows: in “An extended study on the Taylor series expansions of the inverse Langevin function” we present our analysis of the Taylor series expansion, which is extended up to 3000 terms, while previous reports include only 500. It includes the analysis of the maximum relative error for the Taylor series expansions of the inverse Langevin function based on different number of terms and the estimation of radius of convergence of the initial/infinite Taylor series of the inverse Langevin function. In ”New proposal” we introduce a new method for finding an approximant of the inverse Langevin function. This method uses the minimax approximation algorithm. The efficiency of this method is illustrated by finding a new rational approximation formula which gives what is currently the most exact rational approximation of the inverse Langevin function. “Practical application of new approximation of x=L−1(y)” evidences the high precision of our proposed formula. The examples are selected in such a way as to show different aspects of application of the inverse Langevin function. They include: chain free energy, three-chain model and FENE dumbbell model. Finally, the Conclusion contains some concluding remarks. At the end of the paper, there are a number of Appendices that provide the complementary material for the issues discussed in the main party of manuscript.
