During the last few years, the Maker Movement has appeared as a new trend that derives from the general maker culture, which is also described as a philosophy or phenomenon. The definition of the Maker Movement is very broad and builds on an individual’s ability to be a creator of things, a “maker.” There is a growing community of hobbyists and professionals with diverse skills and interests who make their own functional devices, from technological gadgets to home decorating. The rapid growth of this movement derives from advances in technology and new digital fabrication technologies that allowed the appearance of tools such as wearable computing e-textiles, robotics, 3D printing, microprocessors, and programming languages. Moreover, online communities permit the sharing of tools and ideas that enhance collaboration and the globalization of problem-solvers.
The rise of the Maker Movement and the increase of various maker culture-based initiatives (e.g., Makerspaces, Fablabs, Techshops) have evolved in the sense that the Maker Movement is a technological and creative evolution that has limitless implications for the world of education. In addition, prominent funding agencies support research efforts related to the Maker Movement.1 The role of making in education in particular has been studied for many decades. First, Papert’s constructionism demonstrated the need to learn through creative making processes, as well as discovering knowledge rather than receiving it passively [27]. Making provides a different perspective in the learning process, as it gives learners the opportunity to have control over their own knowledge, instead of being passive recipients. Martinez and Stager [48] presented three ways of learning, based on the constructionist approach: making, tinkering, and engineering. Their approach distinguishes making from tinkering. Making has very wide content, characterized as “a stance” that is more like an attitude toward learning that sets the learner in the center of the educational process and creates opportunities that students may never have encountered themselves. On the other hand, tinkering appears more specific, as it is characterized as a problem-solving process through discovery. Honey and Kanter [30] include making as one of the main components of learning, in accordance with designing and playing. Making is defined as “building or adapting objects by hand for the simple personal pleasure of figuring out how things work.”
The interest in making is mainly focused in educational settings centered around science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) concepts. In addition, many studies, starting from Papert’s Logo programming language [52] and Lego Mindstorms [58], showed the connection between making and the learning principles of engineering, design, and computer programming [57], [35], [32].
In this study, we assess the recent research concerning the Maker Movement and its emerging role in formal and informal education. For the purpose of this review, we define what we consider as making in order to determine our approach to the Maker Movement. In particular, making involves constructing activities and related ways to fabricate real and/or digital things using technological resources, including fabrication [39], physical computing, and programming. Making focuses on the process that occurs in an environment that is not always merely learning oriented, but promotes design thinking, computational concepts, collaborative work, and innovation, among other things.
Our motivation for this work is based on emerging developments in the area of manufacturing, coding, and learning technologies, creating momentum for adoption of the making approach. We draw on the research literature to consider the trends and possibilities within this movement for teaching and learning. The aim of this literature review is to provide a review of research on the Maker Movement approach in order to summarize the findings, and understand how different types of making activities are related to a successful learning experience in terms of learning, interest, and engagement. Furthermore, we consider how these practices could help students to improve their performance in coding, computational skills, and problem solving. This has been achieved by evaluating empirical studies from the last five years.
Key areas covered in the current review include the types of technology used, previous literature reviews, benefits and challenges of the Maker Movement, methodological concerns, and suggestions for future research. In line with the scope of this review and the fact that it is a maturing field, defining Berlin Model [29] areas is important. Despite using making types of instructions in teaching and learning is not novel, there has been a lack of evidence to identify which are the most commonly used subject areas (“contents” in the Berlin Model) that could be applied. Investigating technologies (“media” in the Berlin Model) to support making activities so far, will provide an overview of the already widely used tools, as well as the promising potential existence of new ones. Also, evaluation is an important aspect since evidence of learning laid the foundation of learning science and decision-makers as well as practitioners and researchers rely their future decisions on it. To guide our research, we used two of the main categories of the Berlin Model (i.e. content and media) and also assessment because it is critical for policy makers in order to adopt making. Consequently, we posed the following initial research questions:
1.What are the most common technologies used in making approaches?2.Which are the most common subject areas in which to implement a making type of instruction?3.What are the main measures used to evaluate making types of instruction?
In addition to producing substantive findings regarding the making instructional approach, the review aims to identify potential research gaps as well as make suggestions for future research. Future research efforts will allow us to better indicate which aspects and ingredients of making-type instructions achieve better results in learning, and for which circumstances and student groups.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we present the related work; the third section describes the methodology used for our literature review and how we analyzed the studies selected. The fourth section presents the research findings derived from the data analysis based on our specific areas of focus. The last section discusses the results and identifies gaps, while making suggestions for future research.
