Blood flow is one of the most important indexes to estimate body functional status [1], [2]. It enables the supply for oxygen and other requirements of the tissue, and guarantees the removal of metabolic wastes [3]. Too little blood flow leads to insufficient oxygen supply, and as a result, neurons closely related with energy are laid off. Therewith it causes irreversible cell damages [4]. On the whole, the measurements and control of blood flow play a pushing role in the diagnoses and treatments of illnesses regarding cells and blood vessels [5]. It is significant for basic researches of life science frontier, clinical diagnoses, and treatments that the blood flow monitoring of biological tissues in real time, in a continuous and non-invasive approach [6].
The conventional methods have been used in blood flow monitoring. Laser Doppler blood flow detection technology, taking advantage of Doppler shift effect produced by incident light scattering on the moving red blood cell surface, adopts the conversion formula of the Doppler shift of backscatter light and speed to infer blood flow velocity. This technology is mainly used in blood perfusion, serving to monitor noninvasively and continuously the superficial tissue (under the surface about 0.5 mm) [7], [8]. Laser speckle imaging technology makes use of a coherent light source which irradiates tissue surface. It is limited to the superficial tissue blood flow imaging application currently [9]. Magnetic resonance imaging is one of the most popular technologies. It utilizes maximum body nuclei in subject – the hydrogen nuclei. It can emit nuclear magnetic resonance signals under certain conditions to obtain tomographic images of an arbitrary direction in the body [10]. However, its instruments are expensive and the transfer rate of blood flow correlated information is slow, and worse still it has great size and thus is not portable. Doppler ultrasound technology is based on the information in the ultrasound signals frequency of changes. Analyzing the frequency of changes of ultrasound signals can get information on blood flow. Problems arise because when using this technique to monitor blood flow, it's difficult to measure the magnitude of the blood vessels of less than cm, due to the influence of vessel wall noise [11]. Therefore, the ideal method to measure blood flow is non-invasive, real-time, continuous, not susceptible to external interference and has a deeper depth of measurement [12].
Near-infrared diffuse correlation spectroscopy (DCS) instrumentation uses optical detector to measure light intensity at the distance a couple of wavelengths away in NIRS [13], [14]. It takes advantage of the low absorption properties of biological tissue in the near infrared spectrum range (650–950 nm) [15]. Over the past few decades, a wide variety of NIRS have been extensively studied in various diseases affecting the levels of local tissue oxygenation, such as shock and thrombus [16], [17]. People have been able to complete high speed data acquisition and processing, real-time monitoring and control and finally displaying blood flow particle fluctuation rate [18], [19]. The significance of this method has overcome the shortcomings of invasive monitoring and uses radioactive elements in positron emission computed tomography technology, avoiding the troubles of high cost and non-portable use in magnetic resonance imaging, overcoming the shortage of measuring depth in Laser Doppler blood flow detection technology and measuring only over vascular level in Doppler ultrasound, achieving a non-invasive, continuous real-time, applicable to a variety of vessel sizes and deeper depths blood flow monitoring [20]. In summary, it has a high research value.
In the past researches, the autocorrelation module and the upper computer module were separated, and they transferred data through the USB interface, which could probably lead to man-made errors [13], [21]. However, since our integrative autocorrelator device integrates the functions of the autocorrelation module and the upper computer module, it avoids the problems mentioned above and is more portable and reliable.
Here, we attempted to design and develop the autocorrelator device of DCS instrumentation according to the principles of diffuse correlation spectrometer. In the meantime, we used our integrative autocorrelator device to monitor particle fluctuation rate and tested its reliability. After analysis of data, we found that the device has great potentiality in measuring the particle fluctuation rate conveniently, accurately and reliably.
