Agriculture is one of the most important activities in the world economy, which has led to a large variety of studies with different goals, (Baggio, 2005, Daberkow and McBride, 2003, McBratney et al., 2005, Zhang and Kovacs, 2012, Zhang et al., 2002) including: (i) increasing crop productivity and quality, (ii) decreasing production costs and (iii) reducing environmental damage. The use of technology in agriculture can be characterized as Precision Agriculture (PA), as defined by Bongiovanni and Lowenberg-DeBoer (2004): the use of information technology in all agricultural production practices, whether to adapt the use of inputs to achieve the desired results in specific areas, or to monitor the results achieved in agricultural plantations. The demand for larger agricultural production is often reflected in the increase in the amount of pesticides used during cultivation (Faustino et al., 2015, Tsimbiri et al., 2015, Walander, 2015). These products are used for pest1 control, and creation of a nearly ideal environment for the crop growth. Pimentel (2009) estimates that 3 million metric tons of pesticides are used annually worldwide, but about 40% of all crops are destroyed. One of the main reasons for this problem is the pesticides drift out of the targeted area. In addition to the environmental damage caused by pesticide drift to neighboring areas, prolonged contact with these products can cause various diseases to humans (Dhouib et al., 2016), such as cancer, complications in the respiratory system and neurological disorders.
Pesticide spraying in agricultural crop fields is generally performed in two ways (Sammons et al., 2005), namely: (i) terrestrial and (ii) aerial. In the terrestrial way, which is largely based on ground vehicles, paths are needed within the crop field, as the vehicles require permanent contact with the ground during locomotion. The spraying system must be close the culture, which reduces the drift of pesticides to neighboring areas. Additionally, the terrestrial spraying is able to reach a higher accuracy of spraying distribution in favorable conditions. For example, it can attend particular demands of a specific culture. On the other hand, this spraying approach is usually slow and has contact with the culture, which decreases the production area and can damage healthy plants. In contrast, the aerial spraying allows faster spraying without the need for paths inside the crop field. However, the larger distance between the spraying system and the cultivated area increases pesticide drift to neighboring areas (Nádasi and Szabó, 2011).
The aircrafts usually employed for spraying are manned, therefore requiring the presence of a pilot during the spraying activity. If there is any failure, human or mechanical, during the flight that cause the aircraft fall, can severely harm the pilot. It is important to observe that most of the aerial spraying occur close to the soil (around 3 meters high), which increases the chances of accidents. An alternative to reduce the risk of fatal accidents is to use unmanned (autonomous or remote controlled) aircrafts, like UAVs.
Several studies on the use of tele-operated UAVs to spray pesticides can be found in the PA scientific literature (Bae and Koo, 2013, Huang et al., 2009). However, the use of full or semi autonomous UAVs to perform the spraying operation still has not efficiently addressed the problem of how to autonomously find control parameters able to continuously adapt the flight route of an UAV spraying pesticides in a highly dynamic environment. In the (semi) autonomous operation, an UAV must be able to adjust its flight route accordingly to its velocity and operation height, the velocity and orientation of the wind, and the type of chemical being sprayed (as it might change the size of the droplets).
In this paper, the authors investigate the use of four metaheuristics, two of them population based, to obtain semi-optimal flight control parameter values. The authors believe that these metaheuristics can efficiently search the solution space to find good parameter values for the UAV control rules, increase the accuracy of the spraying process.
Hence, looking to obtain higher accuracy in pesticide spraying and reduce the risk of human exposure to these products, this paper proposes a system called AdEn (Adaptation to the Environment) to autonomously adjust the control rules of UAVs spraying operation taking into account possible changes in weather conditions. In the proposed system, four metaheuristics are evaluated regarding their performance in the optimization of the control rules, namely: (i) Genetic Algorithms, (ii) Particle Swarm Optimization, (iii) Simulated Annealing, and (iv) Hill-Climbing. Afterwards, this study will compare the performance obtained in pesticide spraying by using AdEn with the same approach adopted in the literature for the optimization phase (i.e. replacing the metaheuristics by a specific empirical setting of the PSO).
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 described the main aspects of related works. Next, Section 3 briefly presents the proposed approach for UAVs-based pesticide spraying. In Section 4 there is a detailed description of each component of the approach proposed in this paper. The experimental evaluation process used to assess the performance of the proposed approach is described in Section 5. Finally, a summary of the main conclusions and suggestions for future works are presented in Section 6.
