As computers have been an indispensable tool, re-finding a document which has been accessed previously becomes a common task [1]. Some of the re-finding tasks are effortless to accomplish, especially when the user is familiar with the target file or it has been accessed recently. For a simple re-finding task, a variety of methods can be selected to accomplish it. Such as navigating directly to the folder which contains the target document. If a user cannot recall a document’s path but remembers its keywords or other meta-data attributes such as size, creation time, author etc., a desktop search engine can be used to retrieve it. If the document is still “warm”, checking the “Recent file list” maintained by the operating system might be a better choice.
However, if a user’s memory about the quested document is obscure; no effective attributes (i.e., path, keywords, meta-data etc.) are recollected to locate the document, it is a difficult re-finding task. Typically, none of the methods listed above can deal with these re-finding tasks because of poorly recollected memory. We argue that maybe the user can recall some other attributes which have not been exploited by existing file retrieval systems or methods. E.g., supposing a user is re-finding a document, he cannot remember its path and keywords, but clearly remembers it has hundreds of pages; it contains at least two images and no math equations; he only read the first chapter of it for less than an hour; he might have accessed it one or two times, but definitely less than five times; he has printed some pages of it. Apparently, these information fragments are detailed enough to locate the document without much effort. However, most of them are not collected and exploited by existing document re-finding systems. Studies of recollection for texts and stories indicate that people are not good at remembering precise details. Instead what tends to be remembered are high-level meanings or gists like information of the example [2].
If plenty of these gist attributes are recalled, even though none of them are detailed enough to locate the quested document separately, the combined group effort of them can be effective tools to achieve the re-finding task. If each of these high-level meaning information can exclude 1/3 of irrelevant documents, 16 attributes can filter a candidate set of 10,000 into about 15. Within 15 candidates, it will not be strenuous to find out the target with just scan and recognition. If the user can recall a more specific value about a particular attribute, fewer filters are required.
1.1. The three stages of memoryHuman memory works in a very complex and elusive way [3], [4], even today scientists still do not fully understand how humans remember or recall exactly . Most psychologists believe that the process of memory begins with encoding. It allows the perceived item of interest to be converted into a construct that can be stored within the brain, and then recalled later from short-term or long-term memory. There are two parts of the brain, the hippocampus and the front cortex, are responsible for analyzing various sensory inputs and decide if they are worth remembering [5].According to the multi-store model [6], people’s memory can be stored in three stages: the sensory stage, the short-term stage, and ultimately, the long-term stage. Each stage of human memory functions like a filter which discards useless information. The sensory memory can only last a fraction of a second, the short-term memory can only hold about seven items for 20 to 30 s at a time. Only those information which is of interest to the subject can be gradually transferred into long-term memory.Therefore, in a difficult re-finding scenario, only those attributes stored in long-term memory can be used to locate the target, since sensory memory and short-term memory can only be held for less than one minute.
1.2. Other possible attributes for re-findingA document can be characterized by many attributes, such as file name, size, keywords, and authors etc. The user’s experiences about a document can also be used to locate the target, such as printing experiences, reading it at an unusual place or time etc. For an attribute to be an effective filter, not only it should be recollected by the user, but also there exists a logging system which has recorded the attribute values for all the documents the user has accessed. Since the re-finding system needs to compare the value of the quested document with values of others. There is uncertainty which set of attributes will get into a user’s long-term memory, and can be recollected when the re-finding occurs [7]. It depends on many circumstances, such as the user’s interest, characteristics etc.We propose to use a logging system to record other possible attributes when a person is processing a document, such as a printing experience, an unusual time or location, and some conclusive gists like cumulative processing time of the document etc.; preparing for that any set of attributes would be used as filters to locate the document later. The quantity of documents a user can access during a life span is limited, so the total recorded information will not be huge.
1.3. Alleviating cognitive burdenTo recollect many kinds of information about a document would bring the user considerable cognitive burden. According to findings of cognitive psychology, when people are trying to recollect something, a great deal of their memory is “available but not accessible” [8], [9]. For example, if a user is asked to recollect attributes of a document he has read, typically, little information can be recollected because a large portion of the information is “available but not accessible”. If some hints are provided, such as a list of questions about the document, more information can be recollected since it relieves the subject’s cognitive burden. Therefore, a question and answer wizard interface is utilized to alleviate users’ cognitive burden when the recollecting occurs.A logging system is developed to record attributes of documents and the user’s reading experiences about them. Some attributes cannot be extracted directly, such as how long and how much the user has read a document. Therefore, an analyzing system is used to calculate these values.To further alleviate the user’s cognitive burden, recommendations are provided for each question. A recommendation is generated by analyzing the distribution of attribute values. As mentioned above, in a difficult re-finding context, the user’s memory about the target document is usually some high-level gists, so the recommendations are generalized to a gist about the document. For example, one of the questions asks the user:“How many tables does the document contain?”Instead of recommending specific numbers like 2, 3 or 10, a generalized answer is recommended, such as:“A. More than 3    B. Less than or equal to 3”Fig. 1 shows the framework of the method for re-finding. In Section 3, a PDF (Portable Document Format) re-finding system is developed based on the method. Details of introducing new attributes and providing recommendations will be discussed there. A user study is carried out to evaluate the system in Section 4.Download : Download high-res image (158KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The framework of the method.
