Automatic zipper defect detection plays an important role in product quality inspection of industrial automation production lines and is an urgent need for current zipper intelligent manufacturing. Its goal is to recognize and localize the defects on the surface of zipper during quality inspection. Due to the strict quality standards of the zipper products and technical challenges of the quality inspection, the current zipper quality inspection still relied mostly on subjective visual inspection by experienced inspectors, subject to poor inspection efficiency, high labor intensity and high missing and false positive rates resulting from human inexperience and fatigue. Besides, the traditional manual inspection fails to yield accurate quantitative statistical results for different types of defects, which are conducive to subsequent defects source analysis. Automated visual zipper inspection with high precision, high efficiency, and low cost is imperative for better productivity of the zipper manufacturing industry.
In this paper, we focus on plastic steel zipper tape defect detection. Typical zipper tape defects are divided into tape indentation, large-scale broken tape defects, small-scale broken tape defects, and other small-scale defects that are not included in the above defects, as shown in Fig. 1. The zipper images are acquired by a black box acquisition device that includes two industrial cameras and two auxiliary light sources. To acquire all the defects of the zipper, the zipper images are taken from both sides when the zipper goes through the middle of the two cameras. The cameras are placed on both sides inside the black box and the auxiliary light sources are installed on both sides of the transmission path.Download : Download high-res image (748KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Image acquisition device and several typical plastic steel zipper tape defects.
Due to the complexity of the zipper defects and the imperfect zipper image acquisition environment, current zipper tape defect detection is faced with the following challenges. First, the tape defects have multi-scale characteristics (as shown in Fig. 1). The features of large-scale defects are obvious and thus relatively easy to detect. The small-scale defects, however, are very difficult to detect because the defects have no remarkable change in the features. Second, the defects are of diverse categories. There are various defect types and even a single class of defects can differ in size and position, which brings a great challenge to defect detection. Third, it is not easy to collect a large number of high quality training samples in industry, especially for some atypical defect types. Insufficient training datasets may lead to a poor generalization ability of the model. Besides, the zipper tape images are often twisted with a low contrast. Hence, how to develop a detection method with high detection accuracy and real-time performance is extremely challenging.
As far as we know, there are few works on the zipper tape defect detection up to now. Zipper defect detection can be regarded as a typical application of object detection in industry [1], [2]. The most related work to our research should be the fabric defect detection [3], [4], [5], [6], because both of the zipper tape and the fabric have the textures structures. However, these methods are hard to handle some complex situations, such as nonuniform distribution of brightness in an image, image blurring, and image twist. Hence, the above traditional methods can hardly meet the stringent requirements of zipper quality inspection. Although several deep learning based approaches [7], [8], [9], [10], [11] have recently been adopted to detect the fabric defects, none of them are utilized for the zipper defect detection. In this paper, we propose to adopt the state-of-the-art deep learning-based method to detect the zipper tape defects.
Due to the stringent requirements for time-efficiency and precision of the zipper production lines, an appropriate detector plays an important role in our zipper defect detection system. We adopt the state-of-the-art single-stage detector YOLOv3-SPP [12] as a basic detector for our real-time zipper quality inspection applications. However, it does not work so well when it is directly applied to our zipper tape data. The detected results for our zipper tape data using a single-stage detector YOLOv3-SPP show that the detection accuracy of the original small-scale defects is not satisfactory. To improve the detection accuracy, we introduce a new detection network branch by fusing the features from the high and shallow layer into the YOLOv3-SPP framework. Furthermore, the improved YOLOv3-SPP network performs prediction in the multi-scale feature maps from the different layers, thus capable of detecting the different scale defects. In addition, the pooling operation will weaken the features of small-scale defects in the detection network. Thus, we propose to replace the pooling operation with the dilated convolution in order to further reduce the loss of small-scale features.
Generally, the zipper defects cause local changes of intensity in an image, leading to corresponding local discontinuities in the gray values of the obtained image. Hence, in this study, we propose to first detect the larger local regions that contain the small-scale defects. The introduction of information in the contextual local regions enclosing the small-scale defects highlights the discontinuous changes between the small-scale defects and surrounding normal textures. The features of the discontinuous changes are relatively more discriminative, which are more easily captured by the CNN network. Thus, an integration of local contextual information around the small-scale defects is expected to enhance the detection accuracy of the small-scale defects.
The contributions of the proposed method are listed as follows:
•We propose a novel two-stage coarse-to-fine cascade framework to solve the zipper tape defect detection problem. In the first stage, we detect the large-scale defects and local context regions containing small-scale defects. In the second stage, we detect small-scale defects from the local context regions detected in the first stage, which can be seen as a refining process. In this case, small-scale defects can be regarded as large-scale objects, which are more easily detected.•We propose a new improved multi-scale network architecture in the first stage by adding a new detection branch in the high layer of the multi-scale detection network, where the shallow layer features with more information about edges and contours are fused into the high layer to further boost the detection accuracy of the local context region containing small-scale defects.•We integrate the spatial pyramid convolution (SPC) module obtained by concatenating the spatial pyramid feature maps with different receptive fields into the medium layer detection branch in the network architectures of the first stage to further improve the detection accuracy of the medium-scale defects.•The proposed method has a high detection speed compared with most of the state-of-the-art methods, promising in real applications. The detection accuracy in two stages is over 99.0% for all zipper tape defects on our testing dataset, comparable to those of the state-of-the-art methods.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to apply the deep learning based object detection techniques to the zipper tape defect detection problem. We call the improved method in the first stage as YOLOv3++-SPC.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work. Section 3 introduces the system review. Section 4 details the defect detection system. Section 5 introduces the dataset and data augmentation. Section 6 describes the experiments and results. Finally, some conclusions are drawn in Section 7.
