Despite what appears to be a general popular consensus that decision-making should be based on scientific evidence, the acceptance and adoption of scientific principles by the general public has been uneven and fraught with controversies. The current dialogue about climate change provides one notable example (Lewandowsky et al., 2013). Even in realms where science appears to be foundational, such as in US agriculture, a closer read of agricultural history shows that the relationship between agricultural scientists and farmers has been slow to develop and the two populations have often been at odds with each other. The current iteration of agricultural science has bridged the perspectives of scientists and farmers by emphasizing efficient production based on chemical inputs, biotechnology, and specialized equipment.
When public health science addresses agriculture, the focus is typically food access, nutrition, or the environmental impact of farming practices. However, the past three decades have also seen a growing body of research examining occupational safety and health outcomes of agricultural populations (DeRoo and Rautiainen, 2000). Agricultural workers experience high rates of occupational fatalities, injuries, and illnesses. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that an agricultural worker is more than seven times likely to die on the job than workers in other industries. Agricultural workers also experience high rates of chronic illness related to their occupation, including musculoskeletal disorders, skin and lung disease (Lessenger, 2006, Donham and Thelin, 2006). There has been a response by both public health researchers and federal agencies over the past decades to improve these rates; however, agriculture has been much slower to change than other industries and in fact fatalities among agricultural workers has increased in recent years (CFOI Macken-Walsh (2016)).
This paper examines qualitative data collected from broiler chicken producers in the southeastern US to better understand their barriers to participating in health and safety research on farms. The study was developed in response to a lack of participation by broiler producers in an educational intervention to increase respirator use among those working in the production barns. While some researchers have examined barriers to changing safety and health behaviors on farms, there is little attention to producers’ willingness to participate in the research that supports occupational safety and health interventions in agriculture.
