Scientific workflows help computational research in different disciplines by consolidating heterogeneous software written in many different languages  [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. Such workflows, designed by domain experts in their own fields, may also be of great utility to scientists in other disciplines; in fact, sites like http://www.myexperiment.org spotlight the opportunities for reusing and re-purposing scientific workflows  [7], [8]. Although such sites help reproduce and reuse entire workflows, experts in other disciplines might want to use specific components of the workflows for new research purposes. Therefore, the ability to share components of workflows would allow researchers in different disciplines to compose applications that utilize the same functionality across very different domains of data.
An elegant solution to this research development problem is to utilize and share workflow fragments  [6], [9], [10]. Workflow fragments are a coherent sub-workflow designed by a domain specialist. They have the potential to reduce workflow authoring time and improve quality of the final workflows by allowing reuse of established, validated workflows. Each workflow fragment, in fact, is a useful resource in its own right and allows for cross-fertilization in new scientific domains  [6].
In this paper, we utilize workflow fragments to demonstrate the ability to reuse workflows as a way to facilitate development and bridge expertise across disciplines. We introduce several workflow fragments for text analysis, image analysis, analysis of activity in video, and analysis of artistic style using deep learning. In addition, we examine case studies that highlight the re-usability of workflow fragments across multiple data domains, from video analysis to multimedia analysis, which involves both text and image analysis. In particular, we show how a pre-existing but incomplete multimedia analysis task can be developed more rapidly and extended by simply reusing workflow fragments we had previously developed. This new workflow can subsequently be made accessible to end-users or researchers to conduct further analysis or reproduce results, as needed.
To facilitate this export of workflows and workflow fragments, we utilize the WINGS workflow system, which was developed to assist scientists in managing complex computations  [3] and has been used in several scientific applications  [5]. WINGS uses semantic workflow representations that capture the requirements and semantic constraints of individual steps and datasets explicitly, as well as workflow reasoning algorithms to generate and validate possible combinations of workflow components systematically.
Our main contributions in this paper are: 
•Creation of various workflow fragments for text analysis, image analysis, analysis of activity in video, and analysis of artistic style using deep learning.•Case studies that show the re-usability of workflow fragments across multiple data domains, including computer vision and machine learning applications for multimedia analysis.•Analysis of development time and effort to both extend a nascent, rudimentary analysis of a multimedia analysis project using the provided workflow fragments and to port its pre-existing code as new workflow fragments as well as creating multiple implementations of the neural algorithm for artistic style.
