The story is the description in chronological order of events that have occurred based on relationships (such as lover, opponent, or friend) of characters. A story contains thoughts and various choices regarding events experienced by people in their lives, and such a story provides information and pleasure to other people. A story consists of respective events (i.e., chronology and narrative), a topic formed by grouping relevant events together, and a storyline (i.e., central plots and subplots) that composes the entire story [1]. Events are correlated with other events, and using this correlation, relations between entities and newly inferred facts can be obtained.
A story is sometimes used for personal goals in narrative forms, such as a diary or autobiography. Furthermore, it is used to effectively deliver relevant information in many domains, such as marketing, user experience design, and social media. Tangherlini et al. [2] proposed scalable machine-learning methods for story aggregation on social media. They discovered the aggregate narrative framework and characterized temporal trends in the narrative framework. Houghton et al. [3] proposed tools to increase influence in marketing domains. In addition to a method for effective delivery, the storytelling technique is used in as diverse areas such as preventing terrorism in advance by analyzing events [4].
To effectively create stories that are used in various forms, it is necessary to consider the various multimodal content and structures that compose a well-structured story. First, from the structural perspective, hierarchical structure and cause-and-effect-based structure are classified according to the correlation of events composing a text or dialogues [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Hierarchical structure, which is usually used as a method for summarizing texts, includes an extractive method that extracts sentences, and an abstractive method that summarizes contents [11], [12], [13], [14]. The use of hierarchical information is favorable for explaining reports or content with hierarchical relationships and has the advantage of being able to see the entire structure at a glance.
The extractive method has the advantage that implementation is simple and important events can be composed at important points, but it is difficult to compose good connections between sentences [11,12]. The abstractive method is a method of summarizing and describing essential contents in a paragraph and has the advantage that it condenses content relative to the extractive method. However, as a drawback, this method makes it difficult to compose in a well-structured manner because the structural characteristics of a story cannot be taken into consideration [13].
Recently, with the remarkable advance of natural language processing based on the pre-trained language model, it had a significant influence on natural language tasks such as generation [15], question-answering [16,17], bio domain [18], science domain [19] and so on. In particular, auto-encoder models such as BERT and auto-regression models such as GPT-2 have achieved remarkable growth in natural language generation [20,21]. Yang et al. [22] proposed XLNET, which has two characteristics of the auto-encoder model and the autoregressive model. However, although the generated sentences are more natural than before, the sentences of similar meaning are repeated due to model characteristics, so the readers evaluate it as simple and superficial. In addition, there is a problem that the consistency of the overall content composition is poor as the sentences become longer and paragraphs change. For this reason, a structured approach, such as a graph network, is required to lead a series of long stories and enrich the details of stories.
With respect to expressing a particular event or the growth process of a character, a cause-and-effect relationship is an important factor for understanding the event. The methods for describing a continuous story include story and narrative. As mentioned earlier, a story describes content related to people in chronological order. Meanwhile, the narrative is the concept of having a comprehensive symbolic frame that affects decision-making composed of such stories, and it has the characteristic that it does not follow chronological order and provides broad descriptions.
Unlike the listing method, it is important to have a process to find relationships based on the cause-and-effect relationship of events and topics and to compose a plot based on those relationships.
From the perspective of the contents constituting a story, the majority of past stories have been composed and expressed based on texts. However, as the frequency of multimedia content search (e.g., a search on YouTube) is increasing, rather than text-based search, the target contents of a story are also changing from text to multimedia. Owing to the widespread use of cell phones and various devices, users are massively generating not only texts but also multimedia contents such as photographs and videos. The multimedia data generated in such a way express a greater volume of thoughts and experiences of users than do simple texts [14,23]. Studies have been conducted on methods for creating and providing albums based on the images produced by the users [24]. Multimodal data deliver broader information using various forms of information; however, they suffer from a scarcity problem in terms of data matching owing to high dimensional space.
As far as methods for effectively dealing with the problem of multimodal content, there is a method for converting data into a different modal type and a method for integrating and expressing data of different modal types in a single space [25,26]. For integrating data, some studies use reconstructing methods with representation embedding. Poria et al. [25] used unimodal and multimodal embeddings in affective computing. Poria et al. [26] also dealt with multimodal sentiment analysis as input data, especially web video, which is decomposed into audio, visual, and text content. They also introduced decision-level fusion as well as a feature-level fusion to integrate multimodality.
Conventional studies lack investigation of procedures and methods for composing a story, compared with the need and importance of a story. As mentioned earlier, the text-based summarization method explains important topics by summarizing based on the level of importance, but it is difficult to compose a storyline that encompasses the cause-and-effect relationships of each event or topic. As stated earlier, from the data perspective, it is difficult to compose data pairs for each modal type due to the high dimensionality and scarcity of multimodal data. Therefore, studies should be conducted for methods that can manage multimodal data effectively and express them in a cause-and-effect relationship with hierarchical relationships. Accordingly, this paper defines the respective elemental techniques and procedures required for multimodal storytelling, compares the studies conducted for each procedure, and analyzes the discussion points.
As shown in Fig. 1, the five modules used for multimodal story creation consist of data embedding, topic modeling, storyline generation, draft story generation, and story evaluation. Besides, we have defined 12 detailed sub-modules to describe the five modules better. The data embedding module plays the role of converting multimodal contents into common representation. The topic modeling module clusters data based on similarity and links events, thereby extracting a topic. The storyline generation module composes a storyline that becomes the skeleton for conversion, and the draft story generation module generates a draft story by using multimodal data based on the storyline. Lastly, the story evaluation module composes an appropriate and convertible multimodal story through the draft story module's hierarchical conversion, modal conversion, and validation. A more detailed description of the five modules and 12 sub-modules will be presented in Section 3.Download : Download high-res image (163KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Architecture of multimodal story generation.
The structure of this paper is mainly organized into four stages. First, multimodal data, which cannot be used in conventional stories, are described in detail in Section 2 from the type and conversion perspectives. Second, in Section 3, the five modules explained previously are defined according to each flow, and their roles are described in detail. Third, the latest technological trends that are required when constructing the five modules are discussed in Section 4. Lastly, the issues regarding multimodal storylines are discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper.
