1.1. Where are the Incidents?2010 represented a landmark year in European aviation safety. This was the first year in the entire history of European aviation that no fatal commercial air transport incidents occurred at all (EASA, 2010). Whether it takes into account exposure by distance (0.01 fatalities per 100 million miles) or number of flights (3.1 fatalities per 10 million) the risk to the travelling public within the European aviation sector is exceedingly low (EASA, 2010). In everyday terms the probability of a fatal air crash in European airspace is approximately equal to winning second prize on the Euro Lottery (a jackpot of over €0.5 million). The highest risk for most travellers stems from the car journey to the airport (approx. 1 in 20,000 chance of a fatal accident; WHO, 2016) and using the escalators once inside the terminal building (65% of all such accidents occur in transport facilities; Schminke et al., 2013).This safety science success story has, to a very considerable degree, benefitted from a device the sole purpose of which, was to help the industry learn from incidents. This device is the humble ‘black box’, or to put it more correctly, the combined features of a Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) and Flight Data Recorder (FDR). This paper takes the opportunity of a Special Issue on Learning from Incidents to present the brief history of black boxes and the often unstated relationships it has with fundamental safety science principles. It also reveals a strong paradox instructive for other domains. Never before has there been access to so much data, and the ability to learn from incidents, yet serious fatal incidents from which to learn have (in the aviation sector at least) almost disappeared. Powerful trends in the safety science domain are discussed, including the role of lagging, coincident and leading indicators and a new role for black boxes described. Instead of a post hoc accident analysis tool, something that needs an accident as a ‘lagging indicator’ of future risks, black boxes can be used as a predictive safety assurance tool, a supplier of ‘big data’ from which leading indicators of strategic risks can be derived in novel ways.
