Over the last six months, Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies have been a significant topic in the news. In late 2017, headlines about people becoming over-night millionaires by investing in these "digital currencies" created a massive market bubble, as an influx of new investors rushed to try and get into the game. This caused Bitcoin's price to reach an all-time high of nearly 20,000 USD in December of 2017 before the price crashed to around 7000 USD (at the time of writing this article). With all the speculation occurring in the Bitcoin market, price fluctuations of over 10% a day are common. Price changes in the range of 1-3% frequently happen within very short timeframes – just several minutes. These price fluctuations create massive opportunities for people to profit from trading Bitcoin over short periods and have sparked a wave of people known as "day-traders" who try to capture profit from these short periods of price fluctuation. The world of Bitcoin is following in the footsteps of other financial markets, and the use of algorithmic trading-bots is becoming a common practice [1]. With over 60% of trading volume estimated to be attributed to these bots, it is getting harder for the human trader to make any profit trading over short periods [1]. These bots are being supported using increasingly sophisticated artificial intelligence based on complex machine learning models, often supported by deep learning [2]. Besides, due to the large volume of data obtained to represent cryptocurrencies as time-series datasets, big data fusion is a challenging task both in the preprocessing and modeling stages [2], [3], [4]. The goal is to develop a model that can assist an algorithmic trading bot in making trade decisions to maximize the chance of making profitable returns when trading Bitcoin against USD pairs. In this paper, we discuss, implement and compare various bitcoin price prediction models with multiple strategies to help traders decide how to best act over the changes in bitcoin prices over short timeframes by creating a model that can predict the direction of price movement.
The rest of this paper is organized and presented as follows: In Section 2, the background on the bitcoin market is presented, Section 3 discusses related work on Cryptocurrencies prediction models. Experimental analysis and results are presented and discussed in Section 4. Finally, conclusions and future directions are summarized in Section 5.
