Argumentation, as the discursive practice aimed at increasing (or decreasing) the acceptability of controversial standpoints (van Eemeren & Grootendorst, 1992), has been recognised as both the means and the goal of science education (Driver et al., 2000, Jiménez-Aleixandre and Erduran, 2008, Osborne et al., 2013). Consequently, national initiatives in different countries have included argumentation as one of the key goals of science teaching. The problem is that argumentation scarcely occurs in science classrooms (Larrain et al., 2014, Roth et al., 2006). So the question is why – after decades of advancing argumentation as a key goal of science education, and arguing for the need to argue to learn science – is it scarcely exercised in classrooms?
Argumentation is a discursive activity that emerges when speakers, in order to deal with controversial issues, provide additional pieces of discourse to support a given claim (see Leitão, 2000, Toulmin, 1958). Part of the problem is that argumentation is a type of language that is highly sensible to context, requiring specific conditions in order to emerge: a polemic theme; indeterminated discussion's outcome; participants' dispositions to change their views; familiarity with the audience; specific interactional goals; argumentative instructions; previous knowledge; and participants' symmetric relations, among others (see Andriessen and Coirier, 1999, Asterhan and Schwarz, 2016, Leitão, 2009). Classrooms do not normally accomplish these conditions so in order to promote argumentation in classrooms a careful design is needed (Andriessen and Schwarz, 2009, Leitão, 2009).
Are teachers prepared not only to talk in an entirely different way but also to transform the classroom conditions and design instruction considering all the relevant variables for promoting argumentation in the science classroom? More relevantly, how can in-service teachers prepare for promoting argumentation in classrooms?
1.1. Professional development and classroom practices change: the role of feedbackArguably the most popular and globally disseminated form of teachers' professional development has been out-school short-term one-off workshops, focused mainly on the transmission of knowledge (Birman et al., 2000, Garet et al., 2001). This has been the case, at least in countries such as Chile (Ávalos, 2007, Montecinos, 2008, Larrain, 2017). These workshops have worked based on the tacit epistemological assumption that practice is oriented by knowledge, that is, that first one needs to know and only then will one act accordingly. Teachers’ failure to transform their practices therefore is believed to have been due to a lack of knowledge about the desired practices and how to achieve them.Evidence shows that this type of in-service teachers' professional development is not appropriate to promoting instructional changes (Loucks-Horsley et al., 1998, Montecinos, 2008). Pedagogical change has been an elusive achievement indeed (Hord and Hall, 2001, Sarason, 1996). In the case of Chile, despite many attempts to provide professional development to in-service teachers, teaching is still teacher-centred and organised around the transmission of knowledge (Preiss, Larraín, & Valenzuela, 2011; Preiss, 2009, Radovic and Preiss, 2010). Various studies have converged, showing that effective professional development initiatives are characterised by content focus, active learning, adequate duration and sustainment over time, coherence between PD and teachers' beliefs and school and national policies, and collective participation, among others (Desimone, 2009, Garet et al., 2001). Following these findings, and sociocultural and pragmatist theories of learning (Dewey, 1939, Lave and Wenger, 1991, Rogoff, 1995; among many others), professional initiatives around the world have become increasingly active and peer-work based, including collaborative spaces to discuss and reflect around their own practices as the pivotal aspect for change (Ávalos, 2011, Edwards-Groves and Hardy, 2013, Englert and Tarrant, 1995, Flitton and Warwick, 2013, Harford and MacRuairc, 2008, Lom and Sullenger, 2011, Louca et al., 2013, Nehring et al., 2010, Nelson and Slavit, 2007, Schön, 1983). Again, knowledge is seen as a necessary condition for change (see Desimone, 2009), although in this case it should be collaboratively constructed and based on the participants’ own teaching practices. In addition, video-based reflections have been considered particularly effective in fostering practical change insofar as teachers can discuss relevant examples and evidence of desired practices (Harford & MacRuairc, 2008).However, the effectiveness of these components of teachers’ professional development has been mostly reported by teachers, and less so by direct evidence of changes in classroom practices (Garet et al., 2001, Samaras and Gismondi, 1998), with a comparative focus on their differential effectiveness (Desimone, 2009, Garet et al., 2001, Wilson, 2013). In fact, evidence on dialogical teaching initiatives suggests that collaborative reflections and video-based workshops are not sufficient (see Louca et al., 2013, Reznitskaya and Wilkinson, 2015, Wells and Arauz, 2006). Successful studies have involved the use of specific and focused one-to-one feedback, coaching and/or mentoring (Bennett, 2010, Chinn et al., 2001, Kiemer et al., 2015, Rathel et al., 2013, Sedova et al., 2016), suggesting that direct and focused feedback is one effective way to change instructional practices (Auld et al., 2010, Brinko, 1993).
1.2. Professional development for classroom argumentation: teachers’ knowledge as a prerequisite?The literature reports modest successes relating to teachers' professional development in promoting classroom argumentation in science teaching. McNeill and Knight (2013) conducted three workshop series focused on the development of pedagogical content knowledge for science argumentation. Seventy secondary teachers attended the workshops. The results showed that, although teachers increased their ability to discuss some aspects of students' argumentative writing, they did not increase their ability to apply argumentation in their classroom discussions. Osborne et al. (2013) evaluated the effect of a collaborative reflective professional development initiative involving distributed leadership for the use of argumentation in science classrooms. Four schools and two lead teachers participated in a two-year project. The lead teacher participated in a series of workshops (5) in which they worked with videotaped materials, followed by periodic meetings with researchers, albeit with scant feedback. Between workshops, lead teachers had to work with their colleagues in embedding argumentation in lessons. The results showed no differences between the experimental and control conditions in student outcomes. This is surprising considering that this initiative assumes that change should be driven from within schools, involving the schools in their entirety in the development of the PD process. The authors concluded that there being fewer than the 30 h of PD suggested by the literature (Guskey & Yoon, 2009), and the need for teachers to develop deep understandings of scientific argumentation, might be responsible for the absence of effects. Pimentel and McNeill (2013) accounted for the lack of teachers' success in orchestrating whole-class discussions in secondary classrooms, pointing to teachers' beliefs: their beliefs about students’ ability and its role in discussions; about external constraints such as time; and beliefs about their own capability to lead discussions. Regarding the latter, according to Sampson and Blanchard (2012), part of the problem is that teachers do not have proficiency in arguing, insofar as they have trouble supporting arguments with data.Therefore, among scholars working on argumentation in science teaching there is a shared view that knowledge and beliefs are a prerequisite for practice, and that they should be developed in order to change teachers' instructional practices (Beyer & Davis, 2008; McNeill et al., 2017, Pimentel and McNeill, 2013, Sampson and Blanchard, 2012). We also think that teachers' knowledge and beliefs are relevant conditions (see Ávalos, 2011); while the latter provides the epistemological soil to value argumentation as an essential part of scientific knowledge construction and learning, the former enables teachers to manage pragmatic, epistemic and discursive conditions for arguing in the classroom, thus allowing them to design argumentative lessons. However, the relationship between practice and knowledge is not linear but complex (Clarke and Hollingsworth, 2002, Wilkinson et al., 2017). Pianta and colleagues conducted a study to explore the effect of teachers' knowledge of, and skill in, identifying high-quality teacher–child interactions on the observed interactions during instruction (Pianta et al., 2014). The results showed that, contrary to expectations, the observed behaviour was a leading indicator of changes in identification skills. The authors concluded that the ‘observed behaviour was a more powerful driver of change in identification skills, than vice versa’ (p. 152), discussing the linear view of the relationship between knowledge and teacher practice, and arguing for a cyclical process in which knowledge, skill and behaviour feed one another in dynamic ways.This may be particularly true in the case of the change in classroom discourse, insofar as people learn to talk by talking (as a situated and context-based practice) and not by gaining declarative knowledge on how to talk (Wells, 1986). Following this line of thought, in order to facilitate a change in the way that teachers talk with children, coaching and feedback, although relevant, may not be sufficient. What is needed is to scaffold teachers’ classroom discourse in order to change how they talk and, in turn, through feedback and coaching, to promote their epistemological, theoretical and pragmatic understanding of high-quality discursive interactions, favouring its sustainment over time.
1.3. Curriculum materials as scaffolds for classroom argumentationGiven that, in order for argumentation to occur in classrooms, a very sophisticated design is required in which the rhetorical conditions should be carefully settled (Andriessen and Schwarz, 2009, Leitão, 2009), during the past 15 years a growing body of literature has reported the use and effects of computer-mediated scaffolds for classroom argumentation (see Noroozi et al., 2017, Noroozi et al., 2012). The main idea behind the use of these computational systems (see Scheuer, Loll, Pinkwart, & McLaren, 2010 for a review) has been to lighten the responsibilities of teachers in terms of the provision of direct scaffolds for students. However, as peer argumentation has been the main focus of almost all these computational systems, the change in teachers' instructional practices, for example, teachers’ discourse during whole-class segments and plenaries, has been less well supported.Another types of scaffold used to support teaching practices are curriculum materials. Curriculum materials can be defined as any resource focused on curriculum and instruction, over either a full year of instruction or a shorter period of time, including textbooks, curricular programmes and curriculum frameworks, among others (Grossman & Thompson, 2008). They play a pivotal role in instruction generally, and specifically in the classroom practices of primary-school teachers (Ball & Feiman-Nemser, 1988). In Chile, in particular, the use of textbooks is widespread in primary and early secondary education, this being the main way in which the State has influenced classroom instructional practice (Leiva, Cardemil, Rittershaussen, Latorre, & Rodriguez, 2000).However, textbooks and their correspondent teacher notes are frequently undervalued by teachers and teacher educators because of the belief that good teachers do not follow textbooks but rather design their own lessons (Ball and Cohen, 1996, Ball and Feiman-Nemser, 1988). The problem is that developing and designing a lesson autonomously is extremely difficult, even for highly experienced teachers (Ball & Feiman-Nemser, 1988). What ensues is that, even when curriculum materials play a crucial role in teachers’ early careers, and for teachers in the initial steps of change processes, they are not seen as promoting learning possibilities and are therefore dismissed.Although materials may have several limitations, some authors have argued that they also offer great learning potential for teachers (Arias et al., 2016, Ball and Cohen, 1996, Collopy, 2003, Davis and Krajcik, 2005, Grossman and Thompson, 2008, Herbel-Eisenmann et al., 2006, Reisman and Fogo, 2016, Remillard, 2000). In the case of promoting science classroom argumentation, there is some evidence to show that curriculum materials especially designed to support classroom talk are effective in changing the discursive practices of teachers and students (Arias et al., 2017, Michaels and O'Connor, 2013, McNeill et al., 2017) and may prompt the development of pedagogical content knowledge of argumentation (Marco-Bujosa, McNeill, González-Howard, & Loper, 2017).Michaels, O'Connor and colleagues (Chapin et al., 2009, Michaels and O'Connor, 2013, Michaels et al., 2008) developed a series of curriculum materials focused on utterances to support productive classroom discussions. They identified a small number of talk moves, or types of conversation that help teachers to prompt students' thinking elaboration and the sustainment of productive interactions, and developed professional development materials in order to support teachers' talk in different contexts.In the UK, Howe and colleagues (Ruthven et al., 2011) developed curriculum materials as part of a project called epiSTEMe, aimed at designing and evaluating modules to promote principled improvement in science through dialogical teaching in early secondary education (12–13 years). The results showed that students in the intervention classes demonstrated pre-post gains that were significantly higher than those of the students in the control group. However, it was not clear to what extent the intervention classes were more dialogical and argumentative (Howe et al., 2015).We conducted a case study whose aim was to explore how curriculum materials especially designed to foster argumentation in classrooms might support teacher use and orchestration of argumentation. We adapted the Forces module of epiSTEMe to the Chilean curriculum, strengthening its potential to foster argumentation both in whole-class and small-group interactions, and observed how it supported science classroom transformation. Our research questions were as follows: (1) Does the use of curriculum materials boost whole-class and group-work oral classroom argumentation? (2) How can the use of curriculum materials help a science teacher who has no formal background in the pedagogical use of argumentation to promote oral argumentation in his or her teaching?
