The learning process is a social activity causing a lot of research concerning the modern approach of collaborative learning, based on constructivism, the learning theory where the learner is an active creator and not a passive recipient of knowledge (Kong & Song, 2013). Among different definitions of collaborative learning we accept the following one (Takači, Stankov, & Milanovic, 2015): “The term “collaborative learning” refers to an instruction method in which students at various performance levels work together in small groups toward a common goal” (Gokhale, 1995, p. 22), which means: “ to solve a problem, complete a task, or create a product.” (Laal & Ghodsi, 2012, p. 486).
In collaborative learning members of the group work together helping one another in exchanging information, conclusions and explanations connected to the common project. Each student affects the successfulness of collaborative learning of all members in his group (Gokhale, 1995), and therefore successfulness of collaborative learning depends on the forming group procedure (Bekele and McPherson, 2011, Graf and Bekele, 2006, Lin et al., 2010, Moreno and Vicari, 2012, Wang et al., 2007) In particular, the composition of groups is crucial for students’ academic achievements. The authors Bekele and McPherson (2011) stress out: “… how groups should be formed to maximize academic performance is an issue that is gaining more and more attention among researchers in this field”.
The learning in heterogeneous groups (in regard to academic achievement, gender, ethnicity, task orientation, and abilities) is considered as very effective (Johnson and Johnson, 1975, Kagan, 1994, Slavin, 1996). Forming heterogeneous groups is a complex problem taking into account the multiple students' characteristics. According to Kagan (1994), the forming of heterogeneous four member groups is based on the different level of students’ knowledge and their feelings towards one other.
Nowadays, the computer-based methods for forming small groups are used for increasing the heterogeneity of small groups and effectiveness of the learning process.
A lot of researchers (Graf and Bekele, 2006, Bekele and McPherson, 2011, Lin et al., 2010, Moreno and Vicari, 2012, Wang et al., 2007, Sadeghi and Kardan, 2015, Sadeghi and Kardan, 2016) used different computer-based approaches to create procedures of forming collaborative groups considering multiple students characteristic.
In their paper Graf and Bekele (2006) proposed a mathematical approach, i.e., an Ant Colony Optimization algorithm in order to maximize the heterogeneity (based on personality traits and the performance of students) of the formed groups.
The authors Bekele and McPherson (2011) presented Bayesian Performance prediction model as the prototypical approach for forming collaborative groups. The information of high school students was collected and analyzed in order to predict students’ personality traits that affect their performance in mathematics.
Lin et al. (2010) used Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) approach for an automatic group composition system that can address the multiple criteria grouping problem. The authors Moreno and Vicari (2012) proposed a method for forming collaborative groups based on a genetic algorithm approach. The consideration of as many students’ characteristics as may be desired is enabled in the presented method by translating the problem of forming groups into one of multi-objective optimization. Wang et al. (2007) described a computer-supported grouping system that uses genetic algorithms to achieve a constant level of heterogeneity of the formed groups.
To model the procedure of forming the most appropriate collaborative learning group for each student, Sadeghi and Kardan (2014) used a novel binary integer programming formulation. In their further research, the authors Sadeghi and Kardan (2015) improved their model for forming the optimal small collaborative learning groups. The constructed linear Mathematical Programming model is exactly solvable in reasonable time satisfying the requested requirements.
It is interesting that, besides the other advantages, the procedure presented in this paper enables “that justice is equally served among all the learners.”
The new mathematical model, proposed in this research, is based on Kagan's instructions (Kagan, 1994) for considering (dealing with) multiple students characteristics for forming small collaborative groups. During this process the students' willingness for the use of the proposed languages was taken into consideration besides the level of the students' knowledge and their feelings towards one another.
Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS), the metaheuristic based on the systematic change of neighborhoods proposed by Mladenovic and Hansen (1997), is applied in our research. The heuristic based method had to be applied because the dimension of the proposed problem was so big (172 students) and it was not possible to solve it exactly (by obtaining optimal solution) using CPLEX solver applied to mathematical formulation as proposed in Sadeghi and Kardan, 2016, Sadeghi and Kardan, 2015 (see Section 2.7). Most of the known heuristics for solving the problem of dividing students into small collaborative groups are based on population-based metaheuristics: Ant Colony Optimization (Graf & Bekele, 2006), PSO (Lin, et al., 2010) and Genetic Algorithm (Moreno and Vicari, 2012, Wang et al., 2007). On the other side, objective function of the proposed problem can be effectively calculated in close neighborhoods of the existing solutions (see Section 2.5), so using local search based heuristic is significantly more efficient than using population-based method (Djenić, Radojičić, Marić, & Mladenović, 2016). A well-known local search based metaheuristic, with many significant applications, variable neighborhood search (VNS) is chosen for solving proposed problem.
Introducing computers in classroom contributes to the developing of computer supported collaborative learning, CSCL. CSCL can be considered as: “… an emerging branch of the learning science connected with studying how people learn together with the help of computers” (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006, p. 1). The implementations of online collaborative learning approach is increasing and therefore they are very interesting for the current latest researchers (Kuo et al., 2015, Sadeghi and Kardan, 2016).
In our research each small group of students used a computer with GeoGebra package, in order to visualize calculus concepts (examining functions and drawing their graphs). In particular, it enables simultaneously appearing on the screen mathematical formula and its corresponding graphics, “… so that the learners can compare what they do with what is expected to be done” (Miyake, 1986, p.258).
In this paper we present the upgraded research of computer supported collaborative learning analyzed in the paper Takači et al. (2015), where the heterogeneous four member groups are formed according to Kagan's instructions, without using computer. Since we have many students (about two hundred each year) forming small groups was very slow and difficult process. Therefore, in 2015 we decided to use the computer for forming four member groups.
Let us remark that the forming group procedure by using (VNS) metaheuristic algorithm is not always exactly the same as Kagan prescribed. Therefore it was necessary to examine the efficiency of using VNS algorithm for forming heterogeneous groups for CSLS learning.
The research was implemented at Subotica Tech – College of Applied Sciences, in Subotica, Serbia. The CSCL is applied to Calculus course of the first year students, where they can choose the language of their study: Serbian or Hungarian.
We had three groups of students each of 172 students: the experimental group E (formed by using VNS algorithm, in 2015), group K (formed by using Kagan's instructions, in 2014), and group R (formed by random selection, in 2013). The students of all three groups had a pre-test before CSCL, and the difference between the results of the tested groups was not statistically significant.
The paper in which we report about the research is structured as follows:
In the second section the authors explain their new group forming procedure. First the problem of forming groups is described and then the mathematical model fulfilling the authors’ requests for forming heterogeneous groups and VNS (variable neighborhood search) algorithm is applied.
In the third section the CSCL of examining functions, applied in Subotica, was explained in detail. The results of the experimental group E are compared and analyzed with the results of group R (formed randomly). Separately the results of group E with the results of group K (formed by using only Kagans’ instruction) are presented.
The conclusions follow in the end. The students' results of the test, done after CSCL, were better in group E, when VNS algorithm is applied, than when the students were divided randomly (R). But the results were almost the same in group E and in heterogeneous groups formed by Kagan's instructions, without using computer (K).
