Parkinson's disease (PD) is a chronic neurological disorder associated with a number of motor and non-motor symptoms. Major motor symptoms include bradykinesia (slowness of movements), tremor and rigidity. While currently incurable, proper treatment can significantly ease the symptoms. As the disease progresses, however, patients start to experience motor fluctuations which adversely impact the quality of their life. Therefore, the treatment approaches should be individualised in order to alleviate unwanted symptoms which occur as a result of insufficient levels of medication (Off state) and abrupt, involuntary movements (also known as dyskinesias) which occur as a result of excessive levels of medication. To this end, careful and objective monitoring of the disease is of paramount importance. As the patients usually see the neurologist only few times per year (sometimes also just once per year), the neurologist often has only a very vague picture of their condition in-between the visits and has problems with prescribing the optimal drug dosage. Currently, patients monitor their long-term condition by keeping a simple diary. The entries in the diary, however, are subjective opinions of the patients and are not something measurable. Clinical scales like the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) are not suitable for long-term and remote follow-up of the symptoms since they are relatively time-consuming [1], may need to be filled out at a clinical visit, require considerable clinical experience [2] and some of their items have poor inter-clinician reliability [3].
The digitalised spirography is a quantitative method for detection and evaluation of different types of tremors and other movement disorders. The spirographic system is usually composed of a computer with a specialised software, a graphic tablet or a touch-screen measurement device (e.g. a smartphone), and a stylus [14], [4]. The patient is required to draw a spiral (or sometimes several spirals). The digitalised spirography enables us to store the exact timestamp of each point of the spiral in a two-dimensional area and thus provides an objective measurement of upper limb motor function. These systems allow extraction of detailed upper limb motor features from the spiral drawing tasks by analysing spatial and temporal artefacts of the spirals.
Our long-term goal is to develop a system for objective monitoring of PD patients that would also be able to automatically detect any significant changes in the patient's condition and report these changes to the neurologist. We envision the same methodology also used for automatic analysis of the patient's diary containing spirographic measurements, and as a decision support system for clinicians (automated spirographic test). To this end, the spirals drawn have to be described mathematically by various features (some described in Table 3 later in the paper) for the machine learning algorithms to be able to analyse them automatically. These features are also needed for visual explanation of the computer's reasoning.
This study presents a step towards our long-term goal. There were two main objectives of this study: (1) to investigate whether the methodology developed for the ParkinsonCheck application can be successfully used for the differentiation between states of bradykinesia (insufficient medication) and dyskinesia (overmedication), and (2) to create a visual aid for the physicians to use with spirography that also serves as an explanation of the computer's reasoning.
The background (previous work of both groups) is as follows. The group in Slovenia previously developed the ParkinsonCheck application for early detection of signs of Parkinsonian or Essential tremor [11], [12]. ParkinsonCheck is a decision support system based on a spirographic test performed on smartphones. The application involves extensive preprocessing and mathematical descriptions of different features of the spirals drawn by the user. The group in Sweden performed a clinical trial to (also) test the suitability of spirography for objective monitoring of the patients. These were advanced PD patients, and one of the goals was to determine whether spirography can be used to associate the dosage of the medication with the current condition of the patient.
In the present study we applied the ParkinsonCheck methodology to automatically differentiate between the states of bradykinesia and dyskinesia which is important for drug dosage adjustment, using spirography data collected in a Swedish study [5], [6], [17]. Note that this application is different from ParkinsonCheck's objective. The successful application validates the ParkinsonCheck's preprocessing and features for spiral description on a more general level as well as confirms the usefulness of digitalised spirography for this particular task. In the second part of the study we used the mathematical features with the visualisation methodology to create a decision support system for the physicians.
The work presented here consists of two parts, and the organisation of the paper follows this. In the first part, described in Section 2, we use machine learning to construct a decision model for differentiating bradykinesia from dyskinesia using the descriptive features and methodology developed for ParkinsonCheck application. The data used and the differences with the data for which the features were originally constructed are also described in this section. The second part (Section 3) tests the comprehensibility and clinical usefulness of the decision model built in the first part. It describes an experiment using a visualisation technique to explain the “reasoning” of the decision model to the clinicians and their acceptance of the model. The results of both experiments (parts) are presented in their respective sections, while the joint discussion, conclusions, and further work are given in Sections 4 and 5.
