Fringe Projection Profilometry (FPP) has been widely used in 3D shape measurement due to a number of advantages such as its noncontact, full-field, simple structure and fast measurement [1], [2], [3], [4]. A typical FPP system consists of a projector, a camera and a computer. The projector projects fringe patterns generated by the computer onto the object being measured, and the camera captures the distorted fringe images reflected from the object’s surface. Then the 3D information of the object can be extracted by processing the captured distorted fringe images using a computer.
With regard to FPP, the conversion from 2D digital images to 3D coordinates (xw, yw, zw) of the test object surface, especially the primary phase-to-height (PTH) mapping relationship, is a key problem. The PTH relationship depends on the structural composition of the FPP system, specifically the position of the camera, projector and the reference plane (zero-height plane). The PTH relationship proposed by Takeda, et al. [1] in the early years of FPP development was based on a simple triangulation which assumed that (1) the optical centers of the camera and projector are at the same distance away from the reference plane; (2) the camera’s and projector’s optical axes are coplanar and perpendicular to the reference plane; and (3) the camera’s optical axis is vertical to the reference plane. However these conditions seem to limit its application for accurate measurements because the geometric position arrangement is not always met in practice. Some improved PTH mapping methods, in which one or two of the three conditions specified above are removed [5], [6], were proposed to solve this problem. However these approaches still seem impractical for FPP measurement; thus, a flexible method applicable to arbitrarily arrangement of the FPP system is really needed.
Strictly speaking, the PTH relationship depends not only on the geometrical arrangement of the experimental setup (extrinsic parameters) but also the intrinsic parameters of the camera and projector. The accurate evaluation of all of these parameters plays a crucial role in FPP. Recently a number of approaches for precise calibration of the FPP system have been proposed [7], [8], [9]. Merner [7] et al. used the binary defocusing technique, in which z is regarded as low-order polynomial functions of absolute phase, to calibrate the system and (x, y) coordinates are computed from camera calibration with known z values. Villa et al. [8] calibrated phase to z transformation based on typical polynomial fitting to several z positions, and phase to x and y transformation based on the use of a cross grating pattern at several z positions. Recently, Yue et al. [9] proposed a calibration technique for an arbitrarily arranged FPP system. Based on positioning a chessboard at a series of random positions and capturing the corresponding chessboard images with and without projected fringes, they built three look-up tables (LUTs) using nonlinear fitting at every pixel to obtain the object’s 3D data (x, y, h). It appears that this method requires a large number of calculations; additionally, the theoretical derivation is somewhat complicated. However the methods mentioned above make FPP system calibration more effective and accurate compared to the traditional approach.
In this paper, an efficient method is proposed for phase-to-height calibration of FPP systems of which the camera, projector and the reference plane are positioned arbitrarily. The coefficients of phase-to-height can be efficiently calibrated by projecting a black-white pattern as well as four phase-shifted fringe patterns on a calibration board moved along its normal for several known positions. Using the calibrated coefficients on the distorted fringe pattern reflected by the object surface, the height values (zw coordinate) at each pixel coordinate were extracted. Then, by calibrating the camera, the xw and yw coordinates corresponding to zw can be obtained. The proposed method is verified by experiments, and the results demonstrate the validity and accuracy of this proposed calibration method.
