Contemporary retail markets have experienced and are experiencing an important digitalization shift in the form of computers and associated technologies (Hagberg et al., 2016). Important contributions to this development have included the introduction of the Universal Product Code (UPC) in the 1970s (Cochoy et al., 2016a) and the subsequent spread of checkout scanners, Point Of Sale (POS) software, computerized couponing and loyalty programs, biometric payments, RFID chips, e-catalogs, e-commerce, and, more recently, QR codes, smartphone apps, and other interactive technologies. Among this large array of innovations, Electronic Shelf Labels (ESLs) deserve particular attention. These devices present themselves as electronic price tags: they allow retailers to change prices through computerized transmitters instead of tedious handheld operations, and they offer consumers a clear and accurate form of price display. As such, these devices evidence a puzzling situation. On one hand, they pertain to one of the most classic and crucial features of self-service retailing: the display of prices; thus, it would seem that they should play a distinct and prominent role in retail digitalization. On the other hand, despite their relevance and decades-long history, ESLs have not become ubiquitous. Even in those few retail outlets where they have been implemented, ESLs seem to face resistance from paper price tags and price cards. The purpose of this paper is to account for this “resisting evolution” of digitalized prices and to discuss the role of price display technologies in the functioning of contemporary economy.
Retailing has been subject to a great number of pricing innovations that have received considerable attention (see e.g. Grewal et al., 2010, Grewal et al., 2011; Kopalle et al., 2009). The literature has explored the effects of low price guarantees (Biswas et al., 2006), dynamic pricing models (Hall et al., 2010), and mobile payments on consumers’ price images of retail stores (Falk et al., 2016), among others. However, while prior studies have examined different retail price innovations, they have so far tended to neglect the more material aspects of pricing innovations: that is, the particular devices involved in price representation. Further, there has so far been a paucity of studies addressing how digital forms of pricing interrelate with their more analogue counterparts. Moreover, so far, existing studies have paid insufficient attention to the process of innovation, including how and why particular digital technologies face resistance.
Theoretically, we draw upon infrastructure studies (Bowker et al., 2010) and market studies (Callon, 1998), two fields of research inspired by science and technology and the Actor-Network Theory (ANT). More specifically, we rely on the previous literature focused on price representation practices in retailing (e.g. Grandclément, 2008; Hagberg and Kjellberg, 2015). These works portray markets not as abstract platforms connecting supply and demand, but as complex “agencements” (Callon et al., 2007, Callon, 2016) or arrangements of human actors, organizational schemes, and material artifacts that shape and perform the economic game. Within such configurations, “price representations,” price infrastructures, and price display techniques—rather than abstract and automatic “price adjustment” mechanisms—play major roles.
Empirically, this paper draws on several different sources. First, it builds a longitudinal “archaeology of price tags” based on a systematic reading of the trade journal The Progressive Grocer from 1922 to the present. Second, it references an ethnographic study of three stores equipped with ESLs from one specific provider, including observations within these stores documented through field notes, photos, and interviews with retail managers and ESL professionals, as well as observations of the websites of ESL providers. Third, it is based on a short ethnography of paper price tags in New York City performed in 2016. The paper shows how ESLs prolong but also challenge nearly a century of price display technologies by improving the chain of “price representations” (Hagberg and Kjellberg, 2015) by adding new possibilities in terms of price flexibility. Further, it explores how the claims of ESL providers and the promises of their technologies should be questioned as soon as these claims and devices are put into practice, particularly when ESL faces competition from classic paper price display techniques.
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we introduce our theoretical framework. This is followed by a section describing our method. Thereafter, our findings are presented in four sections. The first of these sections traces the history of price tags and the role of ESLs within this history, then discusses ESL providers and how and why the stores under study have been equipped with ESLs. In the second section, we further explore ESLs by entering stores and by presenting the three variants of price representation observed during our visual ethnography. The third section analyses the interaction between paper and electronic tags that represents prices in food retail markets. In the fourth section, we further elaborate on these findings by putting contemporary ESLs into perspective. Finally, we conclude with some reflective remarks.
