The term “Big Data” is used to describe data sets that are too large and complex to be worked with using commonly-available tools (Snijders, Matzat, & Reips, 2012). Climate science represents a Big Data domain that is experiencing unprecedented growth (Edwards, 2010). NASA’s climate change repositories alone are projected to grow to 350 petabytes by 2013 (Skytland, 2012). Some of the major Big Data challenges facing climate science are easy to understand: large repositories mean that the data sets themselves cannot be moved: instead, analytical operations need to migrate to where the data reside; complex analyses over large repositories requires high-performance computing; large amounts of information increases the importance of metadata, provenance management, and discovery; migrating codes and analytic products within a growing network of storage and computational resources creates a need for fast networks, intermediation, and resource balancing; and, importantly, the ability to respond quickly to customer demands for new and often unanticipated uses for climate data requires greater agility in building and deploying applications. It is useful to situate the Big Data challenges of the climate domain in this larger context, because doing so helps us understand where innovation can yield improvements.
Cloud Computing is one of several technologies often invoked as a solution to Big Data challenges. However, the technical definition of “Cloud Computing” is so variously interpreted that the term has become jargonized (Mell & Grace, 2011). That Cloud Computing is both ubiquitous and ambiguous points to the need to examine carefully how Cloud Computing enables.
1.1. Climate Analytics-as-a-Service (CAaaS)In our efforts to address the Big Data challenges of climate science, we are moving toward a notion of Climate Analytics-as-a-Service (CAaaS). We focus on analytics, because it is the knowledge gained from our interactions with Big Data that ultimately produce societal benefits. We focus on CAaaS because we believe it provides a useful way of thinking about the problem: a specialization of the concept of business process-as-a-service, which is an evolving extension of IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS enabled by Cloud Computing. Within this framework, Cloud Computing plays an important role; however, we see it as only one element in a constellation of capabilities that are essential to delivering climate analytics as a service. These elements are essential because in the aggregate they lead to generativity – a capacity for self-assembly that we feel is the key to solving many of the Big Data challenges in this domain.
1.2. Generative technologiesGenerativity refers to a system’s capacity to produce unanticipated change through unfiltered contributions from broad and varied audiences (Zittrain, 2008). The concept highlights aspects of an innovation or process that enable an autocatalytic feeding-forward that can help make growth, further innovation, and success possible. Generativity connects inputs from diverse people and groups, who may or may not be working in concert, with emergent and unanticipated outputs. How much the system facilitates participant contribution is a function of both technological design and social behavior (Baker & Bowker, 2007). A system’s generativity describes not only its objective characteristics, but also the ways the system relates to its users and the ways users relate to one another. In turn, these relationships reflect how much the users identify as contributors or participants, rather than as mere consumers.The Internet itself, modern operating systems, Apple’s iTunes, Twitter, Facebook, and the emerging infrastructure for mobile application development are examples of generative systems. In both cases, the design elements contributing to their generative potential are easy to see. The Internet’s framers made simplicity a core value, defining in the process the classic end-to-end argument that most features in a network should be implemented at its computer endpoints rather than by the network itself, which appropriately implements only those functions that are universally useful (Saltzer, Reed, & Clark, 1984). To do otherwise might have tilted the generic network toward specific uses and limited its potential for growth. (Consider, for example, the proprietary, non-generative, and now defunct CompuServe network.).Zittrain (2008) identifies five properties of generative systems:(1)How extensively a system or technology leverages a set of possible tasks: Leverage makes a difficult job easier, and, in general, the more a system can do, the more capable it is of producing change.(2)How well it can be adapted to a range of tasks: Adaptability enables new, unintended, and innovative uses of a technology. It broadens the technology’s use.(3)How easily new contributors can master it: Ease of Mastery reflects how easy it is for broad audiences to understand how to adopt and adapt it. The more useful a technology is both to the neophyte and the expert, the more generative it is.(4)How accessible it is to those ready and able to build on it: Accessibility makes it easier to obtain the technology and the information necessary to achieve mastery. The more accessible, the more generative.(5)How transferable any changes are to others, including non-experts: Transferability reflects how easily changes in the technology can be conveyed to others.A major deficiency in any one factor greatly reduces overall generativity. Conversely, the more these five qualities are maximized, the easier it is for a system to welcome contributions from outsiders as well as insiders. In general, generative tools are more basic and less specialized for accomplishing a particular purpose.In the remainder of this paper, we illustrate how we are translating these concepts into reality: we describe the context in which we are working; the technology foundations important to us, including our definition and rationale for the generative elements we feel are crucial; a specific project, MERRA Analytic Services, and applications that demonstrate these capabilities in action; ways that Cloud Computing are contributing to the effort; and, finally, our plans for the future.
