One day, at the end of July 1978, Ondrej Krivanek and myself first met, during a specialist workshop in Analytical Electron Microscopy (AEM), held at Cornell University. This was the second workshop of this name; the first one two years earlier, had beautifully introduced and promoted the general concept and the practical aspects of AEM. In this context, spectroscopy tools added onto the column of a transmission electron microscope (TEM) constitute useful components which enlarge its domain of exploration by providing local information on the chemistry as well as on the electronic properties of the specimen. By the way, two papers published a couple of years before in the first issue of the journal Ultramicroscopy had firmly established the fundamentals and the perspectives of the EELS technique in a TEM. The first one by Isaacson and Johnson [1] had focused on the use of EELS for the microanalysis of light elements, evaluating the two important parameters to be improved, the Minimum Detectable Mass (MDM) and the Minimum Detectable Mass Fraction (MMF), and concluding after a first round of preliminary experiments that “the feasibility of elemental analysis of single light atoms remains a distinct possibility (in theory, at least!)”. On their side, Colliex et al. [2] had more extensively described the richness of the information contained in an EELS spectrum recorded in the transmission mode from a nm-sized area and revisited the influence of various parameters in the drive towards the ultimate detection limits using this technique. I however confess that the use of the word “ancillary” in the first sentence of the conclusion of this paper “Electron energy loss spectroscopy must be regarded as a very promising ancillary method in electron microscopy”, does not sound today very optimistic, when reading it!! I want to point out at this stage, that both papers were mentioning the development and introduction of parallel detection devices as an anticipated necessary step to come closer to the identification of the individual atom.
It is therefore no surprise that the EELS technique was in 1978 at the center of heated debates concerning the future of AEM. Therefore, the young Ondrej Krivanek came to me and asked: “Christian what do you think of the future of EELS?”. Listening to his own report of the ensuing exchange, it now appears that I did not show a great deal of optimism, diverting the discussion toward other subjects (liquid metal ion sources, contrast of inelastic images of phase objects…) which I was exploring at the same time with my first students, Pierre Sudraud and Claudie Mory. I feel that I may have masked a bit that a third student, Pierre Trebbia, was very much involved at that time in the introduction and use of computer control and analysis to progress towards quantitative processing of EELS data. Revisiting now my own blurred memories, maybe I had felt that if such a young and bright guy, Ondrej, had immediately entered this field, the competition would quickly have become very severe. You all know, now, what happened: the rest of this paper will emphasize the major inputs, realizations and successes in the field of EELS in a (S)TEM, which have to be unambiguously attributed to Ondrej Krivanek and which the many different contributions to the present Ultramicroscopy issue beautifully illustrate today, i.e. 40 years after the beginning of my story here above. I can also recommend to interested readers the TEM-EELS personal perspective by Ray Egerton, published a few years ago in a previous issue of Ultramicroscopy [3].
