There are unique challenges in managing data collection and management from instruments in the field in general. These issues become extreme when “in the field” means “in a plane over the Antarctic”. In this paper we present the design and function of the Forward Observer a computer cluster and data analysis system that flies in a plane in the Arctic and Antarctic to collect, analyze in real time, and store Synthetic Aperture Radar data used to analyze the thickness and structure of polar ice sheets. We also discuss the processing of data once it is returned to the continental US and made available via data grids. The needs for in-flight data analysis and storage in the Antarctic and Arctic are highly unusual, and we have developed a novel system to meet those needs.
Ailamaki et al. [1] describe a number of purpose-built systems for the capture, analysis, and management of scientific data by high-performance systems. “Big science” projects such as analysis of data from the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), earthquake simulations, and astronomy often involve very big storage and compute facilities. In some cases, such as analysis of LHC data, computational scientists have the benefit of years to prepare massive international storage and computational grids to analyze data. When doing research in the field there are very often constraints on the size, power consumption, and durability of computing equipment used in the field to do data collection [2]. A brief survey of literature on radar data processing systems indicates that due to the nature of SAR data analysis, data is a concern, as it produces holographic or volumetric data, and that analyses of data can be difficult, however, work on instrument data has not previously been a concern [3], [4], [5], [6], [7].
Starting in 2007, Indiana University (IU) began working with the University of Kansas’ Center for the Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets (CReSIS) in order to support management of data collected by CReSIS during arctic field missions. This began with the PolarGrid project [8] to create cyberinfrastructure in support of remote sensing systems, particularly Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) imaging of polar ice sheets. Research into the ice sheets at our poles is vital information to understand the effects of climate change, of glacier interactions, and to monitor the thickness and condition of ice sheets over time. While there is still uncertainty regarding the rate of change of the global climate and the causes of that change, what we know certainly is this: there can be no confidence that data collected next year will provide data identical to data collected this year. That means that there is a tremendous premium for researchers working in polar regions during any year to collect as much data as possible and to ensure that the data make it back to the laboratory for analysis. Fig. 1 shows the general workflow for gathering ice sheet data, to be processed back at IU and CReSIS.
Continuing this relationship, IU provides data collection and management for SAR data gathered in flight by CReSIS staff participating in NASA Operation Ice Bridge. NASA Operation Ice Bridge will last six years “the largest airborne survey of Earth’s polar ice ever flown. It will yield an unprecedented three-dimensional view of Arctic and Antarctic ice sheets, ice shelves and sea ice. These flights will provide a yearly, multi-instrument look at the behavior of the rapidly changing features of the Greenland and Antarctic ice” [9]. Ice Bridge flights involve a SAR radar system and computer equipment taken over a predetermined path to image polar ice sheets in a plane (either the NASA Operation Ice Bridge DC-8 or P-3 aircraft) [10]. The NASA Operation Ice Bridge radar systems [11], [12], [13] are enhanced and improved on an ongoing basis and as a result the rate of data collection goes up every field data collection season. Table 1 below shows the rate of data production over time and the expansion of the amount of data collected per flight day and season.Download : Download high-res image (274KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Data movement for the Ice Bridge project.
Prior to 2012 SAR data collected on NASA Operation Ice Bridge (hereafter OIB) flights were written directly to disk, and analyzed in as close to real time as possible. In 2011 this near real time analysis proved absolutely essential to the scientific mission when vibrations from the plane interfered with the spinning disks used by SAR radar equipment, causing data to be only partly usable for analysis. Other environmental conditions such as the physical shock of shipping and handling in difficult conditions, thermal changes due to differences in environment and weather, and issues due to unconditioned power in the hotel rooms and offices used by the team for processing contributed to multiple failures of drives that were not destructive to radar data, because the team had already made duplicate copies of the data. These incidents and the risks they exposed convinced the Indiana University team that it was essential to develop true real time data analysis facilities so that the SAR data could be observed by scientists in the plane as data were being collected. In addition to ensuring data quality, this creates the possibility that the planned route for a flight could be changed in response to detection of some particularly interesting feature in the ice. IU thus developed a new and novel computing system called the Forward Observer.Table 1. Data rates for Ice Bridge field missions.CampaignTB per dayTotal data (TB)2009 Antarctica2.8332011 Greenland3.38105.572011 Antarctica2.8656.772012 Greenland4.02161.502012 Antarctica2.4739.552013 Greenland1.9846.682013 Antarctica1.6911.882014 Greenland1.8186.812014 Antarctica1.69432015 Greenland2.1370.292016 Greenland1.81292016 Antarctica2.1360Note: 2015 Antarctica mission was conducted by a minimal team and did not utilize the system.
The Forward Observer system (hereafter FO) represents a considerable improvement over earlier in-flight data management capabilities. FO provides the ability to capture, process, and display data in real time while radar instruments are recording data, whereas systems that had been previously used as part of NASA OIB data collection only captured radar data files. Metadata associated with the flight and GPS coordinates are associated with the data in real time. The FO interface provides information analysis of data in real time and in addition a real time interface to the data management process. This process includes copying data to multiple different physical devices (with verification), so that even if a particular storage device is lost or damaged, one of the copies of each byte of data collected makes it back to the US for analysis. Working in extreme environments sometimes means things do not go perfectly, and the data copying interface allows for things such as monitoring the speed at which data are written and checked.
