It is possible to define Computational Thinking briefly as having the knowledge, skill and attitudes necessary to be able to use the computers in the solution of the life problems for production purposes (Özden, 2015). Computational thinking is a method of problem solving, system designing and also a method of understanding the human behaviors by drawing attention to the basic concepts of the science of computer. Computational thinking also covers the acquainted concepts such as analysis, data demonstration and modeling and also the ideas that are less known such as binary search, repetition and parallelization. When the fact that computational thinking has a border and general frame is taken into consideration, it is a valid basic skill not only for the computers, but also for everybody and it is considered that it shall take place in the basic skills (reading, writing and arithmetic) used by everyone in the near future (Wing, 2006). Computational thinking is a fundamental skill for everyone, not just for computer scientists. Wing (2006) emphasizes that computational thinking should also be added to the reading, writing and arithmetical processes for the analytical skills of every child. According to the researchers (Wing, 2006); the computational thinking makes use of extraction and decomposition when it is compared to the great complex systems or processes. It helps in the selection of a convenient representation to solve a problem or modeling in the parts related to the problem. Moreover; the digital age individuals are expected to have the computational thinking skill, but no proof has been encountered in the literature regarding at what degree they have these skills and the revelation of whether the levels they have are sufficient. Within this frame, it could be said that the scale could make significant contributions to the literature.
According to Bundy (2007), computational thinking affects the studies in almost all the disciplines in both the human sciences and the natural sciences. The researchers make use of the cognitive metaphors for the purpose of enriching the theories such as protein science and mind-body problem. The science of computer has made the researchers gain the skills of asking new questions such as the ones requiring the data process with substantial amount and forming new solutions.
Today, there is almost no environment in which there is no computer and no computer is used. The daily usage is mostly limited to communication, surfing in the Internet or office applications. Whereas, the concept of computational thinking is far deeper than them and forces the ordinary thinking way to change. Such that, it is claimed that a person who would like to understand the 21st century is firstly obliged to understand the computational thinking (Bundy, 2007).
On the basis of the aforementioned explanations, there are limited numbers of studies in the literature regarding this skill that has such an important for the individuals to have for meeting the requirements of the digital age. Moreover; the digital age individuals are expected to have the computational thinking skill, but no proof has been encountered in the literature regarding the determination of at what degree they have these skills and the revelation of whether the levels they have are sufficient. Within this frame, it could be said that the scale could make significant contributions to the literature.
Wing (2008) argued that CT complements thinking in mathematics and engineering with a focus on designing systems that help to solve complex problems humans face (Wing, 2008, Lu and Fletcher, 2009). The core CT concepts include, abstractions (the mental tools of computing, necessary to solve the problem), layers (problems need to be solved on different levels) and relationships between layers and abstractions (Wing, 2008). The idea of abstraction and students' ability to deal with different levels of abstractions, as well as to think algorithmically and to understand the consequences of scale (big data), are fundamental to CT (Denning, 2009, Lu and Fletcher, 2009). Aho (2012) further argued that CT involves “thought processes involved in formulating problems so their solutions can be represented as computational steps and algorithms” (p. 832). Denning (2009) argued CT has a long history in computer science dating back to 1950s when it was known as algorithmic thinking meaning “a mental orientation to formulating problems as conversions of some input to an output and looking for algorithms to perform the conversions” (p. 28). Some computer science educators have also argued that programming is not essential in the teaching of computational thinking (e.g. Lu and Fletcher, 2009, Yadav et al., 2011). Lu and Fletcher (2009) even suggested that an emphasis on programming might deter students from becoming interested in computer science. In sum, computational thinking is a conceptual way to “systematically, correctly, and efficiently process information and tasks” to solve complex problems (Lu & Fletcher, p. 261).
Many educators and especially the experts in the educational technology field have emphasized that Computational thinking is so significant in terms of the skills of 21st century (Voogt, Fisser, Good, Mishra, & Yadav, 2015). When the definitions given in the literature are examined, the focus regarding the computational thinking is that it contains continuity by getting help from the computing and computers in the solution of the complex problems (e.g. Barr and Stephenson, 2011, Grover and Pea, 2013, Lee et al., 2011, Sengupta et al., 2013, Wolz et al., 2011), it is very distinguishing in many levels in the abstraction and design-oriented thinking (Sengupta et al., 2013) and it brings the algorithmic thinking to the forefront (Mishra & Yadav, 2013).
It is possible to see in the literature some scales that measure the sub-dimensions of the computational thinking skills as independent from one another (Aksoy, 2004, Korkmaz, 2012, Yeşil and Korkmaz, 2010, Kökdemir, 2003). This research is limited with self-report based scale and other assessment techniques were not taken into consideration. In this frame; in the literature, no scale whose validity and reliability have been proven has been found to measure the levels regarding especially the computational thinking skills. The purpose of this study is to develop a scale for the purpose of determining the computational thinking skills of the students by filling this space in the literature. It is considered that this scale shall make significant to measure CT.
