Smart grid is a modernized electrical grid and is generally referred as the next generation power system. For the purpose of sensing, monitoring, protection and control, information and communication technology system are being deployed in modern power system. With this integration, smart grid is expected to greatly enhance efficiency, reliability and economy of power production and consumption along with the integration of renewable energy resources, as well as demand response and distributed intelligence [1]. Although the current smart grid initiatives are expanding the use of information technologies to modernize the existing grid, their adoptions in cyber physical systems (CPS) have introduced power system security issues [2], [3]. Attacks on either cyber or physical part of the smart grid will possibly impact the stability of the entire system.
Recent research in cyber attack against smart grid has shown that these intentional attacks can have an impact on power system operation in terms of stability and economy. For example, authors in [4] commented that cyber attack in measurements of static var compensator (SVC) or static synchronous compensator (STATCOM) can degrade the system’s stability margin. Cyber attacks including false data injection attacks can mislead the state estimating process [5] or even can impact the economic operation of electric power market operations by manipulating the nodal price [6]. Similarly, denial of service (DoS) attacks in the cyber layer of smart grids can affect the dynamic performance of physical power system [7]. It is also important to verify the device settings, algorithms and application before they are deployed in real power system to avoid any unfortunate incident. For example, malfunctioning of relays can lead to false tripping of breakers which can cause cascading failures. In this case, cyber-physical testbeds can serve as a tool for simulating the power system model accurately and also helps to understand the complex relation between cyber and physical domains. Although United States Department of Energy (DoE) is giving considerable attention to the security enhancements of cyber-physical power system, the research related to cyber attack and impacts are constrained by the availability of realistic cyber-physical system testbed.
In many cases, cyber and/or physical attacks also result in the stability issues in smart grid and microgrid. There are several dynamic events happening in power system, e.g., a sudden change in load, fault in transmission lines or buses, and generator out of service. These events will impact the system’s stability and can ultimately lead to loss of synchronism. The stability control is also an important piece in cyber-physical system [8]. Computational intelligence (CI) based supplementary adaptive control approaches for microgrid have been investigated in simulation platforms with the consideration of different faults [9], [10], [11]. For example, researchers reported their computational cost in seconds based on adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) controller, and the controller usually generated the instant actions within the sampling interval [9], [12]. However, none of them implements this type of computational intelligence based controller on a real-time platform. This motivates us to conduct the adaptive control experiment based on CI for power system on the developed platform. The contributions of this work are summarized as:
•A real-time cyber-physical system testbed is developed based on OPAL-RT, SEL 351S protection system, high-performance computers and communication networks. The testbed capability is then investigated in terms of power system protection and control.•The impact of a real-time cyber attack on the multimachine power system is studied in terms of voltage stability and generation loss. The post-contingency results after the successful coordinated attack are observed through bus voltage fluctuations and generator transients.•Two different mitigation strategies are studied off-line using optimal power flow for system reconfiguration in order to restore normal or next steady state operating condition after failures. Different reconfiguration plans are suggested for avoiding the cascading failures following any kind of cyber attack.•The ADP based real-time adaptive control is conducted for multimachine power system during the load fluctuations based on this proposed cyber-physical system platform.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the research work related to cyber-physical system for security and control. Section 3 describes the application areas of real-time cyber-physical system testbed. Section 4 provides the implementation of proposed testbed. Sections 5 Experimental study on cyber security, 6 Experimental study on stability control shows experimental studies on cyber-security and control respectively. Finally, Section 7 concludes the work with possible future directions.
