In the area of computed tomography (CT) based clinical abdominal diagnosis, the accurate segmentation of liver tissue from CT volumes is an essential and crucial step for computer-aided liver disease diagnosis and surgical planning. Taking the liver transplantation for example, the measurement of liver volumes and the analysis of liver vasculature require accurate liver segmentation from CT volumes, and are extremely important for deciding whether a candidate of transplantation is suitable or not. In clinical practice, however, segmentation is usually performed manually by radiological experts through tracing the organ contours on each slice, which is tedious, time-consuming, and generally non-reproducible. Therefore, an increasing interest continues for achieving the automatic or semi- automatic segmentation of livers from CT volumes.
The automatic liver segmentation remains as a challenging task due to many reasons, such as gray-level similarity of adjacent organs, injection of contrast media, different CT modalities, partial volume effects, atypical liver shape, and individual difference. So far, a variety of techniques have been developed for liver segmentation from abdominal CT images, which can be roughly classified into two categories: image-based and statistical model-based methods. Image-based methods perform segmentation based on intensity, texture, and other information available from an image, including thresholding [1], [2], clustering [3], [4], region growing [5], [6], deformable models [7], [8], [9], neural network [10], [11], [12], [13], graph cuts [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], etc. Considering the challenge in liver segmentation, Selver et al. [3] proposed a fully automatic method for liver segmentation from CT volumes based on mathematical morphology, K-means, and multi-layer perceptron network (MLP). First, mathematical morphological techniques combined with gray-level thresholding are used for the presegmentation of some adjacent tissues to liver, such as fat tissue, right kidney, spine, and ribs. Then, either K-means clustering or MLP is applied to extract the liver in each slice depending on the data set characteristics. In [5], region growing is coupled with non-linear mapping and Quasi-Monte Carlo methods to perform liver segmentation, where the Quasi-Monte Carlo method is utilized to select seed points from the region of interest (ROI) and to design region-growing criteria. This approach requires the removal of some adjacent tissues, and the ROI needs to be specified manually by a user. Yang et al. [8] developed a hybrid semi-automatic method to extract the liver from CT volume. The CT volume is initially segmented by a fast-marching level-set method with multiple seed points, and followed by a threshold-based level-set method to refine the initial segmentation. Peng et al. [9] presented a constrained convex variation model integrated with intensity and texture features for liver boundary delineation, where an accelerated primal-dual method is applied in the model computation.
The statistical model-based techniques employ object population shapes and appearance prior to segmentation. In MICCAI 2007 Liver Segmentation Challenge [19], the top three methods [19], [20], [21] on fully automatic methods are all based on the statistical shape models (SSM). Heimann et al. [20] employed a deformable mesh to segment a liver by internal forces based on the SSM and external forces. Kainmüller et al. [21] matched the SSM to the CT data and refined the results by a deformable mesh, where the SSM consists of around 7000 landmarks and is built by 112 liver shapes. The segmentation accuracy of these statistical model-based methods mainly depends on shape and location. However, they cannot satisfy the significant variation of livers from patient to patient.
During recent years, there has been an increasing interest in graph cut based segmentation methods since they demonstrate a great potential with the advantages of global optimization and topology variability. Besides, they can deal with highly textured data and the case of containing multiple separated regions in an object [22]. Lingutaru et al. [16] applied graph cuts in the simultaneous segmentation of multiorgans from multiphase CT scans, such as liver, kidneys, and spleen. Enhancement information from multiphase CT, constraint on shape from Parzen windows, and location from probabilistic atlas were all integrated into the graph cuts for segmentation. A strategic combination of the active appearance model (AAM), live wire (LW), and graph cuts was presented by Chen et al. [17] for abdominal organ segmentation and successfully applied in liver segmentation. In this method, the AAM combined with LW was employed for initial object recognition, and then the shape constraint generated from the initial recognized object was integrated into the graph cuts cost computation to improve segmentation accuracy.
Due to the injection of contrast media, the intensity of liver vessels is quite different from that of liver parenchyma [23]. There also exist some other organs and tissues having similar intensities with vessels around the liver, such as spine, ribs, and kidneys. All these factors make the accurate and complete segmentation of livers from abdominal CT volumes to be challenging. To address these issues, Selver et al. [3] and Göçeri et al. [24] attempted to use thresholding and morphological operations to remove the similar tissues and organs. However, the process is tedious and does not work always since the intensities and shapes of these tissues vary significantly from patient to patient.
In this paper, we propose an automatic liver segmentation method based on density peak (DP) clustering, graph cuts, and border marching. An initial slice is automatically selected and segmented by the DP clustering. Then, a novel intensity model and a PCA-based regional appearance model are built according to the initial extracted liver, together with the location constraint from each previously-segmented slice. They are effectively integrated into graph cuts for automatic liver segmentation from the remaining slices. Finally, by considering the fact that the possible undersegmented liver vessels usually form local concavities at the liver edge, we develop a novel automatic method for vessel compensation based on border marching. The improperly excluded vessels are compensated by marching along the extracted liver border and bridging all the local concavities formed by these vessels with optimal paths.
The main contributions of this paper are threefold. First, an unsupervised method is proposed to segment the initial slice, in which the liver parenchyma is extracted automatically by DP clustering. Second, the intensity and regional appearance property as well as the relation between neighboring slices are integrated effectively into graph cuts for liver segmentation. Third, a border marching based method is proposed to compensate the undersegmented liver vessels, which to the best of our knowledge is the only one to date to be used successfully for vessel compensation in liver segmentation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A complete methodology of the proposed segmentation algorithm is elaborated in Section 2. The performances of the proposed method and the comparison with some existing methods are presented in Section 3. The strength and weakness of the proposed method and our future plan are discussed in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
