Prior to 1914, any restrictions on use and distribution of drugs in the United States (U.S.) were at the state or local level, with federal control over drug use and prescription practices by medical professions thought of as unconstitutional (McBride, Terry-McElrath, Harwood, Inciardi, & Leukefeld, 2009; Musto, 1999). Drugs such as heroin, morphine, and cannabis were readily available and sold as medicines. Cannabis remained legal under federal law until the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) of 1970 (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2009, Eddy, 2010). The act classified all drugs into schedules, and cannabis was placed in the most restrictive, Schedule I category, which implied that it had no accepted medical use, had a high potential for abuse, and could not be used safely even under medical supervision (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2009).
Since cannabis’ Schedule I classification there has been mounting public and political pressure to enact laws enabling the use of cannabis for medicinal purposes, with suggestions that if cannabis were moved to Schedule II to allow for its medical use, the federal government would be able to better regulate it (Belackova et al., 2015, Clark, 2000, Grinspoon, 2001, Pacula and Sevigny, 2014). The ongoing controversy over cannabis being a medicine and its adverse effects as well as the conflict between scientific evidence and political ideology have been impeding progress in the area of medical cannabis (Mather, Rauwendaal, Moxham-Hall, & Wodak, 2013; Pacula & Sevigny, 2014).
Medical cannabis advocates note that cannabis will most likely not be rescheduled until there is sufficient scientific evidence for its effectiveness and have turned to state and local governments to pass medical cannabis laws (Marshall, 2005). To date 28 states and the District of Columbia have enacted medical cannabis laws and eight states and the District of Columbia have passed laws allowing for the personal possession and consumption of cannabis by adults (National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, 2017, ProCon.org, 2017). While the state medical cannabis laws apply at the state level, the laws put the states in violation of federal law because cannabis is a Schedule I substance according to the CSA (Eddy, 2010, Marijuana Policy Project, 2013).
As medical cannabis measures have created a conflict between the federal prohibition on medical cannabis and state legalisation, patients, their caregivers, and cannabis providers are at risk of being arrested and prosecuted under federal law (Ferraiolo, 2008, Hall and Degenhardt, 2003, Pickerill and Chen, 2008). In August 2016 the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) announced that it had denied two petitions to reschedule cannabis under the CSA, maintaining that cannabis has a high potential for abuse, has no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the US and lacks accepted safety for use under medical supervision (Denial of petition to initiate proceedings to reschedule marijuana, 2016). However, the DEA also announced a policy change designed to expand the number of DEA registered cannabis manufacturers (U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, 2016). The University of Mississippi is currently the only entity authorised to supply cannabis for research (U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, 2016). In his paper on the drug policy governance in the United Kingdom (UK) and the classification of cannabis in the UK Misuse of Drugs Act, Monaghan (2014) pointed out that “the issue of cannabis classification gained prominence because it was linked to an increasing preoccupation amongst academics, policy makers and the public over the way that evidence is used, misused or unused in policy making” (p. 1026).
It is important to determine the role scientific evidence plays in public health policymaking and identify factors it contends with in the sometimes arduous policymaking process (Birkland, 2005, Ritter, 2009). In the current study, we explored the role scientific evidence played in medical cannabis policymaking from the perspective of the individuals directly or indirectly involved in the drug policy field.
