The growing scarcity of fresh water and the increase of energy costs are two of the main challenges for the sustainability of production systems nowadays. This fact is prominent in agriculture, where most water consumption occurs (Smith and Urpelainen, 2016, Wong and Pecora, 2015, Spinoni et al., 2015), and especially in some areas such as in the Mediterranean basin (Chalghaf et al., 2015, Roca et al., 2016). In recent decades, great improvements in water and energy management have been achieved by applying information and communication technologies (ICT) to agronomic engineering, particularly in the field of irrigation systems.
One of these emerging applied technologies is photogrammetry, which can be defined as the science of making measurements from photographs. It has been shown that, with suitable photogrammetric systems, it is possible to optimize the use of water in irrigation management in agriculture (Lou et al., 2016, Escarabajal-Henarejos et al., 2015a). Moreover, computer vision techniques can be helpful in many other tasks, such as crop monitoring (Brillante et al., 2016, Lin et al., 2013), controlling the quality of vegetables and fruits (Donis-Gonzalez et al., 2016, Kodagali and Balaji, 2012), weed control (Arroyo et al., 2016, Slaughter et al., 2008), and reading QR codes in the field (Qian et al., 2015), among others.
Many advances have been developed by means of remote sensing, where satellite imagery is used to cover large areas all over the world (Ramírez-Cuesta et al., 2017, Odi-Lara et al., 2016, Sicre et al., 2014, Xu et al., 2010). However, they are very costly techniques, so some research works have proposed alternatives such as smartphones, lightweight drones, kites and other kinds of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) (Haghighattalab et al., 2016, Anderson et al., 2016, Chianucci et al., 2016, Torres et al., 2016).
In the case of intensive agriculture for small holdings, which works with smaller plots and a greater variety of crops, these technologies could fail to provide useful visual monitoring. In those situations, the installation of cameras on the ground is a feasible option to achieve precise visual crop monitoring (Schima et al., 2016, Escarabajal-Henarejos et al., 2015a, Fernández-Pacheco et al., 2014). The cameras could be included as an additional component of other existing devices, such as lysimeters or agroclimatic stations, or they could be installed independently. For this to be feasible and profitable, two basic requirements should be met: the cost of each camera sensor should be kept as low as possible; and the system should be based on an open standard architecture. These features enable reduced installation and maintenance cost, ease of integration with other system components, and the possibility of future extension.
In both kinds of applications, the percentage of green cover (PGC) of a crop can be obtained from photography, and can be calibrated with respect to the exact amount of irrigation water that a crop needs for growing. Therefore, the estimation of PGC – named by some author as the leaf area index (LAI), fraction of vegetation cover (Fc), or plant canopy coverage (PCC) – has received much attention in the literature recently (Viña et al., 2011). This fact has resulted in some free and public tools for PGC estimation, such as EasyPCC (Guo et al., 2017), Canopeo (Patrignani and Ochsner, 2015), and Easy Leaf Area (Easlon and Bloom, 2014). The techniques applied are usually based on pixel by pixel color classification, using vegetation color indices and different color spaces. For example, Guo et al. (2017) extract the 9 channels of spaces RGB, HSV and CIELab, and apply decision trees for color classification. The method of (Patrignani and Ochsner, 2015) is based on color ratios, such as red to green (R/G), blue to green (B/G) and excess green (2G–R–B) which are then thresholded by the user. Although these tools are very effective and freely available, they are offered in the form of interactive PC programs or portable apps, so they cannot be directly integrated into a web server.
The objective of the research reported in this paper is the development of a new system for visual monitoring of crops in intensive horticultural applications. The proposed system consists of different hardware and software components, whose final goal is to provide farm managers with accurate, useful and frequently updated information about the state and water balance of the crop and its irrigation requirements.
