With the rapid development of the artificial intelligence technology, the intelligent transportation system has shown significant influence in production and life [1], [2]. The transportation is the support of the economy and human life for most of countries, and affects other related industries and sectors. It requires sustainable and efficient transport system for improving trade, strengthening economy and mitigating unnecessary loss. In the railway transportation, the modern railway system tends to be automated, systematic and intelligent, which has complicated and integrated composition of equipment. On account of the complex structures and diverse factors, the potential security risks exist and are critical with increasing the efficiency and capacity of the railway transportation. The faulted component of the equipment would probably influence the normal operation of railway system which leads to the collapse of the whole electric railway system [3], [4]. For the sustainable and efficient transport system, the fault diagnosis is of great significance.
In the electric railway field, the pantograph-catenary system could supply power to the vehicle, which is crucial for the train running. The catenary system which is built in the field experiences various natural factors such as wind, snow, rain and so on. Meanwhile, the system bears long term dynamic loads and contact force. Because of the various factors, the fault and defect would occur in the catenary system, which would affect the power of the vehicle and influence the normal railway transport. In pursuit of safety and reliability of the catenary devices, the fault diagnosis for the railway system has attracted much attention in academics and industries [5], [6], [7].
The sensor and computer technologies are developed rapidly, which are applied widely in the different fields of the modern society. The big data obtained from the sensors can be stored and computed for the fault diagnosis. Thus, it is necessary for the fault diagnosis methods which can analyze the massive data effectively and give precise diagnosis results. Numerous diagnosis methods are proposed and made great contributions to the intelligent fault diagnosis of the railway system. For example, Wang et al. [8] introduced the method for fault diagnosis based on the bilevel feature extraction. The method can extract the features at different levels and fuse the fault features from two levels by serial fusion, which presented the efficiency in the experiments. Wang et al. [9] presented the fault diagnosis method based on the sparsity guided empirical wavelet transform. The method determined the Fourier segments adaptively by the proposed transform and the comparisons in the experiments revealed the effectiveness of the method on the defect detection. Chen et al. [10] proposed the fault diagnosis method based on the probability relevant principal component analysis, which could increase the fault detection capability and be flexible in processing the data. The experiments validated its performance on the fault detection. However, for analyzing the complex data in some various conditions, the performances of some methods reveal that the features from the data which are excavated by the shallow network model would have limited generalization ability.Download : Download high-res image (256KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) The illustration of the catenary system, (b) The components of catenary, (c) The broken rings in the images.
Deep learning as an important part of machine learning has been applied in various applications. With the structure of multiple layers and deep blocks, it could establish the relationship between the data and features through excavating the inherent characteristics from a large amount of data. The learning and analysis capability of deep learning model could overcome some disadvantages of traditional methods and have generalization ability. Deep learning networks such as Convolutional Neural Network, Recurrent Neural Network, Deep Belief Network and so on, are widely used in the computer vision, pattern​ recognition, signal processing and so on [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. For the object detection network based on the deep learning model, such as Faster RCNN [16], YOLO [17], RetinaNet [18] and so on. Recently, deep learning technique has been widely applied in the fault diagnosis of railway system. Liu et al. [19] proposed a deep learning fault diagnosis system for the catenary system, which was composed of feature extraction network and Markov random field model. The fault state could be analyzed by the quantity of the local regions. The experiments exhibited its validity in the detection accuracy. Kang et al. [20] presented a deep multitask neural network for the defect detection of catenary system, which could accomplish segmentation and defect detection simultaneously. The experiments revealed its robust ability of the catenary insulator defect detection. Bruin et al. [21] introduced a fault diagnosis approach based on the recurrent neural network. The long short term memory network was adopted to learn the fault features from the spatial and temporal dependences, which showed the performance on detecting the faults. Yin et al. [22] introduced a fault diagnosis model through the deep belief network with Restricted Boltzmann machine. The fault diagnosis problem was formulated by a mathematical model. The experiment results conformed the effect of the method in the comparisons. According to the recent researches in the deep learning, it can be seen that the prominent advantages of the deep learning are remarkable in the feature representation with multiple transformations and complicated functions.
According to the characteristics of the catenary system, the current-carrying rings are always small in the catenary images. In order to detect the ring and resist the affect of the background and other objects, in this paper, a fault diagnosis method based on the deep learning for the current-carrying ring of the railway catenary system is proposed. The method is based on the improved RetinaNet which consists of different models in the backbone. The main contributions are as follows.
(1) For the feature extraction network, the spatial attention map block (SAMB) is embedded to focus the interested local features. The SAMB fuses the multiscale features from the former layers, which could enrich the information for the following feature extraction network. The spatial attention map (SAM) could enhance the local features produced from the convolutional network in spatial domain.
(2) For the multi-scale feature maps produced by the feature pyramid network, the channel weight map block (CWMB) is presented. The CWMB is used to weight the varying importance of channels for the detection and exploit the useful information among the global feature maps. Weighting the multi-scale feature maps by the channel weight map (CWM) could use the relative global feature information in channels.
(3) The embedded blocks could assist the backbone to extract significant object features and restrain the other interferential information. The different importance degrees are allocated in the local and global regions of feature maps, which could improve the detection accuracy for the faulted current-carrying rings in railway transportation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work is introduced. In Section 3, the improved method is described. Section 4 presents the experiments on the data set of the railway catenary and the Section 5 contains the conclusion.
