The question of the Factory of the Future (FoF) is a major issue that is described in both national research strategies of many countries and also in the European Commission roadmap (European Commission, EFFRA, 2013). Among the common objectives of these proposals, the FoF allows the innervation of the industry with scientific and technological innovations on products, processes and production systems as a whole, and by the strengthening of an ever more effective collaboration among stakeholders to impel innovation. The FoF will be at the heart of its ecosystem sustainability, human-centered, and agile (able to reconfigure quickly according to demand). This factory is a response to multiple simultaneous transitions: energy, ecological, digital, organizational and societal. Each of these transitions requires many new technologies and modes of organization. Indeed, the FoF must operate in networks to easily reword the value chain to adapt to market and technologies changes. As a result, the FoF must be innovative, competitive, efficient and attractive. Therefore it must be a technological and societal response to the current factory, claiming a systematic reduction and optimization of all costs, and where the issues of competitiveness allow limited space for technological innovation. In the future the major part of the competitiveness will be based more on product intrinsic quality, the fullness of the associated services and the innovation degrees which will become the main differentiators. The purpose is to support the implementation of new paradigms on the role of individuals in the plant (operators, management …), in its organization but also its role in the ecosystem. In this context of deep changes, innovation appears as a crucial feature, therefore it should be made more systematic, needs to be accelerated but also the quality of the inventive ideas generated should be raised.
In the same time, the deployment of new digital technologies must speed up, facilitate, and change the links between the different partners of the value chain. This vision of the extended enterprise gives way to a new inter-companies business model around common projects to enable the sharing of knowledge, skills and experiences. Another challenge is, therefore, to invent new patterns of collaboration between these partners. Indeed, the collaboration is at the heart of the innovation process. It concerns social networks dedicated to technical problems resolution allowing information sharing, management and ranking of ideas, management of product portfolio, resolution of problem locks… Consequently the approach to innovation must go beyond the current model turned within the company to be deployed outside the company boundaries for a more open innovation. This new way of collaboration concerns both the design process and the operation of the factory. Therefore, the FoF must take into account the modifications generated by these new collaborative practices and in particular it must propose new organization to foster collaboration between people across the globe and with different cultures.
In this context, the Process System Engineering (PSE) community has to propose new methods and tools that integrate all previous dimensions, which must be adapted to the new organization to foster innovation and to ensure this transition to the factory of the future. Furthermore as Ten Kate (2016) underlines, the application of computer aided formulation design is particularly attractive in the early design stages, but it needs specific methods and tools as in this stage the level of detailed information is typically low. Thus the use of Computer Aided Innovation (CAI) is part of the strategy to address this transition. For Leon (2009) CAI is the research field that leads the efforts to develop a new category of computers aided solutions in order to support and automate the different activities of the innovation process for a new product or process development. Hüsig and Kohn (2009) and Leon (2009) present an overview on the CAI concept, its main components approaches and perspectives. In the array of computer-aided tools, the initial studies on CAI aimed to assist process engineers during the creative stage of the design process, also called the fuzzy front end. Subsequently, the scope was extended such that the general goal of CAI is to effectively support the entire innovation process, from the fuzzy front end with the generation of ideas, through detailed design and development, up to the withdrawal or recycling. As Dereli and Altun (2011) demonstrate, the perception of CAI in literature is associated with three pillars: design (e.g. computer aided design), problem solving techniques (e.g. TRIZ, Russian acronym for Theory of Inventive Problem Solving), and optimization (e.g. evolutionary algorithms, genetic algorithm). Besides CAI, the development of other computational tools have progressively extended to enhance product development cycles. Computer Aided Design and Engineering (CAD/E), and Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAM) are the leading solutions for an efficient design process and high quality representation of products (Zeng and Horváth, 2012). Fig. 1 illustrates the positioning of CAI related to some other computational tools used within New Product Development (NPD). The figure identifies the abstraction level corresponding to CAI, it also shows how CAI are positioned in preliminary design phase.Download : Download high-res image (162KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Application of CAI in NPD according to (Becattini et al., 2011).
To go deeper on the comparison of methods and tools to support the tasks of product or process development, Fig. 2 makes the relationship between the specific approaches for design with the tasks and tools associated. From the PSE point of view, Fig. 2 raises the question CAI versus Optimization. Indeed Innovation and Optimization are sometimes perceived as conflicting activities or on the contrary for some people they represent the same scientific problem. Optimization, in design, means translating the design problem into a mathematical model where it is possible to identify: the objective(s) function(s), the decision variables and the constraints. As a consequence, this approach assumes that there is enough knowledge on the system studied to identify the three aforementioned entities but also a certain experience in the design process. The optimal solution is often a compromise since improving one performance of a process may result in the degradation of another. Despite recent significant efforts on the optimization methods (e.g. multi objective optimization), the generation of the objective function or the choice of the optimal solution is based on a subjective assumption of the designer on the relative importance of the objectives. In some case this best compromise is not satisfying which means that we must seek solutions beyond what can achieve the optimization, i.e. go beyond the Pareto front. In this case, the decision variables, the definition domains and the constraints have to be questioned. As the problem has never been faced before, there is no experience on how to solve it. As a result the designer needs methods and tools to change the representation space of the problem, the solution space but also to have guidelines to avoid exploring theses spaces randomly. This is one objective of the CAI to deal with these categories of problems and to support their analyze, modeling and resolution. To continue our comparison with optimization, CAI enable to review the constraints, to expand the definition domains of variables, but also to redefine new design variables. To prove the complementary between previous approaches, Cascini et al. (2009) present an attempt to set up a framework for integrating optimization and CAI to increase the effectiveness of some design activities.Download : Download high-res image (115KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Comparison of product or process development methods and tools. Adapted from (Cascini et al., 2009).
As most of the CAI are TRIZ based, Leon (2009) has discussed the possibility to connect TRIZ capabilities with other concepts and techniques used in conceptual design such as: optimization and evolution algorithms, integration in product lifecycle management, semantic web and data mining. To go further on the last point, the joint advances in the information and communication technologies possibilities commonly referred to Web 2.0 and the strategic paradigm shift from closed to open innovation lead to the next generation of CAI defined by Hüsig and Kohn (2011) as Open CAI 2.0.
In this context, the main contribution of this paper is to propose a software prototype for an Open CAI 2.0 for improving the innovation process in the context of the FoF. To our knowledge, it is one of the first attempts for an Open CAI 2.0 in PSE. Thus, this numerical tool must allow to various experts (inside or outside the boundaries of a firm) to work together and to simultaneously interact on an innovation project. As a consequence, a first sub objective is to create a methodological framework that takes advantages of collaboration and collective intelligence, and that can be implemented in the prototype through recent advances in information technology. The second sub objective is to propose a problem resolution process to impel creativity of expert but also to develop, validate and select innovative solutions in the context of open innovation. The main difficulties are to ensure a shared vision on the nature and the formulation of the problem but also a sharing and a transfer of knowledge between experts in different scientific domains.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Like in other engineering domains, in process engineering TRIZ is one core component of the resolution process in CAI, thus the next section gives the theoretical backgrounds concerning TRIZ, its benefits in PSE in general and in CAI in particular. The paradigm of open innovation and the way to implement in a CAI is also discussed. Section 3 describes the concept of Open CAI 2.0 and details the main elements of our methodology and the tool architecture. It also highlights some capabilities of the problem resolution process. Before to draw conclusion, the framework and the tool prototype are illustrated through a case study on heat integration in biomass gasification.
