Scientometrics was first introduced by Nalimov and Mulʹchenko in 1971 (Nalimov and Mulʹchenko, 1971), who defined it as “[the application of] quantitative methods of the research on the development of science as an information process”. The term, as a compound of words consisting of “Science” and “Metrics”, indicates that measurements of some aspects of science are made. The overall aim of scientometrics research is to gain insights in the development of a scientific research on a specific topic, a broader domain of inquiry, or even the entire scientific body of knowledge. This is approached by mining data about the scientific literature of the topics or other media, often extracted from citation databases and typically focusing on journal articles, papers in conference proceedings, theses, and other types. In the scientometrics research domain, other terms related to scientometrics are used as well, for example bibliometrics (Pritchard, 1969) and informetrics (Nacke, 1979). Together, these are known as the “3-metrics” in the discipline of information and library sciences. However, the terms do not have clear boundaries in practical research, with terms often used interchangeably (Siluo and Qingli, 2017).
Scientometric mapping, as a subdomain of the scientometrics research domain, signifies the application of quantitative methods for understanding and visually representing particular metrics associated with the scientific literature based on bibliographic data. With the development of data science and visualization techniques, scientometric mapping has become an increasingly popular method for reviewing research domains in recent years, also in the safety science community. The combination of data mining and visualization is useful especially for relatively rapidly gaining a high-level understanding of a research domain, its structure in terms of collaboration networks or development history, impactful articles or journals, and topic focus areas. More traditional literature review types have a somewhat different aim, and usually focus on the contents of the research articles, summarizing knowledge, identifying gaps and research directions (Grant et al., 2009).
As explained and further elaborated in Section 2, scientometric analysis, and scientometric mapping in particular, has recently become increasingly applied in safety research, several articles that use scientometric methods and tools have been published in the Safety Science. As the overview in Section 2, only a limited range of methods and analysis types have however been applied in this body of safety mapping literature, indicating that the full potential of the scientometric research concepts has not yet been exploited. Moreover, as the technique is relatively recent, many Journal readers and reviewers may not be familiar with the purpose, conceptual basis, methods, tools, and processes of scientometric analysis and mapping. Hence, in context of the Safety Science Virtual Special Issue ‘Mapping Safety Science – Reviewing Safety Research’, it is considered valuable to review the application of scientometric mapping in safety research, and to provide an overview of some key concepts, methods, and tools of scientometrics and scientometric mapping to advance the application of the techniques. Thus, this article aims to review the application of scientometric analyses in safety research, and to serve as a tutorial to the approaches, enabling high-quality applications and analyses.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the use of scientometrics and scientometric mapping in safety research, showing the range of safety topics addressed, and indicating some common limitations and methodological shortcomings in the published research. Section 3 provides an overview of scientometrics concepts, data sources, and of available methods and tools for performing scientometric mapping analysis. Section 4 serves as an introductory tutorial, describing a generic framework of practically performing a scientometric mapping analysis. In Section 5, a discussion is made, focusing on common pitfalls and best practices. Section 6 concludes.
