In the Concise Oxford Dictionary,1 anomaly is defined as “something that deviates from what is standard, normal, or expected”. If regularities allow investigating the general characteristics of a complex system, anomalies allow the uncover and analysis of unexpected features that might not be otherwise discovered. For this reason, the detection of anomalies has become very important in data analytics, and is widely investigated both in statistics and machine learning [1], [2], [3]. The relevance of anomaly detection is universally acknowledged, since data anomalies are at basis of significant events and patterns. Example application domains include: privacy and cybersecurity [4], [5]; fault detection [6]; ecological disturbances [7]; communication networks [8]; social media life [9], [10], [11], [12]; and gene regulation [13], [14].
In recent years, anomalies have been widely investigated in social networks to detect fraudulent individuals [15], [16], spammers [17], [18], malicious behavior, and so forth. Even more recently, anomaly detection has been analyzed in contexts where more social networks interact with each other [19], thus going from social networking into social internetworking.
Social internetworking is certainly one of the frontiers of social network analysis, since people tend to have multiple social network accounts and can, thus, become “social bridges”. Furthermore, all sorts of networked objects are getting increasingly smart and social, giving rise to the so-called Smart Objects (SOs) and revolutionizing both the Internet of Things (IoT) and the Social Internet of Things (SIoT) [20]. Also, several SIoTs and IoTs cooperate with each other through “bridge” objects, thus generating new architectures, referred to in the literature as Multiple IoT (MIoT) [21].
The detection of anomalies in a single-IoT environment has been widely investigated [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], and many results involving privacy, security and fault detection have been found. However, to the best of our knowledge, no investigation on anomalies and their possible detection in an MIoT has been performed so far.
In this paper, we aim at filling this gap by proposing a new methodological framework for anomaly detection and classification in MIoTs. Our framework models anomalies and the corresponding issues in an MIoT by providing a multi-dimensional view, based on three orthogonal taxonomies: (i) presence anomalies vs success anomalies; (ii) hard anomalies vs soft anomalies; and (iii) contact anomalies vs content anomalies. Each combination of the possible values of these dimensions gives rise to a specific type of anomaly to investigate, for instance the Presence-Hard-Contact anomalies. Furthermore, anomaly definitions are orthogonal to specific anomaly detection approaches, past or future, which may be applied (and will be combined) in the context of our framework.
Together with the multi-dimensional taxonomy, another main component of our framework is the extension of conventional methodological frameworks to the MIoT case. Our framework has been conceived to address two problems, known as the “forward problem” and the “inverse problem”, respectively. In the forward problem, we aim to analyze the effects that multiple anomalies have onto the MIoT. On the other hand, in the inverse problem, which is traditionally more complex, we aim at detecting the source of the anomalies (i.e., the objects that have generated them) based on the effects that these have on the objects or their connections.
In order to show the possible usage of our framework, we present a case study centered around a smart city. Furthermore, in order to evaluate our framework and extract knowledge, we have conducted a series of tests, which we extensively present in this paper. These allowed us to find several important knowledge patterns about anomalies and their effects in an MIoT. Our most important findings may be summarized as follows: (i) the effects of the anomalies of a node rapidly decrease as the distance from the node itself increases; (ii) anomalies are less evident in an MIoT than in a single IoT; (iii) the number of anomalous nodes increases as the number of IoTs increases, in a roughly linear way; (iv) the outdegree of anomalous nodes has a great impact on the spread of the anomaly over the MIoT; (v) closeness centrality is even more important than degree centrality in the spread of anomalies; (vi) the computation time necessary for the detection of anomalous nodes is polynomial against the number of MIoT nodes; (vii) the time necessary for evaluating the effects of anomalies in an MIoT is quadratic against the number of its nodes.
Summarizing, the main contributions of this paper are the following:

•We present three different anomaly taxonomies, orthogonal to each other, obtaining and formalizing eight kinds of different anomalies.•We present an approach to evaluate the spread and the effects of an anomaly in an MIoT (forward problem) and another one that, starting from the analysis of the effects of one or more anomalies, aims at detecting the anomalous node(s) (inverse problem).•We present a case study regarding smart cities, which can benefit from our framework, and illustrate several experiments aimed at evaluating the proposed framework and at deriving many knowledge patterns about anomalies in an MIoT.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we examine related literature. In Section 3, we illustrate the MIoT paradigm, which is the reference one for our framework. In Section 4, we present our multi-dimensional taxonomy of anomalies in an MIoT context. In Section 5, we introduce the specialization of the forward and the inverse problems for MIoTs. In Section 6, we illustrate our experiments. Finally, in Section 7, we draw important conclusions and outline possible future developments.
