The accurate detection of lesions and tumors is an important step in computer-aided diagnosis systems. This step is usually performed by a radiologist; however, manual detection becomes tedious in the presence of small sized lesions and is time consuming due to the large amount of data to be analyzed. Hence, developing an automatic or semi-automatic method can save radiologists' time. Automatic detection of jaw cysts is a challenging task and machine learning based methodologies can simplify this task.
CBCT (cone beam CT) is a rapidly advancing area of imaging specifically designed for maxillofacial region and can provide three dimensional images of hard and soft tissue structures with lower dose of radiation [1], [2]. This is an important aspect since sensitive tissues and organs are located in head and face. In evaluating cysts or benign tumors, OPGs1 may not fully record the dimension and location of the lesion. Multi-planar sections (axial, coronal, and sagittal planes) and 3D reconstruction are required in examining cysts or tumors. In several studies, accuracy of CBCT images in diagnosing jaw cysts is evaluated [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]. Many researchers reported that the accuracy of CBCT imaging is comparable to conventional CT with no significant statistical difference [3], [5], [8]. However, like other imaging technologies, surgical biopsy and histopathological evaluation are needed for further accurate differential diagnosis of some lesions [4]. Thus, it can be concluded that CBCT is a reliable tool for preoperative radiological assessment of cyst and tumors when compared with conventional CT.
Periapical or radicular cyst is the most common type of maxillofacial cysts. Radicular cysts account for more than 50% of all inflammatory cysts and they are the main reason of chronic swelling in mandible [9]. The second prevalent cyst is dentigerous cyst which is associated with the crown of an unerupted tooth. Keratocystic odontogenic tumor is the third most common odontogenic cyst which is of great importance due to the high possibility of recurring [9]. To the best of our knowledge, there are very few researches performed for maxillofacial cysts detection. Flores et al. [10] combined graph-based random walks segmentation with machine learning-based boosted classifiers in order to diagnose dental periapical lesions. In [11], an algorithm is developed to identify dental cyst using morphologic descriptors of the shape, margin and area at an early stage. Then, a neural network is trained to diagnose and measure severity of cysts with high classification accuracy in dental X-rays. A combination of support vector machine and bagging with logistic regression was proposed by Frydenlunda [12] to classify four types of developmental odontogenic cysts in digital micrographs. Landini et al. [13] used a semi-automated algorithm to segment histopathological images of odontogenic keratocysts and radicular cysts into theoretical cell regions. They obtained various morphometric features which proved to be successful in the classification of radicular cysts and odontogenic keratocysts.
Designing an algorithm for maxillofacial cysts detection is a challenging task due to several reasons. First, cysts can be of various sizes and shapes and conventional detection methods will lead to poor results. Hence, information such as shape and texture should be utilized to gain more accurate result. Second, examination of 2D slices is a time consuming task for a radiologist. Thus, an effective computer aided diagnosis procedure would reduce the workload and the costs of multiple expert diagnostic opinions. This goal is the main motivation of this article.
According to dental radiologists, accurate and fast classification of maxillofacial cysts is clinically very important. To our knowledge, there is no existing automatic system that can sufficiently address this problem. This is the clinical impact of this research. To this aim, engineering integrations is essential and this is the main novelty of this paper. Due to the capability of shape and texture features in studying the effects of various diseases, we have proposed a novel hybrid framework for cystic lesions detection. To this aim, a combination of SPHARM and contourlet features is employed. SPHARM is one of the most widely used methods in studying anatomical structures such as brain and liver [14], [15]. SPHARM allows us to study 3D shape variations between different diseases and contourlet features provide texture information for physicians in finalizing their diagnosis process. Moreover, an adaptive algorithm is utilized for increasing the accuracy of SPHARM features. The idea of performing an extra orthogonalization procedure to reduce the bias of IRF estimation was also proposed by Wang in [16]. By orthogonalizing Spherical Harmonics, residual sum of squares will decrease which leads to a more accurate estimation. The practical efficiency of proposed framework is proven experimentally using different classifiers such as support vector machine and sparse discriminant analysis.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we first describe the dataset and method used for segmentation of cystic lesions in CBCT images. Afterwards, we briefly introduce feature extraction methods, i.e. Spherical Harmonics and contourlet. In Section 3, residual sum of squares in orthogonalized SPHARM is compared to conventional SPHARM representation. Statistical measures for methods validation are described in Section 4. Then, in Section 5, experimental results are reported. Finally, in Sections 6 and 7 discussion and conclusion are presented, respectively.
