The Human being is currently under an increasing demand for performance, fruit of a society that is moving faster everyday. Workplaces are particularly “good” examples of this reality. Lack of jobs, decreasing wages, increasing working hours, working in shifts, competitiveness or unrealistic productivity goals result in a constant and increasing pressure on the individual.
Numerous studies highlight the negative effects of this lifestyle. Sparks et al.  [1] show positive mean correlations between overall health symptoms, physiological and psychological health symptoms, and hours of work while Dembe et al.  [2] analyze the impact of overtime and long work hours on occupational injuries and illnesses, to conclude that these variables depend more on the amount of time worked rather than on the level of risk of the job. In  [3], the effects of shift work and extended hours of work are analyzed at different levels, including family and social life, performance, fatigue, productivity and health.
As addressed in detail in  [4], there is currently an overwork culture, which is further encouraged by greedy management techniques and job insecurity. While the main objective of management in doing so is to increase production, this does not necessarily happen, nor will it increase productivity.
There is thus the need to improve performance or productivity by other means that do not bring along such negative effects. In this paper we pursue this aim by developing an environment that takes as input individuals’ behavioral cues. Indeed, Humans tend to show their personality or their state through their actions, whether in a conscious or unconscious way. The way individuals interact with technological devices is influenced by such factors and can thus be assessed to assess them. Some of these effects, analyzed in preliminary studies, show that our performance tends to decrease with the onset of mental fatigue  [5] or that the way we touch or handle a smartphone changes with our level of stress  [6].
This means that the performance of each individual in a group (and consequently of the group) can be assessed in real time and continuously, instead of being assessed on a regular basis as happens with traditional approaches (e.g. weekly, monthly, yearly). Moreover, workers are more likely to accept this kind of performance monitoring as opposed to traditional measures based on productivity indicators, which are often dreaded and may even result in decreased performance or productivity due to the pressure of monitoring  [7]. The privacy of the worker is thus safeguarded.
This approach also translates into a range of other advantages. Namely, it is non-invasive and non-intrusive as it requires no specific interactions by the workers. In that sense, the approach is also transparent. We validate the proposed environment by assessing performance in real time of three groups of people. Moreover, we assess the effect of musical selection on performance.
We do this aiming at the main goal of this line of research, which is not only to monitor performance but also to manage and improve it. The fact that we pursue performance improvement through the use of music may yield additional advantages as described in Section  2.1 (e.g. mood, well-being), as opposed to the culturally established use of punishments (e.g. economic, withdrawal of benefits) or intimidation (e.g. threatening to lose job, preventing career promotion), with negative side effects.
In the overall, this approach is expected to result in better, more efficient and easier to implement performance monitoring initiatives in the workplace, that take into account the worker’s well-being and satisfaction.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 addresses some related work on the field of Human–Computer Interaction and deals with some of the effects of music on the Human being at different levels. Section  3 describes the intelligent environment for real time performance management, including a detailed description of the interaction features considered as well as an analysis of the system’s scalability. Section  4 describes in detail the experimental study carried out with the aims to: (1) validate the environment developed and (2) assess the influence of external factors on worker performance. It includes a description of the study design, a thorough characterization of the population (including an emotional and personality characterization) as well as the process followed to validate the auditory stimuli used in the study. The next section details the results of the study in what concerns Human–Computer Interaction. Finally, Section  6 discusses the results achieved and summarizes the conclusions.
