What do a galaxy, a natural food chain, a social community, or other complex systems have in common? Although they are different, these structures share common characteristics by an evaluative dynamic nursed by the immeasurable amount of interactions existing between the entities they contain. Knowing that for each action, there is an equal and opposite reaction, the interactions are what give life to systems apparent static at first glance.
Being surrounded by an immense quantity of stimuli, our brain observed that filtering the information or paying awareness only to specific interactions can be more than enough to ensure the effectiveness of its daily activities [1], [2]. Moreover, by making use of abstraction, our brain can reuse information associated with patterns observed in specific systems in new and unknown systems later encountered [3].
Although unnatural to how our brain was used to perceive the world, our race evolved a scientific framework based on a common analytical approach of splitting the problem into smaller conundrums — divide et impera [4]. It is quite common now, even more since the popularity gain by statistics, to associate a global characteristic to a system by analyzing the most atomic components of its own. Although such an approach is simpler to follow and more comfortable to generalize proofs, it is not necessarily accurate as analyzing individually smaller components of a system, one is in danger of losing the big picture.
Without any willingness to neglect the benefits brought by such analytical methodology, which significantly boosted the process of understanding the world, literature presents the need for more robust frameworks that are capable to understand the apparent chaos as it is and not to make order in it. Understanding the importance of patterns and how our brain is perceiving the world around ourselves, an intriguing question arises: can the patterns be a missing variable in understanding the evolution of complex systems and their dynamic? By dynamic, we understand the non-linear mathematical behavior of a complex system over a certain period [5]. Our work is willing to represent an empirical study of correlations between the properties of these patterns and other components of different scales found in the complex systems.1 
We found the network theory as a robust enough framework to serve as a tool for the research we intend to propose. The mechanism approached by this field is to encode the entities and the interactions between them as topological structures represented as graphs, composed by nodes and edges. What makes these mathematical objects so powerful is that they encapsulate in their underlying graph the contextual information offered by the modeled real-world system. This means that each edge between two nodes will have a meaning, and it is explainable by understanding a real-world dynamic [6]. Metaphorically, we can say that each complex network has a story.
The interdisciplinary applicability of network theory makes it such an elegant framework, emerging notions from physics, mathematics, computer science, biology, and many others. Statistics are used as a mechanism of quantifying properties of the topological spaces, as it can offer the analytical approach to study the essential components of the networks: the nodes. The study of these fundamental components has formulated a large number of microscale properties from which we can remind a few of them: nodes degree, clustering coefficient [7], assortativity degree [8] or power-law exponent [9]. Fundamental properties of Stability Theory of dynamical systems  [10], [11] were used as the argument to sustain the focus of the study on microscale properties in complex networks. This argument states that a dynamic triggered in a complex system by a given perturbation at the macroscale will eventually converge to its smallest structural components, encoding in these microscale components the results of the macro dynamic [12], [13]. Hence, knowing that action at a global scale is persisted at the local scale was a robust argument for continuing a microscale-based research.
Applying this convergence principle in a reversed engineering manner, the studies were extended to a macroscale analysis. In this type of examination, the microscale properties are correlated with macroscale network dynamics. The literature recalls the real-world networks that are characterized by the famous theory of six degrees of separation [14], namely small-world networks. These networks tend to form clusters with short paths between every two nodes of the network, which makes them robust structures without any trade-off in the performance of information flow between its members [15]. Other remarkable networks studied in the literature are sparse networks, which are most of the real-world networks governed by a power-law degree distribution [16] or random networks - structures generated using probability theory to help the study of real-world networks [17]. All these properties are quantifying the relationship of the nodes with their neighbors, as it can be observed in the analytical principle of divide et impera.
Although the accepted analytical framework [18], [19], [20], [21] can be considered reliable and came with answers to many questions proposed by researchers, something is missing in the big picture. We consider that the convergence from macro to microlayers2  and its impact in the in-between layer (meso) are topics not studied sufficient, which require a better emphasis in the current analytical framework of the complex networks. Motivated by the existence of applications that study the importance of mesoscale structures in domain-oriented contexts (biology, ecology or sociology) [22], [23], [24], [25] in respect to the other layers of the network, macro, respectively micro, we consider the mesoscale structures as bridges between the macro and microscale analysis, the missing key in solving the equation of the dynamical convergence from macro to microlayers. Such an approach could lead to a universal framework that could imply better precision of the dynamics of the complex networks surrounding us.
Our focus is on improving existing approaches of understanding complex networks by not following a simple analytical method but trying to observe these topological spaces in their entire complexity and beauty.
The state-of-the-art presents various mesoscale structuressuch as communities — groups of nodes which are more densely connected than the rest of the network  [26], block models — decomposed functional classes of entities within a complex network [27], or modules — community-like components with specific contextual roles [28]. These structures are widely studied in applications addressing problems from fields such as Biology, Physics, or Social Sciences  [29], [30], [31], [32], [32], [33], [33], [34], most of the times presented as stand-alone components and not correlated with properties of components found on different scales.
Wharrie et al. [35] studied how the presence of triangles is an essential factor in the evolution of communities — raising awareness on the existence of a relationship between the structures of a given network. Starting from their valuable results, our work is willing to follow a similar principle by presenting an empirical study proposing more detailed research of the correlations between all layers of a complex network — macro, meso, and micro.
As a first step in the pursuit of this goal, our paper proposes research focused on the study of mesoscale properties named network motifs — patterns of interconnections which can occur in significantly higher numbers in complex networks than in randomized networks which hold the same degree of distribution as the first network. Considering their nature of existence, network motifs will always have behind them contextual reasoning brought by the dynamics of the network.
Learning from nature’s wisdom and understanding strong network motifs contributing to the dynamics of the network, we consider them a perfect candidate as a first step in the direction of our cross-layer analysis. This paper proposes an experimental analysis of the correlation between the properties of microscale components and the existence of network motifs, respectively, the existence of network motifs and the properties of macroscale structures. The results obtained will emphasize how the existence of these mesoscale structures can help to discretize types of networks in ones with a more complex source of information. This experiment is also willing to empirically validate the convergence of the dynamic flows between all layers of the complex networks, having network motifs as a bridge in the dynamic convergence from macro to microlayers.
Introducing the study of network motifs as possible components facilitating the convergence mechanism, we intend to not only strengthen existing conclusions about the micro, meso and macro-layers dynamic previously analyzed through the perspective of modular structures such as triangles [35], but also to detail it and provide it with meaningful reasoning using the network motifs — blocks characterized by their unique frequency in the topology of real-world networks, a frequency that denotes an unusual behavior of the network, local or global.
Applied to fields where connections between structures or components play an essential role, this study can help further understand molecular, self-assembly, protein-based cellular adaptation, or social interactions.
The following sections of the paper will start with a deep dive into the theoretical insights behind the convergence principles and the concepts of complex network analysis for properties of micro, meso, and macroscale structures or components. After the theoretical overview, a series of research questions are introduced together with the methodology of the experiment that will be studied. The next part of the paper focuses on the results obtained during the experiment while correlating the appearance of network motifs with properties of microscale and macroscale structures or components from a set of studied networks. The experimental analysis will conclude with a discussion over the results obtained, which are the validation of the formulated research questions. The validations of the research questions have as a purpose the confirmation of the initial hypothesis, which states that the dynamical convergence in complex networks has mesoscale structures as facilitators in the dynamical flow from macro to microlayers.
