Smartphones are prominently personified from their design to consumption in our society. Take Apple's virtual assistant application Siri for example. The early developers of Siri used thinking to indicate the process of fetching context-aware search results from the server (Siri at SXSW, 2010). Later Apple also recruited Siri script editors and companies to work on “character-driven” and “machine initiated” dialogue (Simonite, 2013; para. 3; Sheridan, 2015. para. 1). In Siri promotions, the human touch has also been prominent since researchers believed it would encourage positive responses (Aggarwal & McGill, 2012). Siri was introduced as the one who understands what you say, knows what you mean, and even talks back in its debut in iOS 5. There are also explicit anthropomorphic connotations in Siri commercials. Not surprisingly, the media responded vigorously with articles like “The iPhone 4S finds its voice” (Mossberg, 2011) and “iPhone virtual assistant Siri has her flaws, but she's learning” (Xia, 2011). The user community also actively seeks Siri personifications. Many Siri advertisement parodies have sprung up on YouTube; people have shared their unexpected conversations with Siri on social networks and user-submitted blogs, such as www.siri-isms.com. Given the near omnipresence of applications like Siri and their influence on both individual lives and popular culture, this study empirically investigates, this study takes the user's perspective to investigate the pervasive personification of smartphones.
Personification is a metaphorical expression of anthropomorphism. In computer science and engineering, anthropomorphism has not been limited to the phenomenon of early developers borrowing psychological terms, such as the memory of a computer, to describe computers and their operations. Anthropomorphism has been a major approach to human-computer interactions (HCI) that is apparent in the design of robots and humanoids that take anthropomorphic form as well as the design of anthropomorphic interfaces that facilitate social behavior and interactions between users and robots/computers (“anthropomorphism.org, n.d.”). In communication studies, the Computers as Social Actors (CASA) paradigm is well-known. CASA researchers hold that individuals’ interactions with computers, televisions, and “new media” (as used in 1997) are essentially social and natural (Nass et al., 1995, Nass et al., 1994). People expect media to follow a wide range of social rules and their (re)actions follow the same rules (Reeves & Nass, 1996). Since smartphones are essentially portable computers, most CASA assumptions should apply to smartphones as well.
However, researchers have realized that the CASA paradigm may need revisions and revalidations (Lang, Klepsch, Nothdurft, Seufert, & Minker, 2013). Since smartphones have gained high penetration globally (Heggestuen, 2013) and have become the primary mediators of our digital social lives in lieu of personal computers, there are changes worth noticing. Unlike desktop and laptop computers, smartphones are always online and are carried along by users, and they are comparatively proactive in social interactions. Therefore, the investigations of incidents created within CASA laboratory experiments may not fully uncover certain characteristics of smartphone anthropomorphism. Smartphones are also highly personalized thanks to various embedded sensor technologies. Modern smartphones such as iPhones and Android devices can be used to determine and recognize the user's location with GPS/Wi-Fi reception, his/her actions with an accelerometer and gyroscope, and speech with chip-level language processing (e.g., Moto X8 and Apple M9). It can also be used to determine the user's physical environment with temperature, light, and humidity sensors, as well as physiological conditions with pressure and heartbeat sensors. It can even be used to estimate the user's psychological conditions based on these sensor readings (Saeb et al., 2015) and facial/vocal expression screening (using technologies from Affectiva and BeyondVerbal). Smartphone users' profiles are established based on not only the information consciously submitted by the user but also personal and behavioral information closely monitored and collected via sensors. Based on personal profiles, contents and applications are customized, and thus, personalized user experience comes into being. The personalized experience has become so valued that smartphone makers endeavor to make it easy for users to transfer those personalized memories when they purchase new devices. With iOS CarPlay and Android Auto, smartphone makers hope that this personalization can be retained even when users are cocooned in a different machinery.
Personalized user experiences provide affordance and potentials for personification. Yet both personification and personalization of smartphones can be user-initiated. Users actively seek to personalize smartphones by changing their phone's name, ring tone, lock screen, and wallpaper. Although the physical appearances of smartphone products are homogeneous out-of-factory, numerous official and aftermarket cases cater to people's tastes. Some users have gone beyond to exquisite DIY decorations, as one can see in Japanese Ita Katai (translated as painfully embarrassing mobile phones, a term used in self-mockery) (Choo, 2007). Phone cases and ring tones are examples of personalization that is meant to signal the owner's tastes and values to others, as these are elements that any stranger can see or hear. On the other hand, personalization of software may more accurately reflect the interiority of the user, or at least the type of relationship he/she wants to have with the machine. Interest in smartphone anthropomorphism is persistent among the users as well. The volume of searching Siri conversations/talks/chat has been relatively steady since the technology's debut, according to Google Trends. Altogether, the characteristics of our adoption of smartphones highlight some hidden factors, particularly those pertaining to personalized experience and dispositions, which CASA studies might have failed to adequately address since the field's inception in the early 1990s, when translation of social and psychological theories was limited to the analogy of methods and experiment designs (see Reeves & Nass, 1996. p. 15).
Because smartphones as a new communication technology require new perspectives in research, this study sets out to develop and preliminarily investigate a new construct, social disposition, in assessing anthropomorphism of smartphones. Rather than (re)examining occurrent behavioral rules the experimental subject follows, this study probes into social dispositional factors—personalities, internal and often unchangeable characteristics specific to smartphone users. Rather than conditioning experimental subjects into specific perceptions of reality, based on which the users then make judgments and respond, this study examines attitude, reflection, and awareness of anthropomorphic agents and, therefore, arrives at a better generalizability than those of experimental studies commonly seen under the CASA paradigm. Although Reeves and Nass (1996) contend that social interactions with computers are automatic and come from people's innate needs for simplicity and predictability, variances in innate needs have not been well investigated, and motivations behind the social actor attribution and social interactions have not been well explained. In the sense that social psychological disposition suggests trends in social behaviors and diversifies responses to social cues, this study attempts to add to CASA studies, specifically in regard to current communication technologies including but not limited to smartphones.
