Adolescents’ access to Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), especially their access to computers and the Internet, at home and at school has increased markedly in the past few years (see Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD], 2015a). It is currently estimated that nearly 2.9 billion people have access to the Internet worldwide, and the majority of Internet users are adolescents and young people (OECD, 2015b). The increased access to computers and the Internet has tremendously transformed the ways in which social interactions are conducted in the digital economies across the globe (OECD, 2015b). According to Subrahmanyam and Greenfield (2008), adolescents tend to largely use 11 forms of online activities that constitute Internet-based, digitally mediated social communication: e-mail, instant messaging, text messaging, chat rooms, bulletin boards, blogs, social networking sites (SNSs) such as MySpace and Facebook, video sharing such as YouTube, photo sharing such as Flickr, massively multiplayer online computer games (MMOGs) such as World of Warcraft, and virtual worlds such as Second Life and Teen Second Life.
Although the digital world is now being increasingly recognized as yet another indispensable social context for adolescent development (see Subrahmanyam & Smahel, 2011), the rapidly and dramatically changing digital landscape presents both immense opportunities and risks for adolescents. Many of the benefits that adolescents accrue from their use of ICTs include, among others, moderate gains in achievement (e.g., Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2015a, Skryabin et al., 2015), increased opportunities for socialization and self-development (e.g., Ainin, Naqshbandi, Moghavvemi, & Jaafar, 2015), enhanced academic engagement (see Law et al., 2008, Rappa et al., 2009), improved higher-order thinking skills (e.g., Yang, 2015), and improved problem solving skills (e.g., Argelagós & Pifarré, 2012). The risks arising from the use ICTs among adolescents include, among others, sleep-related problems (e.g., Polos et al., 2015, Punamäki et al., 2007), violence, cyberbullying, and victimization (e.g., Barlett, 2015, Korchmaros et al., 2014, Landoll et al., 2015), sexting (e.g., Temple et al., 2014, Van Ouytsel et al., 2014, Ybarra and Mitchell, 2014), sexual solicitation and harassment (e.g., Mitchell et al., 2013, Mitchell et al., 2008), self-harm and suicide (e.g., Mitchell, Wells, Priebe, & Ybarra, 2014), substance use (e.g., Huang et al., 2014, Mu et al., 2015), and overweight and obesity (e.g., Kautiainen, Koivusilta, Lintonen, Virtanen, & Rimpelä, 2005). These risks together may lead to many other grave physical and mental health disorders among adolescents (see Subrahmanyam & Smahel, 2011).
Thus, a growing body of research has examined both the positive and the negative roles of ICTs in adolescent development. However, relatively little is known about the factors that are linked to adolescents’ use of ICTs for social communication. Although the crucial roles that genetic and environmental factors play in adolescents’ social interactions in face-to-face, offline contexts are well-documented (see Manke, McGuire, Reiss, Hetherington, & Plomin, 1995), the relations of such factors, especially environmental factors such as adolescents’ ICT-related behavioral and motivational characteristics, with their social interactions in ICT-mediated contexts are under-researched. Such an examination is warranted to identify the critical ICT-related behavioral and motivational characteristics that are crucial for early adolescents’ healthy psychosocial development in the digital era.
1.1. Adolescents’ ICT-related behavioral characteristics and their use of ICT for social communicationICT-related behavioral characteristics may broadly relate not only to the availability of ICT at home and school but also to the use of ICT at home and school (see Goldhammer, Gniewosz, & Zylka, 2016). Although a large body of research has documented the positive relations of the availability and use of ICT at home and school with a variety of academic outcomes (e.g., Erdogdu and Erdogdu, 2015, Lee and Wu, 2012, Luu and Freeman, 2011), there is sparse research demonstrating the links between the availability and use of ICT at home and school and the use of ICT for social communication. Gross (2004) reported that adolescents who had access to the Internet at home and school tended to devote most of their online time to private communication, especially instant messaging. Even though e-mail was found to be a popular tool for online communication among the adolescent participants, they tended to spend relatively less time using other forms of online communication, such as chat and message board posting (Gross, 2004).Recently, Ang (2017) demonstrated that adolescents’ Internet habit strength was positively and significantly associated with their online social communication. Moreover, Subrahmanyam, Kraut, Greenfield, and Gross (2000) concluded that the use of home computers could also shape children’s social interactions and development. Jackson et al. (2006), in contrast, reported that adolescents who had access to the Internet at home tended to use the Internet more frequently for information gathering rather than for social communication. To the best of our knowledge, no study to date, however, has specifically examined the relations of early adolescents’ ICT-related behavioral characteristics, such as use of ICT for recreation, use of ICT during lessons at school, use of ICT for study purposes, use of specific ICT applications, and their learning of ICT tasks at school, with their use of ICT for social communication. Such an investigation is crucial for determining the pivotal roles that these ICT-related behavioral characteristics may play in promoting healthy psychosocial functioning and development among early adolescents.
1.2. Adolescents’ ICT-related motivational characteristics and their use of ICT for social communicationICT-related motivational characteristics include, among others, ICT self-efficacy as well as interest and enjoyment in using ICT (see Goldhammer et al., 2016). ICT self-efficacy refers to students’ confidence in their capabilities to perform simple as well as complex computer- and Internet-related tasks (Fraillon, Ainley, Schulz, Friedman, & Gebhardt, 2014). Hence, ICT self-efficacy can be further classified into self-efficacy in basic and advanced ICT skills (Fraillon at al., 2014).Despite a growing body of evidence attesting to the positive associations of ICT self-efficacy with ICT literacy (e.g., Rohatgi et al., 2016, Scherer et al., 2017), use of ICT for leisure (e.g., Tømte & Hatlevik, 2011), and achievement in various academic domains (e.g., Lee and Wu, 2012, Luu and Freeman, 2011) among adolescents, there is very limited evidence for a link between adolescents’ ICT self-efficacy and their use of ICT for social communication. Moreover, the very limited research findings documenting the relations between adolescents’ ICT self-efficacy and their use of ICT for social communication appear to be contradictory and inconclusive. For example, Livingstone and Helsper (2007) as well as Scherer et al. (2017) found that adolescents with higher levels of ICT self-efficacy tended to use ICT more frequently for online socializing; whereas Hinostroza, Matamala, Labbé, Claro, and Cabello (2015) reported that adolescents with higher levels of ICT self-efficacy tended to use ICT less frequently for online socializing. However, to the best of our knowledge, only one study has specifically examined whether or not adolescents’ interest and enjoyment in using ICT is related to their use of ICT for social communication (see Scherer et al., 2017). The authors found that adolescents with higher levels of interest and enjoyment in using ICT tended to use ICT more frequently for social communication. Nevertheless, the very small body of prior research examining the links between ICT-related behavioral as well as motivational characteristics and the use of ICT for social communication was primarily based on small samples, and did not adequately control for endogeneity. More theoretically and methodologically sound studies based on nationally and internationally representative samples are certainly warranted to better understand the critical roles that ICT-related behavioral and motivational factors play in early adolescents’ psychosocial well-being and development in the new digital era.In short, healthy face-to-face as well as ICT-mediated social interactions are indubitably integral to the healthy cognitive, emotional, and social development of adolescents (see Casale et al., 2013, Hari et al., 2015, Schilbach, 2015). However, the degree and the extent of such interactions, especially ICT-mediated social interactions, may vary greatly from individual to individual (see Fraillon et al., 2014, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2015a), partly due to huge variations in adolescents’ use of ICT for varied purposes across diverse contexts (see Scherer et al., 2017). Given the individual differences in adolescents’ ICT-mediated social interactions and their critical role in adolescent development, it is crucial to examine what factors, especially the malleable environmental factors, are associated with adolescents’ use of ICT for social interactions. Hence, the purpose of the present study was two-fold: first, to investigate the associations of early adolescents’ ICT-related behavioral characteristics with their frequency of use of ICT for social communication; and second, to examine the relations of early adolescents’ ICT-related motivational characteristics with their frequency of use of ICT for social communication. The following two research questions addressed the purpose of the study:1.To what extent are ICT-related behavioral characteristics, such as the availability and use of ICT at home and school, associated with the frequency of use of the ICT for social communication among early adolescents in 20 countries, after accounting for student-, school-, and country-level demographic characteristics?2.To what extent are ICT-related motivational characteristics, such as ICT self-efficacy as well as interest and enjoyment in using ICT, associated with the frequency of use of the ICT for social communication among early adolescents in 20 countries, after accounting for student-, school-, and country-level demographic characteristics?We hypothesized that ICT-related behavioral characteristics, such as the availability and use of ICT at home and school—Internet access at home, number of computers at home, the use of ICT for recreation, the use of ICT during lessons at school, the use of ICT for study purposes, the use of specific ICT applications, and the learning of ICT tasks at school—would be significantly and positively associated with the frequency of use of ICT for social communication (see Fig. 1). We also hypothesized that ICT-related motivational characteristics, such as ICT-self-efficacy and interest and enjoyment in using ICT, would be significantly and positively associated with the frequency of use of ICT for social communication (see Fig. 2).Download : Download high-res image (122KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The hypothesized three-level HLM model predicting the use of ICT for social communication from ICT-related behavioral characteristics.Download : Download high-res image (102KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The hypothesized three-level HLM model predicting the use of ICT for social communication from ICT-related motivational characteristics.
