Under hazy weather conditions, the light reflected from objects is absorbed by haze particles along the route of light, resulting in the attenuation. As for imaging, besides the signal light of interest, the camera also receives much undesired light scattered by haze particles, which is usually called the airlight [1], [2]. Images taken in such conditions usually have poor visibility and low contrast, and the detailed information is always lost, as well. To enhance the quality of hazy images, lots of groups engage in exploiting new dehazing methods and algorithms.
During past decades, many kinds of methods have been developed for dehazing images. These methods can be roughly divided into two categories according to the number of images used in the dehazing process. One is based on the single image method, which can accomplish haze removal only with single image [3], [4], [5]. This kind of methods can effectively improve the visibility and the contrast of hazy images. But sometimes some detailed information may be vanished and more computational time is cost. The other is based on the multi-image method. Among these kinds of methods, polarimetric dehazing methods are especially promising [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. It is known that the degradation of the visibility of hazy images is mainly caused by the airlight mentioned above. Fortunately, the airlight is always partially polarized [13], [14], and this feature can be used to estimate the radiance of it. Therefore, the quality of the image can be improved through removing the airlight radiance out. Schechner et al. [6] described the original idea of the polarimetric dehazing method in detail and adequately demonstrated that this method can effectively enhance the visibility of hazy images. Later, they focused on image visibility enhancement based on polarization and obtained very interesting results [8]. Mudge et al. [9] also involved in this field but their dehazing method is almost the same as Schechner’s. Furthermore, the visibility enhancement methods based on polarization have been extended to the underwater detection [15]. So far plenty of applications demonstrate that the polarimetric dehazing methods are robust and effective for handling images with poor visibility.
In general, two key steps are involved in the polarimetric dehazing algorithms. The first step is the estimation of the global atmospheric light radiance (A∞) which is one of the principal parameters in algorithms. The second step is the calculation of the airlight radiance (A) according to the degree of polarization (DOP) of the airlight (pA). So the estimation of pA is also very important. Usually, for simplicity A∞ is estimated from the brightest patch of the hazy images, and in fact it should be the brightest pixels in the sky region. Similarly, pA should be estimated by the pixels in the sky region. Thus the sky region should be extracted manually. It will be difficult to achieve dehazing process automatically when the images are taken randomly.
In this paper, to overcome the above drawbacks, a simple and automatic way, which is based on the dark channel prior technique, is proposed to estimate A∞ and A. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time to adopt the dark channel prior to estimate A in polarimetric imaging dehazing method. Furthermore, we creatively introduce a dynamic bias factor ε imposed on A∞, which can correct the estimation inaccuracy of the transmittance of atmosphere. According to the evaluation function–Entropy, the best dehazed image can be automatically obtained while the human-computer interaction is not considered during the dehazing process.
