Climate change is expected to impact ocean ecosystems and their fisheries in a number of known and unknown ways that will have significant impacts on those who depend upon ocean resources, particularly fishing communities. Fishing communities, scientists, and environmental decision makers are just beginning to understand what those impacts will be. In order to better understand the implications of those impacts, a considerable amount of additional research will be needed over the next few decades, but traditional research institutions (universities and government agencies) will be greatly challenged to keep pace with that need (Visser, 2008). Collaborative fisheries research conducted by scientific and fisheries partners and acceptance of industry-led research offer possibilities for supplementing available data, but come with considerable limitations. Through interviews with researchers and the fishing industry, this paper explores the opportunities and limitations of increasing collaborative and industry-driven research in the context of climate change for fisheries based out of Rhode Island, USA.
1.1. Climate change impacts in the Northwest AtlanticAlthough the science for understanding climate change impacts is still in its early stages, a number of impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems and their related fisheries have been identified. In addition to the changes in air and water temperature, there are also projected changes in patterns of ocean acidification, habitat loss, food webs, freshwater runoff, wind patterns, and more that can affect fisheries directly or indirectly (Doney et al., 2012, Doney et al., 2014, Hare et al., 2010). In the waters off the northeast United States, studies have found shifts in fish stock distribution (northward and into deeper waters: Pinsky et al., 2013, Nye et al., 2009) and species composition (Collie et al., 2008). In response to these pressures from climate change and other drivers, fishing communities will need to cope with and adapt to climate change pressures, which can range from diversifying locations, gears, and targeted species to opting out of fisheries entirely (Coulthard, 2009). While studies are starting to provide a clearer image of the effects of climate change on marine ecosystems and their fisheries, effects need to be further researched, better understood, and more deeply incorporated into management directives (Doney et al., 2014, Hare et al., 2010, Sumaila et al., 2011).
1.2. Advancing research collaborationsIn fisheries governance in New England, across the United States, and globally, there is a consistent call for stakeholder participation, even if it can mean different levels and depths of engagement (Johnson, 2011). For example, as the New England Fishery Management Council (NEFMC, 2016) describes, “The intent of the Council system is to maximize public participation in the management of a public resource …” Often, the stakeholders that are being called on for participation are a mix of the general public and “experts” who have a vested interest in the issue under consideration. While actual participation varies, in general, participants in fisheries governance tend to include representatives from the fishing industry, environmental non-governmental organizations, universities, and state and federal agencies.The inclusion of “experts” in these processes is seen as a way to legitimize decisions and subsequent political actions (Nenadovic and Epstein, 2016, Evers and Menkhoff, 2004, Collins and Evans, 2002). In the case of fisheries, this category of “experts” often refers to research scientists from government agencies, universities, or consulting companies, whereas the fishing community is considered separately as offering anecdotal information outside of the “expert” sphere (Hall-Arber and Pederson, 1999). This is seemingly contradictory to the popular definition of expert, which often relates directly to an individual's level of experience and familiarity with a topic (Collins and Evans, 2002). Those working in the fishing industry have often been taught by seasoned mentors and have extensive experience fishing various conditions throughout the seasons. But this firm line between “legitimate” expertise and earned experience seems to hold in many policymaking circles.While the value of local knowledge in fisheries management has been recognized for decades, a mismatch remains between the recognized value of local knowledge and its actual use (Mackinson, 2001, Nenadovic et al., 2012). One barrier to the incorporation of local knowledge is the reluctance on the part of managers to give credence to local knowledge equal to that of traditional biophysical science (Mackinson, 2001, Mackinson and Nøttestad, 1998). One distinct exception to the exclusion of fishers as “experts” is the work of Mackinson (2001:533), which includes fishers and First Nations peoples, along with managers and scientists as “experts and fishery professionals.” His work outlines a methodology for incorporating the practical, local knowledge of fishers and First Nations peoples with the scientific information and literature produced by fisheries scientists. Most notably, Mackinson (2001) found that the two types of knowledge were not contradictory, but were instead complementary in scope for furthering fisheries science. Other exceptions include Grant and Berkes (2007), in which fisher knowledge is considered as the expert system for investigating the longline fishery of Grenada, and Richmond (2013), who offers specific recommendations for incorporating indigenous expertise into fisheries policy and management.In New England, and other parts of the United States, cooperative research efforts between the fishing and research communities have begun to blur the lines of expertise and have advanced relationships that have historically been crippled by distrust and low credibility (Hartley and Robertson, 2009). These efforts integrate, to varying extents, the expertise of fishing and research partners in design, implementation, and communication of fisheries research (Hartley and Robertson, 2009, Kaplan and McCay, 2006). Past research by Hartley and Robertson, 2006, Hartley and Robertson, 2009 on cooperative fisheries research efforts has shown increased perceptions of credibility of the science by the fisher participants. It also showed more positive relationships between the fishing and research communities in terms of mutual understanding, trust, and likelihood of long-lasting partnerships. Further, scientists and researchers who participated in cooperative research efforts were more likely to engage in management efforts afterwards (Hartley and Robertson, 2006, Hartley and Robertson, 2009). While studies identify a number of benefits of cooperative management, participants from the fishing community in particular were less certain about how their data would be integrated into fisheries management. This skepticism colored their perceptions of the success of the overall efforts (Hartley and Robertson, 2006).Johnson (2011) analyzed a cooperative fisheries research effort in the U.S. squid fishery. She found the engagement of fishers from the beginning of and through the research effort resulted in improved integration of scientist and fisher knowledge. This integration was facilitated by critical “boundary spanners” who facilitated interactions and helped the two groups to better understand what was needed and communicate with one another. In another study of northeast collaborative fisheries research, the two-way flow of information between fishers and scientists is important in cooperative management, which enables better participation in management and improved understanding of the scientific process by fishers (Johnson, 2010). Johnson (2010) also identified improved management outcomes because of improved trust and understanding. In their analysis in the northeast United States of the Trawl Survey Advisory Panel, Johnson and McCay (2012) found improved interactional communication between fishers and scientists who had participated in past collaborative research efforts. While this improved communication was important, it was not enough to maintain the relationships necessary for the success of the panel. Other limits in communication and transparency, such as perceived one-way communication, weakened the institutional arrangements and resulted in ending the panel.In addition to improvements in communication between scientists and researchers, Johnson and van Densen (2007) identified a number of other benefits of collaborative research. These benefits include reduced costs and improved capacity to increase the breadth of data coverage as well as improved quality of the data. The collaborative research also resulted in improved research relevance for management. Nenadovic et al. (2012) also identified improvements in the spatial resolution of data because of the collaboration with fishers.
