Nowadays, multimedia-based medical technology is becoming a hot topic, which can explore and utilize multimedia information from multiple sources, including video streams, images [1], voice, heartbeat, breath data [2], [3] and sleep condition [4]. Videos and images are important multimedia sources in real application scenarios, so numerous relevant algorithms with image or video processing have been proposed to solve various problems [5], [6], [7]. They can be extended to find their ways in medical use [8].
Gesture and gesture recognition terms are heavily encountered in communication [9], [10], [11]. Gestures are the motion of the body or physical action formed by the user in order to convey some meaningful information. Gesture recognition is the process of making user's gestures known to the system [12], [13]. It can be applied as an advanced medical technology which could help the patients with physical health examination by testing their gestures, make their communication much easier for the deaf-mutes or optimize the human computer interaction in medical care. With various sensors to obtain mass videos or images and increasing demanding that the medical care should be more intelligent, the gesture recognition is a novel and important applied point in the future medical technology.
Hand gesture has the natural ability to represent ideas and actions very easily, thus using these different hand shapes identified by gesture recognition system and interpreted to generate the corresponding event, has the potential to provide a more natural interface to the computer system [14]. Handwriting is a crucial aspect in hand gestures. Traditional handwriting on electronic equipments requires direct touch and that limits the users' gestures a lot. Nowadays, natural handwriting in the air is a hot topic and people are trying to realize free inputting into the computers. The research will benefit the deaf-mutes a lot because it can make their communication with others more easily.
According to different collection devices, the handwriting recognition systems can be generally classified into the data-glove-based and vision-based system. Glove based methods have a lot of limits on the users so that they cannot be applied in large scale. Vision-based methods attract more attention in the wave of the future research and three dimensional recognition. With binocular cameras or other depth detecting equipments, we can obtain the depth information which makes 3D hand gesture recognition and character recognition possible [15], [16].
In this paper, we propose a natural 3D character recognition algorithm. At first, we define two kinds of gestures which separately indicate valid and invalid inputting. When the valid inputting gesture is detected, we will record the hand's locating information using disparity principle and draw out its trajectory. The gesture detection is kept going at the same time. Then we can get the user's written character in the computer. The algorithm is made to adapt to angle variation robustly in the application.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we briefly introduce the related work in Section 2. The proposed hand model for feature extraction is presented in Section 3 and gesture analysis is in Section 4. Section 5 shows the experimental results in details.Finally, we conclude this paper in Section 6.
