The technological advances and ease of technology access in education enable teachers to integrate Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in their classroom settings to improve the creativity and performance of the learners. Even in some contexts, teachers feel “under pressure to use technology to prepare students to live in a technologically interconnected, globalized world” (Chun, Kern, & Smith, 2016, p. 65). In the faculties of education and K-12 schools, several studies have been carried out, first, to enable teachers/prospective teachers to use ICT effectively in their lives and, second, to empower them to integrate ICT into their teaching environment. Despite all these efforts and sources, many studies emphasize that ICT integration has not been at the desired level (Aslan & Zhu, 2017; Umar & Hassan, 2015; Williams, 2017). In almost all countries, individual and nationwide trainings are planned and implemented to ensure the integration of ICT in educational settings. While some of these programs focus on the integration process of ICT in the teaching environment, others focus on teachers' personal improvement in ICT. Though, it is emphasized by many researchers that technology mentoring is an effective method to ensure teachers' use of ICT in both their daily lives and instructions (Hobson, Ashby, Malderez, & Tomlinson, 2009; Mathur, Gehrke, & Kim, 2013). However, the literature lacks providing teachers with the opportunities that enable them to freely and flexibly experience both sides of the training of ICT use. Therefore, with the current study, it is aimed to explore the preferences and the ways of decision making of teachers when supported with the ICThelp through technology mentoring for two semesters.
1.1. Reasons for problems in technology integrationThe number of training and seminars on the use of ICT in education is increasing all over the world. However, the integration of technology in educational settings may not result in success as planned all the time due to some challenges or unexpected reasons (Williams, 2017). First, insufficient infrastructure does not allow teachers to use ICT effectively since not all educational institutions are equipped even with basic technological devices, or the configuration of the devices may not meet the requirements of teachers. The main challenges related to the insufficient infrastructure can be listed as unsustainable power supply and the lack of computers, and Internet connectivity (Kihoza, Zlotnikova, Bada, & Kalegele, 2016). These challenges are completely related to the hardware issues, and this might also be considered as the financial problems of the institutions. If they are supported financially, this challenge could easily be removed.Second, the attitudes and beliefs of teachers might also affect the achievement of ICT integration. Although there are a significant number of studies indicating the positive attitudes of teachers towards technology, this point cannot be generalized for all teachers (Tondeur, van Braak, Ertmer, & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2017). The negative beliefs and attitudes of teachers towards technology can easily hinder the achievement of technology integration in classroom settings. Some teachers claim that they do not need to use ICT and advocate the effectiveness of direct instruction and traditional teaching methods (Lim & Chan, 2007).Another challenge is closely related to teachers' workload and the requirements of the curriculum. Since teachers are expected to carry out many bureaucratic formalities, the integration of ICT may sometimes be perceived as a procedure that increases the workload of teachers. Khanlari (2016) found that some teachers avoided integrating robotics into their mathematics classes, although it was proved in the literature that robotics could improve the problem-solving skills of the learners (Gura, 2012). In that study, teachers believed that the use of ICT required extra time for planning activities, too much time for training, and more effort for solving technical problems. These obstacles were considered to increase the workload of the teachers.Teachers may also be in need of both technological and administrative support while using technological devices and platforms for teaching purposes. As mentioned by Khanlari (2016), teachers had to spend too much time on solving technological problems, and in some cases, they were not competent enough to solve the problems on their own. At this point, they might need someone, a technician may be, to solve basic technology problems in the classroom. If they frequently experience technical problems that negatively affect classroom activities, they could easily postpone or give up using ICT in their teaching environment.Besides the insufficient infrastructure, all challenges mentioned above, such as teachers' attitudes and beliefs, teachers' workload, lack of technological and administrative support are closely related to teachers' competencies in using ICT. The undergraduate programs for teacher education for all disciplines cannot equip pre-service teachers with competencies for ICT (Dinçer, 2018; Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018). Although they offer courses related to Instructional Technologies, these courses are not enough to train pre-service teachers in terms of technology integration. Moreover, these courses usually cannot go beyond teaching technical skills. This issue was mentioned by Peters (2006) as follows:“We observed that the students were frustrated by trying to learn technical and pedagogical competencies in a single course because they had a lack of preparation in the former. This divergence also became frustrating for students and professors alike because too much time was spent on technical skills development rather than learning how to integrate these skills in one's teaching” (p. 156).Since many teachers could not receive sufficient training at the undergraduate programs, they have to develop themselves professionally when they start their teaching career. Alternatively, as the technologies/techniques used in education change very rapidly, teachers need to receive appropriate in-service training in order to follow and adopt these new developments. However, many of these in-service training activities do not include any follow-up sessions; they are usually designed as one-shot events; they include theoretical information rather than practical and hands-on activities (Harris, Mishra, & Koehler, 2009; Nami, Marandi, & Sotoudehnama, 2016; Çetin, 2016), and they ignore the needs and preferences of the teachers (Jones & Dexter, 2018; Lucas et al., 2017; Ndongfack, 2015). The characteristics of these seminars could not be as effective as desired by the policymakers (Karaseva, Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt, & Siibak, 2018).
1.2. Teachers' role in technology integrationAn ever-changing world requires the parties of education to reshape their roles and responsibilities in the teaching and learning process. The role of teachers is undeniable in the integration of new developments in education. Recent developments affecting education have been considered as the adaptation of technological innovations. Hence, teachers have enormous responsibilities during the integration of ICT use in their classrooms. Najdabbasi and Pedaste (2014) state that teachers' knowledge and beliefs about ICT use is crucial in implementing ICT in their classrooms. Teachers have the roles providing students with technology-related knowledge, encourage students for ICT use in their learning process, and creating an environment where students can use ICT to solve their problems. It has also been known that the integration of ICT varies from teacher to teacher and from school to school, depending on several factors such as the teacher's knowledge, beliefs, self-efficacy, and school culture (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010).Integrating ICT in their classrooms, teachers need to have positive beliefs about using ICT in their teaching environment (Lim & Chan, 2007; Tondeur et al., 2017). Teachers change their beliefs about the use of ICT if they see the benefits of ICT integration in their students' learning. In order for the change to happen in teachers' beliefs, at first, they should start to use technological tools (any hardware and software). Some obstacles prevent teachers from putting ICT in their instructional materials, even though they believe the benefits of using ICT in teaching and learning. For example, teachers sometimes do not feel confident in using ICT in their classrooms, which may be more important than knowledge of ICT itself (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010).With the integration of ICT in the classroom, the roles of teachers and students have been reshaped according to the philosophy of learning and teaching that the teacher holds (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010). If the teacher has a view towards teacher-centered learning, then he/she tends to use ICT for teaching purposes (e.g., presentation of the content via PowerPoint). On the other hand, if the teacher holds a more student-centered view of learning, then he/she tends to create an environment where students have the opportunity to explore the content of the course through technological tools (any kind of hardware and software). Therefore, changing the roles of teacher and learner in the classroom is not directly related to the use of ICT as many researchers have attributed (Ertmer, Ottenbreit-Leftwich, & Tondeur, 2015; Kim, Kim, Lee, Spector, & DeMeester, 2013; Wang, 2002); rather, it is related to the teacher's philosophy of learning and teaching. ICT integration requires drastic changes in teachers' and students' roles, teaching strategies, and the educational environment (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010). Before discussing different teaching practices to maximize the effectiveness of ICT, it is essential to consider the factors that affect teachers' decision to use ICT in their classrooms (Baek, Jung, & Kim, 2008; Inan & Lowther, 2010).
1.3. Technology-related teacher educationWith the presence of ICT in educational contexts and changing teacher roles, effective teacher training related to ICT is required for teachers to be equipped with the skills necessary for a successful ICT integration into the teaching and learning process (Williams, 2017). Researchers (e.g., Dinçer, 2018; Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018; Usun, 2009) have shown that teacher education programs are not sufficient to ensure that teachers are competent in integrating ICT into practice. In ICT-related courses in teacher education programs, the focus is generally on using ICT without considering how to integrate ICT into the teaching and learning process of a specific subject matter (Røkenes & Krumsvik, 2016; Tondeur et al., 2012). These courses mostly focus on technical skills without enough attention to its relationship with content and pedagogy and to the complexity of contextual factors (Harris et al., 2009; Røkenes & Krumsvik, 2016). A study conducted with 814 pre-service English teachers concluded that 66% of the participants thought that ICT training during their teacher education programs was not practice-oriented, and 70% of the participants thought that ICT training they had taken was not applicable to language teaching (Korucu-Kis & Ozmen, 2019b). In the same vein, Tondeur et al. (2012) mentioned that if teachers' ICT knowledge and skills were targeted without relating them to teachers' subject matters, this knowledge and skills would likely be isolated and unused.With the promise of the TPACK framework (Mishra & Koehler, 2006), which states the need to make ICT an integral part of pedagogical content knowledge, the focus of teacher education programs has begun to change from pure ICT courses into ICT courses for instructional purposes. Recent studies have shown that pre-service teachers started to be provided with the ICT courses for instructional purposes, for example, by inquiring ICT to solve a learning problem (Korucu-Kis & Ozmen, 2019a) or by exemplifying how a technological resource can be used for a specific context (Armfield & Blocher, 2019). Recent research (e.g., Korucu-Kis & Ozmen, 2019b; Røkenes & Krumsvik, 2016) shows that the number of these changes is not enough due to insufficient knowledge and skills of prospective teachers in using ICT for teaching purposes.The ICT-related training programs for in-service teachers (Erdem, 2019; Çetin, 2016; Nami et al., 2016) have been generally provided as one-shot sessions without ongoing support in teaching environments or accommodating ICT integration experience in teachers' own context. In these trainings, a limited number of in-service teachers are assigned, and they receive one-shot training sessions outside of their own institutions. However, preparing the teachers who are already accustomed to teaching with non-digital technologies such as paper, pencil, and board through traditional methods is a critical issue (Williams, 2017) for such training. ICT training provided in teachers' own context accommodates teachers with the chance to experience the potential benefits of ICT from the first-hand and manage ICT integration process by overcoming technical problems (Mishra, Ha, Parker, & Clase, 2019). Therefore, teachers should apply and experience how ICT-related activities work in their own educational settings so that they believe the value of ICT integration (Ottenbreit-Leftwich, Glazewski, Newby, & Ertmer, 2010). These kinds of experiences foster ICT transfer into teachers' own contexts (Mishra, Ha, Parker, & L.Clase, 2019).
1.4. Mentoring and teachers' professional and personal developmentMentoring in both pre-service and in-service teacher education is “one of the most important strategies to support novices learning to teach” (Wang, 2002, p. 52) and it was found that it influences confidence, self-esteem, attitude and the ability to teach (Hobson et al., 2009; Mathur et al., 2013). Several institutions have adopted the idea of using the power of undergraduate and graduate students' energy and expertise in helping faculty to address their needs for technology breakdown, maintenance, and training, and these institutions have used the mentoring approach successfully for many years (Pamuk & Thompson, 2009). In this mentoring type, called technology mentoring, while graduate or undergraduate students are in the mentor role, faculty members or teachers are mentees. With technology mentoring, it is assumed that the young generations have more advanced knowledge, skills, and experience with the latest technologies. Technology mentors provide just-in-time support in designing instructional materials and technological breakdowns. Besides, they provide different models and ways of teaching with ICT in situated contexts (Kopcha, 2010). Overall, the technology mentors help their mentees (teachers) to meet their needs in using ICT to enhance teaching and learning. As Sánchez-García, Marcos, GuanLin, and Escribano (2013) stated, receiving ICT training with the guidance of mentors would help to ensure the effective use of ICT in the classroom.Technology mentoring has been found to overcome many of the common barriers to ICT integration in education and improve teachers' use of ICT for instruction (Sánchez-García et al., 2013). Lowther, Inan, Strahl, and Ross (2008) conducted a study on teachers' attitudes towards and competencies in ICT with 927 teachers in 26 different schools. They concluded that mentored teachers used ICT in their classrooms more confidently, and they practiced more student-centered use of ICT than non-mentored teachers. Similarly, Polselli (2002) reported that teachers who received mentoring improved their comfort levels with ICT and their practice with ICT integration. In-classroom mentoring after a workshop style training was found to be effective in implementing student-centered use of ICT. Zhao and Bryant (2006) indicated that teachers who did not take ICT mentoring were less likely to practice ICT in student-centered learning environments. In a study implemented with 18 elementary school teachers, Kopcha (2012) stated that mentors play an important role in increasing teachers' positive beliefs not only for ICT but also for the use of ICT in teaching. On the other hand, changing habits of teaching practice with non-technological ways takes time for teachers first to understand the structure of ICT and then to attempt to implement ICT for setting the learning environment. As Desimone (2009) emphasizes, while putting a new perspective over own old teaching practice, teachers need a sufficient amount of time to tackle professional development activities at their own pace over a period by spending the necessary time in specific activities.
1.5. Statement of the problemIt is seen that the programs provided to teachers during the ICT integration process generally involve one-shot training, which is not enough to encourage them to feel sufficient and secure to integrate ICT in their classrooms. It is believed that teachers feel competent and confident enough to enable ICT integration in their classes if the content, level, duration, and speed of training are left to their preferences. Moreover, it is thought that technology mentoring can provide these flexibilities for teachers so that they can design their own education at their own pace according to their personal and instructional needs. For this reason, one-to-one teacher-mentor matching was designed, and the progress of the process was left to the teachers' preferences. Thus, the study was guided by the following questions:●How do secondary school teachers and their mentors agree on the content of the mentoring process?●What are the preferences of secondary school teachers in the process of individualized technology mentoring?●What are the components that constitute the teachers' preferences?
