Age estimation, i.e., predicting the age from a face image, has long been an active research topic in computer vision, with many applications such as age-based face retrieval [1], precision advertising [2], intelligent surveillance [3], human-computer interaction (HCI) [4] and internet access control [2].
The typical methodology for age estimation from face images is to extract carefully designed handcrafted features representing the aging information and subsequently solve an age estimator learning problem. Widely used features include local binary pattern (LBP) [5] and Gabor features [6], with some further processing models like the anthropometric model [7], AGing pattErn Subspace (AGES) [8], and the age manifold model [9]. To learn an age estimator, most approaches use either a multi-class classification framework or a regression framework. In multi-class classification the age values are treated as independent labels and a classifier is learnt to predict the age [1], [10], [8]. However, age estimation is more of a regression problem than a multi-class classification problem due to the continuity of the age space. Based on this observation, many regression based approaches are proposed [9], [11], [12], [13].
Although these existing methods achieve promising results, the age estimation problem is far from being solved. The main challenges come from the large appearance variations of face images. Fig. 1 shows some face images from the benchmark datasets used in this work. We can see that the face images may be obtained from people of different races, genders, and under conditions of large pose variations, bad illumination, and heavy makeups, which make it difficult to manually design aging features that are robust to all these disturbances. In addition, due to the difficulty of collecting and labeling datasets that contain sufficient samples for all possible ages, the age distributions of most available benchmark datasets in the literature are imbalanced which makes accurate age estimation even harder.Download : Download high-res image (577KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Examples of faces in the two benchmark datasets used in this work. Top row: the Morph II dataset. Bottom row: the WebFace dataset.
In this work, we try to solve the aforementioned challenges in human age estimation. Instead of manually design features, we use a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract effective and discriminative aging features from raw input face images without any handcrafting. To combat the sample imbalance problem, we propose a novel cumulative hidden layer (Section 3.1). In contrast with the mainstream CNN models which directly map the last hidden layer to the output layer, we insert a cumulative hidden layer before the output layer. This cumulative hidden layer is supervised by a point-wise cumulative signal which encodes the target age labels continuously. Thanks to this cumulative hidden layer, our model can not only learn from one face itself but also from the faces with neighbouring ages and thus alleviate the sample imbalance problem.
In order to learn more effective aging features, we further propose a novel comparative ranking layer (Section 3.2) which is supervised by a pair-wise comparative signal, i.e., who is older. The intuition behind this is that it is difficult to tell accurately the age of one face, but it is relatively easy to tell who is older, given two faces. For example, in Fig. 1, it is hard to guess the exact age of these faces, but it is relatively easy to see that the faces to the right of the figure are older than the faces to the left. This comparative signal helps our model to learn the general concept of “old and young”. This concept is valuable for the exact age estimation task. We argue that this auxiliary pair-wise signal facilitates aging feature learning and improves the performance of the main age estimation task. As one face image can be used in many different pairs, we can make full use of the training data. It's worth noting that both the point-wise and pair-wise supervision signals can be obtained directly from the age labels, so our model does not need any additional manual labeling.
There are three main contributions in this work:
1.We propose a novel cumulative hidden layer which alleviates the sample imbalance problem and thus improves age estimation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a new layer for the CNN has been designed to combat the sample imbalance problem in human age estimation literatures.2.We propose a novel comparative ranking layer which facilitates aging feature learning and thus further improve age estimation. We believe that this is the first work that explicitly take account of the pair-wise information between faces during training for human age estimation.3.By incorporating these two novel layers, we obtain a deep age estimation model which outperforms by a large margin all previous age estimation methods on two of the largest benchmark datasets.
