Cloud computing is a recent technology that has received attention from governments and a variety of industries, including medicine, education, entertainment, and other economic sectors (Mircea & Andreescu, 2011, pp. 1–15). In cloud computing, hardware and software provide services to end users based on the users' needs (Shawish & Salama, 2014). Cloud computing offers many advantages, such as saving the cost of the initial investments in an information technology (IT) infrastructure setup. It also offers high performance as well as fast time-to-market and disaster management capabilities (Jadeja & Modi, 2012), which allows for the mobility and flexibility of information (Kitanov & Davcev, 2012). Users can operate the software, platform, and infrastructure provided by a cloud computing provider at a low cost (Zhang, Cheng, & Boutaba, 2010). Furthermore, cloud computing supplies resources to users as on-demand services (Dinh, Lee, Niyato, & Wang, 2013).
In addition to the evolution of cloud computing and the rapid progress made in recent technological advancements, the number of users of mobile devices and smartphone applications has increased due to the rising prevalence of these applications (ICT Indicators in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Q1 2015), 2015). Mobile devices have become an increasingly popular and essential part of people's daily lives (Babu, Prabhavati, & Ravi, 2014), (Zydney & Warner, 2016). This development suggests that the dream of having “information at your fingertips anywhere, anytime, and in anyway” has become a reality (Babu et al., 2014). In modern society, mobile devices that provide Internet access make life easier and more convenient (Rajkumar, 2016). The rapid progress made in the development of mobile computing also applies to IT development (Satyanarayanan, 2010). However, compared to personal computers (PCs) and laptops, mobile devices still face obstacles in terms of having restricted capabilities (Babu et al., 2014) (Gupta & Gupta, 2012), (i.e., storage, battery life, and bandwidth) (Satyanarayanan, 2010), communications (i.e., mobility) (Satyanarayanan, 1996), environment (scalability, availability, and heterogeneity), and security (privacy and reliability) (Kitanov & Davcev, 2012). These limitations impede the service quality (Dinh et al., 2013). Therefore, improving the capabilities of mobile devices is imperative for mobile computing. As a result of the explosion of mobile applications and the support of cloud computing for mobile users, mobile cloud computing (MCC) has been introduced; MCC integrates cloud computing and the mobile environment to address the limitations of mobile computing (Gayathri & Srinivas, 2014). MCC is defined as “an integration of cloud computing technology with mobile devices to make the mobile devices resource-full in terms of computational power, memory, storage, energy, and context awareness” (Khan, Othman, Madani, & Khan, 2014). MCC will become increasingly influential because it consolidates the benefits of mobile and cloud computing, thereby providing optimum services for mobile users (Prasad, Gyani, & Murti, 2012).
Different mobile cloud applications have incorporated the benefits of MCC, such as mobile commerce, mobile gaming, mobile healthcare, and mobile learning (m-learning) (Wang, Chen, &Wang, 2014). Education no longer relies on traditional teaching methods; instead, it makes use of new technologies and forms of learning, such as m-learning (Jain, Srivastava, & Tyagi, 2012). M-learning contributes to the learning process by offering ubiquitous property that allows learners to access the information that they need anytime and anywhere using handheld devices, such as mobile phones and personal digital assistants (Ozdamli & Uzunboylu, 2015). Furthermore, m-learning includes attractive features, such as efficiency for learners, cost effectiveness, online connectivity and sharing, and learning that is student-centered (Chauhan & Kumar, 2013). Mobile technologies open avenues that education and training institutions can use to offer new and unusual modes of learning. In fact, many universities and training systems have started to adopt m-learning services as essential components of their educational systems.
The development of future mobile services for end users must consider the growing capability and complexity of m-learning applications and mobile devices. To make appropriate use of mobile services, the gaps between human abilities and mobile devices must be filled (Englert & Glass, 2006). A powerful solution is to utilize m-learning applications to allow a more normal, user–machine communication and interaction. End users can be provided with interfaces that are suited to their needs in specific contexts. Users can select suitable interaction styles with m-learning applications, which present visual information that includes text, graphics, and auditory features (Shaun, 2014); these are known as multimodal human–computer interfaces. A multimodal interface refers to “applications or systems that combine multiple modalities of input and output” (Kurkovsky, 2009). These interfaces are widely accepted because they allow users to select the interaction pattern that is ideal for the specific application (Kvale & Warakagoda, 2010). This multimodality adapts to the diverse needs of users in varying contexts, enhancing the dependability of the interaction by applying redundant information (Kurkovsky, 2009). The information is presented in a way that is suitable for students. Cloud-based m-learning technology with multimodal functionalities helps to normalize and enhance the learning processes of young students and adult students (Seliaman & Al-Turki, 2012) as well as those with special educational needs (Papavasiliou, Saridaki, Mourlas, & Van Isacker, 2014).
A common special educational need that is classified as a learning difficulty is dyslexia (Al Rowais, Wald, & Wills, 2013). Dyslexia is a language-based learning disability with a neurological origin. Those with dyslexia experience difficulty in spelling, reading, and writing, all of which vary among different language orthographies (Anoual & Abdelhak, 2014). Approximately 15–20% of the global population has a linguistic learning disability, and 70–80% of the individuals within this population have dyslexia (Rello, 2014). Therefore, it is mandatory to provide educational support for students with dyslexia. This circumstance necessitates specific interventions as well as understanding and awareness. It is important to adopt multimodality functions (combined with m-learning, cloud-based technology) that examine not only the needs of learners with dyslexia but also their preferred learning styles. This action would improve the education of students with dyslexia and increase their motivation in the learning process.
In this research, the authors consider the lack of an effective, multimodal, user-friendly m-learning tool that is based on cloud computing for primary students with dyslexia. A novel m-learning tool is presented that provides multimodality functions that are tailored to the different needs of students with dyslexia. The tool empowers these students and helps them to learn effectively.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related work and identifies the details of the problem statement. Section 3 illustrates the theoretical framework. Section 4 presents the development, implementation, and evaluation of the proposed tool. Section 5 concludes the research.
