In 2015, nearly 25 million adults in the United States reported illicit drug use in the past month, and nearly 65 million adults reported binge alcohol use in the past month. Treatment initiation was low among substance users in need of treatment, with only 14% of those needing treatment receiving treatment services (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, 2016). Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) has emerged as a favored framework to identify and refer at-risk individuals to treatment. The White House, Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), and World Health Organization (WHO) promote SBIRT as an evidence-based intervention in settings such as emergency rooms, medical offices, schools, and specialty treatment programs (Humeniuk et al., 2010, The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, 2012; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Office of the Surgeon General, 2016). When implemented as a brief intervention (5–10 min), SBIRT has been shown to reduce risky alcohol use in adult primary care (Moyer, 2013), but does not garner the same results for illicit drug use (Hingson and Compton, 2014, Roy-Byrne et al., 2014, Saitz, 2014). A recent review of 13 randomized trials found that SBIRT does not improve alcohol treatment initiation rates (Glass et al., 2015); however, no such studies exist on treatment initiation for drug use. More research needs to explore whether SBIRT influences treatment initiation, which is often considered a precursor to changes in drug use.
Related research on brief counseling (2–4 sessions) provides robust support for the effectiveness of adaptations of motivational interviewing (MI) at reducing both alcohol and drug use, as well as increasing treatment initiation. MI has been widely validated as a stand-alone treatment, as a precursor to more extensive treatment, or as a clinical style for delivering other components, such as tailored feedback (Hettema, Steele, & Miller, 2005). There is also emerging evidence that MI can improve treatment compliance for individuals in the criminal justice system (McMurran, 2009). Challenges to the dissemination of MI (and SBIRT in general) include the difficulty of sustaining quality practice over time (Hall, Staiger, Simpson, Best, & Lubman, 2016). One solution is to use technology-based interventions that do not rely on provider availability or skill level. In fact, there is a substantial literature on the effectiveness of technology-based interventions at reducing substance use and related risk behaviors in primary care and specialty treatment settings (Marsch, Carroll, & Kiluk, 2014).
Of the nearly 5 million adults under community supervision (i.e., probation and parole) in the United States (Kaeble, Maruschak, & Bonczar, 2015), as many as 60 to 80% are substance-involved (Feucht & Gfroerer, 2011). Nearly 3.5 million individuals under community supervision are estimated to be in need of substance abuse treatment (Taxman, Perdoni, & Harrison, 2007), but only 17% access treatment services (Karberg & James, 2005). Improved rates of treatment initiation could significantly reduce failures on community supervision, which fuel the use of jail or prison incarceration as responses to continued drug use (Phelps, 2013). Technology-based interventions may be particularly well suited to justice settings where the workforce has limited training in behavioral health (Bonta et al., 2011, Chadwick et al., 2015) and there are relatively few treatment resources available (Taxman, Perdoni, & Caudy, 2013). One study of a prison-based substance abuse computer education program found that inmates had comparable attendance at a computerized intervention and similar gains in coping skills as traditional counseling groups (Chaple et al., 2014).
This study reports on a randomized controlled trial comparing the efficacy of an in-person MI intervention, a motivational computer intervention, or standard probation intake to encourage treatment initiation and reduce substance use among substance-involved probationers in Dallas, Texas and Baltimore City, Maryland.
