Face is a universal biological feature available in all human beings and is one of the most commonly used biological feature for person identification. Face recognition is an active research area in the field of computer vision, artificial intelligence, pattern recognition and biometrics [1]. Face recognition has several advantages over other biometric modalities such as fingerprint, iris, pamprint and so on. Besides being natural and nonintrusive, the most important advantage of face recognition is that it can be captured at a distance and in a friendly manner. In the last few decades many face recognition methods have been proposed and developed. However, the performance of such face recognition methods is severely impacted in the presence of occlusion, illumination and expression changes [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. The extraction of optimal features and efficient methods for classification are two major steps of a face recognition system. Hence, in order to improve the performance of face recognition system, it is crucial to find a good feature extractor [6], [7], [8], [9] and an effective classifier [1], [10], [11], [12]. Further it is also necessary to reduce dimensionality of the extracted feature space in order to increase the efficiency and robustness of the algorithm during its classification process.
Recently, many methods for dimensionality reduction of feature space have been developed and proposed to improve the recognition accuracy and speed of face recognition [2], [3]. These face recognition methods can be classified into holistic or local feature based (component based) methods [4]. The holistic (appearance based) methods involve a single vector which represents the entire facial features in a high dimensional space. Whereas local features based methods rely on the individual components of face image such as eyes, mouth and nose prior to performing face recognition. In both holistic and local feature based methods, representation of facial features in a lower dimension is a challenging task. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is one of traditional methods used for lower dimensional representation of the face features. The PCA based methods involve converting original face image matrices into a high-dimensional covariance matrix and it is difficult to evaluate the covariance matrix accurately due to its large size. Hence PCA based methods require high computation time and suffer from poor discriminatory power for large set of training samples. In order to overcome these issues, other techniques such as a two-dimensional Principal Component Analysis (2DPCA), Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [13], Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) [14], Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) [15], Kernel Linear Discriminant Analysis (KLDA) [16], and so on are proposed by many researchers. The 2DPCA method is based on the matrix rather than vectors and it directly computes covariance matrix of face samples without conversion from matrix to vector. The LDA is another dimensionality reduction method to record a great performance in face recognition compared to other methods. It provides a small set of features that carry the most relevant information for classification purposes. However, the performance efficiency of these methods are based on the statistical distribution of the data or the manifold embedding of the neighborhoods and these methods require recomputation of base vectors each time new face samples are added to the database. To overcome these limitations, alternative appearance based methods have been proposed by Hiremath P. S. et al., 2005 [17] and others.
In the recent years, many appearance based face recognition systems are developed to reduce the computation time that is required for classification of face images [18]. The appearance based face recognition systems use face image pixel intensity values directly as the feature values for recognition and are represented using single valued variable. But such single valued variables may not be able to capture the variation of feature values of the images of the same subject and will also have high dimensional features data. One of the technique adapted by researchers to develop efficient system with reduced number features is methodology of feature learning. Feature learning or active learning plays a major role to discriminately represent or construct training image data (extracted feature) to improve the performance of classification task [6], [7], [8], [9]. Hence, recently a number of active learning methods have been proposed which combine representiveness and informativeness of training samples to attain better classification accuracy [7]. Chong Peng et al., 2017, propose a supervised feature learning model for classification of both low and high dimensional data [10]. The technique estimates regression vector using a discriminative regression approach to estimate the similarity between the test data and training data. However, classification task becomes challenging, when low or high dimensional image data are affected by distortions such as illumination, pose variation, presence of occlusion and geometrical variations etc. [11]. To handle such a class of distortions, a mathematical framework for multiclass classification of high dimensional image data has been proposed. The minimax framework estimates a optimal representation model that minimizes the fitting error under listed distortions to the data in a application of interest. Further, categorical information is derived based on the estimated model and regression models used for classification [11].
In such a case, symbolic objects offer a formal methodology to represent such variable information about the face images. Some of the recent works such as a symbolic PCA [17], a symbolic KPCA [19] and symbolic LDA [18] approach for face recognition are reported. In which training face images are represented by symbolic objects and which are further projected into the compressed subspace i.e. face symbolic objects are represented by interval valued variables. City block, Euclidian, Mahalanobis and Cosine similarity measures are used for similarity analysis between trained symbolic objects and test symbolic object [17], [18], [19]. However these methods have not employed symbolic similarity analysis approaches as described in [20]. Hence, in the proposed work a symbolic data modeling approach for face recognition using modified form of content based similarity measure is employed.
Many frequency domain methods have been proposed to enhance the performance of the human face recognition system. These methods transform the face images into a new domain to achieve a higher level of class separability. The fourier transform based approaches demonstrate the advantages over the spatial domain methods [21]. Fourier descriptor, moments and fourier-mellin filter have been proposed [12], [22] for change in domain. These aforementioned techniques provide good invariance theories, but they suffer from either computational complexity or accuracy problems [23]. Alternative methods such as Pseudo Polar Fourier Transform (PPFFT) [24], [25] and USFFT (Unequally Spaced Fast Fourier transform) [26] have been developed to increase accuracy and decrease the computational complexity. The pseudo-polar fourier transform based on the definition of a polar-like 2D grid provides a faster fourier computation [24]. Fourier-based methods are robust to noise and time varying illumination disturbances present in the images [21] and such domain features are also invariant to scale and rotation. Hence polar FFT features employed in the proposed work can effectively overcome variations (such as expression change, illumination change and presence of occlusion) of face images as compared to spatial domain methods such as PCA and KPCA. The PCA and KPCA tend to suffer from slight variations in alignment which can cause large differences in feature representation and classification. Since each class of face images are represented by upper and lower bound of polar FFT features, hence the proposed technique doesn't require recomputation of base vectors each time new face samples are added to the database i.e. the discriminative power of proposed method is able to characterize compact separable inter and intra class discriminability in face features with less recomputation burden than LDA based method. Both PCA and LDA involve eigen value decomposition, which is extremely time-consuming for high dimensional vectors [27]. Hence the proposed polar FFT features based symbolic modeling of face features technique outperforms PCA, KPCA and LDA in terms of discriminability and efficiency.
In the proposed work a spectral domain feature extraction algorithm for novel appearance based discriminative method (similar to LDA, weighted pseudo-zernike moment method) for face recognition is proposed, which effectively exploits the local spatial variations in a face image such as illumination, expression and inclusion of occlusion. For the purpose of feature extraction, the proposed methodology uses a technique associated with fourier analysis in which the set of frequencies is equispaced when viewed in polar coordinates as proposed by Averbuch et al., 2006 [24]. Further, the dominant magnitudes of polar FFT are converted into 1D P-FFT. The maximum magnitude value from 1D P-FFT is considered as feature value for face recognition. The work also takes the advantage of symbolic modeling approach for better representation of extracted features. Thus, the proposed work introduces a new symbolic modeling technique that relies only on the appearance of the original data to reduce the dimension of 2D-DFT spectral features. The performance of the proposed methodology has been evaluated by conducting various experiments on AR [28], ORL [29] and LFW [30] databases (the image restricted settings protocol is adapted) and an efficiency of 96.25%, 100% and 97% is obtained respectively. The major contributions of this work include: * A spectral domain feature extraction algorithm for novel appearance based face recognition technique is proposed. It effectively exploits the local spatial variations in a face image and deals with issues related to changes in illumination, expression and presence of occlusion during face recognition. * For the purpose of feature extraction, the proposed methodology uses a technique associated with fourier analysis in which a set of frequencies are equispaced when viewed in polar coordinates. * Novel symbolic modeling of features for extracted features and a new symbolic similarity measure are devised.
The remaining part of this paper is divided into 4 sections. Section 2 discusses the fourier spectrum analysis and computation of polar FFT in equispaced frequency distribution. Section 3 explains various steps involved in the proposed methodology for symbolic representation of face image and symbolic similarity analysis of symbolic faces. Section 4 reports experimental results obtained on AR, ORL, LFW databases, and the results are compared with some of the similar existing works and also evaluation of proposed method with various face images of different resolution is presented. Finally in Section 5 conclusions are drawn.
