As a new learning algorithm for single hidden layer feed-forward neural networks, the extreme learning machine (ELM) [1] has the ability to learn rapidly, has very few tuning parameters, and does not require the selection of input weights and hidden biases. Since its introduction, it has been used to address a variety of practical problems including cancer diagnosis [2], paraquat poisoning diagnosis [3], prediction of overweight status [4], face recognition [5], image quality assessment [6], image classification [7], excavation equipment recognition [8], land cover classification [9], and hyperspectral image classification [10]. Despite its many good properties, ELM may not be stable or sensitive in some cases because of the random choice of the input weights and biases. In order to overcome this drawback, Huang et al. recently [11] expanded on the original ELM, and proposed the theory of kernel extreme learning machine (KELM), which does not require randomness in assigning connection weights between input and hidden layers. KELM can perform comparatively, or better, than popular machine learning paradigms like the support vector machine (SVM), in many scenarios like hyperspectral remote-sensing image classification [12], [13], disease diagnosis [14], [15], [16], [17], bankruptcy prediction [18], activity recognition [19], 2-D profiles reconstruction [20], recognition of foreign fibers in cotton [21], and fault diagnosis [22].
However, our previous works show that when KELM is applied to practical applications like disease diagnosis [23] and bankruptcy prediction [24], its performance is heavily influenced by the two key parameters of kernel bandwidth γ and penalty parameter C. Parameter γ refers to the non-linear mapping from the input space to a high-dimensional feature space and C controls the trade-off between the model complexity and the fitting error minimization. Meta-heuristic algorithms have been proposed to tackle the issue of KELM parameter setting. These algorithms include particle swarm optimization (PSO) [25] and genetic algorithm (GA) [20], among others. It is also important to note that there are always many irrelevant or redundant features in the data as described in [26], which can jeopardize the classifier used in KELM. Therefore, it is essential to first select features prior to constructing the classifier.
In this study, we attempt to simultaneously address both the issues of parameter setting and feature selection for KELM. In order to achieve this goal, we use one of the latest meta-heuristic algorithms, moth-flame optimization [27] (MFO), to construct a new learning scheme for KELM. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to investigate the ability of MFO to train the KELM model for classification. MFO is based on the behavior of moths, which seek out flames in the night through a navigation mechanism called transverse orientation. MFO has a good balance between exploitation and exploration, because it updates its position through a special transverse orientation method. Due to its excellent characteristics, MFO has attracted the attention of researchers a lot recently. Allam et al. [28] has successfully applied MFO to extract the parameters of the three diode model for the multi-crystalline solar cell/module. The experimental results showed that MFO algorithm was obviously superior to other algorithms for the parameter extraction process of the three tested models. Emary and Zawbaa [29] has proposed an improved moth-flame optimization (IMFO) under controlling of exploration/exploitation rates in the domain of machine learning for feature selection. The improvement was that exploration/exploitation rate of MFO was controlled by chaotic operation. A comparative study exhibited that the proposed IMFO could select the features commendably. Li et al. [30] has also put forward an improved version of MFO based on Lévy-flight (LMFO) and has successfully solved the problem of engineering optimization. Recently, Li et al. [31] constructed an efficient and novel least squares support vector machine based on moth-flame optimization (MFOLSSVM) for annual power load forecasting. The forecasting results of China's annual electricity consumption revealed that the proposed MFOLSSVM model shows much better forecasting performance than other models optimized by other meta-heuristic algorithms. Sayed et al. [32] has used MFO to tackle segmentation biomedical imaging problem for thermogram breast cancer detection. And the proposed scheme has classified breast cancer images into normal or non-normal well. Zhang et al. [33] proposed a moth-firefly optimization based on the logarithmic spiral search capability of MFO to increase local exploitation of the fireflies for the intelligent facial emotion recognition. After being evaluated on the various images, the proposed method significantly outperformed other state-of-the-art feature optimization methods and related facial expression recognition models. From the above MFO-related works, the effectiveness of MFO for parameters optimization for machine learning algorithms has been proven. However, it has to be admitted that the property of the MFO has much room to improve as described by Li et al. [30]. Therefore, Chaos theory is introduced in order to exploit MFO's potential and enhance its performance in this study, Chaos refers to a chaotic dynamic system that is non-repetitive and has ergodicity [34]. It has been confirmed that chaos can search at a high speed with good distribution [35]. Due to these characteristics, chaos has garnered much attention in recent years [36], [37].
In this study, two new chaotic strategies, chaos population initialization and the chaotic disturbance mechanism, are both introduced into the original MFO. The resultant CMFO strategy is used to identify the two key parameters and the optimal feature subset for KELM. The resultant KELM model, CMFOFS-KELM, is rigorously validated in terms of classification accuracy, on medical diagnosis problems via cross validation analysis, area under the ROC cure (AUC), sensitivity, and specificity. In order to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, meta-heuristic-based KELM methods including MFO, PSO, GA and other three competitive approaches including original ELM, KELM, and logit model are investigated for comparison with CMFOFS-KELM. Further, a statistical t-test is used to evaluate the significance of the proposed method over other methods. The proposed method has also been successfully applied to diagnosis of paraquat-poisoned patients and overweight statuses in the practical application. As the experimental results show, the proposed learning scheme can enable a more stable KELM model with higher predictive accuracy compared to others. The main contributions of this study:

(a)First, in order to further balance exploration and exploitation for MFO, we introduce two chaotic mechanisms (chaotic population initialization and chaotic disturbance) that are non-repetitive, and have the properties of ergodicity and regularity. This makes MFO have a faster convergence rate and also avoids it getting trapped into the local optimum.(b)The improved MFO strategy based chaos is successful in simultaneously tackling the optimization parameters and feature selection issues for KELM. The resulting model, CMFOFS-KELM, is not only verified on the two medical datasets strictly, but also successfully applied to diagnose of paraquat-poisoned patients and predict overweight statuses.(c)The proposed CMFOFS-KELM manages to achieve significantly better classification performance, and offers more stable and robust results when compared to several other meta-heuristic-based KELM models.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 contains a brief description of the background of KELM, MFO, and chaos strategy. Section 3 explains the proposed methodology in detail. The experimental design is presented in Section 4. Section 5 presents the experimental results. The application of the proposed methodology is presented in Section 6. A discussion is given in Section 7. Section 8 provides the conclusion.
