It has been over half a century since the first protein structures were determined using X-ray crystallography. Although lacking the anticipated symmetry and elegance of the earlier Watson and Crick model of DNA (Watson and Crick, 1953), they revealed that proteins folded into intricate and consistent three-dimensional (3D) arrangements made up of fundamental structural motifs, alpha helices and beta sheets, which had been previously predicted based upon polypeptide backbone hydrogen bonding patterns (Pauling and Corey, 1950, Pauling, 2015). Those earliest structures of myoglobin and hemoglobin were visualized by stacked contours of balsa wood derived from the 3D electron density maps computed from the crystal diffraction patterns (Figure 1) (Kendrew et al., 1958, Perutz et al., 1960).Download : Download high-res image (221KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 1. Balsa Wood Model of HemoglobinSome of the earliest protein structures solved were visualized using stacked contours of balsa wood, which represent electron density maps computed from the crystal diffraction patterns.
Over the following decade, a number of protein structures were determined. Atomic detail models were built using brass Kendrew model parts fit by hand into a transparent 3D stacked image of the electron density map integrated by a clever construction called a Richards Box using selective lighting and a half silvered mirror (Richards, 1968) (Figure 2). These physical models gave the first clear picture of the spatial atomic arrangements and relationships of the component parts. However, to quantify these structures, the coordinate positions of all of the atoms in the built brass model had to be measured – typically using projected sight lines (for x and y) and plumb lines (for z). Needless to say, this was a tedious and error-prone process.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 2. Protein Structure Model Building and Visualization in 1960sPhysical models of protein structures gained in importance in 1960s as the number of structures solved increased.(A) Stacked electron density used to generate a protein structure model.(B) Brass Kendrew protein model built by hand in Richards Box that used selective lighting and a half silvered mirror to integrate stacked images of electron density map into a protein structure model.
In the late 1970s physical models gave way to virtual with the advent of interactive 3D computer graphics. Computers were quickly applied to the task of fitting atomic structures into computed electron density maps, and a number of electronic Richards Box programs were developed to accomplish this. Protein crystallographers were some of the earliest adopters of these new and expensive 3D interactive display systems – making protein structure visualization one of the early killer apps that drove development of the technology (Olson and Goodsell, 1992).
The building and use of physical protein models quickly disappeared. By the 1980s most of the Kendrew models of protein structures were abandoned – with only a few preserved as historic artifacts. Although the transition to computer-based protein structure building and visualization had numerous advantages, some of the characteristics of physical model visualization were lost. Physical models can convey spatial relationships and mechanisms in ways that images alone cannot. They engage perceptual and cognitive processes that go beyond the visual and bring a sense of reality and natural interaction into the process of exploration and understanding. Physical molecular models can also serve as analog computers where spatial relationships between components in complex molecular interactions can be explored and manipulated. For instance, in the discovery of the structure of DNA, Watson and Crick manipulated physical models of the nucleotide bases, whose structures and dimensions were known from chemistry, to develop the double helical model of base-pair complementarity that explained the molecular mechanism of genetic inheritance underlying all of biology (Watson, 1968, Crick, 2008).
In the late 1980s, a new rapid prototyping using additive manufacturing technology introduced the concept of computer autofabrication, or 3D printing, of physical objects. Originally conceived as a way to quickly produce and test physical models of designed objects before committing to the expense of machining, the technology also became a way to produce custom fabricated objects as the end product in itself. One of the earliest models of a natural object to be produced on a 3D printer was of the enzyme superoxide dismutase in 1991 (Roberts, 1993) (Figure 3). We and others have since explored the utility and special capabilities of 3D printing as applied to molecular models (Fjeld and Voegtli, 2002, Gillet et al., 2004, Bailey, 2005, Gillet et al., 2005, Herman et al., 2006), and have produced a wide variety of molecular representations.Download : Download high-res image (233KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 3. Stereolithography Model of the Enzyme Superoxide Dismutase Generated in 1991Computer autofabrication, or 3D printing, of physical objects that developed in the 1980s opened opportunities for using this technology in structural biology to visualize shape and features of protein structure, such as the enzyme superoxide dismutase.
Although 3D printed rigid molecular models have proven widely useful, we have also explored and developed a number of articulated models that demonstrate flexibility and operational characteristics such as assembly. In 2005 we used 3D printing and embedded magnets to produce a self-assembling model of poliovirus (Olson et al., 2007, Olson, 2015). In 2002 we started to design a polypeptide folding and assembly model. Our first attempt printed the specific configurations of each beta strand of a beta barrel of the retinol binding protein, connected by flexible wire loops, in which embedded magnets of complementary polarity represented the peptide backbone hydrogen bond donors and acceptors. This model revealed that even using the known conformations of each strand of the beta barrel, small misalignments in magnet positioning or other structural elements resulted in larger, accumulating errors during the assembly process The complete beta barrel was difficult to assemble and not very strong (Figure 4A).Download : Download high-res image (472KB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 4. Evolution of Approaches in Building Realistic and Informative Peptide Model(A) Model of retinol binding protein polypeptide was built using rigid configurations of each beta strand of a beta barrel connected by flexible wire loops. Beta strands contained embedded magnets of complementary polarity to represent the peptide backbone hydrogen bond donors and acceptors. The strand rigidity introduced tension into the physical model as even a small misalignment of magnets resulted in large problems with the model.(B) Flexible two stranded beta sheet that uses plastic extrusion 3D printing technology, embedded magnets, and the knowledge of the peptide backbone geometry to impart geometric flexibility to the hydrogen bonding patterns. In these models each amino acids can rotate freely within the polypeptide chain, but there is a specific fit position that is defined based on physicochemical reality of bond angles.
In 2004 we developed a flexible model of the polypeptide backbone using plastic extrusion 3D printing technology (fused deposition modeling -- FDM) (Figure 4B), which enables the printing of robust multi-component objects. We used the known geometry of the peptide backbone to print a set of parts to be assembled into a chain that folds into a given protein shape. We used the Python Molecular Viewer (PMV) (Sanner, 1999) to establish the geometries and FormZ software (www.formZ.com) to develop the geometry of the mechanical aspects of the model parts (Figure 5A). Again, we embedded magnets into the peptide unit to mimic the backbone hydrogen bonding interactions. However this time, we imparted geometric flexibility to the hydrogen bonding by in situ printing of a ball and socket joint for the hydrogen bond acceptor to reflect its known 120° angular interaction range. The orientation of each amino acid in the polypeptide chain is related by two rotational angles (phi and psi) to its two adjacent amino acids. We encoded these angles into the alpha carbon of each by specifying a keyed fit of the preferred angle to each flanking peptide unit. The peptide units and the chain’s alpha carbons are strung successively on an elastic monofilament, such that the tension on the filament drives the chain into the preferred specific folding configuration. Thus, while the polypeptide chain is free to rotate at each amino acid, there is a tangible fit when the angle of rotation is at the specific value. The alpha carbons have a slot that allows them to be removed and replaced with those of different phi/psi specifications. Each alpha carbon has a stub that enables physical or virtual side chains to attach to the model (see below). The peptide units are of two types. In the middle of a strand the peptide units contain carboxyl and amino groups together as a single object. At the two ends of each strand separate amino and carboxyl units can snap together to form a new peptide bond and elongate the chain. Since the major structural motifs of proteins consist of alpha helices and beta sheets, with canonical phi-psi angles, we have made units of such motifs along with loop structures with no preferred phi-psi angles that can be snapped together to make a generic protein folding kit. Any specific protein structure can be printed with standard peptide units and custom printed alpha carbons keyed and labeled with the sequence numbers and phi/psi angle encoded. The scale of the model was set to .375 cm/Å, which makes the model of a folded 200 amino acid protein small enough to handle (about the size of a football), but large enough to assemble part by part. A larger CPK scale (1 cm/Å) polypeptide model that also uses magnets for hydrogen bonds, as well as for simulating phi/psi energy barriers was developed by Zuckermann and Chakraborty in 2013 (Chakraborty and Zuckermann, 2013), however the larger scale makes building a full protein model more difficult and costly.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFigure 5. Polypeptide Model Components and Assembly(A) Computer model showing individual components with flexible ball-socket H-bond acceptor and preference keyed phi/psi sockets.(B) Complete folded model of HIV protease backbone with two protein chains (yellow and green) and peptide substrate (white).
In this resource, we discuss different types of polypeptide and proteins models, describe methods to generate them, and highlight how we have been using them to teach basic biochemistry and structural biology. We hope that this will stimulate their uptake as a useful teaching aid at different levels of science classes.
