Tourism researchers have substantially contributed to understanding travel behaviors at the destination and estimating tourism demand. The relevant literature has suggested the existence of inequality in tourism income and demand across different travel regions (Li, Chen, Li, & Goh, 2016). This can be fundamentally attributed to the disintegrated nature of tourism destinations, which consist of diverse stakeholders (i.e., destination marketing organizations: DMOs) with various business goals (Wang & Xiang, 2007). Accordingly, the destination marketing and promotion carried out by individual DMOs can be challenged to form holistic destination image and is hard to make it successful in a sustainable manner (Wang, 2008). Recognizing competitive marketplace in tourism, the collaborative marketing that involves collective efforts from different DMOs can create competitive advantage for a destination (Fyall & Garrod, 2005). In this sense, this study explores the network structure of tourism destinations, which are the foundation of collaborative strategy in tourism marketing based on an understanding of tourist mobility. Much of the knowledge from existing research has been built upon augmented capabilities to track tourist mobility in time and space (Shoval & Ahas, 2016). Apart from the continuous adoption of surveys, more and more studies are benefiting from the use of technologies such as Global Positioning System (GPS), mobile positioning, Bluetooth tracking, and geocoded social media (Li, Xu, Tang, Wang, & Li, 2018).
Studies that link destinations and tourist mobility can generally be categorized into two groups — one focusing on tourist dynamics within destinations, and the other mainly investigating inter-destination movements. Among studies in the latter group, some have employed network science approaches (Asero, Gozzo, & Tomaselli, 2016; Miguéns & Mendes, 2008; Shih, 2006; Stienmetz & Fesenmaier, 2019). These studies treat tourism destinations as complex networks, of which the topological and structural properties can be derived and analyzed through observations of tourist movements. From a quantitative point of view, network science provides a rich set of tools and metrics for tourism research (Baggio, 2017; Baggio, Scott, & Cooper, 2010), and many of them can be used to characterize tourism destinations and their interactions (e.g., degree or strength of node, network density, community structure).
Despite the increasing availability of tourism big data, there has been a scarcity of research that investigates destination networks based on mobility of foreign tourists. Although there have been studies for understanding tourism networks (Asero et al., 2016; Miguéns & Mendes, 2008; Shih, 2006; Stienmetz & Fesenmaier, 2019), the focus has been more on characterizing destinations (e.g., degree centrality and distribution) and the structural properties of the networks (e.g., network density). Little effort has been devoted to quantifying the spatial interactions of tourism destinations through large-scale mobility observations. Based on the idea that tourism destination is a complex network system (Baggio, 2008), understanding of spatial interactions formulating clustered destinations guides developing strategic planning to accelerate destination collaboration. From the data perspective, survey and GPS data collection are costly and time-consuming (Shoval & Ahas, 2016). These data usually cover small sample sizes and are mostly used to understand tourist mobility within destinations (e.g., a city) or around attractions (e.g., a park). Social media data (e.g., geo-tagged photos) allow for tourism analysis at broader scales and they could reveal rich contextual information about travelers. However, such data can be sparse and irregular in time and space (Lo, McKercher, Lo, Cheung, & Law, 2011). Mobile positioning data could capture location footprints of large populations. At the downside, such data are more difficult to acquire and usually fall short of collecting sociodemographic attributes of travelers (Ahas, Aasa, Roose, Mark, & Silm, 2008). These issues have hindered a systematic understanding of: (1) the network properties of destinations and their spatial interactions in relation to mobility of international tourists, and (2) the collective behavioral difference among travelers from different foreign countries.
This study aims to address these gaps by linking tourist mobility data with network science approaches. By analyzing a large-scale mobile positioning dataset that captures the nationality and movement patterns of foreign tourists to South Korea, we employ a few metrics to quantify the network properties of tourism destinations, aiming to reveal the collective dynamics of tourist movements and key differences across nationalities. First, we extract inter-destination tourist movements from the mobile positioning dataset to build destination networks. Two types of networks (directed and undirected) are formed to reflect the properties of destinations and their interactions. The directed networks are primarily used to quantify destination attractiveness, and the undirected networks — which are generated based on the topology of directed networks — are used to describe aggregate tourist flows between destinations. Then, by analyzing the distributions of node strength in the directed networks, we explore the attractiveness of destinations to the overall tourist population, followed by a segmentation analysis that unveils the mobility preference of different nationalities. Finally, we apply a community detection algorithm over the undirected networks, with the purpose to reveal groups of destinations that are closely connected by tourist flows. The main research questions we aim to address are as follows:
•Which destinations in South Korea were traveled more by international tourists? Is there a large heterogeneity of attractiveness among the destinations?•Did travelers from different foreign countries tend to visit the same set of destinations? If not, what are the key differences?•Which destinations were closely connected by tourist flows? Do networks derived from different nationalities show diverging community structures? What are their implications for regional tourism planning?
This research provides important insights contributing to knowledge of tourism destination networks and destination collaboration. The findings of this paper discover non-linear and dynamic structures of tourism network as well as heterogeneity of destinations’ attractiveness through the lens of travel inflow, suggesting complex tourism systems (Baggio, 2008). As opposed to previous tourism studies that use social network analysis mainly describing the shape of network (Casanueva, Gallego, & García-Sánchez, 2016), this study applies community detection algorithm as a type of network science analytics. The insights derived from community detection method suggests important knowledge in the development of strategic destination collaboration and cooperation as a way to enhance destination competitiveness (Fyall, Garrod, & Wang, 2012). The analytical framework (e.g., community detection algorithm) can also be applied to comparable datasets in other countries and regions to facilitate destination management such as transportation efficiency and tourism planning. Furthermore, considering tourism literature largely focusing on travel decision-making process (e.g., perceived intention) (Jönsson & Devonish, 2008), this research identifies different travel flow between travelers from different origin countries. As a result, this finding implies an innovative clustering method based on the travel movement patterns.
