The World Health Organization (WHO) has stated that in 2014, approximately 39% of the world's adults (38% of males and 40% of females) were overweight,1 while in KSA, the corresponding percent was 68.2% (67.5% of men and 69.5% of women).1 The overall percent of obese adults in the world aged 18 years and more reached 13% (11% of males and 15% of females). The percent of obese adults in KSA was 2.6× higher than the world's population (33.7% vs. 13%). The percent of obesity (39.5%) among adult females in KSA was higher than that of males (29.5%). The same trend was noted for the world's population.
Overweight (OW) and obesity (OB) can affect the health and socio-economic status of those at risk. Increased rates of OW and OB is a main risk factor for non-communicable disorders such as heart disease, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and some types of cancer (e.g., breast, colon, and endometrial).2 The socio-economic consequences of OW/OB include the following: poor self-image, decreased self-esteem, and restriction in production and mobility.2
Many research studies have investigated the impacts of food habits, lifestyle, and eating behaviours on the prevalence of OW/OB among university students across the globe.3, 4 For instance, a Canadian study revealed that 22.9% of university students and 37.3% of staff were either obese or overweight.3 Regina et al.5 showed that only a small number of university students in Hong Kong participated in health-promoting behaviours.
While obesity intervention studies in a university settings have been conducted, they are fewer in number compared to epidemiological studies. For example, Hivert et al.4 conducted a randomized-controlled study in a Canadian university over a 2-year period. The participants received a health-promotion programme through educational/behavioural seminars. After 2 years, the results indicated a considerable improvement in blood lipid chemistry, body mass composition, and weight gain prevention.4 In another study, Emrich and Mazier6 found that taking a nutrition education course may result in a decrease of total and saturated fat intake by university students.
In KSA, several epidemiological studies have been conducted among university students. For example, Al-Reethaiaa et al.7 found that the prevalence of OW and OB among male HSS at a Saudi University was 21.8% and 15.7%, respectively.7 El-Quadh8 showed that the prevalence of OB among male HSS was higher than females (16.7% vs. 6.7%). A large percentage of the population of KSA is youth.9 The population of KSA has experienced significant changes in their lifestyles, which could be due to many factors such as rapid socio-economic changes, rapid urbanization, wide use of cars, and increased reliance on computers and other telecommunication.10 These factors have significant effects on lifestyle and food habits among the people of KSA, as society trends towards a more “Western diet”. Many research studies have shown that eating habits are the most crucial factors affecting the nutritional and health condition of schoolchildren and adolescents in the kingdom. For example, in a study conducted in Riyadh City, it was found that skipping breakfast was more prevalent among obese/overweight schoolgirls than among normal-weight schoolgirls. In another study conducted in Abah (KSA), it was shown that 28% of schoolchildren skipped breakfast. Furthermore, obesity and overweight rates were linked with infrequent intake of breakfast, frequent intake of fast food and sugary drinks, and low consumption of fruits/vegetables, eggs, and milk.7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
Furthermore, no similar studies have been conducted among male university students at Taif University. To the best of our knowledge this is the first study that combined a questionnaire and anthropometric measurements as tools of investigation. The aim of the present study was to determine the prevalence of OW/OB and related risk factors in a Saudi university community. The detailed objectives were: to assess impacts of participant's demographic characteristics on BMI and W_C and to evaluate the effects of participant's dietary habits and lifestyle on BMI and W_C. The outcomes of the present study will be the basis of a second study, which is simply an intervention study.
