Sedentary behaviours are defined as any waking behaviours characterised by an energy expenditure of ≤ 1.5 METS, where sitting or lying is the dominant mode of posture (e.g., screen-viewing (SV), motorised transport, office work) (The Sedentary Behaviour and Obesity Expert Working Group, 2010, Sedentary Behaviour Research Network, 2012). National data from England in 2012 suggest that adults spend approximately 5 h daily being sedentary on both weekdays and weekend days (Health and Social Care Information Centre, 2013). Moreover, half of English adults in 2012 spent two or more hours watching television (TV) or other screens daily, and a third watched TV for over 3 h (Shiue, 2016), with TV viewing the most prevalent leisure-time activity for UK adults in 2005 (Office for National Statistics, 2006).
Sedentary time and SV (TV, computers, tablets, smartphones, video games) have been found to be associated with increased risk of obesity (Blanck et al., 2007, Heinonen et al., 2013, Hu et al., 2003, Shields and Tremblay, 2008), cardiovascular disease (Dunstan et al., 2010, Ford and Caspersen, 2012, Inoue et al., 2008, Katzmarzyk et al., 2009, Stamatakis et al., 2011, Wijndaele et al., 2011), diabetes (Hu et al., 2003), cancer (Friberg et al., 2006, Howard et al., 2008), all-cause mortality (Dunstan et al., 2010, Inoue et al., 2008, Katzmarzyk et al., 2009, Stamatakis et al., 2011), mental disorders (Shiue, 2016), and poor self-rated health (Shiue, 2016) in adults. A study of Finnish adults found that each additional self-reported daily TV hour was associated with a 1.81 ± 0.44 cm larger waist circumference in women and 2.0 ± 0.44 cm in men (reference category: < 1 h; p < 0.0001) (Blanck et al., 2007). However, both cross-sectional and prospective studies in children and adults show little association between objectively-assessed time spent sedentary with adiposity or adverse cardio-metabolic health (van Ekris et al., 2016, Ekelund et al., 2012, Stamatakis et al., 2012, Stamatakis et al., 2015). This lack of association suggests that reporting bias may explain some of the associations with adverse outcomes seen in studies that only use self-report. An alternative explanation may be that SV is more strongly associated with negative health, for example due to an increase in snack consumption during SV (Pearson and Biddle, 2011), with measures of SV currently relying on self-reported data because objective SV measures for use in population studies do not exist. While some sedentary activities are associated with positive educational, mental and social benefits (e.g., reading, connecting with loved ones, imaginative play) (Jacobs et al., 2008), the links with adverse health outcomes, at least from self-reported data, cannot be ignored. As such, there is a need to develop effective interventions to reduce SV and sedentary time for the whole family. While reductions in sedentary time at work are desirable, it is more likely that major reductions in sedentary behaviour will come from addressing leisure-time behaviours, such as SV, and shifts toward more active travel (The Sedentary Behaviour and Obesity Expert Working Group, 2010).
To develop effective interventions to reduce SV and sedentary time among families, we must first understand how parent and child sedentary behaviours are associated, and how parents can influence their child's behaviours. Parent TV-viewing time has been found to be strongly associated with child TV-viewing across the week (Jago et al., 2012, Jago et al., 2014a). Parents who report low restriction of sedentary activities, low self-efficacy, and permissive parenting styles have children with greater levels of SV on average (Jago et al., 2011, Smith et al., 2010). Findings from a previous study using the B-Proact1v dataset, found parental self-efficacy to limit child SV was associated with child weekday TV-viewing and mediated associations between parental control and child SV (Jago et al., 2015). Beyond these observational studies, a RCT of a school-based intervention aimed at improving 9–10 year olds' physical activity and diet, reduced child-reported SV (though not their accelerometer-assessed sedentary behaviour or any of the primary outcomes) and this effect appeared to be mediated by an effect on child-reported maternal limitation of SV (Kipping et al., 2014, Lawlor et al., 2016).
These studies demonstrate that associations exist between parent and child SV time, and that parenting styles and preference for limiting child SV are associated with child SV. However, it is yet unknown whether parents' attitudes toward their child's SV are associated with their own SV and sedentary time. For instance, if parents who report more negative attitudes toward their child's SV also report less SV and spend less time being sedentary themselves, there is potential to develop interventions to encourage parents to have negative attitudes toward their child's SV with the aim of reducing both parent and child SV and sedentary time. Therefore, it is important to understand which aspects of parents' attitudes toward child SV (e.g., self-efficacy for limiting SV, preference for limiting SV, negative attitudes toward SV, setting rules about SV) are associated to parents' own SV and sedentary behaviour.
The aim of this study was to examine whether parents' attitudes toward their young child's SV behaviour was associated with their (the parents) objectively-assessed total sedentary time and self-reported SV behaviours. Specifically, it is hypothesised that parents with a more restrictive attitude toward their young child's SV (i.e., higher preference and efficacy for limiting child SV, more rules and negative attitudes toward SV) would engage in less accelerometer-assessed sedentary time and self-reported SV themselves.
