Globally the building sector consumed more than one-third of the total primary energy. Improving energy efficiency in buildings to reduce energy use and green-house-gas emissions is a proven key strategy to mitigate global climate change. Although building technologies have advanced significantly in last decades, one of the most significant barriers to substantially improving the energy efficiency of buildings is the lack of knowledge about the factors determining the energy use. There is often a significant discrepancy between the designed and real total energy use in buildings. The reasons for this divergence are poorly understood and often have more to do with the role of human behavior than the building design. This discrepancy leads to misunderstanding and miscommunication between the parties involved in the topic of energy savings in buildings.
In fact, building energy consumption is mainly influenced by six factors: (1) climate, (2) building envelope, (3) building services and energy systems, (4) building operation and maintenance, (5) occupant activities and behavior and (6) indoor environmental quality provided. The latter three factors, related to human behavior, can have an influence as great as or greater than the former three [1], [2], [3]. The user-related aspects and behavior effects can be seen from the large spread in energy use for similar or identical buildings, but a distinction between the building-related and the user-related energy consumption cannot be established. It is necessary to investigate all six factors together to understand building energy consumption data. Detailed comparative analysis of building energy data, concerning the six factors mentioned above, would provide essential guidance to identify opportunities to save energy.
Aiming to advance the knowledge in the field and develop and apply methods to analyze and evaluate total energy use in buildings and its driving factors, a group of about 100 researchers from 15 countries gathered together and worked from January 2009 to March 2013 on the Annex 53 project, under International Energy Agency’s (IEA) Energy in Buildings and Communities (EBC) Programme. Annex 53 was organized into four subtasks and one taskforce: (1) Subtask A − Definition and reporting, (2) Subtask B − Case Studies and Data Collection, (3) Subtask C − Statistical Analysis, (4) Subtask D − Energy Performance Evaluation, and (5) Task force − Occupant behavior.
Annex 53 employs an interdisciplinary approach, integrating building science, architectural engineering, computer modeling and simulation, and social and behavioral science. The ultimate goal of Annex 53 is to better understand and strengthen knowledge regarding the robust prediction of total energy usage in buildings, thus enabling the assessment of energy-saving measures, policies, and techniques. This annex studies how occupant behavior influences building energy consumption in order to bring occupant behavior into the building energy field so as to develop building energy research, practice, policy, etc. more closely aligned with the real world. The research was performed on two building types: residential buildings (detached houses and multi-family apartments) and office buildings (large scale high rise offices and small scale offices). The main objectives of Annex 53 were to develop and demonstrate the following:
•Definitions of terms related to energy use and the influencing factors of building energy use•An approach to describing occupant behavior quantitatively and to setting up a model for occupant behavior•Database of energy use and influencing factors for existing typical buildings in different countries•Methodologies and techniques for monitoring total energy use in buildings including hardware and software platforms•A statistical model for national or regional building energy data including the influence of occupant behavior•Methodologies to predict total energy use in buildings and to assess/evaluate the impacts of energy saving policies and techniques
This paper highlights main research methods, findings, and outcomes of Annex 53, drawing some content from Annex 53’s published reports [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10].
