Despite the fact that throughout the years different words have been used to label users who infrequently used systems, e.g., intermittent, causal, naïve, little has been done in order to formally categorise such use, offering instead more than a category, i.e., a generally imprecise label that impeded its systematic use. The main goal of this work is to describe and newly characterise the Occasional User (OU), defined as a user who is going to use a system but does not have sufficient knowledge about the interface, and may not know whether they would use the system ever again.
Infrequent users have been scarcely mentioned and imprecisely defined in most classifications of users. Several reasons may explain such exclusion or ambiguity in their definition. Originally, the early user classifications were made at the time of command line interfaces (Shneiderman, 1987), whose complex syntax was difficult to learn for non-experts (Whiteside, Jones, Levy, & Wixon, 1985). Following, new interface elements such as windows, icons, menus and pointer (WIMP) became easily recognisable across different platforms. These items represented metaphors (Carroll & Thomas, 1982) of real world objects which were transparently connected with computer logic instances, and, for the first time, allowed the user to interact with them on the screen through a peripheral (e.g., mouse). This approach made user interfaces (UIs) intuitive because they allowed direct manipulation of its elements (Shneiderman, 1983). Command line interfaces forced the user to directly deal with computer logic elements requiring a substantial knowledge of machine concepts and entailing a considerable human memory demand. When compared to command line ones, WIMP interfaces resulted in a qualitatively more approachable interaction paradigm for non-knowledgeable users. However, WIMP interfaces still require a process of familiarity with their functionalities (Stasko, 1996, Van Dam, 1997). In particular, Stasko stated: “[…] Although GUI and WIMP interfaces are a big step past line-oriented terminals, they still have a learning curve and they can be awkward to use”. Many WIMP interface systems were built on the general assumption that user expertise acquisition is granted by continuous use of the same system interface. WIMP user interfaces assume the recognition of certain familiar elements orchestrating a metaphor for the system model. The direct manipulation of the elements teaches the way in which they can combine or interact with each other so, through trial and error, a user learns how to operate a WIMP UI. Depending on the complexity of such UI, the learning process may require extensive or repetitive use of the same interface across time to be able to explore the whole functionality of the system. The learning process can be supported by descriptive text of specific key elements and graphics - animated frames or movie - based help systems to help the user make a mental model of the UI.
The requirement of learning across time has been one of the main obstacles for users who, without technology experience in general and/or in a specific computer system, want to occasionally achieve a specific goal by performing a single transaction. Thus, a problem arises when a system is used in an occasional fashion, when the frequency of use is irregular, unknown or unplanned and whatever is remembered from previous uses, if anything, does not provide sufficient knowledge for an optimal interface interaction. At least three arguments support an explicit design of systems for its occasional use: advances in UIs, new approaches in design, and new technologies and computer networks. Firstly, the evolution of Graphical User Interface (GUI) (Myers et al., 2000, Shneiderman and Plaisant, 2010) with multi-touch input (Buxton, 2007, Norman, 2010, Selker, 2008) has allowed the introduction of new kind of devices and new styles of interaction, increasing the heterogeneity and the potential number of users. Secondly, in the same way, the incorporation of Accessibility (Americans with Disabilities, 2008, Mueller, 2003, US Rehabilitation Act Amendments Section 508, 1998, Usability (Nielsen, 1993, Nielsen and Budiu, 2012) and Inclusive Design (Clarkson and Coleman, 2015, Savidis and Stephanidis, 2004) principles influenced them. Thirdly, the emergence of new context of use of technology in physical spaces traditionally dedicated to non-technological purposes, from shopping centres to airports and supermarkets, due largely to the introduction and expansion of the Internet, mobile technologies (Charland and Leroux, 2011, Gong and Tarasewich, 2004, Sharpless, 2000) and Self-Service Technologies (SSTs) (Bitner et al., 2002, Meuter et al., 2003, Meuter et al., 2000) has taken place. These technologies have facilitated new scenarios of use where human-computer interaction (HCI) is on the move, using technology as a mean to achieve an immediate goal. Therefore, technology allows the user now to perform not only routine pre-planned activities but also those with immediate goal in time and effectiveness, such as buying a transport ticket, or checking weather forecast or instantly communicating, these being examples of widely available tasks that can be spontaneously carried out. Designing systems for their occasional use requires the definition of the users who are already using such systems, their needs and their goals. However, the definition of the established user categories does not fulfil the requirements, characteristics and scenarios of the use previously described. The mismatch between the widely accepted 3-category user classification with the briefly described OU, was the motivation for this paper.
The reasons presented above motivated the authors to make a revision of the existing user classifications, cross-analyse them to establish the definition variables and range of values used to define the infrequent and inexperienced users, and frame accordingly the newly characterised type of user among the established user categories. Section 2 of this paper introduces a description of user's representation and classification. Section 3 frames user classification in the context of UID and lack of recent literature. Section 4 presents a review of the literature of user classifications, underlining their strengths and weaknesses referred to the occasional use. Section 5 describes the lessons learned from the literature review of infrequency and inexperience in use. A synthesis of the paper findings is presented in section 6. In section 7, the OU is newly characterised, with values assigned to their representative parameters, presenting a decision-tree to aid designers to categorise OU, enumerating several unequivocal examples of OUs. Section 8 describes the implications of the OU and the recommendations for UID. Finally in section 9, the overall conclusions are enumerated in the context of interface design and future work.
